 This volume may not be reproduced in whole or in part in any form without prior written permission from the publisher .
 J is the tenth letter of our alphabet, and was the last to be added to the alphabet . It is the last letter of the alphabet, with J being the tenth .
 Semite was the tenth letter in the alphabet used by the Semites, who once lived in Syria and Palestine . It developed from the letter |, which was the 10th letter used by Semites .
 They probably adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic meaning hand to represent the letter . The resemblance is slight, but the resemblance is very slight .
 In the late Middle Ages, scribes often added a long tail to the last one of their i's . The tail was added to the end of the i's when they were written together .
 During the 1600's, an / at the beginning of a word was written with a tail . During the 16th century, the tail was used at the start of each word . The tail was also used during the 1600s to write a word .
 The / developed from these forms, and became a symbol for the consonant /, as in joy . The / is a symbol of joy, and is a sign of joy .
 Common forms of the letter J Roman letters have small finishing strokes called serifs that extend from the main strokes . Serifs are used in the letters of J Roman Roman letters .
 Manuscript letters, /eft have simple curves and straight lines . The letters are written in a manuscript .
 / or / ranks as the 24th most frequently used letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material in English . Uses. / or . ranks as a letter that is used in print .
 In English, a person pronounces / by placing the tongue below the edges of the lower front teeth . In English it is placed below the edge of the front teeth to pronounce .
 Occasionally, j has a y sound, as in ha/lelujah, and in Latin, German, and Scandinavian languages . The sound of j has been heard in many languages .
 In Spanish, jhas the sound of A . In French, it is roughly like s/o in the English word adhesion . In English, it means "adhesion" in the word word .
 Computers can “read these letters either optically or by means of the magnetic ink with which the letters may be printed’s . The letters are printed using magnetic ink, which can be read by computers .
 The bill and legs, as well as the head and neck, are all black, except for a reddish ring of skin around the lower neck . The head, legs and head are black, as are the head, neck and head .
 Jacana, zHAH suh NAH, is a type of small wading bird found in tropical areas worldwide . Jacana is a small, wading wading species of wading birds . The Jacana bird is a tropical species that is found worldwide .
 The long toes permit a jacana to run easily over the floating leaves of large water plants, when it searches for food . The long toe of the long toes allow the jacanas to run over floating leaves .
 An Asian jacana, called the surgeon bird, has a long tail like a pheasant's . It has been called the 'surgeon bird' and has long tail . It is called a "surgery bird"
 The northern jacana lives in South America and as far north as Texas . It is also known as American jacanas .
 In the bend of each wing is a strong spur, which the jacana uses as a weapon . This is the same as the strong spur used in each of the most powerful weapons in the jungle .
 Its long toes enable the jacana to run over floating water plants as it searches for food . The long toes are used to avoid water plants in the water .
 Jacaranda, jak uh RAN dut, is the Brazilian name for a group of trees and shrubs native to tropical America . It is the name of a group that grows in tropical areas .
 The tall, beautiful fern-tree jacaranda grows in many subtropical regions of the world, including the southern U.S. It grows in the southern United States .
 In late spring, it produces large clusters of beautiful bluishviolet flowers . The plant is a popular flower flower in the middle of spring .
 Jacaranda is a beautiful flowering tree that grows in tropical and subtropical climates . Jacarandas belong to the bignonia Flowers 25 to 50 ft .
 It has small, purplish, bell-shaped flowers and delicate, fernlike leaves . Family, Bignoniaceae. family, is a fern-like species .
 Jack Frost is the imaginary sprite who is supposed to trace the patterns that frost makes on trees, windows, and other objects . Jack Frost traced the patterns on trees and windows .
 The sprite appears in nursery rhymes and stories as an elflike character representing nipping cold . The sprite is believed to be a symbol of the cold .
 In Norse mythology, Kari, god of the winds, had a son named Jokul or Frosti . /oku/ means icicle, and Frosti means frost . Kari is the Norse god of winds .
 In Russia, frost is represented as Father Frost, a mighty smith who binds the earth and waters with his chains . Frost is represented in Russia as a powerful smith, who bind the earth with chains .
 When Old Mother Frost shakes her bed, white feathers fly and snow begins to fall . "Old Mother Frost" will shake her bed when it comes to an end .
 Stekert Jack-in-the-pulpit is any of several American wildflowers that grow in moist woodlands, flood plains, thickets, and swampy or boggy areas . It is a common name for a Jack in the Pulpit .
 Jack-in-the-pulpits are found chiefly in the eastern half of the U.S. They are often found in eastern states . They are also found in the United States .
 A jack-in-the-pulpit has a spadix, which is a cluster of small flowers crowded on a slender stalk . A jack in the pulpit is a jack with a small cluster of flowers on a stalk .
 The plant's tissues contain bundles of needlelike crystals that can injure the mouth and throat . The plant contains needles that can be found in its tissues .
 Indians used the plant for food, but only after a long series of preparations to make it edible . Indians used it for food only after making it edible with a series of preparatory preparations .
 Jack-o’-lantern is a name often given to a hollowedout pumpkin which has eyes, nose, and a mouth carved in one side .
 Jack-o-lanterns are usually made on Halloween . A candle or other light is placed inside the pumpkin in a pumpkin .
 The term also refers to the light that frequently shines from rotting stumps or logs in swampy land . The term is also used to refer to rotting logs or rotting logs .
 Jack rabbit is a name for four kinds of large hares found in deserts and prairies in western North America . Jack rabbit hares are found in desert areas of western America .
 The four kinds of jack rabbits are black-tailed, white-tailed and whitesided . The four types are the black, white, white and antelope jack rabbits .
 All of these hares have long hind legs, large eyes, and long, thin ears . The hares are also known for their large eyes and large ears .
 The black-tailed jack rabbit lives in dry areas of Mexico and the western U.S. The wild animal is a native to dry areas in the western United States .
 It is sometimes called the jackass hare because its long ears resemble those of a donkey . It has brownish-gray fur and a pure white belly . The hare has long ears and brownish gray fur .
 White-tailed jack rabbits range northward into Canada and eastward into Wisconsin . They range from Canada to Wisconsin .
 Jack rabbits like to eat succu/ents, plants with thick, juicy leaves or stems . Jack rabbits often eat succeseses, succuents with thick and juicy leaves .
 The chief enemies of jack rabbits are coyotes, but eagles, bobcats, badgers, and other animals also prey on them . Jack rabbits are preyed by coyotes and eagles .
 It is also known as the Parson Russell terrier or Parson Jack Russell Terrier . The dog is also called a Jack Russell Jack Russell . It is the same dog as a dog called a Parson dog .
 Its strong, muscular body has a top coat of coarse, weatherproof hair and a soft undercoat .
 The markings should cover parts of the head and the base of the tail . Preferably, the markings should also cover the head .
 The Jack Russell terrier was developed in southern England during the 1800's to help hunters catch red foxes . The dog was developed to help the hunt for foxes in the 1800s .
 It was named after John Russell, an English clergyman and fox hunter . Russell was a well-known fox hunter who hunted foxes in the area .
 First-time dog owners probably should avoid choosing the breed as a pet . The dogs need careful training and much exercise to be a good pet .
 Jack the Ripper was an unknown murderer who terrorized London in 1888 . Jack Russell Terrier Association of America has reviewed the Jack Russell terrier .
 From August 31 to November 9, five prostitutes were killed and mutilated . Five prostitutes were mutilated from August 31 until November 9 .
 The murderer was Called Jack the Ripper because a knife was used to cut the victims' throats and slash their bodies . The murderer used a knife to slash the bodies of the victims to death .
 The murderer was never caught in spite of the efforts of police, citizen patrols, bloodhounds, and even fortunetellers . The murderer never caught .
 Scotland Yard, headquarters of the London Metropolitan Police, identified three principal suspects . Scotland Yard has identified three main suspects in connection with the murder .
 Police failed to prove that any of them had committed the murders . However, the police failed to find any of the men responsible .
 Widespread charges of police incompetence caused the commissioner of Scotland Yard, Sir Charles Warren, to resign on November 8, the day before the fifth murder . Scotland Yard commissioner, Sir Warren, resigned a day before fifth murder in London .
 London police received hundreds of letters from people who claimed to be the murderer . The London police were contacted by hundreds of people claiming to be responsible for the murder .
 The sender's address was ‘From Hell,” and part of a kidney of one of the victims was enclosed . Part of the kidney was enclosed, along with the recipient's address .
 Jackal is a wild dog that lives in Asia, Africa, and southeastern Europe . The wild dog is a native wild dog in Asia and Africa . Jackal was the first wild dog to live in Europe and Asia .
 Arabs call it ‘the howler’ because of its mournful cry and yapping, usually heard at night . Arabs call the howler because it is mournful and usually heard in the middle of the night .
 Jackals feed on almost any small animals, but they are chiefly scavengers . Jackals are mainly scavengers that eat animals they find dead . They feed on any small animal, but eat animals found dead .
 Street cleaners are important as “street cleaners’ in some Asian and African cities . For this reason, they are important in some Asia and Africa cities .
 It has a grayish-yellow or brown coat, and a bushy tail about 8 inches long . It's grayish yellow or brown, with a brown coat and a brown or brown tail .
 People prize the blackbacked jackal of Africa for its fur, which is more attractive than that of the common jackal . People prize its fur for its more attractive appearance than its fur .
 The common jackal is classified as Canis aureus . The black-backed jackal has been classified as C mesomelas .
 The jackal, a member of the dog family, is mainly a scavenger . The animal feeds on creatures it finds dead . It is a dog family member .
 It is dusky black, with gray on the back of the head and on the cheeks and neck . It is also gray on back of head and cheeks and around neck .
 Each member knows its status, and highranking birds are allowed to eat and drink before lowranking birds . Highranking birds know their status and eat before others .
 Jacks, also called jackstones, is the name of a children’s game played with small metal objects called jacks . Jacks is also known as jackstones .
 Players must pick up the jacks from the ground while tossing and catching a ball or another jack . Players must also pick up a ball while tossing or catching a jack or another .
 Some stunts are called Downs and Ups, Upcast, Downcast, Scrubs, Bounce, and No Bounce . Some of these stunts are known as Downcasts and Ups and Ups .
 Some stunts are Over and Back, Scatters, Pigs in the Pen, and Sweeps . Some of the stunts are over and back and back .
 The game probably came from Pebble Jackstones, which are still played in © Linda Kelly-Hassett from Caryle Calvin Jacks .
 Each player bounces the ball and tries to pick up a certain number of jacks while the ball is in the air . Each player is asked to try and pick up jacks in order to keep up with the challenge .
 Jackson, Mississippi (pop.4,256; met. area pop. 440,801), is the capital and largest city of the state . Jackson is the state's largest city .
 It serves as acenter of commerce, industry, and transportation and is called the Crossroads of the South . It is also known as the birthplace of African-Americans .
 Jackson lies on the west bank of the Pearl River in central Mississippi . Jackson lies near the Mississippi River . Jackson is located on the Mississippi shore of Pearl River .
 In 1821, the Mississippi Legislature established the capital in the center of the state at a site called LeFleur's Bluff .
 The Legislature renamed the site Jackson to honor Major General Andrew Jackson . Jackson was a hero of the War of 1812 . The site was renamed Jackson after the death of Major General Jackson .
 It lives in Europe and North Africa and often nests in towns and villages . It often nestles in towns, villages and often lives in the wild .
 Mississippi College lies just west of Jackson, Mississippi College . Tougaloo College is north of the city . Mississippi College is also located in Jackson .
 Tourist attractions in Jackson include the Old Capitol, which houses the State Historical Museum . The Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Museum and the Mississippi Museum of Natural Science are among the most popular tourist attractions .
 The city’s Dizzy Dean Museum has memorabilia about the legendary baseball pitcher . The museum also features memorabilia from the legendary pitcher .
 Jackson Symphony, Mississippi Opera, and Ballet Mississippi perform in the Municipal Auditorium . The Jackson Symphony and Mississippi Opera will perform at the Municipal Theater .
 Jackson's central location in the South helps make it one of the most important commercial centers in that region . Jackson is one of America's most important centers of commerce in the region .
 Some of Mississippis largest banks and law firms are located in the city . The city is home to some of the state's largest cities .
 Bus companies and railroad passenger and freight lines serve the city . Jackson International Airport also serves as a hub for the city's airport .
 The city’s chief products include automotive and aircraft parts, electrical houseware equipment, and motors .
 Other major industries include food processing and the manufacture of clothing, furniture, and products made of clay, glass, or stone . Food processing and clothing manufacturing are major industries .
 Choctaw Indians lived in what is now the Jackson area before French settlers arrived in the early 1700's . Choctaws lived in the area before the arrival of French settlers in the 1700s . The area is now Jackson, Mississippi .
 In 1792, Louis LeFleur, a French-Canadian fur trader, set up a trading post there . He set up the post in 1792 .
 In 1821, the Mississippi Legislature chose this post as the site of the state capital . The post was chosen as the state's capital .
 Union forces invaded Jackson four times during the American Civil War . Jackson, Alexander Young, was captured by Union forces during the war .
 General William T Sherman and his troops burned much of the city in 1863 . Sherman's troops burned the city during the Civil War . The city was destroyed by the Sherman fire .
 The rapid development of railroads during the late 1800s helped make Jackson a center of trade . Jackson was a major center of commerce during the 1800s .
 This discovery attracted industry because it provided cheap fuel for factories . The discovery of the gas attracted industry to factories .
 About 70 companies built factories in the area in the late 1960's and early 1970's . About 70 factories were built in the 1970s and 1970s .
 A Civic Arts Center-Planetarium, including art gallery, planetarium, and two rehearsal halls, was completed in 1978 . It includes art galleries and planetariums .
 Alexander Young was a Canadian landscape painter . He was a founding member of a group of Canadian artists called the Group of Seven . Jackson, Jackson and Young were the first members of the group .
 The group developed a national school of painting in the early 1900's based on the Canadian wilderness . The school was set up in Canada's wilderness .
 Jackson traveled across Canada, painting in Ontario, Quebec, and the West . Jackson painted in Ontario and Quebec . Jackson traveled around Canada .
 Jackson was strong supporter for the continuation of the group's ideas . Jackson was a strong supporter of the organization . Jackson died in 2003 .
 He helped develop 7he Canadian Group of Painters, a national association that was formed in 1933 to succeed the Group of Seven . He helped to develop the Canadian Painters' Association .
 Alexander Jackson painted to portray the beauty and grandeur of the Algoma district of southern Ontario . National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa te ot etre Algama, November is one of many wilderness landscapes .
 Jackson, the son of poor Scotch-Irish immigrants, became an orphan at 14 . Jackson, who was orphaned at 14, is now a successful actor in Hollywood .
 He was a successful lawyer and landowner in Tennessee . Then he moved to Tennessee, where he became a successful attorney .
 Jackson won fame as an Indian fighter and as a general in the War of 1812 . Jackson was a general and Indian fighter during his time in the US .
 He won election as President in 1828 partly because his party was so well organized throughout the nation . He won the election partly because of his party's well-organized party .
 Jackson made the presidency a more powerful office, though still subject to the will of the people . Jackson made it more powerful and more powerful, but not subject to will of people .
 As President, he disapproved of many actions by Congress and vetoed 12 bills, more than all previous Presidents combined . He disapproved many of many bills by Congress .
 Many of these bills sought to increase federal spending on domestic improvements . Many of the bills were passed by Congress in 2012 .
 The Democrats believed that the states, not the national government, should pay for such projects . The Democrats believe that the state should not have to pay for the projects .
 Jackson's strong actions, particularly during disputes involving the Bank of the United States and the rights of states, won him much praise . Jackson's actions won him praise for his actions during disputes with the bank and the states .
 The 20-year period after Jackson became President is often called the Age of Jackson . Jackson was President of the U.S. during the 'Age of Jackson' period .
 Under Jackson's leadership, his followers tried to win reforms in the states . Under Jackson, he led the state legislature in Louisiana .
 They fought for the right of workers to organize labor unions . They called for a 10-hour workday . They also called for an 11-hour a day .
 When Jackson was reelected President in 1832, he became the first President who had been nominated by a national political convention . Jackson was the first to have been nominated for President by national political conventions .
 Historians often use the term Jacksonian Democracy to describe the reforms and reform movements of the period from 1828 to 1850 . The term is often used by historians to refer to the reforms of the era .
 The opening of land in the West sped up the westward movement . During Jackson's presidency, land opened up the West . Jackson opened the West during his presidency .
 Wild speculation on land, roads, canals, and cotton led to a business depression in the late 1830's . Wild speculation led to the death of the cotton industry .
 William Lloyd Garrison organized one of the first societies favoring an end to slavery . Garrison organized the first society to end slavery in 18th century .
 Peter Cooper built the first American steam locomotive used for passenger service . Jackson became the first President to ride a train . Cooper built Cooper's first steam train .
 Andrew Jackson was born on March 15, 1767, in either North Carolina or South Carolina . No one really knows which state he was born in .
 Jackson believed he was born on the farm of his uncle, James Crawford, in Waxhaw settlement, South Carolina . Jackson's uncle was the farm owner of the farm .
 Crawford house stood on the west side of the road that formed the boundary between North Carolina and South Carolina at that time . The Crawford house was built in the 1920s and '50s .
 Jackson's parents, Andrew and Elizabeth Hutchinson Jackson, were a poor farm couple from Northern Ireland . Jackson was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 They had sailed to America in 1765 with their first two sons, Hugh and Robert . The couple's first son Hugh was born in England .
 He died in 1767, a few days before Andrew, their third child, was born . Andrew was born in 1766 .
 "He grew up among people who were ready to fight at any time to defend their honor," he says . He grew up with people ready to defend themselves, he says. "He's a fighter, not a fighter," he adds .
 Congress established the Wisconsin Territory in 1836 . The United States flag had 25 stars by the end of Jackson’s second term in the presidency .
 A 26-star flag was adopted after he left office in 1837 . found himself challenged to a battle with the British government .
 Andrew would “never give up,” even when another boy had him on the ground, a schoolmate later recalled . Andrew would never give up even when he was beaten down, a classmate said .
 In those days, most farm communities had “public readers’ who read aloud items from the Philadelphia newspapers . The public readers were used to read out items from Philadelphia newspapers. In the 1930s, public readers read aloud to farm communities .
 Andrew later recalled that he was “selected as often as any grown man’ to be the reader’s reader . Andrew later said he was selected “as many times as any adult man' to be a reader .
 In 1776, at the age of 9, he read the newly adopted Declaration of Independence to his neighbors . He read it to neighbors in 1776 . He was 9 when he read it out to neighbors .
 Sports and cockfighting occupied more of his time than did studying . He was also involved in cockfighting and sports .
 The 13-year-old Andrew and his brother Robert joined South Carolinas mounted militia . Andrew and Robert joined the South Carolina mounted militia in 2011 .
 Electromagnetic induction, a way of turning mechanical energy into electricity, was discovered independently by Michael Faraday of England and Joseph Henry of the U.S. in the early 1830's . The world of President Jackson, Andrew 7, was created by President Jackson .
 Both men found that a moving magnet produced electric current in a coil of wire . Both men used magnets to create current in wire .
 Black Hawk, a Sauk Indian chief, led a group of Sauk and Fox Indians to try to regain their land near Rock Island, Ill., from white settlers . Black Hawk led the Sauk, Fox and Sauk chief of the 18th century .
 The resulting conflict, the Black Hawk War of 1832, ended in defeat for the Indians . It was the result of a conflict between the two sides .
 Presidential candidates began to be chosen by national conventions in the election of 1832 . Presidential candidates were chosen by conventions in 1832.
 Oberlin Collegiate Institution began to admit students of both sexes in 1833 . Oberlin was the first coeducational college in the United States to admit both sexes . The first co-eduction college in America was Oberlin College .
 Felix Mendelssohn and Robert Schumann of Germany and Frédéric Chopin of Poland wrote many of their finest works during the 1830's . The romantic composers wrote their best works in the Romantic period .
 The first successful reaping machine was patented by the American inventor Cyrus McCormick in 1834 . It enabled farmers to harvest grain much more quickly and more easily .
 The Battle of the Alamo, the most famous battle in the war for Texan independence, took place in 1836 . The most famous Texan war for independence was the Battle of Alamo .
 Mexican troops under General Antonio Lépez de Santa Anna defeated the Alamo defenders . Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie were among those who fought for Alamo .
 The British commander wanted his boots cleaned, and ordered Andrew Andrew to scrub them . Andrew's boots were ordered cleaned by the British commander .
 The angry officer lashed out at Andrew with his sword, and the youth threw up his left hand to protect himself . The officer then lashed out with a sword and hit Andrew in the head with his right hand . The youth was hit by the sword, but was unhurt .
 The blade slashed Andrew's hand to the bone and cut him badly on the head . Andrew was left with a cut to the head after the blade slashed his hand to bone . Andrew suffered a serious head injury in the attack .
 In exchange of prisoners, Elizabeth Jackson obtained the freedom of her sons . Elizabeth Jackson was freed in exchange for her sons' freedom .
 Jackson's boyhood home was a log cabin in the Waxhaw settlement in South Carolina . Jackson died a short time later, and Andrew on 4 , deg deg rg eee f-4 9 Puscraas ig ae a Oe ae Library of Congress .
 A British officer slashed Jackson with his sword because he refused to clean the soldier's boots . Jackson became an orphan at the age of 14 after being slashed by a soldier .
 After the Revolutionary War, Andrew found little to interest him in school . Andrew was fascinated by the Civil War . Andrew's father was also fascinated with the war and family history .
 Jackson met Spruce Macay, a wealthy lawyer, in Salisbury, N.C., in 1784 . Jackson met the wealthy lawyer in the town of Salisbury in 1783 .
 He soon established a reputation as ‘the most roaring, rollicking, gamecocking, horse-racing, card-playing, mischievous fellow that ever lived in Salisbury,” an old-time resident of the town .
 Jackson was admitted to the bar in 1787 . Professional standards for lawyers were not high in those days, and professional standards were low .
 In 1788, John McNairy appointed Jackson solicitor, or attorney general, for region that now forms Tennessee . McNairy was a judge of the Cumberland superior court .
 On his way to Nashville, Jackson stopped briefly at Jonesborough to take part in a civil suit . Jackson is on his way from Nashville to Nashville .
 He accused the opposing lawyer, Waightstill Avery, of taking illegal fees, and challenged him to a duel . He accused him of using illegal fees and accused the lawyer of taking legal fees .
 Thousands of settlers had moved into Nashville after the Revolutionary War . Nashville was founded in 17th century .
 His success as a public official brought him a large private law practice . He has a large law practice in New York City .
 Robards was separated from her husband, Captain Lewis Robards, an army officer . Robards' husband was an Army officer and was married to a British soldier . She had been separated from him for years .
 Robards believed that Robards had obtained a divorce and were married in Natchez in August 1791 . Robards and Robards were believed to have been married in 1791, but Robards died in 1792 .
 In December 1793, Robards learned that Robards had not been granted a divorce until September of that year . Robards' divorce was not granted until September 1793 .
 The confusion surrounding their marriage and remarriage made the couple targets of gossip that troubled their lives for decades . The couple's confusion over their marriage led to their divorce from each other .
 The Jacksons also reared his two sons, John Donelson and Andrew Jackson Donelson . John and Andrew Donelson died in 1918 .
 In addition to practicing law, Jackson made money by selling land to new settlers . Jackson also made money selling land .
 He bought land for as little as 10 cents an acre and later sold it for as much as $3 an acre . The land he bought was bought for $10 cents per acre .
 In 1796, he bought Hunter's Hill, a plantation 13 miles from Nashville, Tennessee . He bought the plantation in 1796 .
 Jackson served as a delegate to the state constitutional convention that prepared for Tennessee's admission into the Union . Jackson was a delegate in the state's constitutional convention . He was a member of the original Tennessee delegation .
 There is a story that Jackson proposed the name ‘Tennessee’ for the new state . Jackson proposed Tennessee for the state .
 Jackson’s rough western frontier manners made him stand out among the representatives of eastern states in Congress . Jackson was a member of the House of Representatives from the eastern states .
 Jackson was 1 of 12 representatives who voted against a resolution praising President George Washington's Administration . Jackson was one of 12 members of Congress to vote against the resolution . Jackson served as a member of the House of Representatives .
 He also felt that the pace of life in the capital, Philadelphia, was too slow . He said he felt that life in Philadelphia was too fast .
 Jackson was elected as a justice of the state supreme court . Six months later, he was elected to the Tennessee legislature . Jackson is a member of the Tennessee Supreme Court .
 In 1804, Jackson resigned the judgeship to devote full time to his private affairs . Jackson resigned in 1804 to concentrate on his own affairs .
 In 1805, he and John Hutchings established a general store at Clover Bottom, near the Hermitage . The store was established in 1805 .
 His pistol duel in 1806 with Charles Dickinson, a lawyer, ended in Dickinson's death .
 When war with Great Britain began, he quickly offered his services to President James Madison . He quickly offered to help in the fight against Great Britain .
 For several months, Jackson and his 2,500 Tennessee militiamen awaited orders from the War Department . Jackson's troops were ordered by the U.S. Department of Defense .
 Governor Willie Blount of Tennessee directed him to reinforce American troops in New Orleans in January 1813 . Blount ordered the troops to reinforce the city .
 Jackson received orders from Secretary of War John Armstrong to demobilize his forces on the spot . Jackson arrived in Natchez, Miss., on the way to New Orleans, he received orders .
 Jackson was furious because the federal government had not provided pay, food, transportation, or medicine for his men . Jackson was angry that the government had failed to provide him with pay, transportation or medicine .
 Jackson next took command of a volunteer force of 2,000 men in a campaign against the Creek Indians . Jackson next became president of the Confederate Congress .
 A serious shortage of supplies and food made military operations difficult for Jackson . The shortage of food and supplies was a major problem for the military .
 He also had to put down two mutinies when some of his men threatened to desert . He had to deal with two mutinees when he put down the mutines .
 It took place near the Creek village on Horseshoe Bend of the Tallapoosa River, near presentday Alexander City . The Creek village was located on the Horsesoe Bend .
 Jackson allowed the Indian women and children to cross the river to safety before he attacked . Jackson allowed them to cross to safety . Jackson's attack was the first time he had attacked the Indians .
 He dictated peace terms to the Creek, who gave up 23 million acres of land in present-day Georgia and Alabama . The Creek gave up more than a million acres .
 The federal government commissioned Jackson to be a major general in the regular army . Jackson was commissioned as major general by the government .
 Jackson was assigned to command United States forces along the southern coast of the United States . Jackson commanded U.S. forces during the Second World War . Jackson died in 1944 .
 Before moving on to New Orleans, Jackson asked permission to seize Pensacola in Spanish Florida . Jackson also asked permission for the seizure .
 Jackson arrived in the city on Dec. 14, 1814, and found the people almost defenseless . He arrived in Dec. 1814 and took over the city .
 Though ill with dysentery, he set a furious pace in preparing to defend the city . Though ill, he kept his spirits high and prepared to defend his country .
 Timely reinforcements from Kentucky and Tennessee increased his forces to about 5,000 men . The battle was over a year after the Battle of Gettysburg . He was joined by about 4,000 troops .
 After several minor attacks, the British army of more than 8,000 men began its attack at dawn on Jan. 15, 1815 . The British army began its battle against the Turks in January 1815 after several minor battles .
 The British marched up in close columns against earthworks defended by Jackson’s artillery and riflemen . The British march up in front of the enemy's earthworks in the Battle of Gettysburg . The battle was the first of its kind since the Second World War II .
 The American losses totaled only 14 men killed, 39 wounded, and 18 captured . The U.S. lost only 14 of the men killed and 39 wounded .
 Peace treaty had no effect on War of 1812 because peace treaty had been signed two weeks earlier . Peace treaty signed in 1812 had no impact on war because of peace treaty signing two weeks later .
 Communications were so slow that Jackson had not learned about the treaty . Communications were slow that communications had been slow .
 Rachel Jackson, Jackson's wife, died of a heart attack in December 1828 . The Hermitage, Nashville, Tennessee, was Jackson's birthplace .
 Her death came shortly before her husband left for Washington to be inaugurated President .
 Jackson returned to his plantation in Tennessee but remained in command of the army's Southern Division . He received orders to lead an expedition to Florida in December 1817 .
 Seminole Indians, some discontented Creek, and groups of escaped slaves and vagabonds had been raiding American settlements north of the Florida-Georgia border .
 At the time of the campaign, the U.S. was negotiating for the acquisition of Florida from Spain . The United States was negotiating with Spain for the state .
 Jackson became provisional governor of Florida in 1821 . Jackson was governor of the new territory of Florida . Jackson became president of the U.S. in 1822 .
 At the age of 54, 54, he was looking forward to the life of a country squire . At the time of his death, he had hoped to become a farmer .
 Jackson's friends and newspapers in Nashville called for his nomination as President . The Tennessee legislature nominated him to run for President in 1824 . Jackson ran for the presidency in 1822 .
 Jackson, now a dignified country gentleman, impressed Washington society . Jackson: "I'm not a politician, but I'm a country gentleman" Jackson was born in 1913 .
 Jackson, Andrew The Hermitage, Nashville, Tenn. Jackson faced stiff stiff competition from fans . Jackson's death toll at 10,000-plus .
 In the Battle of New Orleans, Jackson led American forces to victory over the British . Jackson led his troops to victory in the New Orleans battle . Jackson was the first president of the United States .
 British commander, General Edward Pakenham, died in the fighting in 1824 . He was killed by the opposition in the election of 1824 in London .
 Secretary of State John Quincy Adams regarded himself as the logical man to succeed President James Monroe . Adams was the secretary of state at the time of Monroe's assassination .
 Representative Henry Clay of Kentucky hoped to be elected by winning the vote of the West . Henry Clay was elected to Congress in 18th century .
 A congressional caucus nominated Secretary of the Treasury William H Crawford for President . Crawford was nominated for President by a congressional caucus . Crawford is a former secretary of the treasury .
 He won 99 electoral votes, Adams received 84, and other candidates received 78 votes . He won the election with 99 votes .
 No candidate had a majority, so the election went to the House of Representatives, which voted by states . The election was held by states, but no candidate had enough votes to win the election .
 Clay threw his support to Adams, who won the presidency with the votes of 13 states . Adams won the election with 13 states, the most populous state in the nation .
 In the following years, Jackson and his supporters did their best to embarrass Adams . Adams' supporters tried to embarrass the former president .
 He felt that his chances for winning the presidency in 1828 would be strengthened if he returned to private life . He decided to do so in order to boost his chances of winning .
 The presidential campaign of 1828 was one of the bitterest in American history . The election was held in 1828 in New York City, New York .
 It was also the first in which all nominations were made by state legislatures and mass meetings instead of by congressional caucuses . It was the first time in which state legislatures made the nominations for the president .
 Adams sought reelection, with Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush as his vice presidential candidate . Adams ran for reelection with Rush as Vice President . Adams was elected to the presidency .
 John C Calhoun, who had served as Vice President under Adams, was Adams' running mate . Calhoun had been Adams' VP under President John C. Calhoun .
 Jackson’s supporters continued to call themselves Republicans or Democratic-Republicans . Jackson's supporters called themselves Democrats or Republicans .
 Leaders followed Van Buren partly because they felt his support for the idea of states’ rights would allow for compromise on the question of whether slavery should be expanded . These leaders followed him partly because of his support of states' rights .
 Van Buren also knew the importance of campaign tactics that took advantage of Jackson’s military fame . The campaign tactics were designed to take advantage of the Jackson's military fame.
 Crowds gathered at the Hermitage to congratulate Jackson . “l am filled with gratitude,” he said. Crowds gather at the hermitage .
 She preferred the comfort of her own room, with her Bible and a few close friends . She preferred to be alone with a Bible and close friends.
 Jackson remained convinced that the various slanders of the campaign led to his wife's death . Jackson believed the slanders led to the death of his wife .
 When Jackson arrived in D.C. for his inauguration, he was still bitter at the politicians who had attacked his wife . Jackson's first Administration was the first time he was in Washington for the inauguration .
 The sun shone brightly on Jackson as he walked to the Capitol, followed by a huge crowd . Jackson was greeted by a crowd of thousands as he made his way to Capitol .
 President Obama made his way down to unpaved Pennsylvania Avenue, mounted his horse, and headed for the White House .
 Carriages, wagons, and thousands of people on foot followed close behind . Carriages and wagons were followed closely behind by thousands of spectators .
 The throng swarmed into the White House and eagerly grabbed the cakes, ice cream, and orange punch that had been prepared for the reception .
 They stood on chairs, broke china, tore drapes, and even pushed the President aside . They stood in the President's footsteps, breaking china and even pushing him aside, they said .
 He wanted to destroy what seemed to be a monopoly of federal offices by wealthy individuals, he said . He said .
 This practice, which had long been used in state politics, was known as the spoils system . This practice had been used as a means of winning state elections .
 Jackson has often been described as a “spoilsman’s” but his replacement of Adams’ supporters has been exaggerated . Jackson has replaced Adams' supporters with a new generation of young people .
 Jackson believed no federal employee should have a lifetime “right” to his or her job . Jackson believed that no federal worker should have lifetime ‘right’ to his job .
 He felt that his system of replacing workers made the government more democratic by allowing more people a chance to work for it .
 Political turmoil forced Jackson to limit regular Cabinet meetings during his first years in office . Jackson's Cabinet meetings were limited during the early years of his presidency .
 He relied on advice from loyal Cabinet members he consulted individually and from influential friends . He relied heavily on his advisers to make his decision .
 Critics objected to Jackson's reliance on this unofficial ‘Kitchen Cabinet”
 Jackson had expressed her wish that her niece, Emily Donelson, should be given the opportunity to manage the White House for President .
 Donelson’s husband, Andrew Jackson Donelson, became the President's private secretary . Donelson was married to the President of the United States .
 Sarah Yorke Jackson, the wife of Jackson's adopted son, served as White House hostess . She was also a hostess at the White House .
 The north portico of the White House was constructed during Jackson's Administration . Jackson's administration constructed the portico during his presidency .
 The government committed more than $50,000 to redecorating of the mansion . The mansion was built by the federal government .
 While expensive, fancy foods were served, he usually preferred a simple diet of rice, bread, vegetables, milk and wine .
 An argument over Peggy O'Neale Eaton caused a split in Jackson’s family and in his Cabinet . Peggy O’Neale was a member of the Cabinet .
 The wife of Secretary of War John H Eaton was the widow of a naval officer who committed suicide because of his wife's unfaithfulness . She was the daughter of an innkeeper and widow of an . innkeeper .
 The Donelsons returned to Tennessee for six months rather than accept Mrs. Donelons' request . They returned home to Tennessee, Tennessee .
 He also came to regard the affair as an attempt by Calhoun to gain power for himself . He also regarded Calhoun's actions as a bid to gain political power .
 In 1831, both Eaton and Van Buren resigned in order to give Jackson more freedom in reorganizing his new Cabinet . Eaton and van Buren left the Cabinet in 1831 to provide Jackson with more freedom .
 Jackson appointed anti-Calhoun men as successors to Ingham, Berrien, and Branch . Jackson then appointed them to succeed Calhoun as successors .
 Early in 1828, Congress had passed a law that increased tariff rates on foreign manufactured goods .
 Calhoun complained that the law hurt his native state of South Carolina . Calhoun died in 1877 . He died of a heart attack .
 In this document, Calhoun claimed that a state could nullify any law passed by Congress which the state believed had violated the Constitution . The document was published in 18th century .
 Emily Donelson, Rachel Jackson's niece, managed the White House and served as Jackson's hostess at most social events . She was the hostess for Rachel Jackson and her niece .
 Her husband was the President's private secretary . Jackson was the first lady of the White House .
 They invited him to a dinner celebrating Thomas Jefferson's birthday, on April 13, 1830 . The dinner was held in honor of Thomas Jefferson, who died that day .
 Jackson's fight against the Bank of the U.S. became the major issue of his first Administration . Jackson fought the bank of the United States .
 The Bank of the United States could also prevent state banks from making loans without enough security . State banks could also be prevented from lending without security .
 State banks in the South and West were usually freer in extending credit and loans than the more conservative Eastern banks . State banks were usually more free to extend credit than those in the East and South .
 Western and Southern farmers who could not get new loans or renew old ones denounced the Bank of the U.S. for restricting the power of local banks .
 Currency would be more reliable if paper money was based strictly on specie, or gold and silver, he said . That is, he believed currency should be based on speciel or gold or silver .
 Jackson called the bank a monopoly and said its vast powers threatened the government . Bank had meddled in politics and its political supporters, including Senators Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, opposed Jackson .
 Jackson interpreted it as a direct attack on his reelection campaign . Jackson charged that the bank's president, Nicholas Biddle, was misusing bank funds to support Clay . Jackson interpreted the bank president's actions as an attack .
 Biddle's congressional supporters tried to override the President's veto, but failed . Biddle’s congressional supporters failed to override .
 For the first time, national political conventions chose the candidates for President . The convention was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Candidates had to be nominated by state legislatures, mass meetings, or congressional caucuses . Before this time, candidates had been nominated by states legislatures or mass meetings .
 In December 1831, Jackson's opponents nominated Henry Clay for President . Henry Clay was nominated for President by President Jackson in 1831 . Henry was nominated by Henry Clay .
 They chose John Sergeant, head of the legal staff of the Bank of the United States, for Vice President . John Sergeant is head of legal staff for the bank .
 The fight to recharter the Bank of the U.S. became the chief issue of the 1832 presidential campaign . The delegates nominated Jackson for President and Martin Van Buren for Vice President .
 South Carolina declares tariff laws of 1828 and 1832 null and void . In 1832, Congress passed another high-tariff act . South Carolina declared the tariff laws null .
 It threatened to secede, or leave the Union, if the government tried to collect duties at Charleston . The Charleston, South Carolina, was the last place in the Union .
 Senator Robert Y Hayne of South Carolina reacted to the crisis in opposite ways . Jackson and Senator Hayne react to the situation differently to each other . Jackson: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with this crisis"
 Hayne resigned from the United States Senate and won election as governor of South Carolina . Hayne won election in South Carolina in 2008 .
 Jackson ordered troops and warships to be concentrated near Charleston, South Carolina, in Dec. 1832 .
 On December 28, Calhoun resigned the vice presidency and took over Hayne’s Senate seat . Calhoun took over the Senate seat from Hayne in December .
 At the same time, Senator Henry Clay pushed through a compromise tariff bill that reduced all tariffs for 10 years . The bill was passed by Henry Clay in 18th century .
 Senators Daniel Webster and Robert Y Hayne debated states’ rights . South Carolina withdrew its nullification of the tariff laws, but declared it nullified .
 Jackson vetoes a bill to renew the charter of the Bank of the United States . Jackson vetoed a bill that would renew the bank's charter .
 United States troops forced the Seminole Indians to retreat to the Florida Everglades . The Seminole was forced to retreat from the Evergades in order to avoid capture .
 Jackson's Specie Circular required payment in gold or silver for public lands . The force law was null and void in 1832 1832 and 1835 .
 Jackson's stand against nullification angered states’ rights supporters in his party and strengthened the opposition in the South . Jackson's stance angered states' rights supporters and angered the opposition .
 Jackson properly interpreted his reelection as public approval of his bank policy . Jackson's reelection was public approval for bank policy, Jackson said .
 The U.S. Treasury removed deposits from the Bank of the United States and placed them in state banks . The move was ordered by the Treasury Secretary of the Treasury Louis McLane .
 Both McLane and his successor, William J Duane, refused to carry out Jackson’s order . McLane refused to comply with the order . Duane and McLane were both in charge of the military .
 Duane was appointed even though Jackson knew that he opposed the President's bank policy . Duane had been appointed despite Jackson's opposition to the bank policy. Duane's appointment came despite Jackson knowing that he was opposed to the policy .
 The withdrawal of the governments funds reduced the powers of the national bank . See Taney, Roger B .
 In 1834, the United States Senate voted to criticize Jackson's bank policy . Jackson was criticized by the Senate for his bank policy in 1834 .
 In 1837, Jackson's allies won control of the Senate, and revoked the 1834 resolution . The resolution was revoked in 1837 . In 1834, the resolution was passed by Jackson's Senate .
 The dispute over the Bank of the United States occurred during a period of heavy speculation in land, the opening of the West, and increased foreign trade .
 The government was receiving more money from tariffs and the sale of public land than it was spending, it said .
 Congress provided that any surplus above $5 million should be divided among the states in 1837 as a loan to the states . Congress provided for the states to receive any surplus over $5m .
 A depression struck in 1837 before the money from the government could be distributed to all the states . The money was distributed to the states, but a depression struck before it was distributed . The depression was caused by the government's failure to distribute the money .
 By 1836, most banks had only 1 gold dollar in reserve for every 10 or 12 paper dollars in circulation . Most banks had 1 gold in reserve per dollar, 1 in reserve every 10 paper dollars .
 Inflation became so serious that Jackson hastened to act before the boom crumbled . Jackson hasten to act as a precautionary measure to keep inflation in check .
 On July 11, 1836, he issued his Specie Circular . He directed government agents to accept only gold in payment for public lands .
 This order shocked the West because speculators there had been buying land with “cheap’s paper money . The West was shocked by the order . This order came after speculators bought land with "cheap" paper money in China .
 The inflation of money, overexpansion of business, and overinvestment in public improvements brought on a depression that struck shortly before Jackson left office . Jackson's depression was the result of over-investment and inflation .
 After the War of 1812, he helped negotiate important Indian treaties and greatly influenced the governments Indian policy . He also influenced the government of India .
 Jackson believed the Indians should be treated as wards of the nation, not as members of independent foreign powers . Jackson did not hate the Indians, but he believed that the government should treat them as wards . Most modern historians believe Jackson didn't hate Indians .
 He doubted that Indians and white people could live together, and therefore favored moving the Indians in the East to the West . He favored moving Indians in East to West .
 In 1828, Georgia passed laws that gave the Cherokee Quotations from Jackson Jackson, Andrew. indians no legal protection if the state seized their lands . The state passed the laws in 1828 to protect the Cherokee Indians .
 The Cherokee protested that the federal government had guaranteed them this land by treaty . The Cherokee protest that the land had been given to them by the government . The federal government said the treaty had guaranteed the land to the Cherokee .
 In this controversy, Jackson did not support the rights of the federal government as he had done in the nullification crisis . In this case, Jackson supported nullification of the Constitution .
 Cherokee Nation Georgia was dismissed by the U.S. Supreme Court of the United States in 1831 . The case reached the Supreme Court, which dismissed the Cherokee suit in 1832 .
 In a later case, Worcester Georgia, the court ruled that the federal government had exclusive jurisdiction over Indian territory . The case was later overturned by the Supreme Court .
 Jackson supporters in Congress helped win approval of the Indian Removal Act of 1830 . Jackson's supporters helped win passage of the act in 1830 . The act was passed by Congress in 1818 .
 The act called for the removal of the Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River and their relocation on land west of that river . The act was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 By the end of Jackson's Administration, almost all Indians east of the river had signed treaties to move west of the Mississippi .
 Thousands of Indians, cheated out of their land, died during the forced migration . Thousands of people were forced to leave their land in India .
 By the time the fighting ended, most of the Seminole had surrendered or been captured and had been sent to the West . By the end of the fighting, most had been captured or captured and sent away .
 After the Revolutionary War, Britain had prohibited American ships from trading in the West Indies . After the 17th and 18th century, British ships were banned from trading .
 Jackson offered to open American ports to the British if Americans received equal trading rights in the West Indies . Jackson offered the deal in 1830 to open U.S. ports to British in exchange for equal trading .
 Jackson achieved another success when he persuaded France to pay its long-standing “spoliation,” or . The following quotations come from some of Andrew Jackson's speeches and writings .
 Message to Congress, Dec. 1830: There are no necessary evils in government . Message to the U.S. Congress: Government is not necessary evil in government.
 If it would confine itself to equal protection, and, as Heaven does its rains, shower its favors alike on the high and the low, the rich and the poor, it would be an unqualified blessing . The U.S. Supreme Court has been criticized for its lack of
 Message to Congress vetoing the renewal of the charter of the Second Bank of the United States, July 10, 1832 . "Fear not, the union will be preserved and treason and rebellion promptly put down"
 They are the preservation of the rights of the several States and the integrity of the Union . They are . The United States is the only nation not to be divided in the United States .
 Secand Inaugural Address: Without union our independence and liberty would never have been achieved . Secand: "Without union they never can't be maintained"
 Second Inaugural Address, March 4, 1833: "Seek a wife, one who will aid you in your exertions. . For you will find it easier to spend two thousand dollars, than to make five hundred"
 Look at the economy of the mother and if you find it, you will find it in the daughter, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The economy of a mother can be found in her daughter's economic success .
 French ships attacked American shipping during the Napoleonic Wars of the early 1800s . French ships had attacked American ships during the early 18th century . American ships were attacked by French ships .
 In 1831, France agreed to pay for the damages in six annual installments . France agreed in 1831 to pay the damages for the loss of France .
 In 1836, Jackson announced that France had paid four installments with interest with interest . Jackson announced the payment in 1836 that the French government had paid the first installment .
 Admission of any state into the Union was linked with the slavery controversy . During this period, any state's admission was linked to the slavery debate .
 Americans believed that an independent Texas would soon be annexed to the United States . The area of Texas was divided into several states .
 Antislavery forces opposed the admission of Texas, or even the recognition of an independent Texas . Antistavery forces were opposed to Texas admission .
 Martin Van Buren feared recognition of Texas would damage his chances for the presidency in 1836 . But he hesitated, fearing that recognition would hurt his chances of winning the presidency .
 President Jackson used his last day as President to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Texas . Jackson established diplomatic relations between Texas and Texas .
 After seeing his friend Martin Van Buren sworn in as President, Jackson returned to the Hermitage . Later years after seeing the inauguration, Jackson went back to his friend's home .
 Whitehaired and sick with tuberculosis and dropsy, Jackson still stood erect . Whitehaired Jackson was still standing erect when he died of tuberculosis .
 He continued his interest in national politics and supported Van Buren’s unsuccessful bid for reelection in 1840 .
 The Battle of Horseshoe Bend was Jackson's first major battle . Jackson the soldier was killed in the battle . The battle was fought in New Orleans .
 The Hermitage, Jackson's home, is near Nashville, Tennessee . Jackson was elected president in 1824 and 1828 .
 It was completed in 1819, damaged by fire in 1834, and rebuilt in 1835 . It was then damaged by a fire and rebuilt by 1835, and is now a tourist attraction .
 Jackson's first administration A The spoils system D The Bank of the United B Life in the White House States C Split with Calhoun E Election of 1832 F The nullification crisis V Jackson’s second administration A
 Helen Hunt became best known for her efforts to secure justice for the American Indians . Hunt was a pioneer of American Indian law enforcement . Hunt fought for justice for Native Americans .
 In A Century of Dishonor, she documented the history of the United States government's mismanagement of Indian affairs .
 She then became special commissioner to investigate conditions of the Indians living in the California missions . She was special commissioner of the missions in California .
 In her novel Ramona Jackson dramatized the mistreatment of the mission Indians . Jackson's novel, Ramona, was published in 1988 . The novel dramatizes the mistreated Indians .
 Jesse Louis is an African American civil rights activist, political leader, and Baptist minister . Jesse Louis was born Jesse Jackson, Jesse Louis . He is a Baptist minister and political leader .
 He was a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1984 and 1988 . He ran for the nomination in 1988 and 1984 .
 In both campaigns, Jackson focused attention on the problems of African Americans and other minority groups . Jackson focused on issues of African American and other minorities .
 Jackson also led efforts to register more black voters and increase representation of minority groups at the 1984 and 1988 Democratic national conventions . Jackson was a pioneer in the field of African-American voters .
 He gained fame as one of the most effective orators in U.S. politics . But he gained fame for his oratory skills .
 From 1966 to 1971, Jackson was director of Operation Breadbasket, the economic arm of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . Jackson was a Southern Christian leader in the 1960s and 1970s .
 In this role, he persuaded many white-owned companies to hire blacks and sell products made by black-owned firms . He persuaded them to hire black people and sell their products . He also persuaded many companies to sell black-made products .
 In Chicago in 1971, Jackson founded People United to Save Humanity . The group was devoted to gaining economic power for blacks . Jackson founded the organization in 1971 .
 In the mid-1970's, the organization's name was changed to People United to Serve Humanity . The organization was formed in the early 1970s .
 Jackson directed Operation PUSH until 1984, when he founded and became head of the Rainbow Coalition . Jackson was head of PUSH and Rainbow Coalition until 1984 .
 The coalition was a group dedicated to gaining political power for blacks and others . It was formed in the 1930s and '60s .
 In 1995, Jackson resumed his leadership of Operation PUSH while continuing to head the Rainbow Coalition . Jackson continued his leadership in 1995, continuing to lead Operation Pushing .
 In 1996, the two organizations merged as the Rainbow PUSH Coalition, and Jackson became the new group’s president . Jackson was the president of the coalition .
 Jackson made several trips abroad that resulted in the freeing of hostages or other prisoners . Jackson visited hostages and other prisoners during his trips abroad . Jackson's trips helped free hostages or prisoners .
 In 1984, he obtained the release of a captured U.S. airman whose plane had been shot down by Syrian forces in Lebanon . In 1984 he was able to release a captured United States airman .
 Jackson helped arrange the release of three U.S. soldiers taken prisoner by Yugoslavia in 1999 . Jackson is credited with helping to release three soldiers taken hostage by Yugoslavia .
 In 1989, Jackson was awarded the Spingarn Medal for his civil rights and political achievements . Jackson won the award in 1989 for his achievements .
 Jackson led protests against a school district in Decatur, Illinois, in 1999 . Jackson has a long history of anti-school district protests .
 The district expelled six African American students for two years for allegedly starting a fight during a football game . The district had expelled six black students from the district .
 Jackson claimed many schools’ “zero tolerance’s policies against violence were unfair . Jackson claimed that many schools' ‘zero tolerance' policies were unfair. Jackson also claimed that some schools have zero tolerance policies .
 In 2001, Jackson revealed that he was the father of a child born outside of his marriage in 1999 . Jackson revealed the child in 2001 that he had a child outside of marriage .
 Some people claimed that this revelation weakened his authority as a moral and religious leader . Some people said that this weakened his moral authority . Others said that he had been weakened by this revelation .
 Jesse Jackson's son Jesse, Jr., has represented an Illinois district in the U.S. House of Representatives since 1995 . Since 1995, Jackson’s son Jesse has represented a district in Illinois state .
 Her singing combined powerful vitality with dignity with dignity, strong religious beliefs . She sang with powerful vitality and dignity .
 She disliked being identified with nonreligious music, but her singing style revealed the influence of jazz . Her singing style was influenced by jazz .
 In 1927, she moved to Chicago, where she became a soloist in the choir of a Baptist church . She later moved to New York and later sang in the church .
 Jackson's 1947 recording “Move On Up a Little Higher” sold over 1 million copies . Jackson recorded the song in 1947 . Jackson's song sold over a million copies of the record .
 By the late 1940's, she was attracting large audiences among the general public . She was able to perform in the 1940s .
 Frank Tirro Jackson is one of the most popular and exciting performers of rock music . Michael Jackson is an American singer, dancer and songwriter .
 Jackson's music has a strong rhythm and steady dance beat that combines elements of soul, rhythm and blues, and rock . Jackson has been married to more than 30 years of fame .
 The music video of the song “Thriller’s” is a 13-minute horror film that combines singing and dancing with spectacular visual and sound effects . The video was shot in New York City .
 Michael Joseph Jackson was born on Aug., 1958, in Gary, Indiana, and began performing locally with his brothers when he was 5 years old . Michael began performing at the age of 5 .
 Michael established himself as a solo singer with the album Off the Waill . Michael established his solo career as a singer . He has since released a solo album of his own .
 Robert Houghwout was an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1941 until his death . He was a lawyer and judge . He served as a Supreme Court associate justice .
 He served as solicitor general in 1938 and 1939, and defended New Deal laws in Supreme Court hearings . He was also a member of the Supreme Court .
 As a Supreme Court justice, Jackson showed independence . Jackson argued that judges should try to keep their judgments free from personal opinion .
 Jackson was chief U.S. prosecutor at the war crimes trials in Nuremberg, Germany, in 1945 and 1946 . Jackson was the chief United States prosecutor at Nuremb, Germany .
 Merlo J Pusey Jackson, Shirley Shirley, was an American novelist and short-story writer . She was known for her tales of psychological horror . Shirley Shirley was a short story writer .
 Jackson's best-known short story, “The Lottery,” tells of gruesome human sacrifice in a seemingly ordinary American town . The Lottery is one of Jackson's most famous short stories .
 Some of her other short stories deal with such social issues as prejudice and the loneliness of modern American women . Her short stories include tales of prejudice, loneliness and loneliness .
 Victor A Kramer Jackson, Shoeless Joe, was the most famous of eight Chicago White Sox players banned from baseball in 1920 . Eight of the eight players were banned from playing in the 1920s .
 They were banned for supposedly accepting bribes to make Chicago lose the 1919 World Series to Cincinnati . Chicago lost to Cincinnati in the World Series in 1919 . They were never allowed to play again .
 An Illinois court found all eight innocent of conspiracy, though some had confessed to involvement in the scheme . Some of the eight were found guilty of conspiracy but some confessed .
 Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis decided the eight players could never again play professional baseball . Despite the verdict, Landis said they were never allowed to play professionally again . Landis: Baseball Commissioner Landis never allowed them to play again .
 Troubled by blisters from a new pair of shoes, Jackson played in his stocking feet . Jackson was playing in stocking feet for the first time in his career .
 Jackson played his first full full major league season in 1911 . Jackson was an outfielder for the White Sox in 1915 .
 Jackson’s .356 career batting average ranks him behind only Ty Cobb and Rogers Hornsby in major league history . Jackson has a career-best batting average of .356 . He is the only major league player to have a career high .
 In the 1919 World Series, Jackson batted .375 and made no fielding errors . Jackson was a World Series MVP in 1919, batting . .
 In 1989, the South Carolina state senate asked to have Jackson freed from blame . The state senate in 1989 asked for Jackson to be freed from responsibility .
 Donald Honig jackson was one of the most famous Confederate generals . He fought under General Robert E Lee . Stonewall was a Confederate general who fought under Lee .
 At the First Battle of Bull Run, or Manassas, Jackson’s brigade faced overwhelming odds, but formed a strong line and held its ground . Jackson's brigade fought overwhelming odds but formed strong lines and held their ground .
 General Barnard E Bee, trying to rally his Southern troops, saw Jackson’s line and shouted, “There is Jackson standing like a stone wall.” General E. Bee, tried to rally troops, said Jackson was “standing like a rock wall”
 After that, Jackson was known as “Stonewall,” and his brigade as the Stonewall Brigade . Jackson was also known as "Stonewall," and his Brigade was known for its role in the Civil War .
 Jackson's chief characteristics were his religious nature, his careful attention to military detail, his firm discipline, and his capacity to get the maximum efforts from his men . Jackson's religious nature and careful attention were his chief characteristics .
 His soldiers loved him and trusted his ability, so they tolerated his strict discipline . His soldiers trusted him and so they trusted him so much, they tolerated him .
 General Lee could not find a man capable of replacing Jackson after his death . Lee and Jackson worked so well together that General Lee couldn't find a replacement .
 Orphaned at an early age, he was raised by an uncle, Cummins Jackson, a miller who lived near what is now Weston, W Va. He was raised in the early 1900s by his uncle .
 He was appointed to the United States Military Academy in 1842 . He worked hard to get his appointment .
 Because of his inadequate schooling, he had to work several times harder than most cadets to absorb lessons . Because of that, he was forced to work much harder than other cadets . He had to do so much more to absorb the lessons .
 His grades slowly climbed until he graduated in the upper third of his class . Graduated in the middle of his senior class .
 The story went around the school that if Jackson had had had one more year, he would have ranked first . The story was told that if . Jackson had . one more . year, it would have . been first .
 As soon as he received his commission as a lieutenant of artillery, Jackson was assigned to the war zone in Mexico . Jackson served in the Mexican Army during the Mexican War .
 Jackson served at Veracruz, Contreras, Chapultepec, and Mexico City . Jackson rose to the temporary rank of major within a year . Jackson served in Mexico City, Mexico City and Mexico .
 Jackson left the army in 1851 and joined the faculty of the Virginia Military Institute at Lexington, where he taught until 1861 . Jackson was a teacher at the Institute .
 He was not popular as a teacher, and students mocked his apparently stern, religious nature and his eccentric traits .
 Jackson went with his state, Virginia, when it secedceded from the Union . Although he favored preservation of the Union, Jackson chose to go with Virginia . He died in 1842 .
 An unknown when the war started, he soon made a reputation in the First Battle of Bull Run . He was unknown at the time of the war when he was killed .
 With not more than 17,000 men, he defeated 60,000 Union troops in a series of lightning marches and brilliant battles . He defeated the Union forces in a brilliant battle .
 After the campaign ended in June, Jackson raced to the aid of Lee at Richmond . Jackson raced back to Richmond .
 He fought in the Seven Days’ Battles, and at Cedar Mountain, the Second Battle of Bull Run, Antietam and Fredericksburg . He died in 18th century .
 He took his Second Corps around Union forces near Chancellorsville, Va. He took command of his troops around Union troops .
 Jackson's men struck from behind and drove the enemy back in wild disorder . Jackson’s men strike from behind, driving the enemy to wild disorder.
 In the darkness, some of his own men mistook him for the enemy and shot him . Some of the men thought he was the enemy . He was shot in the head by his own soldiers .
 The 5 peace MES it ae Ree ar aoe Kp FE Le St he ene Chicago Historical Society . Stonewall Jackson Confederate Army won the battle in which Jackson fell .
 William Henry Jackson was an American photographer famous for his pictures of the Old West . Jackson, William Henry, was famous for taking photographs of the West . He was also known for his work in the Civil War era .
 His photographs of the Yellowstone region of Wyoming helped persuade Congress to establish the first national park there in 1872 . Congress established the Yellowstone National Park in Yellowstone, Wyoming .
 Jackson's pictures provided a realistic view of the West . Jackson's photos of pioneers and settlers provided an accurate picture of the west .
 Jackson traveled throughout the West, often with government geological survey teams . Jackson traveled through the West with government teams .
 Negatives produced by one of his cameras measured 20 by 24 inches, which even at that time was unusually large . Negatives were so large that they measured up to 24 inches .
 Jacksonville is the largest city in Florida and the state's financial and insurance capital . Jacksonville is also known as the financial capital of the state .
 It is also an important seaport and a major distribution and transportation center of the southeastern United States . The city is a major transportation center and distribution center .
 In area, Jacksonville ranks as one of the largest cities in the United States . Jacksonville is located in one of America's largest cities .
 Jacksonville lies in northeastern Florida, midway between Atlanta, Georgia, and Miami, Florida . Jacksonville, Florida, is located on the Florida Keys .
 Indians and early colonists drove their cattle across this ford, which became known as Cow Ford . Georgia plantation owner moved to Cow Ford area in 1821 .
 He named it Jacksonville for Andrew Jackson, the provisional governor of the Territory of Florida . Jackson named it after Andrew Jackson .
 Jacksonville began to grow and prosper during the 1870's with the development of its first industries, lumbering and shipping . Jacksonville was founded in the city of Jacksonville, Florida, in 1881 .
 The metropolitan area of Jacksonville covers 2,836 square miles and extends over four counties . Jacksonville is home to the city of Jacksonville, Florida, and the state of Jacksonville .
 Jacksonville Landing shopping mall along the north bank is a center of activity in downtown business district . Jacksonville Landing is a shopping mall in downtown Jacksonville, Florida .
 The Times-Union Center for the Performing Arts stands west of the Jacksonville Landing . The center is located west of Jacksonville Landing, Florida .
 Concerts, conventions, exhibitions, and plays are held at the performing arts center . Concerts and conventions are held in the center .
 The Prime F Osborn III Convention Center, to the west of downtown, is linked with the business district by an elevated people mover system . The convention center is linked to downtown by elevated people-mover systems .
 Friendship Fountain is one of the tallest lighted fountains in the United States . Friendship Fountain in St. Johns River Park and Marina features the lighted Friendship Fountain .
 The Riverwalk, a boardwalk about 1 5 miles long, stretches along the south bank of the river . The boardwalk is located along the river's south bank .
 Restaurants and hotels line the Riverwalk, which also features entertainment areas where performers such as musicians and mimes appear . The Riverwalk also features restaurants and hotels .
 African Americans make up about 30 percent of the population of Jacksonville, Florida . African Americans -make up about . 30 per cent of Jacksonville's population .
 Jacksonville lies on the northeastern coast of Florida . Other groups in the state are involved in the Jacksonville area .
 Andrew Jackson was provisional governor of the Territory of Florida . Jackson was governor of Florida and later became president of the U.S. Andrew Jackson .
 In the 1970's, the city received over $25 million in federal funds to build low-cost housing . The city received the money in the 1970s to build affordable housing .
 Religious groups have built eight high-rise apartment buildings and a health center for the elderly . Religious groups also have built a health care center and apartments for elderly .
 Jacksonville serves as the main financial and insurance center of Florida . Jacksonville is the state's main financial center .
 It is a major banking center, and about 35 insurance companies have their home or regional offices there . It is also home to a number of major banking and insurance companies .
 Jacksonville is also a leading distribution and transportation center of the southeastern United States . Jacksonville is a major city in Jacksonville, Florida, and a major distribution center .
 The United States Navy operates the Mayport Naval Base and a naval air station in the city . The U.S. Navy operates a naval base and an air station .
 Jacksonville International Airport, railroad passenger trains, and a nationwide bus company serve the city . Jacksonville is also home to a national bus company .
 Other important industries include printing and publishing and the manufacture of chemicals, fabricated metal products, heavy machinery parts, paints, paper and pulp products .
 About 20,000 students attend the city’s 75 private and church-supported schools .
 The people elect the board members to four-year terms, and the board names a superintendent . The board names the superintendent .
 Jacksonville is also the home of Florida Community College at Jacksonville, a two-year college .
 The Haydon Burns Library consists of the main library in the downtown area and about 15 branches . Jacksonville's public library is located in the city's main downtown area .
 Jacksonville Symphony Orchestra performs at Times-Union Center for the Performing Arts and Florida Theatre . Jacksonville Symphony will perform at Times Union Center and the Florida Theatre.
 Local arts groups restored the building, and the city government purchased it in the mid-1980s . The building was purchased by local arts groups and restored by the city .
 Other concerts and plays are presented at the performing arts center and the Florida Theatre .
 The Florida Ballet at Jacksonville is the city's professional dance company . The company is based in the city .
 The Jacksonville Museum of Contemporary Art and Cummer Gallery of Art exhibit works of locally and nationally known artists . The Cummer Art and the Jacksonville Museum are located in Jacksonville .
 Fort Caroline National Memorial, a reconstructed fort, stands northeast of the downtown area . Fort Caroline is located in Fort Caroline's former base . The fort was built in 1817 .
 The fort is near the site of the original Fort Caroline, which Huguenots built in 1564 . Fort Caroline was built in the same place as Fort Caroline .
 Timucua Indians and European settlers are believed to have made a peace pact under the tree in the 1500's . Timucu Indians and Europeans are said to have agreed to a peace agreement under a tree .
 This center includes a baseball park, the 8,000-seat Jacksonville Coliseum, and Alltel Stadium . This center also includes a 73,000 seat Alltel stadium .
 This stadium serves as the home of the Jacksonville Jaguars of the National Football League . This stadium is located in Jacksonville, Florida . It was built in 2000 .
 FLORIDA THEATRE 6 COE SEUN ~~ AMLTEL STAD A av NTEVIPORARY oo (a's UNIVERSITY Gi e C * Ponte Vedra : Beach ir] ac sonville Beach . Beach ir: "Ac sonville
 A major tennis tournament, the Bausch & Lomb Championships, is held yearly at nearby Amelia Island . Amelia Island is also home to a tennis tournament .
 The people elect the mayor, the 19 City Council members, and other city officials to four-year terms . The mayor, council members and other officials are elected to four years each year .
 The city gets most of its income from property taxes, sewer service charges, and utility taxes . The city's income is based on property taxes and sewer charges .
 They took this action to achieve greater efficiency by ending the duplication of many activities and services . The move was designed to end duplication of services and activities .
 More than 1,000 miles of streets have been paved or repaired, and thousands of street lights have been installed . Police and fire departments have been improved under the consolidated government .
 Timucua Indians lived in the Jacksonville area long before Europeans first arrived . Timuca Indians lived there before Europeans came to the area .
 In 1564, a group of Huguenots led by René de Laudonnieére built Fort Caroline .
 Spain claimed the entire Florida region and was determined to keep the French out of the region . But Spain was determined not to allow the French to enter .
 In 1565, Spanish forces defeated the French colony at Fort Caroline in what was probably the first war between white people in America . The Spanish defeat of the colony in 1565 was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Both sides fought for the city during the American Civil War . Union forces occupied it four times during the war .
 During the 1870's, lumbering and shipping became Jacksonville's first major industries . The city's lumber and shipping industry was the city's first industry .
 The city's mild climate began to attract many winter vacationers from the North . The mild climate also attracted many winter travelers from the north .
 The increase in tourism led to the opening of the first direct railroad line between Jacksonville and the North in 1888 .
 The city grew rapidly during the late 1800's, and by 1900, it had a population of 28,429 . By 1900, the city had grown rapidly, and had a growing population of 28,429.
 The fire killed 7 people, left about 10,000 homeless, and destroyed about $15 million worth of property . 7 people were killed in the fire, which destroyed $15M worth of properties .
 Mayport Naval Base and two naval air stations in Jacksonville were established during World War I . During World War Il , the U.S. government established the Mayport naval base and air stations .
 Between 1950 and 1960, Jacksonville's population declined from 204,517 to 201,030 . Jacksonville population declined between 1950-1960 .
 Jacksonville rose in rank from the nation's 61st to 23rd largest city in population in population . Jacksonville rose from 61st in population to 23th in population as a result of this action .
 An industrial park for factories and warehouses was built during the 1970's . The city has carried out a port development program in the past .
 In the mid-1980's, Jacksonville began redevelopment of the downtown areas on both banks of the St. St. Louis River . Jacksonville began redeveloping its downtown areas in the 1980s .
 The Jacksonville Landing shopping mall and Prime F Osborn III Convention Center were built in a converted railway station dating to 1919 .
 During the late 1980's, service industries, such as the health care and telecommunications industries, boomed . During the 1980s, health care, telecommunications industries boomed.
 Jacksonville's population continued to grow rapidly, reaching 735,617 by 2000 . Jacksonville, Florida, was home to more than 700,000 people in 2000 .
 Jacksonville had become the nation’s 14th largest city in population in population . By then, the city had grown to be the nation's 14th biggest city .
 In 2000, a business and housing boom took place in southern Duval and northern St. St. Louis . Duval: "In 2000, in 2000, we saw a boom in business, housing boom in the area .
 To cope with this growth, a coalition of government agencies began major projects to clean the St. Louis area . The city's population has grown dramatically in recent years .
 St. Johns River, upgrade roads, improve sewerage system, preserve open space . The city will also improve roads, upgrade sewerage and preserve open land .
 Jacob Jacob, in the book of Genesis, was the son of Isaac and the father of 12 sons and at Jeast 1 daughter by his wives Leah, Rachel, Zilpah, and Bilhah . Michael P Clark Jacob was born in Genesis .
 According to the Bible, Jacob's sons were the founders of the 12 tribes of Israel . Jacob was Jacob's son Jacob, the son of Abraham and Jacob's wife, Jacob .
 Scholars believe idealized family relationships reflect complex patterns of tribal settlement and migration . Some scholars believe these idealized relationships really reflect complex tribal patterns .
 Jacob's character, with its conflicting dimensions, has come to stand for and embody the characteristics of the entire people called Israel . Whatever the actual historical background, Jacob's . character has come for and embodies the . characteristics of Israel .
 Jacob pretended to his blind and aged father that he was Esau . Later, at the urging of his mother, Rebecca, he enforced his claim by pretending to be Esau himself .
 Jacob slept at a place called Bethel, where he dreamed of a ladder between heaven and earth . On the way to his uncle Laban, he slept at Bethel .
 Laban forced Jacob to marry his older daughter, Leah, before he could have Rachel for his wife . Leah's older daughter was also forced to marry Laban's daughter, Laban, before Jacob could have her .
 Jacob left for home in Palestine with all his wives and their children . After working 20 years for Laban, Jacob worked for the company .
 Jacob received God's blessing and a new religious name -- Israel . Jacob received a new and more religious name—Israel .
 Jacob spent his last years in Egypt, where his son Joseph brought him to live . Jacob's last years were spent with his son in Egypt .
 John Edward Edward was president of the National Urban League from 1982 to 1994 . He served as president from 1982 until 1994 .
 Vernon Jordan replaced Vernon Jordan, 20 Jacobins who had held the position since 1972 . Vernon Jordan had been in charge of the Jacobins since 1972.
 He started working for the organization in 1965 as director of education and youth incentives at the Washington, D.C., chapter .
 Jacob served as acting executive director and president of the San Diego Urban League chapter . Jacob also served as president of that chapter and executive director of the Urban League .
 In 1979, he became exeCutive vice president of the national office of the Urban League under Jordan . In 1979 he was ex-Vice President of Urban League in charge of national office in New York .
 Jacob was a social worker for the Department of Public Welfare in Baltimore . Before joining the Urban League, Jacob worked for the department of public welfare . Jacob is a former social worker in Baltimore City .
 The society got its name from its Paris headquarters, which is near the church of St. St. Louis .
 Jacobins favored changing France from a monarchy to a democratic republic . The Jacobins were the Jacobins' first monarchists . They wanted to replace the monarchy with democracy .
 Most Jacobins were middle-class professionals such as doctors, lawyers, and teachers . Jacobins are Jacobins of 18th century .
 The Jacobins opposed war with other countries at first, fearing that it would lead to a military dictatorship . Jacobins were opposed to war, fearing it would end up with a military dictator .
 When war broke out with Prussia and Austria in 1792, the Jacobins supported it to gain control . The Jacobins backed the French government in the wake of the outbreak of the war in the Netherlands .
 His fellow Jacobins, fearing his political beliefs, turned on him and executed him in 1794 . But his fellow Jacobinists feared his political views and turned him on .
 Emmanuel J Jacobs, Joseph Jacobs, was a British scholar best known for his collections of folk tales for children . See also French Revolution; Girondists; Mirabeau, Comte de; Robespierre; Sieyés .
 Jacobs collected tales from England, Scotland, and Wales and modified them for younger audiences . Jacobs' tales were adapted for children's playbooks and children's shows .
 English fairy Tales and More English Fairy Tales rank among his most popular works . The works include more than 200 fairy tales .
 They include such stories as ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ and ‘The Three Little Pigs’ . The children’s stories are based on the stories of the animals .
 Jacobs was born in Sydney, Australia, and moved to England in the early 1870's . Jacobs moved to London in the mid-1870s . Jacobs was a pioneer in Australia and England .
 Jacobs was active in Jewish affairs throughout his career and wrote many works on Jewish history . Jacobs was also active in the Jewish community . Jacobs died at the age of 92 in 1981 .
 Jacquard, juh KAHRD or zha KAR, Joseph Marie, perfected the automatic pattern loom . Jacquard was born Jacquard .
 Jacquard looms could weave cloth with intricate patterns as easily as older looms made plain cloth . National Urban League John Edward Jacob Jacquard weaves cloth with patterns easily .
 In 1800, he saw an English journal that offered a prize for a simple pattern loom . He saw the prize for the loom in 1800 .
 By 1804, he had perfected the loom action that has remained essentially the same . The loom movement was invented in 1804 .
 O Frank Hunter Jade is a hard, tough, and highly colored stone widely used for fine carvings and jewelry . It is hard and tough to use, and is widely used in fine carved and jewelry.
 The Chinese carved it into jewelry, and also buried it with their dead . The Chinese also used it to make jewelry .
 Many beautiful jade carvings, dating from 1400 B.C., have been dug from the ruins of Anyang, the Chinese capital of the first Chinese dynasty .
 The Chinese developed new sources of the mineral and improved their carving technique . Through the years, the Chinese have improved their technique .
 Nephrite, the chief source of jade, was the mineral which the early Chinese used for carving . Nephrite was the main source of the jade which was used to make jade .
 China's principal jade-cutting centers are at Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou .
 The mineral comes in a range of colors, including dark green, white, yellow, gray, red, and black . The mineral is translucent to opaque, and comes in range of shades .
 Most valuable type of nephrite is a dark green jade called spinach jade . The most valuable type is the dark green green jaded called spinach .
 Jadeite, or Chinese jade, is a rare jade mineral, found mainly in Myanmar, Japan, California, and Mexico . Jadeite is found in carved objects in Mexico, Myanmar and Japan .
 Nephrite is more valuable than nephrite because of its beautiful colors, such as light-green or lilac . It's more valuable because it's beautiful colors such as lilac or green .
 Once ina while, small amounts of a transparent emerald-green colored jadeite are found in boulders . Small amounts of emerald green colored jadesite can be found in rocks .
 Jade minerals have a peculiar structure of interlocking meshes of fine needles that make them very strong and suitable for carving into delicate patterns and thin implements . Jade minerals are used in delicate patterns, thin implements and delicate patterns . Jade is a type of mineral that has a unique structure that makes it
 Nephrite tools were found in the Lake Dweller remains of the New Stone Age in Europe and Central America .
 Three species of sea birds that live in northern regions worldwide . Jaeger, YAY guhr or JAY Guhr, also called hunting gull, is the name of a hunting gull .
 They feed on small mammals and small birds; eggs; and fish, which they often steal from other sea birds . The birds often steal fish and small mammals from small mammals, small birds .
 It has been an important seaport since Biblical times, when it was Called Joppa . The city has been a major port for centuries, and has been called Joppa in Biblical times .
 Jaguar, JAC wahr, is the largest, most powerful wildcat of the Western Hemisphere . Jaguar is largest wildcat in the world, the largest of the world's most powerful animals .
 Jaguars occur in Mexico, Central and South America, and southern Arizona and New Mexico . Jaguars have been known to be found in Mexico and Central America . Jaguars are often found in southern Arizona, New Mexico and southern Mexico .
 Until the early 1900's, they also roamed in southern California, Louisiana, and Texas .
 Jaguars live in forests, shrubby areas, and grasslands—wherever they can safely hide . Jaguars often hide in grasslands, shrubs, forests, grasses and grasses .
 They eat almost any kind of animal, including deer, fish, wild pigs, tapirs, turtles, and capybaras and other rodents . They eat deer and fish, including tapirs and tapirs .
 Jaguars measure from 5 to 8 5 feet long, including their 1 } to 2 5 foot tail . Jaguars measure between 5 and 8 5 foot long, with a 1-to-2 5-foot tail, and Jaguars can reach up to 10 feet long . Jaguars are usually found in
 The spots along its back and sides are lightcolored with dark borders and have a dark spot in the center of the center . The spots on its back, sides and back are light colored .
 The Maya Indians considered the animal a god . The jaguar symbolized strength and courage to the ancient Maya Indians .
 It has a long neck, a weaselshaped head, short ears, stubby legs, and a long tail . It also has short ears and stubbed legs .
 The cat stands about 1 foot high at the shoulder and is from 3 to 4 feet long . The cat is a 1 foot tall cat that stands about 3 to four feet long and is 1 foot wide .
 Jahn’s early works reflect the International Style of modern architecture . Jahn's early works were influenced by the International style .
 This style emphasizes steel, glass, and concrete, avoids ornamentation, and stresses straight lines and overlapping planes . The style emphasizes concrete, steel and glass .
 Jahn adapted these principles in his Kemper Arena and Bartle Convention Center in Kansas City, Missouri . Jahn: "It's a great way to get people to think about their lives"
 About 1980, Jahn made a transition to a style known as Postmodern architecture . Jahn is known for his architectural style, which is now called Postmodern .
 The multicolored facade of Jahn’s One South Wacker Drive office building in Chicago includes black window panels designed in the form of gigantic pillars that refer to ancient Greek columns . The building includes black windows designed in form of giant pillars .
 Jai alai, HY /y, is a fast and dangerous game that resembles handball . Dennis Domer Jai Alai is the fastest and most dangerous game in the world . It's a fast, dangerous game similar to handball.
 Players use a narrow wicker basket to throw a hard ball against the front wall of a court . Players use wicker baskets to throw balls against the wall of the court .
 Spectators sit along the open side of the court, watching the game through a clear, protective screen . Spectators watch the game with the help of security guards .
 To begin a singles game, the server hurls the ball from his cesta against the front wall against the wall . To begin the singles match, the servers hurl a ball from their cesta .
 The opponent must catch the ball either before it hits the floor or on the first bounce . Opponent must catch it either before the ball hits the ground or before it is on the floor .
 The opponent then hurls the ball against the wall, and the server must catch it and throw it back . The server then catches the ball and throws it back to the opponent .
 In international doubles games, a team must score 30 or 40 points to win . In partido games, teams must score between 30 and 40 points in order to win the game .
 Basque sport is played with a basket called a cesta and a ball called a pelota in the 1600's. region of Spain and France during the 1600s.
 Today, jai alai is a favorite sport not only in Spain and France, but also in Mexico and the Philippines . It is also popular in Mexico, the Philippines and Mexico .
 In the United States, jai alai first became popular in Florida . It is now played in several states .
 It is based on the belief that every living thing consists of an eternal soul called the jiva and a temporary physical body .
 The eternal jiva is imprisoned in the body as a result of involvement in worldly activities . It is imprisoned by involvement in a worldly activities, says the author .
 After being freed, it exists eternally in a state of perfect knowledge and bliss . After being released, it is eternally blissed, says the author .
 These men and women try to separate themselves from the everyday world .
 They may not own any property except a broom, simple robes, bowls for food, and walking sticks . They may also own a broom and simple robes .
 They may not live in buildings except for brief periods, and they must beg for all their food . They are not allowed to live in other buildings except brief periods . They must also beg for their food and must eat all of it .
 It may motivate them to cease all bodily activity and die of starvation, but this rarely happens . This rarely happens, but it may motivate people to cease bodily activity .
 The laity support the sadhus and sadhvis and obey less strict rules of conduct . Laity members of the sadhu and sadvvis follow less strict guidelines .
 A broom and a bowl are important symbols of Jainism, and Jain holy men and women always carry them . A broom is important symbol of the Jain religion .
 Holy men use it to sweep aside insects so they will not step on them . Holy men and women use it as a tool to sweep away insects .
 of the laity engage in business activities because such occupations do not directly involve killing any living thing . The laity carry bowls to collect food for themselves and carry bowls .
 They look forward to becoming sadhus or sadhvis themselves in a future life .
 Jains believe that Mahavira was the 24th in a line of teachers of Jain principles . The Jains say Mahavir was a teacher of a long line of principles .
 The Jains honor these teachers and other holy persons, but they do not consider them to be gods . Jains are not considered gods by the majority of the world .
 Jakarta is the capital, largest city, and chief economic center of Indonesia . Jakarta is Jakarta, Indonesia's capital and largest city .
 Jakarta, sometimes spelled Djarkata, lies on the Ciliwung River, on the northwest coast of the island of Java . Jakarta is sometimes known as the Indonesian capital Jakarta .
 Many modern hotels and office and government buildings surround Medan Merdeka (Freedom Square) near the center of Jakarta . The square is located near the Indonesian capital, Jakarta .
 The monument honors Indonesia's struggle for independence from the Netherlands . The Dutch ruled the country from the 1600's to 1949 .
 Jakarta's main business district and some industries are in the northern part of the city . Jakarta’s business district is located in the north of Jakarta . Jakarta is the Indonesian capital of Indonesia and Indonesia .
 Major industries also operate on the southern and eastern edges of Jakarta . Jakarta is the Indonesian capital of Indonesia . Indonesia's capital city is the capital of Jakarta, Indonesia .
 Wealthy Jakartans once lived in a Dutch-built residential section called Menteng . The area is now known as Menteng, a residential section of the Jakartan .
 Today, these people make their homes in Pondok Indah and other fashionable residential areas in the south of Jakarta .
 Many people in Jakarta live in small wood or bamboo structures in districts called Kampongs . Jakarta's Kampongs are known for their bamboo and wood structures .
 The Museum Pusat houses Indonesian archaeological treasures . Its best-known museum is the Museum of Pusat, which houses Indonesian treasures .
 The Taman Ismail Marzuki Center features art exhibits, theatrical and musical performances, puppet plays, and a planetarium . The center's planetarium is located in Tokyo, Japan .
 The city's harbor, Tanjung Priok, handles much of the nation's foreign trade . The harbor is also known for its role in much of South Korea's economic prosperity .
 Factories in Jakarta assemble motor vehicles; process food; and manufacture chemicals, electronic equipment, paper and printed materials, textiles, and other products . Factories assemble motor cars, process food and process food, and make chemicals, electronics, and textiles .
 Government employs many people, although private businesses are growing . The government employs many of the country's most people .
 Automobiles, buses, taxis, trucks, and motorcycles crowd the streets of Jakarta . Jakarta is the capital of Indonesia's capital .
 The Sukarno-Hatta International Airport at Cengkareng lies to the west of the city . The airport is located in the city's capital, Nangang .
 The area of what is now Jakarta was settled as early as the A.D. 400’s, probably by Sundanese people from other parts of Java . The area was settled in the region of what now Jakarta .
 In the early 1500's, the Portuguese established a trading post in the area but were soon driven out by local Muslims . The Portuguese were driven out of the area by Muslims .
 Dutch and English trading companies built outposts in Jayakarta during the early 1600s . Dutch and British trading companies were established in the city during the period .
 Jayakarta was destroyed in 1619, when the Dutch defeated the English in a battle for control of the area . The city was destroyed by the Dutch, who fought for control in the Dutch-held territory .
 The Japanese occupied Batavia from 1942 until their defeat in World War II in 1945 . Batavia was occupied by the Japanese until 1945, when they were defeated by the Allies .
 Indonesia won its independence from the Netherlands in 1949, and Jakarta was renamed Jakarta . Batavia was renamed after Jakarta .
 The great increase in population resulted in overcrowding and a shortage of jobs . The great number of people in the country has increased in recent years .
 In 1970 Jakarta banned new immigrants from settling in Jakarta unless they already had jobs in the city . In 1970, Jakarta's governor banned immigrants from moving in unless they were already working in Jakarta .
 Arawak Indians, who were the first people to live in Jamaica, named the island Xaymaca, which means /and of wood and water .
 Jamaica's pleasant climate and its beautiful beaches and mountains attract large numbers of tourists each year . The island nation is known for its beaches, mountains and beaches .
 Jamaica is among the world’s leading producers of bauxite, the ore from which aluminum is made . Jamaica is one of the world's top producers of aluminum .
 Island also produces bananas, sugar, bananas, and various manufactured goods .
 The prime minister, who leads the majority party in Parliament, is the chief executive . He is also the leader of the country's largest party in parliament .
 The governor general represents the monarch but has few governing powers . He is the governor general of the UK . He represents the country's monarch .
 Jamaican Parliament consists of a Senate and a House of Representatives . Jamaican parliament consists of two chambers, one chamber and one chamber . Parliament is a chamber of chambers and two chambers of assembly .
 The governor general appoints the 21 senators, 13 of them on the advice of the prime minister and 8 of them of the opposition in Parliament . 13 of the senators are appointed by the governor general .
 The voters elect 60 people to five-year terms in the House of Representatives . 60 people are elected to serve five-term terms . 60 of the 60 people elected to the House are women .
 Jamaica is divided into 12 units of local government called parishes, plus the Kingston and St. St. Martin parishes . Jamaica is also divided into Kingston, St. Mary's and Jamaica's parishes. Jamaica is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Andrew Corporation is a governmental unit made up of Kingston and its surrounding area . It is a government unit based in Kingston and surrounding areas . Kingston is the headquarters of the Andrew Corporation, a government body .
 Each parish has a governing council whose members are elected by the people . The council is made up of members of each parish's governing council .
 More than 90 percent of Jamaica's people have black African or mixed black African and European ancestry . Jamaica's population is largely black African, mixed black and white .
 Agricu/ture—bananas, cacao, citrus fruits, coconuts, cocouts, coffee, sugar cane .
 Manufacturing and processing— alumina, cement, chemicals, clothing, machinery, machinery and petroleum products, rum, sugar .
 A gold diagonal cross with black triangular side panels, and green triangular panels at top of the bottom, was created in 2007 .
 The gold stands for sunlight and mineral wealth, the black for hardships of the past and future, and the green for hope and agricultural wealth . The gold is for sunlight, mineral wealth and the black is for hardships .
 Other important crops include sugar cane, coffee, citrus fruits, and coconuts . Asians, most of whom are Chinese and Indians; Europeans; and Syrians .
 Most Jamaican business and professional people are Europeans and Afro-Europeans . Most Jamaicans are European and African-Americans .
 Large numbers of people of African and South Asian ancestry work as farm laborers . African, South Asian people work as laborers in farm labor . Farm laborers are often African-South Asian immigrants .
 Most Jamaicans speak a dia/ect of English that differs from the English that is spoken by Americans and English people . Jamaican people speak a different language than the English spoken by other Jamaicans and Americans .
 Religious groups include Anglicans, Baptists, members of the Church of God, Roman Catholics, and Roman Catholics .
 About 100,000 black Jamaicans belong to a religious and political movement called Rastafarianism . The movement is based on a religious belief in the African-American religion .
 The name Rastafarian comes from Ras Tafari, a title held by Haile Selassie |, the emperor of Ethiopia from 1916 to 1974 . The name comes from the title of the Ethiopian emperor, who ruled the country .
 They adopted many of the beliefs of Marcus Garvey, a Jamaican who died in 1940 . In addition, they adopted many beliefs of the Jamaican .
 After Haile Selassie’s death in 1975, Rastafarians changed some of their beliefs about Africa . Rastarians changed their beliefs after the death of the late king .
 Today, some look forward to a spiritual return to Africa rather than to actually living there .
 The government provides free elementary schools for children from 6 to 15 years old . The government also provides free schools for those from 6-15 years old.
 Jamaica is part of the Greater Antilles, a group of islands in the West Indies . Jamaica is one of the countries in the group, known as the Great Antilles .
 Limestone formations located in northwestern Jamaica include a large number of deep depressions called cockpits . The area is called the Cockpit Country .
 The rainy seasons extend from May through June and September through November . The rainy season is May-June-September .
 Other farm products include allspice, bananas, cacao, citrus fruits, coconuts, cocouts, coffee, milk, poultry, and yams .
 Jamaica's farms do not produce enough food for all the people, so must import much of its food . The nation’s farms don’t have enough food to feed all of its population . Jamaica imports much more food than any other nation .
 Plants near some of the bauxite mines remove a/umina from the ore . The compound is a mineral compound called a-umina .
 Jamaicans mine gypsum, which is used in making plasterboard and other construction materials . Jamaicans also mine gypsyum, used in building materials .
 Jamaica has plants that produce cement, chemicals, cigars, clothing, fertilizer, footwear, machinery, molasses, petroleum products, and rum . Jamaica also has factories that produce clothing, shoes, clothing and machinery .
 Leading tourist centers in Jamaica include Kingston, Montego Bay, Negril and Ocho Rios . Jamaica's leading tourist centers include Negril, Negrit, Och Rios and Ochrio .
 Jamaica's chief trading partners are the United Kingdom, the United States, and Venezuela . Jamaica’s chief trading partner is the U.K. and the United Nations .
 Jamaica belongs to the Caribbean Community and Common Market . Jamaica is part of the economic organization of Caribbean nations .
 It is also a member of other international trade and development organizations .
 The country has an average of only about 1 automobile for every 15 people . But the average of 1 automobile per person in the country is only 1 car per person .
 Christopher Columbus arrived in 1494 and claimed the island for Spain . Arawak Indians lived in Jamaica when the explorer arrived there .
 Spaniards enslaved the Arawak and later brought Africans to the island as slaves . The Spaniards also brought Africans into the island to be slaves .
 Because Jamaica had no gold, they did not try to settle or develop the island . The island is now a tourist hotspot .
 The British invaded Jamaica in 1655, and they gained formal possession of the island in 1670 .
 They continued to fight African slaves called Maroons, who had escaped into the hills when the British arrived . The British arrived in the 17th century, but continued fighting against African slaves .
 British pirates in the Caribbean used Jamaica as a base to attack Spanish ports and ships . During the 1670's, British pirates used Jamaica to attack Spain's ships .
 Island ranked as most important slave market in the Western Hemisphere . Sugar became the major crop, and the island ranked as the most important plantation market .
 The end of slavery hurt the Jamaican sugar industry because the plantation owners lost thousands of laborers . End of slavery in Jamaica hurt the sugar industry .
 In 1865, disputes between planters and workers led to a peasant revolt called the Morant Bay Rebellion . It was the first revolt in the history of African American land disputes .
 After the revolt, Jamaica became a crown colony, governed directly by the United Kingdom . Jamaica was ruled by the British government after the revolt .
 In the 1930's, Jamaican labor leaders urged the British Parliament to give the Jamaican people more political power . In the 30's, labor leaders called for more power to be given to the people .
 In 1944, the United Kingdom gave Jamaica a new constitution that provided for some self-government . Jamaica's constitution was given to Jamaica by the UK in 1944 .
 Jamaica was a member of the West Indies Federation from 1958, when the federation was established, until it was dissolved in 1962 . Jamaica was part of the federation from 1958 to 1962 .
 Later in 1962, Jamaica became a fully independent nation and a member of the Commonwealth of Nations . Jamaica is now a fully member of the Commonwealth of Nations .
 Jamaica joined the United Nations in 1962 and the Organization of American States in 1969 . Jamaica joined OAS in 1969 and joined the UN in 1962 .
 He sought to solve the economic problems by adopting socialistic policies, he said . Mr. Obama sought to adopt socialist policies to solve economic problems, he added . He said: "I want to see how we can solve the problems of the future."
 He adopted economic policies that emphasized the role of private business . He encouraged foreign investment and good relations with Western nations .
 In 1983, Jamaica and several other Caribbean nations joined the U.S. in invading Grenada to overthrow its Marxist government . Grenada was overthrown by the United States in 1983 .
 President Obama followed a moderate course of economic and foreign relations policies . He followed a centrist course in economic, foreign relations policy .
 The PNP won the most seats in parliamentary elections held in 1993 and 1997, and Patterson remained prime minister . Patterson was prime minister in 1997 .
 James was the name of five kings of Scotland and two kings of both Scotland and England . Morgan, Garvey, Marcus Rastafarians, Kingston Reggae Marley, Bob West Indies were also James .
 James I became King James VI of Scotland in 1567 when his mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, was forced to give up that throne . James I was King James I of Scotland from 1567 to 1567 .
 When his cousin Elizabeth | died in 1603, he became James | of England, the first Stuart king of England . He became James of England when he became the first monarch of England.
 Daniel, Daniel, Jr. lished works on theology, witchcraft, and the divine right of kings . A scholar, he pubished works of theology and witchcraft .
 He had great success ruling Scotland, but the English Parliament opposed his attempt to rule as absolute monarch in England . He had success in Scotland but was opposed by Parliament .
 This struggle for power continued under Charles |, and contributed to the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 . Charles was the first monarch to hold the throne in England .
 James also faced opposition from the Puritans, a religious group that wanted “to purify” the Church of England . The Puritans wanted to “purify’’s’ church, James .
 James sponsored a new translation of the Bible, published in 1611, that became known as the King James Version . The King James Bible was published by 1611 .
 Jamestown, the first permanent English settlement in America, was named in his honor . Jamstown is named in honor of the Englishman who founded the town in 17th century .
 James showed an interest in colonies only in Northern Ireland, where he seized land from Irish Catholics and gave it to English and Scottish Protestants . But James showed interest only in . Northern Ireland .
 When James's wife had a son in June 1688, the prospect of another Catholic ruler united James's opponents . James's son was born in 1688 and became a Catholic king .
 In the Glorious Revolution of 1688, James was forced to give up the throne . In the 17th century, he was able to take over the throne from James .
 His Protestant daughter Mary and her husband, William of Orange, ruler of the Netherlands, became joint rulers in 1689 . William and Mary's daughter Mary were Protestant and Protestant . William's wife, Mary, was Protestant .
 James James ruled from 1424 to 1437; James II to 1460; James III to 1488; James IV to 1513 . James V ruled from 1513 to 1542 . James III ruled 1488 to 1588 .
 Tuskegee Army Air Field trained the men who would become the U.S. military's first black pilots . The program was held at Tuskegery Army Airfield .
 James won promotion to brigadier general in 1970 and lieutenant general in 1973 . James was promoted to lieutenant general by the rank of colonel .
 He served as commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) from 1975 until his retirement in 1978 . He was commander of NORAD from 1975 to 1978 .
 He praised excellence in performance as a way to attack institutionalized racism . He said it was an attempt to combat racism in the workplace . He also said excellence is a good way to combat institutional racism .
 It is one of eight letters called “General Epistles’ because they were addressed to Christians in general . The letters were written in a series of letters addressed to the general public .
 This James should not be confused with James, the son of Alphaeus and James, who were among the 12 apostles . This James is not the same James who was among the apostles .
 Some believe the author may have lived in Antioch because the epistle is written in Greek . The epistle seems to contain Greek ideas and seems to be written in the same way .
 Christians warned that profession of faith cannot take the place of good deeds . It warned Christians that profession cannot take place of faith .
 In his short stories and novels, he created characters of great psychological complexity . He created characters that were great psychological depth .
 At first, James's style was straightforward and realistic, and he often sharply satirized manners and morals . At first he was straightforward, realistic, but his style was more conservative .
 Later, his style became complicated, and his basic realism became deepened by a rich, almost poetic symbolism . Later, he became more sophisticated, with his style becoming more complex .
 His reviews, essays, and prefaces have established him as one of the most important theorists of fiction .
 His father was a religious philosopher and a friend of leading thinkers of the 1800's . He was a friend with leading thinkers and religious philosophers .
 His older brother, William, became a great philosopher and psychologist . His brother, also a psychologist, is a Nobel Prize winner in Germany .
 James's father gave his five children an unusual education, which included long visits in Europe . James's dad gave his children long trips to Europe, including long visits to the continent .
 In the tale “The Lesson of the Master’ , he suggested that to be an artist, a person should be free of obligations of family life .
 James devoted himself to his art, writing every day, but he still enjoyed a wide circle of social and literary friendships . James dedicated himself to the art, but also enjoyed a wider circle of friends .
 He felt that the older and more socially complicated societies of Europe would offer him richer material for his fiction . The author felt that Europe's older societies would offer richer material .
 In Paris, he befriended the most advanced European writers, including Gustave Flaubert, lvan Turgenev, and Emile Zola .
 He became a British subject in 1915 to show his support for Britain during World War I . His works include paintings, photographs and works .
 The first, from 1864 to 1874, was an apprenticeship in which he concentrated on writing short stories and criticism . The first was a short story-writing apprenticeship .
 His second phase began with Roderick Hudson , his first important novel . He has also written a number of novels, including one of the world's greatest novels .
 In those works, an innocent, sensitive, intelligent person sets out on a quest for experience . In the works, the innocent and intelligent person is an innocent and sensitive person .
 The person usually travels to Europe, discovering the contrast in manners and morals between the older world of Europe and the new world of America . The person is usually traveling to Europe .
 During James's third stage, from 1882 to 1889, he wrote many short stories and short novels . During this period he wrote several novels and short stories .
 St. James's fourth stage, from 1889 to 1895, is marked by his unsuccessful attempts to become a popular playwright .
 He entered an experimental period that lasted until 1900, writing a group of novels in which he tried different methods of controlling point of view . He entered a series of novels that he tried to control point-of-view .
 An adult story about divorce is told from the point of view of a little girl . For example, in What Maisie Knew, an adult story is told of a child's perspective .
 James's sixth phase, often called his “major phase’s, covers the rest of his life . James's 'major phase' is the sixth phase of his career .
 He wrote his three greatest novels, The Wings of the Dove, The Ambassadors, and The Golden Bow! in this period . He wrote The Wings Of the Dove , The Ambassador, The Red Bow! and The Wings .
 Virginia L Henry James and the Real Thing: A Modern Reader's Guide . Henry James' The Real Thing is a modern-day guide to James' work .
 James, Jesse became one of the most famous bank and train robbers in the history of the U.S. He was the son of Jesse James . He was a member of the infamous bank and rail robbery gang .
 Jesse Woodson James be was born in Clay County, P.M Missouri, and was the son of a minister . He was a member of a church .
 After the war, Jesse and Frank James formed a new band with their cousins, the Youngers, and began to hold up trains, stagecoaches, and banks . The Youngers were the brothers' cousins, Jesse James, who formed a band .
 In 1871, bank officials hired the Pinkerton National Detective Agency to capture Jesse . In 1875, a bomb thrown into his mother's house killed his stepbrother Archie Samuel and injured his mother .
 Some people believed detectives hurled the bomb, and that James was being unjustly persecuted . James was found dead at the scene of the bomb .
 In 1881, Governor Thomas Crittenden of Missouri offered a $5,000 reward for the arrest of Frank or Jesse . Governor Thomas Cittendens of Missouri had offered a reward for their arrest .
 Gang member Robert Ford believed he could collect the reward if he killed either brother, and shot Jesse in the head . Jesse's brother Jesse was shot to the head by a gang member . Robert Ford was a member of the gang .
 A poet as well as a policeman, Dalgliesh brings intelligence and sensitivity to the cases he investigates .
 James's books are noted for their psychological realism, wellconstructed plots, strong characterization, and descriptive prose . James is noted for his psychological realism and wellwritten plots .
 She joined the British civil service in 1949, working first in hospital administration . She worked in the criminal policy department .
 David Geherin James, Saint, was one of the leaders of the Christian church in Jerusalem during the first years after it was founded . He was a leader in the early years after the church was established .
 Some documents record the tradition that the Jews called him ‘the Just,’ probably because of his strict observance of the law . Some documents say he was called "the Just" because he was strict .
 According to tradition, James wrote the Epistle of James in the New Testament . The Epistle was written in James' Epistem of James . James is believed to be the author of the Epistepistes .
 Charlesworth James, William , became the most widely read American philosopher of the 1900's . William James was known for his work as a philosopher in the early 1900s . William became the world's most famous philosopher .
 James's interests turned to psychology and the relationship among experience, thinking, and conduct . James's interest turned to the relationship between experience and thinking . He has published a series of books about psychology .
 Neither physiology nor psychology could satisfy James's interest in the human condition, he says .
 "He was basically a philosopher who believed in the supreme importance of ideas," he said .
 Depression over his inability to reach a decision led him to the verge of despair . Depression over deciding whether to commit suicide led to the end of his life .
 He believed that every difference in thinking must make a difference to someone, somewhere, somewhere . He said that every change in thinking makes a difference .
 If two theories differ, the difference becomes clear when we know how they differ over what the facts are, and the difference in our behavior if we believe that one or the other is true . If we believe one of the theories is true, we will be more likely to believe one or
 Another may claim that people are not free because all human decisions and actions are determined by factors beyond their control . Another may say that all people are free because they are unable to control their actions .
 According to James, we must find a way to decide between them because our conduct depends on which we adopt . Therefore, according to him, we need to decide whether to adopt .
 James proposed that we approach such questions by tracing the consequences of each viewpoint . James proposes that we take a look at each viewpoint and trace the consequences .
 We can regret some of our actions and can say that the world would be better if such actions had not been carried out. We can also regret our actions, we say . We regret our involvement in some of the world's most heinous crimes .
 We are not responsible for our actions, and it makes no sense to speak about something happening differently from the way it did happen . We are responsible for what happened, and we should not have been responsible for it .
 James did not claim to have solved difficult philosophical problems for all time . He said: "I don't think I've solved a difficult philosophical problem for the first time"
 He tried to put them into a form that would make it easier for people to solve the problems for themselves, he says . He says he tried to make them easier to solve for themselves .
 All people, James believed, must make up their own minds on issues of human life and destiny that cannot be settled on scientific grounds, he said .
 It states that if we believe in the possibility of some future event taking place, this belief increases our power to help make the event happen when the time comes for action . The belief increases your power to make an event happen .
 James explored the bay in 28 James River 1631 and again in 1633 while trying to discover the Northwest Passage .
 Several large rivers flow into the bay, among them the Attawapiskat, Albany, and Moose in Ontario; and the Harricana, Nottaway, and Eastmain in Quebec; .
 George B Priddle James River is the largest waterway lying wholly within the state of Virginia . It is also known as the James River, the largest river in Virginia .
 Jamestown, the first permanent English colony in America, was settled on the banks of this stream in 1607 . Jamstown was settled by the first English colony on this stream .
 The Allegheny River rises in the Allegheny Mountains at the meeting point of the Jackson and Cowpasture rivers .
 The Appomattox is one of the chief branches of the James River . It enters the river 66 miles (106 kilometers) from the sea . It is the largest branch of the river .
 From this point down to the sea, the James is a tidal stream and can accommodate large ocean steamers . The James is the largest tidal stream in the world .
 James the Greater, Saint, was one of the 12 apostles of Jesus Christ . He was the son of the apostles of Christ . James was born in Jerusalem .
 James is often called James the Greater to distinguish him from another apostle, James the Less . James was often known as James the Great .
 James and John were fishermen who lived along the northern shore of the Sea of Galilee . They lived in the northern part of the Galilee and lived on the north shore .
 Of all the apostles, his martyrdom is the only one reported in the New Testament . The martyrdom of the apostles is only one of them reported .
 According to tradition, the bones of James were taken to Santiago de Compostela in Spain . According to later tradition, James' bones were taken by the Spanish city .
 The town became an important pilgrimage center during the Middle Ages . As a result, the town became important pilgrimage centers . The town is now a tourist attraction .
 St. James's feast day is celebrated on July 31, 2012 .
 He is often called James the Less to distinguish him from another apostle, James the Greater . He was often called the Less .
 Many Biblical scholars believe that they are three different people . However, many Biblical scholars say they are different people from the Bible .
 James the Less is mentioned in all four lists of the apostles in the New Testament . He is the son of Jesus Christ and is the founder of the Second Century .
 Jamestown, Va., was the first permanent English settlement in North America . It was established in 17th century . It is believed to have been the first English settlement on the continent .
 On May 6, 1607, three ships stopped at Cape Henry, at the southern entrance to Chesapeake Bay, after more than four months at sea .
 Captain Christopher Newport commanded the ships, the Susan Constant, Godspeed, and Discovery . The Susan Constant was the first ship from the Discovery .
 They had been sent out by a group of London merchants and other interested people known as the Virginia Company of London .
 They came to America mostly to search for treasure and spread Christianity among the Indians . They came in to America mainly to find treasure and to spread Christianity .
 Few of the men were able or willing to do manual labor or to raise farm products that could not be grown in England . Few were able to raise products that were not grown in the UK .
 The adventurers landed on a little peninsula on the river on May 24 and established their settlement there . They established a settlement on the peninsula .
 They named both the river and their settlement in honor of King James of England . The settlement was named after King James .
 Two-thirds of the men soon died of malnutrition, malaria, pneumonia, and dysentery . A meager and unwholesome diet weakened the men, and about two-thirds soon died .
 Captain John Smith held the group together when he took control from mid-1608 to mid1609 . Captain Smith took control of the group from 1608 to 1609 . Capt. John Smith is believed to have held together the group .
 He forced the adventurers to stop searching for gold and silver and start working for their survival . He bought corn from the Indians, and he bought them corn .
 Smith returned to England in 1609 for treatment after an accident . Smith was forced to return to England for treatment at the age of 1609 .
 Fire, drought, Indian attacks, disease, starvation, and lack of a strong leader brought the settlement to its lowest ebb in the winter of 1609-1610 . The settlement was devastated by drought, disease and starvation .
 Governor Thomas West, Lord De La Warr, saved Jamestown from abandonment in 1610 . Governor West arrived with settlers and supplies to save the town from abandonment .
 Indian princess Pocahontas is reported to have saved the life of John Smith . John Smith was reported to be killed by his daughter . The Indian princess is believed to have been responsible for saving his life .
 It brought about a few years of uneasy peace between the settlers and the Indians . The settlers and Indians were forced to settle in 1881 .
 Early settlers failed in attempts to produce silk, grapes, and other items unsuited for the Virginia climate . The early settlers failed to produce cotton, silk and grapes .
 Early industries included glass blowing, iron smelting, the making of potash, and shipbuilding . Shipbuilding and glass blowing were important industries .
 The first farm products to be raised successfully were hogs and Indian corn . Hogs were the first to be grown in the United States .
 In 1612, John Rolfe introduced a new type of tobacco to the colony by bringing seed from Trinidad . The tobacco was introduced by Rolfes in 1612 by bringing seeds from the country .
 This new kind of tobacco was sweeter than the native Virginia plant, and settlers found a ready market for it in Europe . The settlers found it sweet and sweet, and it was found to be a popular market in Europe.
 Tobacco, corn, and hogs provided a solid basis for Jamestown’s economy . The town was founded in 17th century .
 In 1619, the first representative legislative assembly in the Western Hemisphere met in Jamestown . The first representatives legislative assembly met in 1619 . The assembly was held in the first place in the Americas .
 In 1619, the Virginia Company tried to encourage young men to make permanent homes in the colony by sending a number of “young, handsome and honestly educated maids’s” to become the bachelors’ wives . The Virginia Company sent the maids to
 Before 1619, only a few married women and female servants lived in Jamestown . The town was founded in 1619 .
 Dutch ship at Jamestown with 20 blacks for sale in 1619 . Dutch ship arrived with 20 black slaves for sale .
 These Africans, and the thousands who followed them, would in time become slaves . These Africans were slaves, and thousands of others .
 The town itself was warned of the uprising and was able to resist the attack . The town was warned that the uprising would take place .
 Both times the colonists struck back, killing many Indians and destroying their food supplies and villages . Both times, the colonists killed many Indians, destroying food supplies, villages .
 Jamestown settlers learned to produce their own food and tobacco proved to be a highly marketable cash crop . Two of the main reasons for the survival of the settlement were that the colonists learned to grow their own crops .
 In 1699, the people in Virginia transferred their capital to Williamsburg in 1699 . The capital was moved to the city of Williamsburg .
 It now lies on an island, having been cut off from the mainland by water . The island was cut off by water and is now isolated from the rest of the world .
 Much of original land has been washed away by tidal currents of the James River . Much of the original land is now under way in Virginia .
 Only a few foundation stones and the ruined tower of a brick church stood as reminders of the settlement . For many years, only a few foundations stones and a few church towers remained as reminders .
 The Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities controls the land around the ruined church . It controls the area around the church .
 In 1957, Virginia celebrated the 350th anniversary of the founding of Jamestown . Virginia's 350th birthday was celebrated in 1957 .
 Jamestown Festival Park is located about 5 mile from the original site of the site of Jamstown . The state built the park about 5 miles from the site . Jamstow Festival Park was built about five miles from original site .
 The park has a reproduction of the area's first fort, Powhatan’s lodge, and replicas of the ships that brought the first adventurers to the area . The park also has a replica of the first fort .
 Bacon's Rebellion London Company Smith, John Glass American glass) Rolfe, John Williamsburg . Additional resources .
 Czech composer best known for his operas and works for male chorus . Janaéek, YAH nah cHenx, Leo$, LFH awsh , was a Czech composer . He is known for operas, works for chorus .
 Many of Janacek’s compositions reflect his interest in the folk music of Moravia, his native region . Many of his compositions reflect an interest in Moravia .
 Janacek’s operas show his fascination with the moods and rhythms of speech . The operas are a study of the composer's fascination with mood and rhythms .
 Janacek’s most popular opera is probably /entifa , a tragedy based on peasant life . Jansky, Karl Guthe 29, was the composer of J. Jansky's first opera .
 He also wrote works for solo piano and songs for solo voice as well as chamber music .
 Janissaries, /AN uh SEHR eez, were a group of highly trained professional soldiers of the Ottoman Empire . Janissary soldiers were highly trained professionals and soldiers .
 Sultan Murad I, the third Ottoman ruler, probably organized the Janissaries in the 1300's . Sultan Murdad I was probably the third ruler of the Ottoman Empire .
 The group at first consisted of slaves and prisoners of war, and later of children trained as soldiers . The group was originally made up of slaves, prisoners and prisoners .
 They were known for their discipline and their early use of handheld firearms . They were also known for using handheld firearms in their early days .
 Janissaries made up the select core of the Ottoman army from the 1300's to the 1500's . Janissary made up a select core force of the Ottomans from 1300 to 1500s .
 Sultan Mahmud II outlawed the Janissaries in 1826 as a first step in reforming the empire . The Janissary was outlawed as a way of reforming the Ottoman Empire . The Sultan's rule was followed by a series of other reforms .
 Justin McCarthy Jansen, Cornelius , was a Roman Catholic bishop best known for his book Augustinus, published in 1640 .
 The church condemned as heresies Jansenism’s views on grace, free will, and predestination . The church also condemned the views of the Jansenists .
 The movement created controversy among Catholics in France and the Netherlands . The movement was created by Catholics in both countries .
 Jansen based Augustinus on his study of the writings of Saint Augustine . Augustinus was a leading early Christian theologian . Jansen's work was based on his studies of Augustinian .
 In Augustinus, Augustinus wrote that human nature ts totally corrupt . Jansen wrote that people need God's grace to act according to His will .
 Jansen taught that God gives grace only to those he has predestined for salvation . Jansen also taught that Jesus Christ died only for the people prededined for heaven . Jesus Christ was the only person to die for those he had been preded for salvation.
 Cornelius Otto Jansen was born in Acquoy, near Gorinchem, the Netherlands . He was a member of the Jansen family . Jansen died in 1953 .
 Karl Guthe was the first person to detect radio waves whose source was outside the solar system . Jansky, JAN skee, was an American engineer . Guthe discovered radio waves that were outside solar systems .
 His discovery led to the development of radio astronomy, a branch of astronomy that studies radio waves given off by objects in space . The discovery of radio waves led to radio astronomy .
 While investigating static interference in transatlantic radio messages, he heard static he could not identify . He heard static interference from transatlantic messages .
 After extensive study, Jansky determined that the static came from outside the solar system . Jansky found it in the constellation Sagittarius, in the southern constellation .
 Radio waves are used to observe objects in space that cannot be seen with optical telescopes . Scientists use radio waves to see objects that can't be seen in space .
 January is the first month of the year according to the Gregorian calendar . It is used in almost all of the world today . Vincent McDermott Roger H Stuewer is the author of a new book .
 Julius Caesar added a day to January in 46 B.C. Roman statesman Julius Caesar made it 31 days long . January is 31 days old, January 31 .
 The Anglo-Saxons called the first month Wolfmonth because wolves came into the villages in winter in search of food .
 Most Christian churches celebrate Epiphany on January 6, the 12th day after Christmas . The third Monday of January is a federal holiday in the United States in honor of Martin Luther King Jr.
 The holiday commemorates the arrival of the wise men from the East bearing gifts for the infant Jesus . The wise men are believed to have arrived in the East to give gifts to Jesus .
 In Norway, a similar holiday is called Tywendedagen (Twentieth Day), because it falls on the 20th day after Christmas . A similar holiday in Norway is known as Tywendagen (twentieth day)
 Many Hindus celebrate a harvest festival called Makara Sankranti or Pongal in mid-January . The harvest festival is celebrated in the middle of January . The festival is a harvest harvest festival celebrated by Hindus .
 During this holiday, many people bathe in the Ganges River, India’s most sacred river . The Ganges is considered a sacred river in India .
 Eat sweets to symbolize the wish for sweet words throughout the year . Give a/ms and eat newly harvested rice to celebrate the wish . Eat rice and eat sweets symbolize wish for sweets .
 Salmon P Chase was an antislavery leader and chief justice of the United States . He was born in 1808 and died in 1807 .
 Carole S Angell Quotations: Ring out the old, ring in the new, Ring, happy bells, across the snow . Ring in the true, ring out the false, Ring out in the real, Ring happy bells . Carole Angell: The year is going
 Alfred, Lord Tennyson Blasts of January would blow you through and through . Blasts would blow through and out of the air . Alfred would be blown through and around .
 Janus, /AY nuhs, in Roman mythology, was a god who had two faces that looked in opposite directions . Janus was a Roman god with two faces facing opposite sides .
 Janus 31 face looked into the past, and the future . The other face looked at the future, and then looked back at the past . One Snowdrop looked back into the future.
 Romans prayed to Janus at the beginning and end of any important action, especially a war . The Romans prayed for Janus during any important military action . Janus was Janus' most important ally in the Roman empire .
 The Romans called on Janus at the beginning of every prayer, even ahead of Jupiter, the king of the gods . Janus was called on by the Romans at the start of each prayer .
 Early Hindus prayed to a two-faced god named Vayu before starting any major undertaking . For example, the early Hindus in India prayed to the two-face god . The early Hindus pray to a deity named Vyu .
 Benjamin Franklin, American statesman and inventor, born 1706 . Anton Chekhov, Russian playwright and short-story writer, born 1860 . David Lloyd George, British statesman, prime minister, born 1863 .
 Versailles Peace Conference opened in 1919, following World War I 19 James Watt, Scottish inventor, born 1736 . Robert E Lee, commander of the Confederate Army in the American Civil War, born 1807 . Edgar Allan Poe, American author, was born 1809 . Paul C
 Jan 15—Martin Luther King, Jr., born Jan 20—Inauguration Day in U.S. 24 Gold discovered in California, 1848 . Edith Wharton, American author, born 1862 .
 Japan is rich in both advanced technology and natural beauty . Canada's Great Western R.R. opened 32 Japan in 2011 .
 Japan's shinkansen, also called the “bullet train,” speeds to its destination through fertile fields . Shinkansen is also known as the "bullet trains"
 Mount Fuji, a volcanic peak considered sacred by many Japanese people, seems to float in the background . Mount Fuji is a popular tourist attraction in Japan .
 It lies off the east coast of mainland Asia across from Russia, Korea, and China . It lies in the middle of the world's most populous region .
 The Japanese call their country Nippon or Nihon, which means source of the sun . The Japanese are proud of their country, which is called Nippo .
 The name Japan may have come from Zipangu, the Italian name given to the country by Marco Polo . Marco Polo, a Venetian traveler of the late 1200's, traveled to Japan in 1200's .
 Mountains and hills cover most of Japan, making it a country of great beauty . The country is known for its mountains and hills .
 The mountains and hills take up so much area that the great majority of the people live on a small portion of the land . The majority live on narrow plains along the coasts, narrow plains .
 These coastal plains have much of Japan’s best farmland and most of its major cities . The coastal plains are also home to the best farmland in the country's best farmland .
 Japan’s big cities are busy, modern centers of culture, commerce, and industry . Tokyo is one of the world's largest cities .
 Its total economic output is exceeded only by that of the United States . The United States has the largest economic output in the world .
 The Japanese manufacture a wide variety of products, including automobiles, computers, steel, television sets, textiles, and tires .
 The country's factories have some of the most advanced equipment in the world . The country’s factories are equipped with advanced equipment .
 Japan has become a major economic power even though it has few natural resources . The country has become an economic powerhouse even though its resources are scarce .
 Japan imports many of the raw materials needed for industry and exports finished manufactured goods . Japan imports raw materials for industry, exports finished products .
 The country's favorite sporting events are baseball games and exhibitions of sumo, an ancient Japanese style of wrestling . Baseball games and sumo exhibitions are among the favorite sports events in Japan .
 Many women dress in the traditional kimono for festivals and other special occasions . Although most Japanese wear Western-style clothing, many women wear kimonos .
 Japanese no and kabuki dramas, both hundreds of years old, remain popular . The Japanese no dramas are still popular today .
 Japanese people flock to see motion pictures and rock music groups . But the Japanese people also flock to movies and rock groups .
 Many Japanese artworks combine traditional and Western styles with Western themes . Many of these artworks have been created in Japan .
 Early Japan was greatly influenced by the neighboring Chinese civilization . Early Japanese culture was influenced by neighboring China .
 The Japanese borrowed heavily from Chinese art, government, language, religion, and technology . From the late 400s to the early 800’s, the Japanese borrowed extensively from China .
 Trade began with several European countries, and Christian missionaries from Europe converted some Japanese people .
 During the early 1600's, the rulers of Japan decided to cut ties with the rest of the world . The rulers of the country cut ties to the world in order to protect their own interests .
 Japan’s isolation lasted until 1853, when Commodore se se SSS Any +5 Lee i Paul Chesley, who was in charge of the country's railways .
 Matthew C Perry of the U.S. sailed his warships into Tokyo Bay . Perry was the first American to sail his warships to Japan .
 Japan agreed in 1854 to open two ports to U.S. trade . As a result of this show of force, Japan agreed to open ports to the United States . Japan agreed that two ports would be opened to the Americans .
 During the 1870's, the Japanese government began a major drive to modernize the country . The country was modernized in the 1870s, and modernized by the government .
 New ideas and manufacturing methods have been imported from Western countries . New ideas, manufacturing methods were brought in from the West, including robots .
 By the early 1900's, Japan had become an industrial and military power .
 During the 1930's, Japan’s military leaders gained control of the government . During the 30's, the government was overthrown by the military .
 The Japanese won many early victories, but then the tide turned in favor of the U.S. and Allied nations . The tide turned the tide against the Japanese in WWII .
 In August 1945, United States planes dropped the first atomic bombs used in warfare on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The first atomic bomb was dropped in August 1945 .
 Many Japanese cities lay in ruins, industries shattered, and Allied forces occupied the country . Allied forces occupy the country in Japan in 1945 .
 Japanese people worked hard to overcome the effects of the war . But the Japanese people were not as hard as they did in the war.
 The success of the Japanese economy attracted attention throughout the world . Japan's economic success has attracted attention around the world.
 Japan is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary government . Japan's government is a democracy with a constitutionality .
 The Constitution, which took effect in 1947, guarantees many rights to the people, including Japan's people . The Constitution was created in 1947 .
 Farmland is limited in Japan because mountains and hills cover most of the country . Freedom of religion, speech, and the press are key to freedom of religion and speech .
 The Constitution establishes three branches of government: the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branch . The Constitution established three branches: the president, the legislature, the executive and the legislative branch .
 The emperor performs some ceremonial duties specified in the Constitution, but he does not possess any real power to govern . The emperor does not have the power of government .
 Diet is the national legislature, the highest lawmaking body of Japan . The Diet is a national legislature and is the highest-level lawmaker body in the country .
 Diet consists of two houses, House of Representatives and the House of Councillors . Diet is made up of members of the House and House of Deputies . Diet has two houses and two houses: House of Representative and the Diet .
 The representatives have slightly more power under the Constitution than the councillors do . The representatives are slightly more powerful than councillors .
 The prime minister is the head of the executive branch of the government . He is responsible for the national security of the country .
 Members of the Diet elect the prime minister, who must be a civilian and an elected member . The prime minister is elected by the Diet and must be elected by a civilian or elected member of the public .
 Prime minister selects members of the Cabinet to help govern the country . The prime minister selects his Cabinet members . The Cabinet members are chosen by the prime minister .
 The Japanese call the country Nippon or Nihon, meaning source of the sun . The country is known as the source of its own sun . It is also known as Japan .
 Japan lies in the North Pacific Ocean off the east coast of mainland Asia . Japan is located in the Pacific Ocean, off the coast of Japan .
 Japan has four main islands: Hokkaido, Honshu, Kyushu, Kyusu, and Shikoku . Japan has thousands of smaller islands, including thousands of small ones .
 Okhotsk é “\Sakhalin ars Island’s Island “” A9 North Latity mec OF Japan {East Sea) ‘Boninin ‘sakhalin’
 The four main islands stretch about 1,200 mi from northeast to southwest . Hokkaido, Honshu, Kyushu, Shikoku are the main islands of Japan . The main islands are Hokaido and Honsu .
 Central and southern Japan have hot summers, mild winters, and moderate precipitation in all seasons . Central Japan has hot summers and mild winters .
 Daytime high temperatures average about 86 °F in August, the hottest month . January is the coldest month in the United States .
 Hokkaido, northern Honshu, and high mountain areas are much colder than the rest of the country in winter and cooler in summer . The region is colder in winter in winter, and in summer in areas that are warmer than in winter .
 Not many Japanese strictly practice either religion, but almost everyone engages in some practices or rituals based on these two religious traditions . Not many people strictly practice the two religions .
 Cabbage, Chinese cabbage, hogs, mandarin oranges, milk, potatoes, poultry, poultry and eggs . Rice, strawberries, tea, tea and white radishes .
 Clams, eels, mackerel, oysters, pollock, salmon, sardines, scallops, squid, tuna . Clams and eels are among the fish species in the area .
 Manufacturing—automobiles, cement, chemicals, computers, iron and steel, . Optical equipment, paper and newsprint, processed foods, . processed foods and processed foods . TV sets, textiles and textiles, tires, watches .
 Major exported goods—chemicals, electronic equipment, . iron and steel, motor vehicles, office machinery, scientific and optical equipment .
 Major imported goods—chemicals, electrical equipment, fish and shellfish, machinery, metal ores, petroleum, petroleum. The bulk of imported goods include fish, shellfish and machinery .
 Main trading partners— China, Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, United States. Main trading partner— China and Germany . Main trade partner— United States .
 Residents of each prefecture elect a governor and representatives to a prefectural legislative assembly . The residents of each Prefectural assembly elect a mayor and a governor .
 The residents of each city, town, and village also elect a mayor and a local council . The residents in each city and town elect the mayor and local council, which are also elected .
 Every 10 years, the people have an opportunity to remove a justice from the court by voting in a referendum . The referendum is held every 10 years in the UK .
 The Supreme Court oversees the training of Japan’s judges and attorneys . It oversees training of judges and lawyers . Japan's Supreme Court is responsible for training of all its judges .
 The court system includes 8 regional high courts; 50 district courts; many summary courts, which handle minor offenses and small claims without formal procedures, other courts . Family courts handle domestic cases .
 Constitution prohibits Japan from maintaining military forces to wage war . Constitution prohibits keeping military forces in use of military personnel .
 Japan does have a Self-Defense Agency created to preserve Japan’s peace, independence, and national security . Self-Defence Agency was created by Japan to preserve its peace and independence . But Japan has a Self Defense Agency created by President Obama .
 The agency oversees an army, a navy, and an air force consisting of about 240,000 members . It oversees the country's army, navy and air force . The agency also oversees its own air force, which has 240,500 members .
 The Ainu may have been Japan’s original inhabitants . About 90 percent of the people live on the coastal coast of Japan .
 Japan 35 plains, which make up only about 20 percent of Japan’s territory, are considered most important areas in the country .
 These plains are among the most thickly populated places in the world . These plains rank among the world's most densely populated places .
 Millions of people crowd the big cities along the coasts, including Tokyo, Japan’s capital and largest city . Millions of tourists flock to the coasts of Japan .
 Tokyo metropolitan region is the most populous urban area in the world . The Tokyo metropolitan area includes the cities of Yokohama and Kawasaki . It is also known as the world's largest urban area .
 The Japanese are descended from peoples who migrated to the islands from other parts of Asia . The Japanese have been descended from people who migrated from Asia in the past .
 Many of these peoples came in waves from the northeastern part of the Asian mainland, passing through the Korean Peninsula . The Korean Peninsula is the birthplace of the Korean people .
 Some ancestors of the Japanese may have come from islands south of Japan . Ancestors may have been from the islands of southern Japan .
 By about 10,000 B.C, the Japanese islands were inhabited by people who hunted, fished, and gathered fruits and plants for food . The islands were once uninhabited by people .
 This early culture is known as the /omon, which means cord-marked, because the people made pottery that was covered with the impressions of ropes or cords .
 This culture is called the Yayoi, after the section of modern Tokyo where remains of the culture were found . This culture was found in modern Tokyo and is known as the Yoyoi .
 The Yayoi people grew rice in irrigated fields and established villages . They established villages in the area .
 Chinese, Koreans, and a group of people called the Ainu make up Japan's largest minority groups . The Ainu, Chinese, Korean, and Koreans are among the minority groups in Japan .
 The country has about 70,000 Chinese, and about 80,000 people from China . Most Japanese people are descended from their ancestors .
 G 7 Okindetnretenee Makurazaki® Kanoya 2 wd 3 ; 4 Sh, ""Doesn't appear on map; key shows general location .
 Most of the Ainu live on Hokkaido, the northernmost of Japan’s main islands . The Ainu people are known for their culture in Japan .
 Ainu have intermarried with the Japanese and adopted the Japanese culture . Many Ainu people have intermarriages with Japanese people . Ainu culture has been adopted by many of Japan's inhabitants .
 The rest of the Ainu are ethnically and culturally different from the Japanese . The Ainu is ethnically different from Japan .
 Some scholars believe the Ainu were Japan's original inhabitants . They were pushed northward by the ancestors of the present-day Japanese people .
 The burakumin are a group of Japanese people who have suffered the most injustices . They have suffered from injustice in the country's most recent history .
 They came from buraku (villages) associated with such tasks as the execution of criminals, the slaughter of cattle, and the tanning of leather . They were associated with tasks such as slaughtering cattle and tanning leather .
 According to Japanese religious traditions, these tasks and the people who performed them were considered unclean . The tasks were performed by people who were deemed unclean by religious traditions .
 Burakumin is not ethnically different from other Japanese . As a result, the burakumin have long been discriminated against . The burakumi have been a Japanese minority .
 Many burakumin live in segregated urban slums or special villages . Many of the burakumans live in separate slums, or in villages .
 The burakumin have started an active social movement to achieve fair treatment . They have had only limited success so far so far .
 Almost all the people in Japan understand the Tokyo dialect . It is used in schools and on radio and television . Almost all people understand the dialect .
 A number of Japanese words, such as a/su kuriimu (ice cream) and guruupu (guruupu) are based on English .
 Most of Japan's people live near the coasts . Most of the people of Japan live in Japan's coastal areas .
 The Pacific coast from Tokyo to Kobe is the most densely populated area in Japan . It is the Pacific coast of Japan .
 It uses phonetic symbols that represent sounds as well as Chinese characters . It uses Japanese phonetic symbol symbols to represent sounds in Chinese .
 Each character is a symbol that stands for a complete word or syllable . Each symbol is a letter or word, and each symbol is used to represent a word .
 Schools in Japan teach students to write the Japanese language with the letters of the Roman alphabet . Schools also teach students how to use Roman letters to write Japanese language .
 The downtown streets are filled with expensive, late-model automobiles and glittering high-rise buildings . The streets are lined with glittering, high-end buildings .
 The buildings house expensive apartments, prosperous firms, fashionable department stores, and elegant shops .
 Most Japanese people who live in cities and suburbs enjoy a high standard of living . Most people in Japan live in a city and suburbs, living in cities .
 Housing in Japanese cities includes modern highrise apartments and traditional Japanese houses . Housing in metropolitan areas includes highrise apartment and traditional houses .
 In traditional homes, rooms are separated by sliding paper screens, which can be rearranged as needed . The rooms in traditional homes are separated from each other by a sliding paper screen .
 People sit on cushions and sleep on a type of padded quilt called a futon . A futon is a cushioned quilt made of padded cushions . People use it to sleep on when they sleep .
 Today, many Japanese apartments and houses have one or more rooms fitted with carpets instead of tatami and containing Western-style chairs and tables . Many Japanese apartments have one of more rooms with carpet instead of a tatam .
 Apartment buildings in Osaka provide homes for many of the city’s residents . Many of Osaka's residents live in apartments .
 Japan's big cities, like those in many other countries, face such problems as overcrowding and air and water pollution . The country's biggest cities face overcrowding, air pollution and overcrowding .
 Crime and poverty are not as common in Japan as they are in most Western nations . However, crime and poverty in Japan are common in most of the world's poorest countries .
 In rural areas along the coasts, some Japanese make a living by fishing and harvesting seaweed .
 Most families in rural areas live in traditional Japanese-style wooden houses like those in the cities . Most of the rural areas have traditional wooden houses .
 Housing is cheaper in the countryside than in cities, but it is still expensive by international standards . Housing in the country is cheaper than in the UK but still expensive .
 Only about 15 percent of farm households live on their farming incomes alone . Only 15 percent live on farm incomes alone, according to USDA .
 Farmworkers maintain an average household income slightly higher than that of urban workers . By taking second and third jobs, farmworkers maintain a higher household income . Farmworkers take second or third jobs in order to maintain their incomes .
 Rural populations have declined as the children of farmers leave to work in Japan's cities . Rural populations are declining as children leave to live in cities . Japan's rural population has declined in recent years .
 Some well-to-do Japanese buy designermade garments, but the majority of the people purchase more moderately priced clothing .
 The styles they buy are similar to those worn in the U.S. and Western Europe . The styles of the men's clothing is similar to that of the United States and Europe .
 For business and professional men, typical workday wear consists of a dark suit, white shirt, conservative tie, black shoes, and a dark woolen overcoat for winter . For winter, a woolen woolen coat for winter is an essential winter coat .
 When not at work, Japanese men typically wear slacks and a casual shirt or sweater . Japanese men tend to wear a casual outfit when not in work .
 Most women who do not work outside the home dress in moderately priced dresses or blouses with skirts or slacks when at home .
 While in a major city shopping area or business district, many of these women wear expensive imJapan 39 ported dresses or skirts, blouses, and jackets .
 On special occasions, Japanese women may dress in the traditional long garment called a kimono . The long garment is worn on special occasions such as weddings and funerals .
 A kimono is tied around the waist with a sash called an obj and worn with sandals known as zori . The sash is worn with a special sash known as an obj, and worn around with a zori.
 The uniforms often consist of a black or navy jacket worn with matching shorts, skirt, or slacks . The uniforms are often worn by women in the military .
 On weekends, Japanese children dress in the latest casual styles from Europe and the U.S. or in T-shirts printed with cartoon characters .
 Japanese families eat at restaurants on weeknights and weekends as well as on special occasions . Many Japanese families are known for their frequent meals at restaurants .
 Roads and superhighways are lined with such American establishments as Denny's and McDonald's . Similar Japanese-owned chains called Skylark and Lotteria are similar to similar American-based chains .
 They supplement the rice with fish, tofu, pickled vegetables, soups made with miso . They also add tofu and miso soup .
 Like their elders, they eat fish, but they also like to eat beef, chicken, and pork .
 They eat more fruit, including imported kiwi and grapefruit, as well as apples, oranges, pears, and strawberries grown in Japan . They eat imported fruit, such as apples and oranges, and pears .
 Children consume larger amounts of eggs, cheese, and milk than their parents . They also consume larger quantities of milk, eggs, and eggs than parents .
 By 1990, total rice consumption in Japan had dropped to about half its level in 1960 . Total rice consumption was about half the level in the 1960s .
 Young people now take in significantly more protein and fat than their grandparents did . Overall, younger people now eat more protein than their parents did .
 A traditional Japanese house blends with the natural beauty surrounding it . The John Launois, Black Star, is set in Tokyo, Japan .
 Schools encourage children to enjoy sports, and adults spend large sums on equipment and membership fees . Adults spend a large sum on athletic equipment, membership fees.
 Baseball, bowling, golf, gymnastics, and tennis attract large numbers of participants . Many Japanese are good swimmers and runners, and many are good athletes .
 Another popular sport is kendo, a Japanese form of fencing in which bamboo or wooden sticks are used for swords . The sport is also known as kendo .
 Many Japanese also practice a/kido, judo, and karate, traditional martial arts . Traditional martial arts involve fighting without weapons .
 Spectator events, such as baseball, horse racing, soccer, and sumo wrestling, are also popular .
 Hobbies are another important leisure time activity for Japanese men and women . Hobbies have become an important part of Japanese life .
 Many Japanese study with masters of these arts to improve their skills . Many study with master masters of such arts .
 Within Japan, popular travel destinations include temples or shrines, hot springs, and famous historical sites .
 Other leisure pursuits common in Japan include watching television, playing video games, and listening to recorded music .
 Many workers read during commuting by train between homes in the suburbs and jobs in the city . Many read during the hours spent commuting between homes and jobs .
 Men in Japan often spend their free time after work socializing in small groups . Men often spend time socializing with small groups after work .
 Japanese meals reflect the culture of both the East and the West . Paul Chesley, Tony Stone and Tony Stone travel the world to Japan .
 Many people enjoy dining at home in traditional Japanese style, above, and many enjoy eating out .
 Casual family restaurants are favorite dining places, and fast-food establishments, /eft are also popular throughout Japan . Restaurants and bars to have a snack together and a drink of sake or beer are popular .
 One of the most popular celebrations in Japan is the New Year's Festival . The festival begins on January 1 and ends on January 3 . The New Year is celebrated in Japan .
 During the festival, the Japanese dress up, visit their friends and relatives, enjoy feasts, and exchange gifts . The festival is a time to dress up and visit friends and family .
 Many Japanese people say they are not devout worshipers and do not have strong religious beliefs . Many Japanese say they do not believe in religious beliefs.
 Nearly everyone in Japan engages in some religious practices or rituals . However, nearly everyone in Japanese society engages in religious practices .
 Shinto is based on the two major religious traditions in Japan, Shinto and Buddhism . Those practices are based on Shinto .
 Shintoists worship many gods, called kami, that are found in mountains, rivers, rocks, trees, and other parts of nature . Shintoism is a religion that focuses on nature .
 In 1868, the Japanese government established an official religion called State Shinto . Shinto was established in 1868 .
 State Shinto stressed patriotism and the worship of the emperor as a divine being . The emperor was the subject of state Shinto and was a national hero .
 The government abolished State Shinto after World War II, and the emperor declared he was not divine . The emperor declared himself not divine after the war .
 Today, fewer than 3 percent of Japanese practice strict traditional Shinto . Fewer than 3 per cent of Japanese people practice strict Shinto.
 Many people visit Shinto shrines to make offerings of fruit, rice, prayers and other gifts to gods .
 They may ask the gods for favors, such as the safe birth of a child, success on examinations, or good health . In return, they may ask them for favors .
 Japanese people invite Shinto priests to preside at weddings and offer blessings for the New Year or for the construction of new buildings . Japanese people typically invite them to offer blessings at weddings or for construction .
 Buddhism offers a more complicated view of humanity, the gods, and life and death . Buddhism has a more elaborate set of beliefs than Shinto, and it offers more complex views of humanity .
 Buddhists believe that a person can obtain perfect peace and happiness by leading a life of virtue and wisdom . Buddhism is a religion that believes that people can obtain happiness by living a virtuous life .
 Many Japanese turn to Buddhist priests to preside at funerals and other occasions when they commemorate the dead . Many Japanese Buddhists turn to them for ceremonies .
 A variety of religious groups called New Religions developed in Japan during the 1800's and 1900's .
 Many of these religions combine elements of Buddhism, Shinto, and some Christianity . Many of the religions are based on Buddhism and Shinto .
 In addition, a small percentage of the Japanese population is Christian .
 The society expects women to marry in their mid-20's, become mothers soon afterward, and stay at home to attend to the needs of their husband and children . Women are expected to marry at the age of 30 and become mothers in their early 20's .
 Women often have a dominant role in raising children and handling the family finances . Women are often more dominant in the family than men in the United States .
 Japan's 41 lies as sole breadwinners . Men are expected to support their family . Men expected to be expected to back their families .
 To make it possible, Japanese employers provide male workers with family allowances . The allowance is a form of family allowance .
 Most Japanese men accept this idea of their place in society, and many women do, too . Most men accept the idea of having a role in society .
 The majority of Japanese women do hold jobs at one time or another . But in practice, the majority of Japan women do not hold jobs .
 Most women work before they marry, and many return to the labor force after their children are in school or grown . Most women return to work after they marry .
 About 50 percent of all Japanese women over age 15 are in the labor force at any one time . Altogether, about 50 percent are in Japan's labor force over the age of 15 .
 Female employees earn lower incomes and receive fewer benefits than male employees do, and have almost no job security . But because of the society's expectations about gender roles, female employees earn less than male workers .
 The traditional ideas about gender roles have begun to change in Japan, most quickly among younger women . The traditional gender roles in Japan are changing rapidly among young women .
 Many women in their early 20's are reluctant to give up their jobs and income . Women in early 20s are reluctant about giving up their job and income to pursue careers .
 As a sign of that change, an increasing number of Japanese women are postponing marriage until they are in their late 20's or early 30's . The trend is changing as a result of an increase in women delaying marriage .
 A driving range with three levels enables large crowds of Japanese golfers to practice their swing . Fred Ward, Black Star, is a former member of the Black Star team .
 Golf is a popular sport in Japan, and the country has many golf courses . Golf is also popular in the country .
 Sumo wrestlers compete in an exhibition of this Japanese style of wrestling . Sumo wrestling is a Japanese form of wrestling known as a form of form of martial arts .
 Many Japanese Buddhists visit the Daibutsu, a huge bronze statue of Buddhism’s founder in Kamakura, above right .
 Japanese society places an extremely high value on educational achievement, particularly for males . Japanese society has a very high value for male students .
 The Japanese measure educational achievement chiefly by the reputation of the university a student attends . The reputation of a student's university is judged by its reputation .
 The student's grades or field of study are less important as signs of success . The students' grades or fields of study is less important than their grades .
 Any student who graduates from a top-ranked university has a big advantage over other college graduates in seeking employment . Under most circumstances, any student with a top university has an advantage over others .
 Families work hard to get their children into a good university, starting as soon as the youngsters begin school . Families work to ensure they have the best chance at a good education at university .
 After six years at an elementary school, almost all Japanese children continue for another three years at a junior high school . Almost all children in Japan continue to attend junior high schools after six years .
 Education at public schools is free during these nine years for children 6 to 14 years of age . Education is free in public schools for children from 6-14 years old .
 Japanese elementary and junior high school students study such subjects as art, homemaking, the Japanese language, mathematics, moral education, music, physical education, science and social studies .
 Many junior high school students study English or another foreign language . In addition to English, many junior high students also study English .
 Students spend much time learning to read and write Japanese because the language is quite difficult . Students spend a lot of time learning the language because of its difficult to read .
 Public schoo] students attend classes Monday through Friday and half a day on Saturday, except for two weeks each month when they have Saturdays off . Public school students are students from around the world .
 The Japanese school year runs from April through March of the next year . The school year in Japan lasts between April and March of 2014 .
 During the last two years of junior high school, many students focus on attaining admission to a high school with a good record of getting its graduates into top universities . Many students aim for a good high school that has a reputation for getting top university graduates .
 Many of the most successful high schools are expensive private institutions that require students to pass a difficult entrance examination . The most successful schools are private schools that require passing exams .
 Many eighthand ninth-grade students spend several hours each day after school taking exampreparation classes at private academies called juku .
 Classes include many of the same subjects studied in junior high school, along with courses to prepare students for college or train them for jobs . Classes include classes to train students for jobs or prepare them for college .
 While in high school, a student may continue to study at a juku as preparation for the entrance exam to a university . A juku may be used to prepare students for entrance exams to university .
 Students work on a Jesson with their teacher . Charles Gupton, Tony Stone Images .
 As soon as they enter school, students begin to focus on getting into a well-regarded university . Students are focused on getting a top university, according to the study .
 After students are admitted to one of these four universities, they tend to pay more attention to extracurricular activities than to their classwork . Students tend to be more interested in extracranks activities than their class work .
 Simply being at a top university will ensure job interviews at the country’s best firms . Being at a university will help you get a job at the best firms in the UK .
 Because Japanese society does not expect a woman to be the family’s main wage earner, the educational experience for girls is more limited . Because of this, girls are less likely to be able to attend higher school .
 Half of women who get college educations attend technical or junior colleges rather than universities . About half of the women in the U.S. attend technical college or junior college rather than university .
 In contrast, nearly all men who get a college degree attend universities . Nearly all men in the U.S. attend universities, but not all attend college .
 Japanese students consistently score well on international tests of science and mathematics skills . Japanese students regularly score well in science and math tests .
 Many Japanese are concerned about the disadvantages of their educational system . But many Japanese are worried about the advantages of their education .
 Parents feel that it places too much emphasis on memorization and taking exams . Parents say it is too much of an obsession with memorizing and exams .
 Most would prefer to have their children educated in a more creative environment that requires less time in classrooms . Most parents would rather have children educated at home .
 Many Japanese politicians and business people agree that their educational system has flaws . The education system has been criticised for its flaws in Japan .
 For hundreds of years, Chinese arts had a great influence on Japanese arts . The arts were influenced by Chinese arts .
 There has always been a distinctive Japanese quality about the country’s art . However, there has also been a distinct Japanese quality .
 Most forms of Japanese music feature one instrument or voice or a group of instruments that follow the same melodic line instead of blending in harmony .
 Japanese instruments include the lutelike biwa; the zitherlike koto; and the three-stringed banjolike samisen, or shamisen . The instruments are Japanese instruments .
 Many Japanese cities have their own professional symphony orchestras that specialize in Western music . Tokyo symphony orchestra is one of the world's most successful orchestras .
 The oldest form of traditional Japanese drama is the no play, which developed during the 1300's . The no play is the most popular form of drama in Japan .
 Masked actors perform the story with carefully controlled gestures and movements . Masked performers perform the stories with carefully choreographed gestures . The story is told in a carefully controlled version of the Bible .
 Two other forms of traditional Japanese drama, bunraku and the kabuki play, developed during the late 1600's .
 In puppet theater, a narrator recites the story, which is acted out by large, lifelike puppets . In puppets, the story is told by a narrator and then acted out in large, life-like puppet theater .
 The puppet handlers work silently on the stage in view of the audience . The puppets are kept hidden from the audience during the performance .
 Kabuki plays are melodramatic representations of historical or domestic events . Kabuki is a Japanese play that is based on historical events in Japan .
 Kabuki features colorful costumes and makeup, spectacular scenery, and a lively and exaggerated acting style . Kabuki is known for its colorful costumes, makeup and spectacular scenery .
 People also enjoy new dramas by Japanese playwrights, as well as Western plays . New dramas are also popular in Japan .
 Much of the country’s literature deals with the fleeting quality of human life and the never-ending flow of time . The country's literature deals .
 Murasaki Shikibu, a lady-in-waiting to the empress, wrote The Tale of Genji during the early 1000's . Murasaki was a lady in waiting to be the Empress of Japan . She wrote the tale in the 1000's during her time .
 This long novel is generally considered the greatest work of Japanese fiction and possibly the world’s first novel . It is considered to be one of the greatest novels in the world .
 Some of the earliest Japanese sculptures were haniwa, small clay figures made from the A.D. 200's to 500’s . Small clay figures were made from a small clay figure to small clay sculptures .
 The figures represented animals, servants, warriors, weapons, and objects of everyday use . The figures were represented by animals and servants, and weapons .
 Japanese sculptors created some of their finest works for Buddhist temples . Their works include works of art for the temples in Japan .
 The sculptors worked chiefly with wood, but they also used clay and bronze . They used wood, clay, bronze and clay .
 The most famous bronze statue in Japan, the Great Buddha at Kamakura, was cast during the 1200's . The Great Buddha was cast in the 12th century and is now located in Japan .
 Kabuki, a traditional form of Japanese drama, features chanting, music, colorful costumes and makeup, and a lively and exaggerated acting style . Kabuki is a traditional Japanese drama that features chanting and music .
 Kabuki plays are melodramatic portrayals of historical or domestic events . Kabuki is a Japanese form of play that is played in Japan .
 Early Japanese painting dealt with Buddhist subjects, using compositions from China . Early Japanese paintings dealt with Buddhism .
 From the late 1100's to the early 1300's, many Japanese artists painted long picture scrolls . Many Japanese artists paint long picture scroll scrolls .
 These scrolls realistically portrayed historical tales, legends, and other stories in a series of pictures . The scrolls were created in order to depict historical tales and legends in a realistic manner .
 Ink painting flourished in Japan from the early 1300's to the mid1500's . Ink painting was popular in Japan between the 1300's and 1500's .
 Many of these paintings featured black brushstrokes on a white background . Many of the paintings were painted on a black background .
 During the mid-1500's and early 1600's, a decorative style of painting developed in Japan . During the 15th and 16th century, Japanese paintings were painted by artists .
 Artists used bright colors and elaborate designs to add gold leaf to their paintings . Artists added gold leaf and bright colors to their artwork .
 From the 1600’s to the late 1800's, artists created colorful wood-block prints . From the 16th century to the . late 1800s, artists from the . 1600s to . 1800's artists made colorful wood block prints .
 These temples have large tile roofs with extending edges that curve gracefully upward . These temples are temples that have tile roofs that curve upward and upward .
 Traditional Shinto shrines are wooden frame structures noted for their graceful lines and sense of proportion . Traditional shrines have been built in Japan using wooded wood .
 The simple style of Shinto architecture has influenced the design of many modern buildings in Japan . Modern buildings are built in Shinto style, inspired by the Shinto religion .
 Japanese architecture emphasizes harmony between buildings and the natural beauty around them .
 The Japanese have long been famous for their ceramics, ivory carving, lacquerA . ware, and silk weaving and embroidery .
 Other traditionTes Se COC~——— CC alarrts include flower arranging, cloisonné (a type of dec. block print by an unknown Japanese artist ; ArtResource.com .
 Landscape prints, such as the wood-block print above, flour into decorative objects . ished in Japan in the 1800's .
 The National Stadium of Tokyo shows the influence of traditional Japanese architecture in the gracefully curving lines of the structure's roof . Robert Glaze, Artstreet .
 Fuji is Japan's highest and most famous peak, and many Japanese people climb it each year . Fuji is the most famous mountain in Japan and is considered a national tourist attraction .
 Fuji is part of a chain of volcanoes on the island of Honshu, the largest of Japan’s four main islands . Fuji is one of the largest volcanoes in the country's history .
 The Japanese islands consist of the rugged upper part of a great mountain range that rises from the floor of the North Pacific Ocean . In fact, the Japanese islands are part of the region .
 Jagged peaks, rocky gorges, and thundering mountain waterfalls provide some of the country’s most spectacular scenery .
 Thick forests thrive on the mountainsides of the Japanese islands, adding to the scenic beauty of the islands . The islands are known for their mountainous scenery, with thick forests and dense forests .
 Shifting causes two of Japan’s most striking natural features— earthquakes and volcanoes . This shifting causes earthquakes, volcanoes and earthquakes to occur .
 Severe earthquakes occur every few years . Most are minor tremors that cause little damage . Severe quakes occur every year, but severe tremors are common .
 Undersea quakes sometimes cause huge, destructive waves, called tsunamis, along Japan’s Pacific coast . The quakes are sometimes caused by quakes that can cause huge waves along the coast .
 The rapids and falls supply power for hydroelectric plants . But their waters are used to irrigate farmland, and their rapids are used for power .
 A large number of hot springs gush from the ground throughout the country . Hot springs are found in many of the country's most popular hot springs .
 The four main islands, in order order of size, are Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, and Shikoku . The islands are located in Japan .
 Japan’s four chief islands have 4,628 miles (7,448 kilometers) of coastline . The islands are home to Japan's four main islands, Japan's main island .
 The East Sea lies east of Russia and the Korean peninsula . It is sometimes called the East Sea because of its east-facing nature .
 The Japanese Alps, the country's highest mountains, are located in central Honshu . They are known as the Honsu Alps in Japan .
 Japan's tallest and most famous peak, Mount Fuji, or Fujiyama, is one of these volcanoes . Mount Fuji is Japan's highest peak, and the most famous volcano is Mount Fuji .
 Hokkaido extends the farthest north of any of Japan's main islands . The Kanto Plain, the country’s largest lowland, spreads Hokkaidan .
 Hokkaido’s chief agricultural region lies in the southwestern part of the island . The island is dotted with small rural communities like the one at the left of the photo .
 Two other major agricultural and industrial lowlands lie south and west of the Kanto region . Nobi Plain and Osaka Plain are two major lowlands of the region .
 Farming and fishing villages and some industrial cities lie on small lowlands scattered throughout this region . Farming and . fishing villages . Some industrial cities . scattered throughout the region scattered throughout small . lowlands .
 Island is Japan's second largest island but has only about 5 percent of Japan's total population . It is the country’s second largest but only has about five percent of the total population.
 Northeast of this peninsula is the Ishikari Plain, Hokkaido’s largest lowland and chief agricultural region . Northeast of the peninsula is Hokkaidai's largest low-land, chief agricultural .
 The economy of Hokkaido depends mainly on dairy farming, fishing, and forestry . The economy is based on fishing, dairy farming and fishing . The island is home to the largest island in Japan .
 Kyushu is Japan’s most heavily populated island, with about 11 percent of the population . After Honshu, Kyushusu is the most heavily-populated island in the country .
 A chain of steep-walled, heavily forested mountains runs down the center of the island . The island is home to a range of mountains that are steep and steep .
 Kyushu’s largest plain and Ss RS Se. chief farming district is located along the west coast . The northeastern and southern sections of the island are located in the northeastern section .
 Rugged have many volcanoes, high lava plateaus, and large deterrain covers much of the island . Rugged also have high volcanoes and high lava platesaus .
 Only small patches of land cut out from the sides of lava plateaus . In both regions, only small patches are small patches .
 Bay Kagoshima Bay OSumi Peninsula E 2] ata Cape . Cape . Sumisu ast eo ; Ching Vsumi ts. Tsumi ts .
 Farmers grow some crops on level strips of land cut out from the steep sides of the lava plateaus . The lava-plagued land is cut out of the steep side of the volcano's steep slopes .
 Most of the people live in northern Shikoku, where the land slopes downward to the Inland Sea . The land is located in northern Japan .
 Farmers grow rice and a variety of fruits along the fertile land along the Inland Sea . Farmers also grow rice, fruit and vegetables in the fertile area .
 The United States returned the northern Ryukyus to Japan in 1953 and the Bonins in 1968 . The U.S. returned the north and the south of the peninsula to Japan . The Bonins and the Ryukyuans were returned to Japan from the United States .
 Okinawa is the largest and most important island of the group . In 1972, it returned the rest of the Ryukyu Islands, including Okinawa, to the island .
 Two Pacific Ocean currents -- the Kuroshio and the Oyashio -- influence Japan’s climate . Two Pacific ocean currents influence Japan's climate .
 The warm, dark blue Kuroshio flows northward along the south coast and along the east coast as far north as Tokyo . The warm and dark blue waters flow northward .
 Oyashio flows southward along the east coasts of Hokkaido and northern Honshu, cooling these areas of Japan . The cold Oyasho flows southwards along the eastern coasts of these areas, cooling them .
 In winter, monsoons from the northwest bring cold air to northern Japan . The cold air is brought in by monsoon monsoon from northwest .
 Heavy snows deposit heavy snows on the country’s northwest coast . These winds gather moisture as they cross the Sea of Japan, which collects moisture .
 During the summer, monsoons blow from the southeast, carrying warm, moist air from the Pacific Ocean . Monsoon rains blow from southeast, bringing warm air from Pacific Ocean in the summer .
 Summer monsoons cause hot, humid weather in the central and southern parts of Japan . Summer monsoon rains are expected to hit Japan in the summer .
 All areas of the country—except eastern Hokkaido, receive at least 40 inches of rain yearly . All areas, except eastern Hokhaido, are at least covered in at least 50 inches of rainfall .
 Japan has two major rainy seasons: from mid-June to early July and in September and October . Japan's rainy season lasts from mid to early to mid-September .
 May | 61 June 75 63 | 24 17 16 June | 68 July 82 70 | 28 21 4 | July | 75 Aug. 4 . Aug. 5 | July 6 | July 7 | July 8 | July 9 | July 10 | July 14 | July 17 .
 In summer, most of Japan has hot, humid weather . In winter, winds from the mainland of Japan . Japan has abundant rainfall .
 Winters are mild in the south . the islands bring warm, moist air. ter, snow falls over much of Japan. Winters in Japan are mild .
 Heavy rains and violent winds often do great damage to houses and crops . The heavy rains and . violent winds of these storms often . often do very damage to homes and crops, say experts .
 The size of Japan’s economy ranks second only to that of the U.S. in terms of its gross domestic product . Japan's economy is the second largest in the world, after the United States .
 The GDP is the total value of all goods and services produced within a country yearly . GDP is a total of GDP produced annually in a country . GDP represents the total amount of goods produced annually .
 Japan is one of the world’s leading countries in the value of its exports and imports . The country is also a major source of food and medicine exports .
 On average, Japanese families enjoy one of the highest income levels in the world . Their assets and savings are among the world's largest .
 The country has few natural resources, so it must buy such necessities as aluminum, coal, lead, and petroleum . It must also buy aluminum, . coal, and lead, as well as aluminum .
 To pay for those imports, the government has adopted a strategy of exporting manufactured goods of high value . The government wants to pay for the imports of those goods .
 Japan’s manufactured products range from tiny computer components to giant oceangoing ships . Japan's manufactured products include computer components and oceanglass ships .
 The most important manufactured products are cars and trucks, electronic products, and communications and data processing equipment .
 Other products include cement, ceramics, clothing, fabricated metal products, food products, and food products .
 Japan's manufacturing sector plays a major role in the Japanese economy . The manufacturing sector is a major part of Japan's economy .
 Manufacturing industries have consistently employed more than 20 percent of the Japanese labor force . Manufacturing industries generated approximately 25 percent of Japan’s gross domestic product .
 An especially important part of Japan’s manufacturing sector is known as the /arge-firm sector . The /arge firm sector is a key part of the economy .
 NEC Corporation, Nissan Motor Company, Sony Corporation, Toshiba Corporation, and Toyota Motor Corporation . It includes such well-known companies as NEC, Nissan and Sony .
 Most of the large manufacturing firms assemble parts and components into a finished product such as a car, computer, or television set . Most of these companies assemble components into finished products .
 Large firms sell the product at a significantly higher price than the cost of the components . The large firms then sell it at a much higher price .
 Another part of the manufacturing sector consists of tens of thousands of small factories . The manufacturing sector is based in small factories in China .
 Most of these companies make the parts or components that large firms assemble into finished products . Most of the companies make or assemble the parts of finished products that they make .
 A core group of Japanese managers and skilled workers in the large-firm sector have secure jobs, earn high wages, and enjoy generous benefits . Core group of managers in large firms enjoy secure jobs and high wages .
 Some workers in the large-firm sector and many in the small factories have less job security, lower wages, and fewer benefits . But some workers in large firms and small factories are less secure and have fewer job security .
 For the location of each region and a listing of its main products, see the map titled Economy of Japan in this section of the article . The economy of Japan is the country's largest economy .
 Construction sector consists of several giant national firms, hundreds of medium-sized regional firms, and thousands of small local firms . The construction sector is one of the largest in the world .
 The industry grew dramatically after World War II, when construction firms were needed to rebuild Japan's ruined cities and demolished factories . The construction industry grew significantly after the war, when rebuilding Japan's devastated cities .
 Japan's gross domestic product was $3,966,096,000,000 in 1998 . The nation’s growing economy brought a constant demand for new shops, offices, factories, roads, harbors, airports, japan .
 GDP is total value of goods and services produced within a country in a year . GDP is the total value produced in a country . The GDP is a measure of the value produced by the country in each year .
 Services include community, social, and personal services; finance, insurance, and real estate; government; transportation and communication; and trade . /ndustry includes construction, manufacturing, mining, and utilities . Services include finance, social services, finance, real estate, and government .
 In the 1990's, most of the largest firms began to expand internationally . Most of the biggest firms in the world expanded internationally .
 Today, Japanese construction firms build such large projects as hotels and office buildings throughout the world . Today, Japan's construction firms are building large projects such as hotels .
 They handle many projects in other parts of Asia, the United Kingdom, and the U.S. They handle projects in Asia and the United States .
 Japan has a wide variety of minerals, but supplies of most are too small to satisfy the nation’s needs . Supplies of most of the minerals are small enough to satisfy Japan's needs .
 The chief mining products are coal, copper, lead, limestone, manganese, silver, tin, and zinc . Coal, copper and lead are the chief products of mining .
 Throughout much of Japan's history, agriculture was the mainstay of the Japanese economy . Agriculture has been a major factor in Japan's economy for decades .
 As late as 1950, the agricultural sector employed 45 percent of the labor force . The agricultural sector was at the peak of its peak in 1950s .
 As Japan's industries grew, the economic importance of agriculture declined . Agriculture declined as Japan's industry grew, but agriculture has declined .
 Because Japan is mountainous, only about 15 percent of the land can be cultivated .
 To make their farmland as productive, Japanese farmers use irrigation, improved seed varieties, fertilizers, and modern machinery .
 Farmers grow some crops on terraced fields on level strips of land cut out of hillsides . Some farmers grow crops on levels of land on the hilltops .
 Japan’s farmers are able to produce almost all the eggs, potatoes, rice, and fresh vegetables eaten in Japan . Almost all of the eggs and potatoes are produced in Japan by farmers .
 They produce 50 to 80 percent of dairy products, fruit, and meat . They also produce up to 80 per cent of dairy, fruit and meat products .
 Japan raises only a tiny share of animal feed, beans, and wheat that Japan needs . However, they raise only a small share of the animal feed and beans needed for Japan's needs .
 The nation must import agricultural products that its farmers cannot supply . The nation needs to import the agricultural products it cannot supply. The nation's farmers must supply.
 For decades, government policies have kept crop prices high, especially for rice . Rice prices have been high for decades, especially in rice .
 Japan's policies help ensure that Japan has an adequate supply of food, and protect rural communities from the sudden loss of income . Rural communities are also protected from sudden losses of income, experts say .
 Most Japanese consumers want to reduce government subsidies so that food becomes less expensive . But most want the government to reduce the government subsidies to reduce food prices . The government is expected to reduce subsidies to less expensive food .
 Other nations want Japan to stop protecting its agricultural sector, so that foreigners can sell rice and other farm products to the Japanese . Japan wants foreigners to sell rice, other products to sell to its citizens . Japan has been criticized for protecting agricultural exports .
 Japanese fishing crews catch large amounts of bonito, carp, eel, mackerel, pollock, sardines, trout, and tuna . Fishing crews catch fish in Japan .
 Other products of Japan's fishing industry include crabs and other shellfish and squid .
 Workers also harvest oysters and edible seaweed from "farms" in coastal waters . Oysters and seaweed are also harvested from coastal waters in Australia .
 Pollution and international restrictions on ocean catches have reduced the quantity and value of the Japanese catch . Pollution has reduced the quality of the fish in Japan .
 Service industries generate over 60 percent of Japan’s GDP and employ more than 60 percent the labor force . Taken altogether, service industries generate more than 80 percent of the country's labor force.
 Japan’s leading service industries include finance, insurance, real estate, and real estate . The country's leading services industries include community, social, and personal services; finance, . real estate and wholesale and retail trade .
 Other service industries that contribute to Japan’s economy include government, transportation and communication . Government and transportation industries contribute to the economy .
 Many of the workers in the service industries are highly educated and well-paid . Many of these workers are well-educated and well paid .
 They include bankers, financial analysts, civil servants, engineers, teachers, accountants, doctors, and lawyers . They hold such positions as bankers, analysts, teachers and accountants .
 Salarymen enjoy good job security until they retire in their late 50's or early 60's . Salarymen receive generous incomes and benefits, according to experts .
 A number of other workers in the service industries earn lower salaries and have fewer benefits and little job security . However, a number of service workers in that industry earn less salaries .
 Such shops sell food, clothing, household necessities, and a variety of other goods . Shops sell food and clothing .
 The little shops are far more numerous in Japan than in the U.S. or Western Europe .
 Discount stores are disappearing as giant discount stores force them out of business . But they are disappearing in the face of competition from discount stores .
 Japan requires large amounts of energy to power its factories, households, offices, and motor vehicles . The country's factories, homes, offices and motor cars all require energy .
 The nation must import most of the fuel required to produce that energy . But it also imports the fuel needed to produce the energy needed to make it happen .
 Hokkaido and Kyushu contain fairly large deposits of coal, but its quality is poor, and the deposits are difficult to mine . The deposits are hard to mine, and are poor quality of coal .
 Japan ranks among the world’s leading consumers of electric power . Nevertheless, Japan is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Power plants that burn coal, natural gas, or petroleum produce about 65 percent of Japan's electric power . The country's power plants are powered by coal, gas and oil .
 Nuclear power plants supply about 25 percent of the country’s electric power, and hydroelectric plants about 10 percent . The country's nuclear power plants are supplied by nuclear plants .
 Japan had hoped to build many more nuclear power plants to decrease its reliance on imported fuels . Japan's nuclear power plant is one of the world's most expensive sources of fuel .
 A 1995 accident at an experimental nuclear reactor raised questions about the future of the expansion program . The expansion program is set to expand in the U.S.
 In many ways, the driving force of Japan’s economy is international trade . International trade is the key to Japan's success in the country's economy .
 By trading with other nations, Japan obtains raw materials it does not have and finds buyers for the expensive, highquality manufactured goods its workers produce . Japan's workers produce high quality, high-quality products .
 Other major imports include chemicals, fish and shellfish, and metal ores . The U.S. imports include fish, chemicals, shellfish and metals .
 Japan buys many of its imports from Asian nations with small populations and few consumers . Japan buys imports from countries with few consumers, such as Japan .
 Japan is seldom able to sell to its trade partners enough manufactured goods to maintain an equal balance of imports and exports . As a consequence, Japan's trade partners are unable to sell enough to maintain equal trade and import balance .
 Thousands of Japanese cars on a huge wharf near Nagoya await shipment to other countries . Thousands of cars are on the wharf in Japan .
 Automobiles are among Japan’s most important manufactured products . Automobile industry looks to wealthy countries in North America and Western Europe .
 Since the end of World War II, the U.S. has bought the largest share of Japan's exports . The United States has bought a large share of Japanese exports .
 In the 1950's, the United States purchased inexpensive Japanese textile products . The U.S. purchased inexpensive textile products from Japan .
 Later, it began to buy more costly goods, such as automobiles and communications and computer equipment . Later, the government began to purchase more costly items such as cars and communications .
 The United States sells Japan many American goods in return, including expensive items, such as computers and medicines . The U.S. sells the goods to Japan in return for more than $1 billion .
 By the 1980's, the U.S. was buying far more from Japan than it was selling to it . The United States was buying more than its selling to Japan .
 In the early 1990's, a similar imbalance arose between Japan and nations in North and East Asia and Western Europe . In the 1990s, Japan and countries in the U.S. and Europe were at odds with each other .
 Japan’s trade surpluses enabled it to accumulate huge reserves of foreign currency, in an amount that was second only to the foreign reserves of the United States .
 Japan used some of its reserves to invest in factories, banks, businesses, and real estate in the U.S. and many other countries .
 Manufacturing is the single most important economic activity in Japan . Manufacturing is one of the country's single biggest economic activity . Canada, Economy of Japan, Canada, Japan .
 This map shows the nation’s five major industrial regions and lists the chief products of each region . It also shows the chief product products of the region .
 Japan's croplands, forest lands, mineral deposits, and fishing products are also indicated on the map . Japan's Croplands and forest lands are included in a map .
 Japan 51 the United States, and Western Europe were suffering economic slowdowns . The U.S. and Europe were also suffering slowdowns. Japan 51 .
 People in other nations began to envy and resent Japan for its trade surpluses, large reserves of foreign currencies, and heavy investment in other countries . Japan's huge investment in foreign currency reserves has led to a rise in Japan's foreign reserves .
 Japan has a modern transportation system, including airports, highways, railroads, and coastal shipping . The country's transportation system is full of airports and highways .
 All the major cities have extensive local transit networks that include buses, trains, and subways . The major cities in the U.S. have extensive public transit networks .
 Japan also has the world’s longest suspension bridge, the Akashi Kaikyo Bridge . Japan also holds the world's longest suspension suspension bridge .
 It connects Kobe and Awaji Island and thus provides a link between the island of Honshu and Shikoku . It is the first of two islands connected to each other . The island is located in the city of Kobe .
 An eight-company business unit known as Japan Railways Group operates about 75 percent of Japanese railroads . The group operates about 80 percent of Japan's railroads.
 Trains traveling between Honshu and Hokkaido go through an undersea tunnel called the Seikan Tunnel . The tunnel is used to connect trains between the two cities .
 Hundreds of smaller ports and harbors enable coastal shippers to serve every major city in Japan . Hundreds of small ports, harbors are located in Japan's coastal cities .
 Tokyo's busiest airports include Tokyo International, also called Haneda, and New Tokyo International . Kansai International at Osaka is one of the country's most popular airports .
 Osaka’s Kansai International was built on an artificial island in Osaka Bay . The island was built in the middle of Osaka Bay and is located in the heart of Osaka .
 Each year, Japanese publishers produce tens of thousands of new books and periodicals, including popular comic books, called manga, for both adults and children .
 Virtually every Japanese household has at least one color television set and one or more radios . Virtually all Japanese households have color TVs and radios .
 The earliest inhabitants lived by hunting and gathering food and made tools out of stone . They made tools from stone and used hunting tools to make tools .
 To obtain food, they hunted for deer and boar, fished, and gathered nuts and berries . They also fished for food, gathered nuts, gathered berries, gathered deer, hunted for food .
 The main artifacts these people left behind were pots with markings made by cords or ropes . /omon means cord-marked. /omon .
 People in Japan learned new ideas and new technologies from contact with Korea and China . Near the end of the Jomon era, people in Japan learn new ideas from Korea .
 The Japanese learned how to grow rice in irrigated fields, and they began to settle in communities near the rice paddies . The Japanese began to live in communities around the rice fields .
 They also learned how to make tools and weapons out of bronze and iron . The team also learned to make weapons and weapons from bronze .
 By the end of the Yayoi era, different groups of extended families began to struggle for power in the Yamato Plain .
 When the leaders of these groups died, their relatives buried them in large tombs called ko/fun that were often shaped like keyholes . The leaders were buried in tombs shaped like keysholes .
 Many haniwa are figurines of warriors or sculptures of bows and arrows . Haniwa is a sign that warfare had become an important part of Japanese society .
 One of the extended family groups began to dominate the others, and it declared itself Japan's imperial household . In the 600's and 700’s, one of the . extended family . groups began . dominating the others .
 The head of the imperial house, whose given name was Kotoku, became emperor in 645 . His given name is Kotoku .
 The next year, the imperial family began a program called the Taika Reform . The program was the first of its kind .
 The program involved constructing capital cities and organizing Japanese society following the example of China . Japan's capital cities were built following China's example .
 The imperial family created a central government and official bureaus and adopted a system of land management similar to China’s . Imperial family also created a system similar to that of China .
 Under this system, most people worked as farmers on land owned by the government . The government owned most of the land .
 Farmers paid taxes to the government and provided labor, including service in the government's small armies . In return, farmers paid taxes, provided labor to government in return for their services .
 To justify its claim to authority, the imperial family relied not on China but on ancient Japanese beliefs . The imperial family used ancient beliefs to justify its authority .
 Japanese histories maintain that the family had descended from the gods who created the Japanese islands in mythology .
 The family’s presumed descent was through Amaterasu, the Japanese sun goddess, Amaterasu .
 In 794, the imperial household moved to a new capital city called Heian-kyo, located at the site of today’s Kyoto . The imperial family moved to the new capital, located in the city of today's Kyoto .
 1500's Japan endured a long period of wars among regional lords . He established a military government headquartered in Kamakura, Japan .
 This visit and a second one in 1854 led to the opening of Japanese ports to international trade . This visit to Japan led to a second visit to the country's ports to open up international trade.
 Tokyo began working to develop modern industries and strengthen its military . Tokyo became the capital, and Japan began developing modern industries . Tokyo was the capital of the country .
 Japan 53 During the Heian era, a male in the imperial household ruled as emperor . During this era, the emperor ruled as an emperor . Japan is now Japan's most populous country .
 The male heads of noble families assisted the emperor by administering the government, collecting tax revenues, maintaining small armies, and judging legal disputes . The head of a noble family was the head of the emperor .
 These officials earned generous incomes and lived in large mansions in the capital city . They lived in mansions .
 The ruling nobles used their leisure time primarily to observe nature and write poetry . Their leisure time was spent observing nature and writing poetry .
 Female members of the nobility, who were barred from holding office, had the most time for these pursuits . The most time was spent by female members of nobility .
 Women produced the era's most famous writings, including The Tale of Genji . Women also produced the most famous works of the 16th century .
 During the Heian era, the leading noble families undermined the power of the emperor and his government . Leading noble families were involved in overthrowing the emperor .
 Fujiwara gained power by intermarrying with the imperial family . One such family gained power through intermarriages with imperial family members .
 Private estates were plots of land whose owners were free from government interference and taxation . Private estates are plots of plots of free land that owners own free of government interference or taxation .
 The government began to establish these estates in the 700’s to provide Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines with income to fund their religious activities .
 During the 700’s, the government also began to allow tax exemptions to those who developed new lands for growing rice .
 The aristocratic families and religious institutions that had enough wealth to develop new lands acquired large holdings . The aristocrats had large holdings of land .
 Fujiwara and other high-ranking families in Heian-kyo used their influence to obtain ownership of other public lands . Later, they used their power to get ownership of public lands in order to obtain other lands .
 About half of the rice-growing land in Japan had been converted into private estates . By the 1200's, about half of Japan's rice growing land had been turned into estates .
 As the influence of the private estate owners increased, the power of the central government declined . Private estate owners became more influential to the government in the 1930s .
 With less public land, the government had less tax revenue to support its activities . The government had to rely heavily on public land in order to keep afloat .
 The government and aristocrats in Heian-kyo had to rely on bands of professional soldiers called samura/to protect the land and keep order in the countryside .
 The earthquake and the fires and tsunami (huge, destructive sea wave) that followed caused about 143,000 deaths and destroyed large areas of the two cities . The earthquake, the fires, and the tsunami (which followed) destroyed large parts of the cities .
 1941 Japan attacked U.S. bases at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii . The fighting became part of World War I .
 Japan surrendered to the Allies, and the Allied occupation of Japan began . Japan was occupied by the Allies in 1945 .
 Japan began a period of political instability and frequent changes of government . Japan has a history of instability, with frequent changes in government .
 By the 1100's's, two large military clans -- the Taira and the Minamoto -- had armies of samurai under their command . The Minamoto and Tairai were the two largest military clans in Japan .
 In the late 1100's, the Taira and Minamoto clashed in a series of battles for power .
 The Minamoto established a new military government headquartered in Kamakura, a town in eastern Japan far from Heian-kyo . It was established by the Minamoto in the early 1600s .
 In 1192, the head of this military government, Yoritomo, was given the title of shogun, a special, high-ranking military post granted by the emperor . The post was a special military government granted by emperor in 1192 .
 Yoritomo was the emperor's special commander . He established his own separate bases of power in Japan . He was a special commander of the Japanese army .
 He began to place nobles who had sworn loyalty to him on private estates . He appointed others to oversee the remaining public lands . He also appointed others who oversaw public land .
 In this way, the shogun began to influence both areas of power in Japan . The shogun influenced both imperial government and the private estates .
 By the early 1200's, Japan's political situation had become highly unstable . The political situation in Japan was extremely unstable .
 Private estate owners were struggling to retain control over their lands as the shogun’s supporters expanded their influence . The shogun's ambitious supporters expanded his influence .
 First, the Minamoto family lost its influence to members of the Hojo family, who ruled as agents in the name of Minamoto shoguns . Second, the family lost influence to those who ruled under the name Minamoto .
 The Ashikaga established a new military government in Kyoto in the 1330's . The new government was established in Kyoto, Japan .
 Peasants in the countryside were forced to take up swords to protect their communities . Peasant farmers were forced into taking up swords in order to protect themselves .
 Temples with large jlandholdings trained their own armies of warrior-monks to protect their assets . Temples in ancient times had large armies of warriors trained to protect them .
 Estate owners gathered private armies of samurai to guard their lands . Some estate owners gathered armies to protect their lands from samurai .
 They exercised control over many armed warriors and governed large areas of farmland . They also ruled large swathes of farmland in the area .
 Japan fought each other for military supremacy during the 1500's, as Japan sank into a long period of civil war . The two nations fought for power in the early 1500's .
 In 1549, Saint Francis Xavier, a missionary from Portugal, arrived in Japan . He introduced a new element into this unstable scene . The missionary arrived in 1549 .
 Xavier and a few other priests had come to Japan to convert the Japanese populace to Christian beliefs . Xavier and the Japanese people were converted to Christianity in Japan .
 The missionaries intended to help Portuguese traders sell European luxury goods and up-to-date weapons to the Japanese . The missionaries also intended to sell European goods and weapons to Japanese .
 The priests had little success in converting the Japanese to Christianity .
 Traders found eager customers among the daimyo in southern Japan .
 An ink paintiog with colors on paper by an unknown Japanese artist . Rival families fought for control of the Japanese government during the 1100’s .
 Two large military clans, the Taira and the Minamoto, met in battle in 1160 . The battle took place in Japan between 1160 and 1180 .
 The Taira won and ruled Japan until the Minamoto defeated them in 1185 . The Minamoto eventually defeated them . They ruled Japan for more than a century .
 In 1560's, he gathered a large coalition of forces under his command and led them to Kyoto . In the 1560s, he led a coalition of troops to Kyoto, Japan, leading them to victory .
 He was beginning to impose control on other areas of Japan when he was killed in 1582 . His death was the start of a new era of Japanese rule .
 Oda’s successor, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, took up the task of uniting the nation . Oda's successor, Hideyoshoto, took over the task from Oda, to unify the nation.
 Toyotomi was succeeded by a noble named Tokugawa leyasu, who had also served Oda Nobunaga . Toyotom succeeded by the noble who had served as a noble .
 The Tokugawa shogun presided over a delicately balanced system of authority . He ruled over a delicate balance of authority in Japan .
 The shogun directly controlled about 25 percent of the farmland in the country . He was directly involved in the development of the country's farmland .
 He also licensed foreign trade, operated gold mines, and ruled the major cities, including Kyoto, Osaka, and the shogun’s capital—Edo, which is now Tokyo .
 The Tokugawa shogun had to share authority with the daimyo, who controlled 75 percent of Japan’s farmland . The daimy controlled most of Japan's farmland .
 In each han, the daimyo, not the shogun, issued laws and collected taxes . The shogun issued laws, collected taxes and issued laws in each of the han han .
 During the Tokugawa era, Japan had only a partially centralized government . Japan thus had a partially central government .
 The Tokugawa did not support Christianity, the religion of most of the outsiders . Their presence disturbed the shogun, in part because of the lack of support for Christianity . The shogun did not want the outsiders to live in Japan .
 The shogun wanted to control Japan's international trade to prevent any daimyo from gaining too much wealth and power through trade with the outsiders .
 Tokugawa had most foreigners expelled from Japan during the 1630's under orders known as seclusion edicts . For these reasons, most foreigners were not allowed to live in Japan under the orders of seclusion .
 Only a few Dutch and Chinese traders were allowed to remain in Japan to conduct their business . Only a small number of Dutch, Chinese traders remained in Japan .
 The town served as Japan’s sole window on the European world until the mid-1800's . It served as a window to the world for the first time in 18th century .
 Japan had now put an end to centuries of internal wars and had closed itself off from the rest of the world . Japan's internal wars had now ended with the country's internal conflicts .
 During this period of peace and isolation, the nation began to pursue its own course of development . The nation's future is now in the hands of President Obama .
 At this time, Japan laid the foundation for its future economic growth . The country's economic growth has been in decline for decades .
 People in all walks of life developed a strong work ethic and devotion to their craft and duty . People in every walk of life have a strong devotion to work ethic .
 Farmers in the countryside and merchants in the cities saved money and learned to invest it wisely . Hard-working farmers and merchants learned to save money and invest wisely .
 Trading firms in the large cities developed skills in finance, organization, and personnel management . Trading firms developed skills to develop skills in the city .
 It developed thriving industries to entertain the many samurai and merchants living in Japan .
 Entertainers perfected the form of stage drama called kabuki and the puppet theater called bunraku . The puppet theater is a form of drama known as kabuku .
 An American mission led by Commodore Matthew C Perry arrived in Japan in 1853 . The opening of dae was painted by Ogata Gassan .
 Perry sent Perry to open diplomatic and trade relations with the Japanese . Perry was sent by the U.S. government to help open diplomatic relations with Japan . Perry: "The United States needs to learn how to deal with Japan"
 In 1858, partly as a result of Perry's efforts, Japan signed trade treaties with the U.S. and other Western countries . The treaties were made partly due to the efforts of Perry .
 The colorful wood-block prints depicted the men and women of the entertainment districts . The prints were made of wood blocks of wood-blocks .
 Their declining incomes added to the samurai's growing dissatisfaction with Japan’s rigid social structure, which prevented them from rising to better stations in life . The samurai was unhappy with the structure of society, especially in Japan .
 Poor harvests and harsh lords drove many peasants to join together in protest . The peasants were led by peasants who were poor peasants in revolt .
 In 1853, renewed contact with the West led directly to sweeping changes in Russia . The country's relationship with the Western world led to a series of changes .
 That year, a small fleet of American naval vessels sailed into the bay south of Edo, Japan .
 The fleet's commander, Matthew C Perry, has asked Japan to open its ports to international trade .
 After many discussions, Japan allowed the United States to station a negotiator, Townsend Harris, in the small port of Shimoda, far from Edo . The U.S. negotiator was stationed in the port, near Edo, in Japan's capital .
 In 1858, Harris succeeded in his negotiations on behalf of the United States, and Japan signed a treaty of commerce . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Japan .
 The treaty permitted trade between the two countries, called for opening five Japanese ports to international commerce . It also gave the U.S. the right to extraterritoriality .
 This right enabled American citizens to be governed only by U.S. laws while they were on Japanese soil . This right was granted to American citizens in Japan .
 Many Japanese disapproved of the treaty and similar agreements signed later . The treaty was signed in 1903 .
 To them, the treaties were unequal, because Japan had granted extraterritoriality and other privileges that were not given to the Japanese in turn . To them they said, "to them, it was unequal" to them .
 The treaties enraged many samurai, who attacked some foreign officials . Many samurai attacked some officials, killing them .
 In 1867, a small group of samurai and aristocrats pressured the shogun into resigning and restoring the emperor to his previous position as head of the government . The shogun was restored to the throne in 1867 .
 The revolutionaries disapproved of the trade treaties . They wanted to increase Japan's security and well-being in what they considered a dangerous and competitive world .
 On Jan. 1868, the emperor officially announced the return of imperial rule . On Jan., 1868,. Emperor officially announced his return to imperial rule.
 The emperor, a teen-ager named Mutsuhito, adopted Meiji, meaning enlightened rule, as the name for the era of his reign . Meiji was adopted by the emperor, who was a teen, as a teenager .
 The revolution that placed him in power is known as the Meiji Restoration . It was known as "Meiji Restoration" The revolution was the result of a revolt against Japan's rulers .
 Leaders of the Meiji Restoration and their successors ruled the country, not the emperor . In practice, however, the leaders of the . Meiji . Restoration and . their successors rule the country . Not the emperor, but the leaders .
 The leaders adopted the slogan “Enriching the Nation and Strengthening the Military’ as their guiding policy . The slogan was adopted by the leaders of the country .
 By enriching Japan, the new leaders believed they would enable the nation to compete with the Western powers . The new leaders hoped they would be able to compete .
 By 1919, Japan was a world power. coal mines, textile mills, shipyards, cement factories, and many other modern enterprises . Japan was one of the world's most powerful nations .
 In the 1880's, the government began selling its industries to private companies . The government sold its industries in the 1880s .
 Some of these companies, such as the Mitsui and Sumitomo groups, were old merchant houses that had been in business since the 1600's . Some of the companies were old merchants houses that were in business for centuries .
 Others, such as the Mitsubishi group, sprang up after the Meiji restoration .
 From 1880's to the 1940's, these business enterprises grew large and rich . From the 1880s to the 1950s, these businesses were very successful . These business enterprises were very profitable .
 Most zaibatsu were owned and operated by a single family or a family group . Zaibats were owned by single families or family groups .
 They created many related ventures, especially banking, insurance, international trade, manufacturing, and real estate . They created numerous ventures, including banking and insurance .
 The zaibatsu cooperated with the government to promote its aim of enriching the nation . Zaibats cooperated to promote the aim of the nation.
 "They remained private enterprises that enriched themselves at the same time. But they enriched themselves," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The second strategy of the Meiji leadership was to strengthen Japan's military force . The Meiji leader was keen to strengthen his country's military power .
 Former samurai took charge of a modern military recruited from the sons of farmers . Former samurai recruited from sons of Japanese farmers recruited from farmers .
 With advice from European experts, the government built naval shipyards and assembled military arsenals . With the advice of European military experts, it built naval shipsyards .
 Within 20 years after the Meiji restoration, Japan had developed the best military force in East Asia . Japan's military force is now one of the most powerful in Asia .
 From 1868 to 1889, government leaders experimented with different methods of organizing the nation’s political institutions . The results of the experiment were published in 1889 .
 This document made the emperor the head of the government and established a cabinet of ministers and a legislature with two houses . It also established a constitution of ministers, and a constitution with two house .
 The Constitution spelled out the rights and duties of the citizens, and it created a system of courts . The Constitution was created by the Constitution in 1903 .
 Under this Constitution, the powers of the Japanese people were extremely limited . The powers of Japan's people are extremely limited under the Constitution .
 "The leaders of the restoration and their appointees continued to hold real power," says U.S. Rep. John Boehner .
 These men now serve in official roles as prime ministers and Cabinet members .
 The nation removed restrictions that had prevented people from pursuing any occupation they desired . People were able to pursue their dreams of pursuing any job they wanted .
 New laws made the family the basic unit of society and males the heads of households . New laws also made males head of households and heads of families .
 Some of these laws limited women’s rights more drastically than they had been during the Tokugawa era of the 1600's to mid-1800's . Some of the laws were more restrictive than they were during the 16th to 18th century .
 The government established an ambitious system of public education in the 1970s .
 By the early 1900's, Japan offered free elementary education to most young people . By the mid-century's end of the century, Japan had a free education system . Japan's education system is now considered one of the world's most successful countries .
 More advanced schooling was available to students who had the money and talent to proceed further . More advanced, specialized schooling was also available to those with the money or talent .
 This school system made it possible for many people to improve their status in society . The school system was made possible to improve the status of many people in society.
 The schools also cultivated in students a strong sense of national pride and superiority, they say .
 Meiji government's emphasis on military might and the educational system’s emphasis on Japanese superiority led to war . In due course, the Meiji . government's . emphasis on . military might . and the . educational system . led to the war .
 In 1895, Japan began to build an empire like those of Britain and other European powers . Japan began building an empire in 1895 .
 The Japanese exploited Taiwan as an agricultural colony producing rice and sugar . The Japanese then exploited the island nation as a colony .
 Korea fell under Japanese control in 1910, following a bitterly fought war between Japan and Russia in 1905 . Korea is now one of the world's most densely populated countries .
 Japan exploited Korea for its rice and potential to develop industries . It exploited Korea's rice for its potential to become a major industry .
 The war gave Japan an economic advantage in India and the rest of Asia . More important, the war gave the country an advantage in the region .
 As Western nations became preoccupied with the war in Europe, they stopped their investment and trade in the East . Western nations stopped their investments and trade with the East during the war .
 Japanese exporters and manufacturers took that opportunity to move into Indian and other Asian markets . Exporporations and manufacturers moved into India and other markets .
 After the war, Western nations reestablished trade with India and the rest of Asia, and the Japanese economy suffered . Japan's economy suffered after the war .
 In 1923, a terrible earthquake struck the Tokyo-Yokohama area and led to the deaths of about 143,000 people . The 1923 earthquake led to about 150,000 deaths in the area .
 A worldwide depression during the late 1920's further hurt the Japanese economy . The Japanese economy suffered a severe recession in the 1920s .
 China began to strengthen its administration in Manchuria . About this time, China began strengthening its administration of Manchurland .
 Japan feared it might lose the rights it gained in the Russo-Japanese War . The war was fought in Russia-era-era Japan .
 Japan's prime minister and other government leaders could not deal with the problems troubling Japan . Japan's PM and other leaders failed to deal with Japan's problems, says CNN.com editor .
 Officers in the Japanese army decided to take matters into their own hands . Officers in Japan's army took matters into account for their own safety .
 nationalist groups threaten members of the government who oppose the army . At home, nationalist groups began to threaten government members .
 On May 15, 1932, nationalists assassinated Prime Minister Tsuyoshi Inukai .
 Japan's military leaders were in firm control of the government in 1936 . By 1936, Japan's government had been in full control .
 Emperor Hirohito, on the white horse, reviewed Japanese troops in 1938 . As Japanese armies marched across China and into Southeast Asia, the United States grew .
 Japan moved toward closer relations with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy by signing anti-Communist pacts with the two nations . Meanwhile, Japan also signed anti-communist agreements with Italy and Germany .
 In September 1940, Japanese troops occupied the northern part of French Indochina .
 When they moved into the southern part of Indochina the next year, the U.S. cut off its exports to Japan . The United States cut off their exports to the south of Vietnam in 1968 .
 In the fall of 1941, General Hideki Tojo became prime minister of Japan . Hideki became the first Japanese prime minister to become a leader in 1941 .
 Japan's military leaders began preparing to wage war against the U.S. Japan began preparing for war with the United States .
 Japanese bombers attacked the U.S. military bases at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii on Dec. 1941 . Pearl Harbor was the first attack on Pearl Harbor .
 They bombed United States bases on Guam and Wake Island and in the Philippines . They also bombed U.S. bases on Wake Island, Guam, Wake Island .
 The bombing brought the U.S. into war against Japan and Japan’s European allies, Germany and Italy . The bombing of Japan brought the United States into war .
 Japan quickly won dramatic victories in Southeast Asia and in the South Pacific . Japan quickly became dominant in the region, winning dramatic victories .
 By 1942, the Japanese empire spanned much of the area from the eastern edge of India through Indonesia, and from the Aleutian Islands near Alaska to the Solomon Islands .
 The Japanese fleet suffered its first major setback in May 1942, when the United States fought the Battle of the Coral Sea to a draw . The U.S. and Japan fought to a stalemate in the battle .
 The United States victory in the Battle of Midway the following month helped turn the tide in favor of the U.S. The U.N. victory in Midway was credited with turning the tide of the war against Japan .
 American bombers hit industrial targets, and warships pounded Japanese coastal cities . U.S. bombers bombed industrial targets in Japan .
 On August 6, the United States dropped the first atomic bomb ever used in warfare on the city of Hiroshima . Hiroshima, Japan, was the site of the first Hiroshima bomb .
 Two days later, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan and invaded Manchuria and Korea . Two days after, the Soviets declared war against Japan, they invaded both countries .
 The next day, United States fliers dropped a second and larger atomic bomb on Nagasaki . U.S. dropped the second and third atomic bomb .
 Emperor Hirohito announced to the Japanese people that Japan had agreed to end the war . The next day, he announced the end of the war with Japan .
 The nation kept only its four main islands and the small islands nearby . The island nation was largely uninhabited .
 The Bonin Islands, lwo Jima, and the Ryukyu Islands were returned to Japan in the 1950's, 1960’s, and 1970's . The U.S. returned to the Bonin islands in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Japan's defeat brought foreign occupiers to its shores for the first time in its long history . Japan was defeated by Japan in the Battle of Japan in 1945 .
 Under the direction of United States General Douglas MacArthur, the occupation force carried out a sweeping set of reforms inspired by American ideals . The occupation force was led by the U.S. General MacArthur .
 More than 5 million Japanese troops were disarmed under the occupation of Japan . Under the occupation, more than 5million Japanese troops disarmed .
 Seven of the leaders, including former Prime Minister Tojo, were executed . Seven of them were executed in Japan .
 Japan conquered Manchuria in 1931, then advanced into other parts of China and Southeast Asia . In 1931, Japan conquered the region and advanced into parts of the world .
 The map above shows the stages of Japanese expansion from 1931 to 1942 . The map was created by the Japanese government in 1931 .
 The Allied occupation force began reforms in 1946, when MacArthur drew up a new Japanese Constitution .
 Under this document, the emperor lost all real power and became merely a symbol of the state . Under the document, he was only a symbol for the state.
 A civilian prime minister, chosen by majority vote in the Jegislature, became head of the government . A civilian PM was chosen by a majority vote by the majority of the parliament .
 The rights of the people increased dramatically compared with those granted by the Meiji Constitution . Rights of the Japanese people were increased dramatically in Meiji .
 They redistributed farmland, legalized labor unions, and encouraged new laws giving women greater rights . They also redistributed farmland and legalized unions .
 The Americans reorganized Japan's educational system to make it more democratic . They also reorganized the country's education system .
 In 1951, Japan signed a peace treaty with 48 nations that went into effect on Aug., 1952 . The treaty was signed by Japan in 1952 .
 Allied bombing destroyed many of the nation’s factories and nearly leveled most large cities . Allied bombings destroyed many factories, nearly leveled many large cities in the war's early years .
 Much of the population lived in dire conditions in small rural villages, and they depended on friends and neighbors to survive . Much of these villages were in poor conditions .
 Japan was almost closed off from the outside world because many of its trading ships had been destroyed . Many of the country's trading ships were destroyed .
 The value of its currency, the yen, dropped so low that Japan could not afford to purchase many foreign goods . Japan's economy has been hit hard by the drop in value of the yen .
 The United States provided financial assistance, but the Japanese national government played the central role in promoting reconstruction . The U.S. provided financial aid, but Japan played a key role in reconstruction .
 After the war, the government began to guide and direct the nation’s industries . Government began to direct and direct industries after war .
 The government formed the Ministry of International Trade and Industry to identify the industries in Japan that needed to be developed .
 The Ministry of Finance directed investment funds toward these enterprises . The government has invested in several of the country's largest companies .
 The Japanese tradition of working hard, saving money and investing wisely helped the nation become economically stable .
 By the mid-1950’s, output of most Japanese industries matched their prewar levels . By the 1950s, the output of many Japanese industries had recovered from the war .
 LDP strongly advocated Japan’s economic growth, and it put into effect many successful policies . The LDP has been in office for more than 30 years .
 Fewer people stay in rural areas to earn a living by farming . Fewer and fewer people stayed in rural towns to make a living from farming .
 They moved to cities and became workers in manufacturing or service industries . Instead of moving to cities, they moved to work in manufacturing and service industry .
 The pressures to conform to society's expectations were less apparent in large cities than in small villages . But the pressure to conform is less apparent than in the small villages, experts say .
 Young people felt freer to be individuals than their parents and grandparents had, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Young people said they were freer than their grandparents had .
 In 1959, Crown Prince Akihito broke tradition by marrying a commoner, Michiko Shoda, the daughter of a wealthy industrialist . In 1959 the Crown Prince married Michiko in Tokyo, Japan .
 This visit marked the first time that a reigning Japanese emperor had ever left the country . It was the first visit to Japan by a reigning emperor ever .
 It soon began to appear that Akihito’s era would be a time of unsettling political and economic change . The new king's reign will be an unsettling time for the country .
 Troubles for Japan's long-term ruling political party, the LDP, began in the 1980's . LDP is the country's longest-serving political party .
 A number of leading government figures accused of raising campaign funds illegally . Campaign funds were allegedly raised illegally by government figures .
 The coalition passed a number of major laws reforming the election system . The coalition also passed a series of major reforms in the past .
 By the mid-1990s, Japan’s political parties had gathered into two large factions, one composed of the LDP and its allies, the other a coalition of opposition parties . The LDP is composed of its own allies, its allies and its coalition partners .
 Japanese manufacturers began finding it difficult to sell their products abroad . Economic troubles also arose in the late 1980’s .
 Japan’s strong currency, high real estate values, and high labor costs all made Japanese goods expensive to overseas customers . Strong currency, real estate value and labor costs make Japanese goods more expensive .
 Japanese manufacturers also had to compete with low-cost businesses from newly developing nations . Japanese manufacturers have also faced competition from newly-developing nations .
 The banks had made many loans during the late 1980's that failed as real estate prices japan 59 dropped in the 1990's . At the same time, the Japanese banking system began to suffer .
 The result of Japan's problems in trade and finance was a recession, a period when the economy virtually stopped growing . The result was a period of stagnation in Japan's economy .
 In the 1990's, Japan’s unemployment rate rose, average household incomes nearly stopped growing, and consumer spending declined . Consumer spending declined in the 1990s . Japan's unemployment rate also rose .
 Japan's relative economic position in the world did not change dramatically . However, other nations also suffered economic problems, so did Japan's position . The country's relative position in economic terms has not changed dramatically .
 Economic anxiety spreads throughout Japan as businesses and workers try to maintain their competitive edge . But economic anxiety spread throughout Japan throughout the country .
 Okinawa Hara-kiri Ryukyu Islands Japan, Sea of Shinto Japanese language . Sony Corporation Space exploration Toyota Motor Corporation 60 Japan Outline Il.
 Government A National government B B Local government C Politics D Politics E Politics ll ll. ll. A National Government B C Politics ll. L. B is a National government . ll. C is a national government . A national government government is a government of government .
 The land A Honshu B Hokaido C Kyushu D Shikoku E The Ryukyu and Bonin islands Vi. Vi. The arts A Music B Theater B Theater C Literature D Sculpture V .
 Hamanaka, Sheila, and Ohmi, Ayano. The Living National Treasures of Japan. /n Search of the Spirit .
 The southern end of the sea is connected to the East China Sea by the Korea Strait . The Korea Strait is the longest strait in Asia .
 The northern end of the Sea of Okhotsk is connected to the Pacific Ocean by Tsugaru Strait and La Perouse Strait and Sakhalin Strait . The northern part of the sea is also connected to Russia's Pacific Ocean . The Sea of Ohotsk can also be found
 Japanese beetle is an insect that injures grasses, trees, crops, and garden plants . It injures crops, plants, grasses and trees .
 It probably was accidentally imported in the roots of nursery plants from Japan . It was probably accidentally imported into the plant's roots .
 It is now found in all states east of the Mississippi River and in Canadian provinces of Quebec and Ontario . It is found in Canada and Canada .
 Its copperybrown front wings are hard and meet in a line down the center of the back . Its front wings met in a hard line with a hard-lined line of wings . It's the first of its kind in the world, and the second of its species is a
 The animals have white comma-shaped bodies with brown heads and swollen tails . They are brown, white and white, with swollen tails and white comma shaped bodies . They have white, brown heads with brown tails and brown heads .
 In late May or early June, the grubs enter the pupa stage and emerge as adults near the end of June . The grubs become adults in late June or early July .
 The U.S. Department of Agriculture has released several types of parasites that attack Japanese beetle grubs . The parasite is a parasite that attacks Japanese beetles .
 A bacterial disease, called milky spore, also can be used to kill the grubs . The grubs can be infected with a variety of diseases .
 Adult beetles may be killed with insecticides or lured into baited traps . Adults may also be lured into traps by baiting traps or insecticides .
 The Japanese beetle belongs to the scarab family, Scarabaeidae, in the order Coleoptera . The Japanese beetles belong to the Scarab family .
 Japanese beetle Japanese chin is a dainty, graceful toy dog . World Book illustration by Oxford Illustrators .
 Its coat is long and silky, with longer hair around its neck and on its tail and legs . The coat is silky and long with long hair around the neck and around the tail .
 The Japanese chin was brought to the Western world from Japan in the 1850's . The chin was first introduced to the world in the 18th century . It was brought from Japan to the western world in 1850s .
 Japanese language is the native tongue of the people of Japan and the neighboring Ryukyu and Bonin islands . The breed probably originated in China, and was formerly called Japanese spaniel .
 Since 1868, the speech of the city of Tokyo has become the standard J language of the Japanese people . The speech of Tokyo is the standard Japanese language . Tokyo's speech is the most common language in Japan .
 The rhythm of Japanese allows an even, metronomelike beat for each syllable . Japanese rhythm of the syllable allows a rhythmic beat for every syllable.
 Differences in pitch are the distinctive features of words and phrases . Differences in stress and emphasis are typical of English . The pitch pitch is a key part of the language .
 Japanese dialects can be divided into three types of dialects based on pitch-accent patterns . The dialects are different from those of English, French and Spanish .
 The Kansai, or Western, type is characteristic of western Honshu, most of Shikoku, and southern Kyushu . It is a Japanese type of type .
 The sing/e-pattern type is found in northeastern Honshu and central Kyushu .
 Both languages resemble languages of the Ural-Altaic type, which also includes Finnish and Turkish . The languages are part of the same type as Finnish, Turkish and Finnish .
 The intimate is correct in everyday conversation with family, friends, and coworkers . It's a good thing to say "in intimate" with family and friends .
 The fonorific style confers honor and respect when spoken and used for older people and superiors . The style is used to refer to older people or superiors . It confers respect and is used in honor of older people .
 There are also impersonal style used in speeches and writing, and the modern literary style . There is also also a modern style of speech and writing .
 Each inflected word consists of a stem and one or more of a set of endings . Inflected word is a stem, ending, and a stem or stem .
 Uninflected words include nouns and most conjunctions and postpositionals . The uninflected word includes nouns, conjunctions, postpositions .
 A postpositional indicates a noun’s grammatical function within the sentence . Postpositional is a postposition . A postposition indicates the function of a noun in a sentence .
 The Japanese language has 16 consonant sounds and 5 vowel sounds . It has five vowel sounds: Ah, ee, oo, eh, eh and of .
 A syllable may consist of only a vowel, only a nasal n, only the nasal n or a consonant plus a vowel . The syllable is a syllable that consists of a vowel or only a single consonant .
 The Japanese predicate always ends the sentence, preceded by subject, object, indirect object, and other phrases in variable order . The Japanese predative always ends a sentence .
 Japanese borrowed the Chinese system of writing, as well as many Chinese words . The Japanese borrowed many of the Chinese words from the Chinese .
 Some Chi; nese characters were used as phonetic symbols without John V Grohol from Michael and Carole Benson (Japanese Chin Club of Americal The Japanese chin Japanese literature)
 These were later simplified into two systems of phonetic symbols called kana, which represent the sounds of the Japanese syllables . The symbols represent the sound of the syllable in kana .
 Two kana systems, called syllabaries, and about 2,000 Chinese characters are used in writing Japanese . Today, the two kana system, called . syllabary, is used in two Japanese systems . About 2,200 Chinese characters used in Japanese writing .
 It is a set of rounded characters derived from cursive Chinese characters . The rounded characters are rounded characters based on the Chinese language .
 The more angular katakana syllabary is derived from parts of Chinese characters . It is based on parts of the language of the Japanese .
 Katakana is used to write words and other language elements in the equivalent elements of another alphabet . Katakanas are written in the same alphabet as other alphabet .
 Katakana is also used to make a word stand out in a text, much like italics are used in English . Katakanas are also used in other languages to make words stand out .
 The Roman alphabet is also taught in Japanese schools, along with Romanized Japanese . Romanization of the Japanese alphabet is taught in schools in Japan .
 This system writes consonants with the nearest English equivalent and vowels as in Italian . This system is written in Italian with consonants as in English . It also writes vowels with their closest English equivalent .
 Japanese literature ranks as one of the world’s great literatures . Laurel Rasplica Rodd: Japanese literature is one of world's great literature .
 It reflects many characteristics of the Japanese people, such as their appreciation of tradition and their sensitivity to nature, it says . It reflects Japan's appreciation of traditions and sensitivity to the environment .
 The Japanese probably produced their first written literature during the A.D. 500's . The first written work was probably written in the early 1900s .
 Japan long remained isolated from the rest of the world, and its written language was difficult to master . But Japan has remained isolated, and the written language is difficult to learn .
 Japanese literature remained almost unknown outside Japan until the 1900's . Therefore, Japanese literature was almost unheard of outside Japan .
 These works glorify the deeds of the imperial family but also include folk tales, legends, myths, and songs . These works are chiefly glorified by the deeds and are often accompanied by folk tales .
 The earliest collection of Japanese poetry, the Manyoshu, also appeared during the 700th century . It is believed to have been written in around 700 years .
 Japanese poems, partly because of the nature of the language itself, have subtle rhythms and no rhyme .
 The Man yoshu consists mainly of 31-syllable poems called tanka . The poems deal with friendship, love, and nature .
 It also has some longer poems, many of which praise the imperial family . Many of the longer poems are written in praise of the emperor .
 Most people who wrote and enjoyed literature at the time were members of the nobility . Most of the people who enjoyed literature in the 19th century were aristocrats .
 First work of Japanese fiction, The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter, written by an unknown author, dates from the early 900s .
 "It far surpassed previous stories with its sophisticated style and accurate description of human emotions," says CNN.com .
 Diaries and essays were also important literary forms during the Heian period . Diaries, essays and diaries were important forms of writing during the period .
 By the 900's, the vocabulary and themes of Japanese verse had narrowed, reflecting the elegant tastes of the aristocracy . By the 9th century, the themes and vocabulary had narrowed .
 Buddhist ideas about human mortality brought a new seriousness to Japanese poetry during the 1100's . The poet was influenced by Buddhism and the death of the Buddha .
 Poets tried to reach beyond the limits of short individual poems by writing groups of poems with related themes and images . In 62 Japanese literature addition, poets tried to . reach beyond . limits of . short individual individual poems .
 The educated warrior classes joined the nobility in producing and reading literature during the medieval period . It was produced by the nobility and the aristocracy .
 In the early 1300's, a trend toward historical fiction and an increasing mood of pessimism about human fate inspired the creation of The Tale of the Heike . In the 1400's, The Tale was created by The Heike, a book of historical fiction .
 This war story, whose author is unknown, describes the rise and violent fall of the Taira family .
 Minstrels recited The Tale of the Heike throughout the Middle Ages . It was the source of stories for plays and fiction in later centuries . The Tale was the subject of numerous plays and novels .
 The most famous medieval Japanese essays include An Account of My Hut by Kamo no Chomei and Essays in Idleness by Yoshida Kenko .
 These works provide insight into traditional Japanese attitudes toward life and art .
 In poetry, the tanka remained the chief verse form throughout the medieval period . The tanka is the most common form of poetry .
 poets also composed renga, which were chains of interlocking poems written by several poets . Renga was a chain of poems composed by poets and poets .
 The oldest form of Japanese drama, the no drama, was first performed in the 1300's . No drama was performed in Japan's first ever drama, performed in 1300s .
 It developed from performances of song and dance that had long been part of religious and folk rituals . It is now a form of dance that has been used in the past for centuries .
 Zeami Motokiyo shaped the no drama into the form in which it is still performed today . In the late 1300's, he shaped the form of the drama into a form of no drama . The no drama is still played today .
 He combined dancing and chanting with literary themes and poetic language from the past . He used literary themes, poems and poetry to create his own version of his work .
 The most successful literary works of the Tokugawa period were those aimed at people of the new middle classes, who lived in the cities . Most successful works of Tokugwa period were aimed at new middle class .
 Many prose works of the time dealt with scenes of urban Japan and with humorous or sexual subjects . Many of these works dealt with subjects such as urban Japan .
 Ihara Saikaku abandoned a successful career as a poet and became the most famous fiction writer of the period . In the late 1600's, Saikakaku became known for his work in Japan .
 During the Tokugawa period, a new verse form called haiku challenged the popularity of the tanka . The new form was haiku, a form of poetry known as haiku .
 Haiku has 17 syllables and began as a comic style of verse that was simple to write . Haiku began with a simple, simple style of poetry that was easy to write.
 Matsuo Basho changed haiku into a serious art form in the late 1600's . Basho's haiku was a serious form of poetry .
 His haiku, written according to strict rules, present aspects of nature and contain a reference to a season of the year . The haiku is written in strict rules .
 These poems merely suggest ideas and feelings, and so the reader must use imagination to interpret them . The reader must also use imagination .
 Two new types of drama, kabuki plays and puppet theater, flourished during the 1600's . The two new forms of drama flourished in the 1600s .
 Kabuki plays are melodramatic and feature colorful costumes and lively music and acting . Kabuki is a traditional Japanese play form .
 The puppet theater of the early 1700's featured several dramatic masterpieces by Japan’s greatest playwright, Chikamatsu Monzaemon . The puppet Theater of the 17th century featured several masterpieces .
 Monzaemon’ss scripts turned simple characters, such as shop clerks and prostitutes, into tragic figures . The poetic power of the scripts was the strength of the script .
 Western ideas have greatly changed Japanese literature since the end of the Tokugawa period . The influence of Western ideas has greatly changed the country's literature .
 The major result of this influence has been the development of the modern novel . The major influence of the novel has been that it has led to the creation of modern novels .
 A small group of writers educated in Western languages called for a break with older forms of literature . During the 1880's, a group of Western writers called for an end to the tradition of old literature .
 Such authors as Futabatei Shimei and Tsubouchi Shoyo thought the Japanese should write Europeanstyle novels as an intellectual counterpart to Japan’s technological modernization . Such authors thought the novels should be written as a response to technological modernization in Japan .
 As a novelist and literary critic of the early 1900's, he established the modern novel as a respected form of literature . As a literary critic, he was a pioneer of modern literature . He established the Modern Novel as an important form of fiction .
 Yasunari Kawabata won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1968 and Kenzaburo Oe in 1994 . Two Japanese novelists have won the prize for literature .
 Other outstanding modern Japanese novelists include Tanizaki Junichiro, Abe Kobo, and Yukio Mishima .
 Western literature has also influenced Japanese poetry and drama of the 1900's . Western literature influenced Japanese poets and drama .
 Some poets still write the traditional tanka and haiku, but longer poems and free verse now account for much Japanese poetry . Free verse now accounts for much of Japanese poetry, with tanka, haiku .
 In spite of Western influences, tradition remains strong in Japan . In Japan, tradition is still strong despite Western influences .
 Yukio Mishima killed himself in 1970 in the manner of a medieval warrior . Mishima committed suicide in 1970 . He committed suicide by self-inflicted gunshot wounds to the head .
 He did so while proclaiming the same reverence for the imperial family that appears prominently in the earliest Japanese literature . He proclaimed his reverence for Japan's imperial family .
 Japanese print is a type of Japanese illustration printed on paper from carved blocks of wood . It is printed on a piece of wood carved from carved wood .
 The most famous Japanese prints were produced from the 1600's to the late 1800's . They were created from the 16th century to 18th century .
 They are noted for their brilliant designs, bold colors, and technical quality . They are also noted for the brilliant designs and bold colors .
 Most Japanese prints portray scenes from everyday life or from the theater and other popular forms of entertainment .
 They called the prints ukivo-e, which means pictures of the floating world . The prints were printed in Japan in the 1930s .
 Japanese prints were designed by highly trained artists and produced by skilled artisans . Prints are designed by skilled artists and are made of Japanese materials .
 The early prints were made in black and white, though the artists sometimes added other colors by hand . The prints were often made by hand, with the artists adding other colors .
 A carver cut away portions of the wood between the lines of the drawing, which left the design itself raised . The design itself was raised by a carver .
 A printer then applied a water-based ink to the raised surfaces of the wood block . The printer then used the ink to apply to the surface of the block .
 The printer rubbed the back of the paper with a smooth-surfaced pad, and the ink soaked into the paper . The printer rubs a smooth surface on the back with the ink, and it soaked in the ink .
 The printer then pulled the paper from the block, and the design appeared in print . The printer pulled the design from a block and it was printed in print.
 The production of color prints required additional blocks of wood, one for each color used . The color prints were printed with wood blocks, with each color being made .
 The carver cut each block so that the only areas left raised were those to be used for a certain color . The only areas raised were the ones used for the color used for certain colors .
 The printer applied various colored pastes to the blocks and placed the paper on each block in succession . The printer then applied various colors to each block .
 Japanese prints originated in the early 1600s as illustrations in popular books . Prints originated in Japan as illustrations for popular books in the 1600s .
 Many people became interested in the pictures themselves, so publishers began producing illustrations separately from books . Publishers began to produce illustrations separately, and so publishers produced them separately .
 The publishers commissioned the artists and hired the carvers and printers . The artists were commissioned by the publishers .
 Printmaking flourished in Japan during the Tokugawa period of the nation’s history, which lasted from 1603 to 1867 . Printmaking was made during the 1603-1867 period of Japan .
 During this period, a middle class arose and prospered in Japan's cities . During this time, Japan's middle class prospeered in cities .
 The people of the middle class were the chief buyers of Japanese prints, which served as inexpensive substitutes for paintings . The middle class was the main buyers of prints .
 Japan had little contact with other countries during the Tokugawa period . Japan was not known to have had contact with the other nations .
 Japanese print artists were not influenced by Western art styles . Thus, they had no influence on Western styles .
 These artists followed Japanese art styles that had developed over centuries . Artists followed Japanese styles that developed in centuries .
 One of the earliest known Japanese print artists was Moronobu, who lived during the 1600's . Moroobu lived in Japan during the 16th century .
 A technique that enabled artists to create color prints was introduced in the mid-1700's . The technique was developed in the 17th century .
 This technique involved carving wood blocks with guide marks so that printers could place paper in the same position on successive blocks . This technique was used by printers to print paper in wood blocks .
 Utamaro and Sharaku were among the greatest print artists of the late 1700's . Utamararo and Shaku were one of the most famous print artists . Sharaku was a print artist from Japan .
 The one shown above emphasizes the colors and patterns of the costumes . The other one emphasizes the color and pattern of costumes .
 These artists created many series of prints of a particular scene in nature under a variety of weather conditions .
 During the mid-1800's, the Tokugawa government became weakened by economic problems and social upheavals . During the 1800's, Japan's government was weakened by social and economic problems .
 The shogun (military ruler) resigned in 1867, and Emperor Mutsuhito officially became ruler in 1868 . Emperor Mutsusuhito became ruler of Japan after the shogun's resignation .
 The new government began to modernize Japan and introduced many Western inventions and traditions into the country . New government introduced Western inventions into Japan .
 The drive for modernization led to the decline of traditional Japanese printmaking .
 Many Japanese artists adopted Western-style painting, and they produced few high-quality prints . Many of them were influenced by the art of Western art .
 Since then, Japanese woodcut artists have followed Western styles and techniques . Japanese woodcuts have been influenced by Western styles .
 These artists sought alternatives to Western art styles . They were fascinated by the unusual designs, bold colors, and pictorial conventions of Japanese prints .
 Utamaro used the kimono, fan, parasol and parasol to create bold contrasts of color and pattern in his portrait of the graceful woman shown above .
 In Jarrell’s later poems, he dramatized the losing battle he saw all people fighting against time and an indifferent universe . Jarrell's later poems were a lost battle against time, he said .
 Jarrell believed that we can only hope to cultivate an intense, compassionate awareness of our position and cherish moments of happiness from our past .
 Jarrell also wrote a satirical novel called Pictures from an Institution and children’s books . He also wrote children's books .
 Jaruzelski, v4 roo ZFEHL skee, Wojciech, VOY chehk , was the top leader of Poland from 1981 to 1989 . Jaruzelki was the Polish president of Poland between 1981 and 1989 .
 In December 1981, Jaruzelski established martial law in an effort to restore order . Jaruzelki established the law in a bid to bring order in December 1981 .
 His administration established strict controls over the lives of the Polish people . His administration set up strict controls on their lives .
 Poland outlawed independent social organizations such as Solidarity, a free labor union led by Lech Walesa . It outlawed social organizations like Solidarity . The Polish government outlawed Solidarity in 2008 .
 In 1989, the government ended its ban on Solidarity and other organizations . The government ended the ban in 1989 .
 It allowed the freest elections to Parliament since the country became a Communist state in 1945 . It also allowed the freeest elections since the Communist state became a communist state .
 Non-Communist candidates backed by Solidarity had the greatest success in the elections . Solidarity backed candidates had the most success in non-Communists' elections .
 Jaruzelski had become president of the government in 1985, then a largely ceremonial post . In 1985, Jaruzelki became president of Poland's government, then largely ceremonial role .
 Under the restructuring, the presidency became a much more powerful post . The presidency was restructured into a more powerful position .
 The Soviets deported Jaruzelski and many other Poles to the Soviet Union . Jaruzelki was deported by the Soviets to the USSR .
 Wojciech Jaruzelski was trained as an officer for a Polish Communist army . After German troops invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, the Soviets recruited him to be trained for the Polish army .
 In the government, he was minister of defense from 1968 until 1983, and prime minister from 1981 until he became president . He was also prime minister .
 The common white jasmine, or jessamine, is a vine with dark green leaves and white flowers . It is called a white jasemine or jaseamine .
 In France, botanists graft the Spanish type on the common white species . The Spanish type is used on common white plants in France .
 Jasmines grow in tropical and subtropical regions. with large, fragrant blossoms. This practice results in a bushy plant .
 Jason was a hero in Greek mythology who led a band of men called the Argonauts . Jason was the leader of a group of men known as the Argonaut . Jason led a group called the Jason Argonauts and led them to victory over the world .
 The capture of the Golden Fleece is one of the most exciting adventures in mythology . The legendary animal kingdom is known for its adventures in mythic folklore .
 Pelias seized the throne and forced the infant Jason and his mother to flee the city . Pelias, Aeson’s brother, seized the kingdom and forced them to flee . Jason was killed by Pelias' brother Pelias .
 After Jason grew up, he returned to lolkos to claim his father’s throne . Jason is the son of Jason, who is now a king of the world .
 Pelias persuaded him to organize an expedition to capture the Golden Fleece from the distant land of Colchis .
 Jason recruited about 50 heroes who became known as the Argonauts after their ship, the Argo . The Argonauts became known after they became known for their bravery .
 With the help of Medea's magic powers, Jason captured the Golden Fleece and returned to lolkos . Medea helped Jason capture the golden fleece . Jason captured it and returned it to his homeland .
 The red coloration of jasper usually indicates the presence of iron oxide in jasper . The red colouration of the jasper is usually caused by iron oxide .
 It takes a high polish and is used for mantels, pillars, and other fancy interior finishings . It is used to decorate mantels and pillars .
 Most beautiful varieties come from Siberia, Greece, India, Turkey, and Poland . The most beautiful varieties are from Siberia and Greece .
 Prehistoric people made arrowheads and tools from jasper and other related minerals . Pre-historic people used jasper to make arrowheads, tools from the minerals .
 Ancient Greeks believed it could heal many illnesses and draw the poison from snakebites . Ancient Greeks and Romans believed it was possible to draw poison from snakesbites.
 It features magnificent mountain scenery, large glaciers, beautiful lakes and rivers, and abundant wildlife . It is also known for its large glaciers and large lakes, rivers and lakes .
 A scenic highway called the Icefields Parkway winds through the mountains of Jasper National Park . It is one of the world's most scenic places to walk .
 From this highway, motorists can view such majestic peaks as Mount Athabasca and Mount Fryatt, both of which rise more than 11,000 feet above sea level . The highway also includes Mount Fryatts and Mount Athaboasca .
 The Icefields Parkway connects the park to Banff National Park, which lies to the south . The park is located in the Icefields National Park .
 The Columbia Icefield is partly in Jasper and Banff national parks in Alberta and partly in British Columbia . It is a vast sheet of glacial ice, partly in Alberta, and partly British Columbia.
 Tourists also visit Athabasca Falls, Medicine Lake, Miette Hot Springs, and an alpine area called Whistlers .
 Jasper National Park has large forests of such evergreen trees as firs, pines, and spruces . Jasper National National Park is one of the largest national parks in the world .
 Animals in the park include bighorn sheep, black and grizzly bears, elk, golden eagles, mountain caribou, mountain goats and ptarmigans .
 The park offers a variety of activities, including fishing, hiking, and camping in summer and winter . The park also offers cross-country and downhill skiing in the winter .
 The resort town of Jasper in the central section of the park has hotels, motels, and other tourist facilities . Jasper is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world .
 Karl Jaspers, Karl, was a leading German existentialist philosopher . He was the son of Jaspers Jaspers . Jaspers was a prominent German philosopher .
 He held that philosophy is not a set of doctrines, but an activity through which individuals can become aware of the nature of their own existence . He said philosophy was not about doctrines but about how individuals become aware .
 He held that in philosophy all content and all conclusions are unimportant . However, he was not primarily interested in the philosophers’ conclusions .
 Jaspers urged the study of other philosophers as a way to disturb and stimulate us so profoundly that we would be compelled to engage in the activity of philosophizing . Jaspers: Study of philosophers is a way of disturbing and stimulating us .
 Jaspers believed that people learn most about themselves in ‘limit situations’ such as death, guilt, and failure . Jaspers: People learn about themselves most in “limit situations, such as deaths, guilt or failure .
 Ivan Soll Jaundice, /AWN dihs, is a yellowish discoloration of the skin, the tissues, and whites of the eyes .
 It results from an increased amount of bi//irubin, a reddish-yellow pigment, in the blood . It is an increase in the red color in the human blood . The pigment is a red-red pigment .
 Bilirubin is formed by the breakdown of hemoglobin, a pigment in red blood cells . It is formed from the breakdowns of the red blood cell's hemoglobin .
 The liver removes bilirubin from the blood stream and discharges it in the bile . The liver then removes the   from the  blood stream, discharges  in bile.
 Jasper National Park, in western Alberta, includes many scenic peaks, including Mount Edith Cavell, above . Jaundice results from either excessive production of bilirubin or reduced discharge .
 Jaundice in dogs, sheep, and other animals is sometimes called yellows . It is also sometimes called jaundice .
 Hemolytic jaundice results from an increased breakdown of red blood cells, which causes a greater concentration of bilirubin in the blood . Hemolyt jaundic jaundices are often caused by increased red blood cell breakdown .
 Hepatocellular jaundice occurs when the liver is damaged so that it cannot secrete enough bile bile . It is caused by damage to the liver so it can no longer secrete bile.
 Many babies are born with physiologic jaundice, which occurs if the body cannot process all the bilirubin it produces . The jaundic baby is often born with jaundiced skin .
 Java fossils, /AH vwuh, are the remains of a type of prehistoric human being that lived from about 1 million to 500,000 years ago . Java fossils were perhaps as early as 1,600,000-years ago, and perhaps 1 million-to-500,
 All evidence of the Java people's existence comes from fossils found in ancient stream and volcanic deposits on the island of Java . Fossils have been found in streams, volcanic deposits .
 The first Java fossils were discovered in 1891 by Eugéne Dubois, a Dutch physician . They were found in Java, Java .
 The fossils show that the Java people had a large face with a low, sloping forehead and heavy ridges above the eyes . The fossils were found in Java, Java .
 Their brain was smaller than that of more modern types of human beings . They had a smaller brain than modern humans . Their brain is smaller than those of modern people .
 Karl W Butzer Javelin, JAV /ihn or f/AV uh lihn, is a light, slender spear that is thrown for distance in track and field meets . Karl W
 The javelin used in track and field meets is made of metal with a metal tip . Javelin is made from metal with the tip .
 Women use a javelin that is 2. to 2. meters (7 feet 3 inches to 7 feet 6 + inches) long . Women use javelins that are between 2. and 3 meters long . Javelins are 2.3 meters long and 2.5 meters
 A javelin thrower grasps the shaft on a cord grip, and runs with it down a runway to gather momentum . The thrower holds the shaft to his hand to the ground, and the shaft is thrown with a cord .
 Throwing a javelin thrower runs about 33. meters and then hurls the javel in overhand from behind a restraining line . The Throwing is a thrower who runs a distance of 33.m. meters .
 It must fall within a marked sector with its point striking the ground first . The point must hit the ground in order to fall within the marked sector .
 For javelin championship figures, see the tables with Track and field and Olympic Games . Michael Takaha is the world's most successful athlete in the javeling event .
 Jay refers to several species of a large family of birds that includes ravens, crows, and magpies . Jay is a member of the raven family, which includes crows and crows .
 Jays are smaller than crows, and their feathers are usually more colorful . Jays are usually smaller than birds, and usually have more colorful feathers .
 This bright blue, black, and white bird lives east of the Rocky Mountains .
 The Stellersss jay, the pinyon jay and the scrub jay live in the Rocky Mountains and farther west . The scrub jays live in Colorado, Wyoming and Idaho .
 The crestless scrub jay has blue and gray feathers and dwells in oak woods and brushy areas . It has blue-gray feathers and lives in oak woodlands .
 Jays are related to ravens and crows but usually have more colorful feathers . The gray jay of Canada, the Northern United States, is related to the raven and crow .
 Two species found in North America are the scrub jay and the green jay . The scrub jays are found in the United States and Canada .
 The javelin must be thrown over the shoulder or upper part of the throwing arm before the person reaches a restraining line . The person must also throw over the arm before they reach the line of throwing arm .
 The javelin must land in a marked sector with its point striking the ground first . i o | World Book illustration by Sarah Woodward i 4 yy .
 The green jay lives in southern Texas and parts of Mexico and Central and South America . It is mostly green and gold and has a blue head, mostly green, gold .
 Other jays are found in other parts of North and South America, Europe, and Asia . Other species of birds found in Europe, Asia and North America .
 The pinyon jay is Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus . The scrub jay, Aphelocoma coerulescens, Perisoreus canadensis; the gray jay and the green jay are also pinyons .
 John Jay, John , was a distinguished statesman during the early days of the U.S. He was born in New York City, New York, and died in 1903 .
 He became the first chief justice of the United States under the Constitution . He was the first Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Jay's judgment and fairness and his courage in making unpopular decisions made him a valued diplomat and respected political figure . Jay's courage in decision to make unpopular decisions led him to be valued diplomat, respected politician, he says .
 Jay was president of the Continental Congress from December 1778 until September 1779, when he became United States minister to Spain . Jay was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 This treaty, which ended the Revolutionary War in America, was signed in 1783 . This treaty ended the 1783 Revolutionary War .
 When Jay returned to the United States, he found that Congress had chosen him as secretary of foreign affairs . Jay was chosen as Secretary of Foreign Affairs by Congress in 1945 .
 Jay's experiences as a diplomat in Europe convinced him that the U.S. needed a stronger central government . Jay: "I'm not a politician but I'm a person who wants to help the United States"
 In 1789, President George Washington appointed Jay chief justice of the United States . Jay was appointed chief justice in 1789 by George Washington . Jay died in 1881 in prison .
 While still chief justice, Jay went to the United Kingdom in 1794 to negotiate a settlement of issues between the two nations . Jay was chief justice of the 17th century when he died in 1791 .
 Elliott Robert Barkan Jay Treaty, signed in 1794, resolved disputes that arose between the United States and the United Kingdom after the Revolutionary War in America ended . The treaty resolved disputes between the U.S. and the UK after the war ended .
 John Jay arranged the treaty in London . John Jay, chief justice of the United States, arranged it in the UK .
 Neither the United Kingdom nor the United States fully lived up to the Treaty of Paris, which ended the war in 1783 . Neither the UK nor the U.S. lived up their promises to Paris .
 Chicago Historical Society John Jay Jayhawkers refused to pay for wartime property losses of Americans who sympathized with the war effort . They also refused to . pay for property losses .
 The British refused to give up military posts on the United States side of the Great Lakes . They refused to open their important West Indies markets to United States ships . U.S. ships were allowed to use the waters in the West Indies .
 Relations between the United States and the United Kingdom almost reached the breaking point after France declared war on Britain in 1793 . Relations between U.S. and the UK almost reached a breaking point when the war broke out between the two countries .
 President George Washington sent Jay to London to negotiate a settlement with the British government . Jay was sent to negotiate the settlement with George Washington .
 The treaty gave the U.S. control of all military posts on its side of the Great Lakes . It opened the British West Indies to United States ships under severe restrictions .
 It also provided that neutral commissions would decide possession of disputed areas on the Canada-US border . The agreement also stipulated the amount United States debtors owed the British .
 Treaty failed to stop British interference with U.S. ships . It prohibited retaliation against such interference, but it prohibited retaliation .
 The U.S. Senate narrowly passed the treaty, but only after Britain removed the section dealing with the British West Indies trade . The treaty was passed by the United States Senate after a British section was removed from it .
 Jaycees are organizations that stress individual development through leadership training and civic involvement . Jaycenees are non-profit organizations that promote civic involvement and individual development .
 The organization in the United States is called United States Jaycees . The organization is based in the U.S.
 Jaycees learn to be leaders by working in community improvement programs . Jaycee members learn to become leaders by attending community improvement classes . Jaycenees are also involved in the Jaycinees' efforts to help people become leaders .
 They sponsor programs on such matters as personal improvement, youth development, government affairs, health, safety, and foreign relations .
 The United States Jaycees has about 5,000 local chapters and approximately 240,000 members . The U.S. Jaycee has about five,000 chapters and about 240,00 members .
 Until 1984, women could join the organization but could not vote or hold office . Women could join but not hold office or vote in 1984 .
 Supreme Court of the United States ruled in Minnesota case that Jaycees could not deny women voting privileges and other rights of full membership . In that year, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a Minnesota case, the case was a victory .
 The United States Jaycees was organized as the Young Men's Progressive Civic Association in 1915 in St. Louis, Missouri . The Jaycee was organized in 1915 as a group of men and women in the United States .
 A national organization was formed in 1920, and the name became the Junior Chamber of Commerce . The organization was later known as the Junior Commerce .
 Junior Chamber International, the worldwide Jaycees organization, has more than 400,000 members . The organization is based in Washington, D.C.
 Jazz is a popular kind of music that originated in America . The Modern Jazz Quartet is the latest in a long-running series of music from jazz .
 It may be performed by a large group called a big band, a combo, or a soloist, above right . It may also be played by small groups called a combo or a big group .
 Jazz Jazz is a kind of music that has often been called the only art form to originate in the United States . Jazz Jazz has been described as the only form of jazz music that originated in the US .
 The music grew fram a combination of influences, including black American music, African rhythms, American band traditions and instruments, and European harmonies and forms .
 Much of the best jazz is still written and performed in the United States . Much of it is still played in the jazz world .
 Musicians from many other countries are making major contributions to jazz . But musicians from other countries also contribute to jazz.
 Jazz was widely appreciated as an important art form in Europe before it gained such recognition in the U.S. Jazz was actually widely appreciated by Europeans before it became more popular in the United States .
 One of the key elements of jazz is improvisation, the ability to create new music spontaneously . Jazz improvisation is an essential part of jazz .
 This skill is the distinguishing characteristic of a genuine jazz musician . Jazz is not just jazz, but jazz is jazz .
 Improvisation raises the role of the soloist from just a performer and reproducer of others’ ideas to a composer as well . The soloist is now a composer and soloist .
 To syncopate their music, jazz musicians take patterns that are even and regular and break them up, make them uneven, and put accents in unexpected places . Jazz musicians break patterns into patterns and make accents uneven and accentuate them .
 The earliest jazz was performed by black Americans who had little or no training in Western music . It was performed in black Americans with little or little Western training .
 As jazz grew in popularity, its sound was influenced by musicians with formal training and classical backgrounds . The sound of jazz has been influenced by jazz musicians since the 1930s .
 Jazz has absorbed influences from folk and classical music of Africa, Asia, and other parts of the world . During its history, jazz has absorbed influence from folk music of Asia, Africa, and Africa .
 The development of instruments with new and different characteristics has also influenced the sound of jazz . Jazz has also been influenced by instruments with different characteristics, such as new instruments .
 Jazz may be performed by a single musician, by a small group of musicians called a combo, or by a big band of 10 or more pieces . The sound of jazz Jazz is similar to the sound of a jazz ensemble .
 The typical front line consists of one to five brass and reed instruments . Front line is made up of one-to-five brass instruments .
 The rhythm section usually consists of piano, bass, drums, and sometimes acoustic or electric guitar . It is usually accompanied by a rhythm rhythm section .
 The rhythm section in a combo or big band maintains the steady beat and decorates the rhythm with syncopated patterns . Rhythm sections in a big band maintain the rhythmic beat .
 The drums keep the beat steady and add interesting rhythm patterns and syncopations .
 The piano plays the chords or harmonies of a composition in a rhythmic manner . The piano, or sometimes a guitar, plays the harmonies in rhythmic ways .
 The bass outlines the harmonies by sounding the roots, or bottom pitches, of the chords, on the strong beats of each measure . The bottom pitches are the roots of each chord and the top pitches of each beat .
 Any of the rhythm instruments, especially the piano, may also solo during a performance .
 The principal brass instruments of jazz are the trumpet, the cornet, and the slide trombone . The trumpet is the most powerful instrument in jazz . The cornet is the saxophone, the sax saxophonist is the trumpeter .
 French horn, valve trombone, baritone horn, fliigelhorn, and even electronic trumpets used in jazz performances .
 Cornet is usually considered more mellow and the trumpet more brassy . But the cornet is considered more m mellow and the trumpet is more brassy than the trumpet .
 The typical brass section of a big band consists of four or five trumpets and three trombones . Typical brass section is four trumpets, five trombone and three trumpets . A typical big band's brass section consists of six trumpets per piece .
 Jazz trumpeters and trombonists frequently use objects called mutes to alter or vary the sound of their instrument . Mutes are mutes used to alter the sounds of their instruments .
 The player plugs the mute into the be// (flared end) of the instrument or holds it close to the opening of the bell . The mute is placed in the player's ear or the player holds it to the be // .
 The flute, though technically a woodwind, is often classified as a reed in jazz . It is the same type of reed as a saxophone in jazz.
 A traditional jazz band consists of a front /ine of a trumpet, trombone, clarinet or saxophone . A rhythm section of drums, a bass, a piano, and often a guitar or banjo . In early jazz, it was an equal member of the front line
 The clarinet eventually gave way to the saxophone, which is capable of much greater volume . The saxophone is now the most powerful instrument in jazz .
 Four members of the saxophone family are regularly employed in jazz . The soprano, alto, tenor, baritone and baritone saxophones are used regularly in jazz.
 A typical reed section in a big band is made up of one or two alto saxophones, two tenors, and a baritone . A typical big band reed is composed of two or three alto and two tenor saxophonists .
 Musicians often “double” by playing two or more reed instruments during a performance . Alto saxophone and a tenor saxophone can be used to play two reed instrument .
 Drums of various types were familiar to black Americans dating back to the days of slavery . Drums were used to play for black Americans from the ages of slavery to the age of emancipation .
 Early percussion instruments played a vital role in the development of jazz . These early percussion instruments were played by jazz musicians .
 As jazz grew, the drum set evolved until one drummer could play more than one percussion instrument at the same time . One drummer can play multiple percussion instruments in jazz .
 Foot-operated bassdrum pedal and pedal-operated cymbals freed the drummer's hands to play other percussion instruments, such as snare drums, tom-toms, cowbells, and wood blocks .
 A wire brush was used to produce a more delicate sound on drums and cymbals . Another important invention was a wire brush that was used in place of a drumstick or mallet .
 A jazz drummer may use electronic percussion instruments that can create an almost infinite variety of sounds and reproduce them accurately at virtually any volume . Electronic percussion instruments can create a wide range of sounds .
 Since the earliest days of jazz, the piano has served both as a solo instrument and as an ensemble instrument that performs as part of the rhythm section . The piano has also been used in the jazz ensemble .
 Today, other keyboard instruments, including electronic organs, may substitute for pianos . Electronic organs, electric pianos, and synthesizers controlled by a keyboard may also substitute .
 The guitar, like the piano, can play both chords and melodies . The guitar is capable of playing both chords or melodies .
 In the early days of jazz, these two instruments, along with the banjo, were often substituted for one another .
 Later, the guitar and banjo were most often used in the rhythm section in addition to the piano . Later, however, the banjo and guitar were used in rhythm section .
 Jazz musicians have used the acoustic guitar in ensembles and as a solo instrument since jazz's earliest days . The guitar has been used by jazz musicians for decades .
 Electric guitar emerged in jazz in the late 1930s to add sustained tones, greater volume, and a new assortment of sounds and effects to jazz . Electric guitar was used in jazz for the first time in the 1930s .
 The rhythm section may substitute a brass bass, such as a tuba or Sousaphone .
 When an electronic organ is used, the organist can play the bass part with foot pedals on the instrument . An electronic organ can also be used to play bass parts . The bass part is played with the foot pedal on the electronic organ .
 Electric bass guitars have been incorporated into some jazz ensembles . Ensembles play a “fusion” of jazz and rock .
 Nearly every Western musical instrument and many non-Western instruments have been used in jazz at one time or another . Jazz is jazz's most popular form .
 The vibraphone, an instrument similar to the xylophone, and the violin deserve special mention . The instrument is similar to a violin and a violin .
 The violin has had only a few notable soloists in jazz, possibly because its volume could not match the power of the trumpet or trombone in ensemble . The violin's volume has never been able to match that of the trumpets and trombones .
 Some violinists have skillfully adapted the violin to jazz . Violinists have adapted classical music instruments to jazz in the past .
 Modern amplification and sound manipulation devices 70 jazz have given the violin new possibilities as a jazz instrument . The violin is an instrument that can be played in jazz .
 The folk songs and plantation dance music of black Americans contributed much to early jazz . The folk song and dance music contributed much of the jazz .
 These forms of music occurred throughout the Southern U.S. during the late 1800's . They were popular in the Southern United States .
 Ragtime, a musical style that influenced early jazz, emerged from the St. Louis area . Ragtime was an early form of ragtime that was influential in jazz .
 Ragtime was an energetic and syncopated variety of music, primarily for the piano, that emphasized formal composition . Ragtime is known for its energetic and rhythmic rhythms and rhythms .
 The blues is a form of music that has always been an important part of jazz . The blues has been a big part of the jazz world for decades .
 Its mournful scale and simple repeated harmonies helped shape the character of jazz . It's mourned scale, simple repeating harmonies and mourns mourns .
 Jazz instrumentalists have long exploited the blues as a vehicle for improvisation . This is the latest in a long line of musicians using the blues to improvise .
 Jazz music probably originated in New Orleans at the beginning of the 1900s . Fully developed jazz music is thought to have originated in the city .
 New Orleans style jazz emerged from the city’s own musical traditions of band music for black funeral processions and street parades .
 Today, this type of jazz is sometimes called classic jazz, traditional jazz, or Dixieland jazz . It is sometimes known as classic jazz or traditional jazz .
 New Orleans was the musical home of the first notable players and composers of jazz . Louis Armstrong, Sidney Bechet, and Jelly Roll Morton were among those to play in New Orleans .
 Fate Marable led a New Orleans band that played on riverboats traveling up and down the Mississippi River . Marable was a member of the band that toured the Mississippi .
 King Oliver migrated to Chicago, and Jelly Roll Morton performed throughout the U.S. King Oliver moved to Chicago . Morton died at the age of 92 .
 Commercial radio stations first appeared in the 1920s . They featured live performances by the growing number of jazz musicians . Commercial radio was first introduced in the 1930s .
 A group of Midwest youths, many from Chicago's Austin High School, developed a type of improvisation and arrangement that became known as “Chicago style” jazz .
 They played harmonically inventive music . Technical ability of some of the players, especially Goodman, was at a higher level than that of many earlier performers .
 Edmond Souchon Bix Beiderbecke was one of the first famous jazz musicians . He was a member of the original jazz band, which was formed in the 1920s .
 Johnson influenced other jazz pianists, notably Count Basie, Duke Ellington, Art Tatum, Fats Waller, and Teddy Wilson . Johnson's influence on jazz influenced many others, including Duke Ellon, Art Teddy Wilson, Count Ellington
 In 1923, he became the first leader to organize a jazz band into sections of brass, reed, and rhythm instruments . In 1923 he organized the first group to organize sections of the brass and reed .
 Don Redman was the first to master the technique of scoring music for big bands . Redman's arranger was the world's first arranger to score big band music .
 Various Henderson bands of the 1920's and 1930s included such great jazz instrumentalists as Louis Armstrong and saxophonists Benny Carter and Coleman Hawkins . The Henderson bands were known for their performances .
 Armstrong also became the first well-known male jazz singer . Duke Ellington, at the piano, has been called the single most significant person in the history of jazz .
 Scat singing popularized scat singing . Wordless syllables sung in an instrumental manner . Scat was popularized by scat singers .
 During the late 1920's and early 1930's, jazz advanced from relatively simple music played by performers who often could not read music to a more sophisticated form .
 Among the musicians who brought about this change were saxophonists Benny Carter, Coleman Hawkins, and Johnny Hodges . The team of violinist Joe Venuti and guitarist Eddie Lang also played .
 Many consider Tatum the most inspired and technically gifted improviser in jazz history . Tatum is considered one of the most gifted improvisers in jazz .
 Woody Herman was a popular bandleader for more than 40 years . Duke Ellington recorded his compo‘ In 1932, Duke Elledton recorded a compo'
 Many musicians who joined his band later became noted soloists with their own groups . Many of his bandmates later joined him on stage at the time .
 Tenor saxophonist Stan Getz was one of the most famous musicians in the jazz world . He was seated next to the guitar player .
 Benny Goodman was a leading bandleader and clarinet player of the swing era . Goodman was known for his clarinet and bandleader skills .
 This sextet included two musicians who were pioneers on their instruments . Lionel Hampton and Charlie Christian played on the vibraphonist and guitarist Charlie Christian .
 Big bands dominated the swing era, especially those of Count Basie, Benny Goodman, and Duke Ellington . Big bands were dominated by big bands, especially Count Basies and Benny Goodman .
 Goodman was the first white bandleader to feature black and white musicians playing together in public performances . Goodman was also the first to have a black-and-white bandleader . Goodman led the band in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In 1936, he introduced two great black soloists—pianist Teddy Wilson and vibraphonist Lionel Hampton . He introduced Teddy Wilson, Lionel Hampton and Lionel Hampton to jazz .
 Until then, racial segregation had held back the progress of jazz and of black musicians in particular . In the 1930s, black musicians were able to play in jazz .
 Their performance was one of the first by jazz musicians in a concert hall setting . They performed in a jazz hall setting in the 1930s . It was the first time jazz musicians had performed in such a venue .
 Other major bands of the swing era included those led by Benny Carter, Bob Crosby, Jimmy Dorsey, Woody Herman, Earl Hines, Andy Kirk, Jimmie Lunceford, Glenn Miller, Artie Shaw, Chick Webb, and Glenn Miller . Stan Kenton was one of
 The Count Basie band had a distinctive swing style . The bands in Kansas City, Mo., especially Basie, Mo. had a distinct swing style. The bands were popular in the city .
 These bands relied on the 12-bar blues form and riff backgrounds, which consisted of repeated simple melodies . The blues form is similar to the ones played by the Beatles in the 1960s .
 They depended less heavily on written arrangements, allowing more leeway for rhythmic drive and for extended solo improvisations . They depended on rhythmic drives and more than written arrangements .
 Boogie-woogie was another jazz form that became popular during the 1930's . Boogie was a form of jazz that was popular in the 1930s .
 The music had an intense quality that created excitement through the repetition of a single phrase . The music was intense and intense, creating excitement .
 Albert Ammons, Pete Johnson, Meade Lux Lewis, and Pinetop Smith were among its most important artists . Pete Johnson was one of its most famous artists .
 Jazz vocalists came into prominence during the swing era, many singing with big bands . Many of them sang with big band .
 Mildred Bailey, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Nat “King” Cole, Carmen McRae, and Sarah Vaughan were among the stars of the night .
 Nat “King” Cole was a superb jazz pianist and Jack Teagarden was a great jazz trombonist . Bebop revolutionized jazz in the 1940's. Nat ‘King’ Cole was one of the best jazz pianists .
 He teamed with trumpeter Miles Davis, right, in an important bebop combo . He played with Miles Davis in the early days of his career .
 In the early 1940's, a group of young musicians began experimenting with more complicated chord patterns and melodic ideas in a combo setting .
 The group included trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie, alto saxophonist Charlie Parker, pianists Bud Powell and Thelonious Monk .
 They played long, dazzling phrases with many notes, difficult intervals, unexpected breaks, and unusual turns in melodic direction . The group played long and dazzling phrases .
 On slower tunes, they displayed a keen ear for subtle changes of harmony .
 Only extremely skilled musicians were able to play bebop well, and only sophisticated listeners at first appreciated it . Bebop was a form of jazz that first appeared in the jazz world .
 In bebop performances, musicians usually played an intricate melody, followed with long periods of solo improvisation, and restated the theme at the end of the piece .
 The bassist presented the basic beat for the group by plucking a steady, moving bass line . The group's bassist played a steady bass line during the performance .
 The drummer elaborated the beat with sticks or brushes on cymbals, snare drum, and tom-tom . The drummer elaborates the beat using sticks, brushes or brushes .
 The pianist inserted complex chords at irregular intervals to suggest, rather than state, the complete harmonies of the piece .
 This form emphasized some of the traditional values of jazz derived from gospel and blues music, including rhythmic drive, uninhibited tone and volume, and freedom from restricting arrangements .
 The hard bop leaders were drummer Art Blakey and pianist Horace Silver . Hard bop was a form of hard-bop .
 Blakey led a combo called the Jazz Messengers from the mid-1950's until his death in 1990 . Blakey died in 1990 at the age of 75 .
 The Jazz Messengers served as a training ground for many of the greatest soloists in jazz history . The Messengers were known for their early days as a jazz ensemble .
 Clifford Brown and Max Roach were co-leaders of another outstanding hard bop combo . Clifford Brown was the leader of the trio .
 Cool jazz originated in the works of Lester Young, who starred with Count Basie, and Charlie Christian, who played with Benny Goodman . Lester Young was a tenor saxophonist . Charlie Christian was a guitarist .
 In the late 1930's and early 1940's, these musicians made changes in the sound and style of jazz improvisation . These musicians were influenced by jazz improvisations from the 1930's to 1940's .
 The band softened the tones of their instruments, used syncopation more subtly, and played with a more even beat . For example, they softened their tones of instruments, and used syncops to play with an even beat.
 Stan Getz recorded a slow, romantic solo of Ralph Burns's composition “Early Autumn’ with the Woody Herman band in 1948 . In 1948, tenor saxophonist Stan Gotz recorded "Early Autumn"
 Miles Davis, Lee Konitz and Gerry Mulligan recorded several new compositions in 1949 and 1950 . Miles Davis was a trumpeter, alto saxophonist and baritone saxist .
 During the 1950's, many combos became identified with the cool movement . Many combos were associated with the 'cool' movement .
 The Gerry Mulligan Quartet, the Modern Jazz Quartet and the Dave Brubeck Quartet were some of the most successful combos . Some of the best combos were the Gerry Mulligans Quartet .
 Bebop and cool jazz began to gain wide acceptance among intellectuals and college students in the 1940's and 1950's . In the 1950's, the sophisticated forms of cool jazz gained wide acceptance .
 Groups of jazz stars made a series of international tours called Jazz at the Philharmonic . The tours were made by groups of jazz musicians .
 The international growth of jazz resulted in many successful overseas tours by U.S. bands and combos . The international success of jazz led to many successful international tours .
 The trumpeter and singer appeared in several motion pictures, including the 1950 film High Society, above . He was also a member of the cast in several films, including High Society .
 Dave Brubeck, a classically trained pianist, led one of the most popular jazz quartets of the 1950's . He led the band in the classic jazz style .
 The combo featured the lyrical solos of alto saxophonist Paul Desmond . Paul Desmond restricted performances to about 3 minutes in length .
 The LP also permitted a number of shorter performances to be issued on a single record .
 Sweden, France, Germany, Japan, and other countries developed players and composers . Their work compared favorably with that of the leading Americans .
 Django Reinhardt and George Shearing were the first foreign jazz musicians to influence Americans . Reinhardt was a Belgian-born guitarist in the late 1930's . Shearing was blind, English-born pianist who immigrated to the U.S. in 1947 .
 In 1954, the first large American jazz festival was held at Newport, Rhode Island . Newport was the birthplace of jazz in the United States .
 These festivals have featured almost all of the most popular jazz musicians . They have introduced many extended concert works . The festivals have been hosted by jazz musicians from all over the world .
 Jazz music began to feature nontraditional instruments, such as French horn and bass flute . Jazz music became more mainstream in the 1930s .
 Jazz musicians began to take an interest in non-Western music, especially modes (different arrangements of scales) and melodic forms, and instruments of Africa, India, and the Far East . Jazz musicians took interest in the modes of African, Indian and Far East music .
 In the 1950's, John Lewis, musical director of the Modern Jazz Quartet, worked with classical musician Jazz 73 and composer Gunther Schuller to write orchestral works that combined elements of modern jazz and classical concert music .
 Stan Kenton also played this so-called third stream music when he toured the U.S. with a 40-piece orchestra . Kenton: "Third stream music" is a form of classical music .
 Also during this period, pianist George Russell developed a jazz theory of modes .
 Miles Davis, Bill Evans, John Coltrane and Cannonball Adderley recorded compositions and improvised solos based on modes rather than on patterns of chords . In 1959, Miles Davis and Bill Evans recorded compositions with Bill Evans .
 In 1960, saxophonist Ornette Coleman recorded the album Free Jazz with a double quartet . Coleman reshaped the thinking of younger jazz musicians when he recorded Free Jazz in 1960 .
 Coleman discarded harmony, melody, and regular rhythms in this recording . In this recording, he discarded harmony and melody . Coleman's recording is the first time he has recorded a recording of his own .
 Pianist Cecil Taylor and bassist Charles Mingus conducted similar atonal experiments . Mingus and Cecil Taylor conducted similar experiments .
 In the 1960's, the influence of the music of India entered jazz through the adaptations of John Coltrane . The influence of Indian music entered jazz in the 1960s .
 Jazz musicians also began to use more unusual meters, such as 2,7, angi . Jazz musicians began using unusual meters in the 1930s .
 In the 1970's, many musicians blended jazz and rock music into fusion jazz . The 1970's fusion jazz is a form of jazz fusion .
 Fusion combined melodic and improvisational aspects of jazz with the rhythms and instruments of rock . Fusion combined the melodic, improvisational elements of jazz and the rhythms of rock. Fusion is a fusion fusion of jazz, rock and jazz . Fusion was formed by jazz, jazz and rock fusion
 Jazz pianists began exploring the increased sound potential of synthesizers . The sound of the synthesizer can be heard in jazz pianists' performances .
 Horn and string players began to use electronics to intensify, distort, or multiply their sounds . Horns and strings players used electronics to distort, distort or multiply sounds .
 Some of the best-known fusion musicians were George Benson, trumpeters Donald Byrd and Miles Davis, pianist Herbie Hancock, and two combos, Weather Report and the Mahavishnu Orchestra .
 At the same time, many veteran jazz musicians retained their popularity by leading groups that played in the swing, bebop, and cool styles . At the time, jazz was playing in swing, cool styles and cool jazz .
 Stan Getz, Dizzy Gillespie, Woody Herman, Gerry Mulligan, and Oscar Peterson were some of the most famous musicians .
 Miles Davis pioneered bebop, cool jazz and cool jazz . He led several successful fusion combos . Miles Davis was a pioneer of jazz fusion .
 During the 1980's, a number of young jazz musicians returned to mainstream jazz . In the 1980s, many musicians were active in mainstream jazz.
 Mainstream jazz includes elements of the swing, cool, and bebop styles . Jazz is jazz influenced by swing and cool vibes, influenced by Bebop .
 The most widely acclaimed young musician of the 1980's was trumpeter Wynton Marsalis . Marsalis was a performer of both jazz and classical music .
 He and his brother, Branford Marsalis, have led excellent hard bop combos . Marsalis and Branford played together in the early 1960s .
 Randy Brecker is a trumpeter and saxophonist . Brothers Randy and Michael Brecker have been together for decades .
 Jane Ira Bloom also displays a mastery of the soprano saxophone and the synthesizer . Bloom is also a masterful saxophonist and composer .
 In the 1990's, jazz was dominated by a blend of older values and more modern styles . In the 90's jazz was dominant by a combination of older and modern styles.
 Many musicians favored acoustical over electronic instruments, formal structure over total freedom, and a sense of history over harsh modernity .
 Bands devoted to the music of Count Basie and Charles Mingus became popular in the 1930s .
 Johnson and saxophonists Joe Henderson and Sonny Rollins, found new audiences among younger listeners . Johnson, Henderson and Rollins, played alongside each other, have found audiences younger .
 The young musicians who energized jazz in the 1980's had become establishment figures by the end of the 1990's . The young jazz musicians energized the jazz scene in the 80s and 90s .
 They included trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Wynton Marsalis, guitarist Pat Metheny, trombonists Steve Turré and Ray Anderson, and pianist Chick Corea . They were joined by jazz greats such as jazz great John Defterios .
 A younger group of musicians also gained popularity, focusing on “straight-ahead jazz’ that reflected earlier mainstream styles . A younger generation of musicians focused on 'straight-forward jazz'
 They included saxophonists Joshua Redman and Donald Harrison, bassist Christian McBride, trumpeter Terence Blanchard, and pianist Marcus Roberts .
 Free jazz style of the 1960's continued strong throughout the 1990's in the playing of saxophonists Steve Lacy and Roscoe Mitchell, pianist John Zorn, and their young followers .
 Many musicians play in historic styles, such as swing . David Redfern, Retna Ltd.
 Exciting young musicians increased the popularity of jazz in the 1990's . Exciting new jazz was created by young musicians .
 These musicians included trumpeter Terence Blanchard and saxophonist Donald Harrison . and bebop. and jazz .
 Art Ensemble of Chicago blends free jazz, African costumes and makeup, exotic instruments, and exotic instruments into theatrical musical events . Art Ensembles blend jazz and African costumes with exotic instruments .
 Ornette Coleman's group, Prime Time, mixes free and fusion jazz in new ways .
 Michael Daugherty is demonstrating that live musicians can interact creatively with computer-generated sound . He says live musicians are able to interact with computer music with computer sound .
 Some artists have attempted new fusion sounds that blended jazz with such forms of rap music . The fusion sounds blend jazz with rap music and hip hop music .
 The piano G Other B Thereeds _ E The guitar instruments C Drums F The bass Il . The bass is the bass .
 The Institute of Brothers of the Christian School is a Roman Catholic religious order devoted to teaching boys . Jean Baptiste de la Salle, a French priest, founded the Institute .
 His schools stress practical skills and religious instruction rather than classical education . His schools stressed practical skills rather than religious instruction .
 He tried to train teachers in Reims but became convinced that only a religious order of brothers could have the dedication to effectively educate the poor . He became convinced only the religious order could be used to teach the poor in France .
 At the time of his death, communities had been set up throughout France and in Rome . At the . time of the death, he had established communities in France and Rome .
 Jeans are trousers that are usually made of denim, a heavy, coarse cotton cloth with a diagonal weave . Jeans usually made from denim, which is made of a heavy cotton cloth .
 The word jeans comes from Génes, the French word for Genoa, a port in Italy . Jeans come from the word "Jeans"
 In the Middle Ages, working men there wore sturdy cotton pants that were the forerunners of jeans . Working men in the Mideast wore cotton pants .
 Strauss arrived in California during the Gold Rush and started a business manufacturing sturdy work pants for gold miners . Strauss was born in 18th Century California and died in 1945 .
 He used brown canvas cloth at first but later made the pants of a tough cotton fabric from Nimes, France . The pants were made of tough fabric from a tough fabric .
 The word denim comes from the French phrase de Nimes, meaning from Nimes . denim is denim and denim is a form of denim .
 Strauss dyed denim a deep blue called indigo, which became the traditional color for jeans . Strauss dyed the denim with indigo before it became the standard standard .
 Strauss and a tailor named Jacob W Davis took out a patent for trousers strengthened with rivets at the pockets and other points of strain .
 For decades, jeans were worn chiefly by outdoor laborers, such as farmers and cowboys . jeans are worn mainly by outdoor workers such as cowboys and farmers .
 In the 1940's, young people began to wear blue jeans for casual occasions . In the 1950s, blue jeans became popular with young people .
 In the 1960's, jeans became important to a youth movement called the counterculture . The jeans were important to the 1960s .
 Members of the counterculture rejected the lifestyles of the middle class . The counterculture rejects the lifestyle of the mainstream .
 These jeans had a label on the outside bearing the designer's name, such as Calvin Klein or Gloria Vanderbilt . The jeans were worn by Gloria Vanderbilt or Calvin Klein .
 Jeep is a small all-purpose vehicle used by the armed forces of many countries . Jeep is used by armed forces in many of the world's most populous countries .
 The term jeep may come from the letters GP, the initials for general purpose vehicle . The term 'jeep' is the name of a vehicle used to drive a vehicle in a jeep .
 Jeep is a trademark for a civilian automotive vehicle that was patterned after the armed forces jeep . When capitalized, the word Jeep is used in the name of a civilian vehicle . The word Jeep means "Jeep" when capitalized .
 This name may come from the initials Jefferson, State of 75 H.M.W.V., which stand for Aigh-mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle . The name may also be Jefferson, which stands for the initials of the state of the Jefferson, state of 75
 Armed forces jeeps also serve as platforms for various weapons, such as machine guns and small missiles . The jeeps are used by the armed forces to carry out missions in the U.S.
 Jeffers was born John Robinson Jeffers in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . His father was a professor at Western Theological Seminary . He was born in Pittsburgh .
 In 1905, he graduated—at the age of 18, from Occidental College in Los Angeles, having mastered many classical and modern languages . In 1905 he graduated with a degree of classical, modern and classical languages .
 He found dramatic inspiration for his feelings about humanity, and an endless source of symbols to express his feelings . "There was a lot of inspiration for him, and he found a way to express it," he said .
 Jeffers regarded human beings as creatures of no significance, largely responsible for their own misery and engaged in a vain struggle against death and darkness . Jeffers considered human beings to be creatures of little significance .
 Jeffers’s pessimism qualified his pessimism, Jeffers said . However, a contrasting strain in Jeffers' philosophy qualified him pessimism . Jeffers had a pessimistic view of the world .
 Jeffers: Although the human race is doomed, a person may find some peace in the stoic wisdom of the past . Jeffers thought that a person might find peace in a person who finds some wisdom in the past, Jeffers said .
 Although nature is indifferent to human fate, one person can appreciate nature’s grandeur . One man can appreciate the grandeur of nature's grandeur, says the author .
 Jeffers’s severe view of life may keep him from becoming widely popular . Jeffers: "I’m not sure if I’ll ever be able to live in the world," says Jeffers .
 Jeffers’s mastery of long narrative forms and the extended blank verse line gave him a firm place in modern poetry . Jeffers was a master of long narratives and long narrative lines .
 Bonnie Costello Jefferson, Joseph Jefferson, became one of the most popular and respected American comic actors of the 1800's . Jefferson was a popular comic actor in the 1800s .
 He gained immense popularity for his performance in the title role of Rip Van Winkle . He was best known for his role in the popular television series .
 He began performing it in the U.S. in 1866 and spent the next 38 years touring the country as Rip . Rip toured the country for 38 years before retiring .
 The actor collaborated with the Irish-American playwright Dion Boucicault on the play . The play was a dramatization of a short story by Washington Irving .
 His Autobiography provides a vivid account of the U.S. theater in the 1800's .
 Don B Wilmeth Jefferson, State of Jefferson, was the name of a proposed state in the United States . Jefferson was a proposed U.S. state of . Jefferson .
 In 1915, the Texas legislature suggested that the Panhandle, or northwestern part of Texas, become the State of Jefferson . The Panhandle became Jefferson .
 The law which admitted Texas to the Union gave the state the right to divide itself, with the consent of Congress . The discussion disclosed that the law . gave the . state the . right to . divide itself .
 Jefferson, Thomas, is best remembered as a great President and author of the Declaration of Independence . Jefferson Madison was a Federalist DemocraticDemocraticRepublican .
 He greatly appreciated art and music and tried to encourage their advancement in the U.S. He also tried to promote the advancement of the United States .
 French sculptor Jean Houdon came to America to make a statue of George Washington . He arranged for the famous sculptor to come to America for the statue .
 Jefferson also posed for Houdon and for the famous American portrait painter Gilbert Stuart . Jefferson was also photographed by Gilbert Stuart and Gilbert Houdson .
 Jefferson served as president of the American Philosophical Society . Jefferson was president of a wide range of scientific and intellectual research group . Jefferson died in 1877 .
 Jefferson invented a decoding device, a lap desk, and an improved type of moldboard plow . Jefferson also invented a new type of plow, a device that could be used to drive a car .
 His collection of more than 6,400 books became a major part of the Library of Congress . His collection was part of a major collection of books that later became a library .
 He developed the decimal system of coinage that allows Americans to keep accounts in dollars and cents . The decimal system was developed in 1883 .
 He compiled a Manual of Parliamentary Practice and prepared written vocabularies of Indian languages . He also compiled a manual of Parliamentary practice .
 He regarded himself as a public-spirited citizen and a broad-minded, practical thinker .
 He spent most of his career in public office . But he made his greatest contribution to his country in the field of politics, he says . He says .
 His ideal society was a nation of jandownowns farmers living under as little government as possible . The ideal society would be a nation where farmers lived under little government, he said .
 The term /effersonian democracy refers to such an ideal and was based on Jefferson's faith in self-government . Jefferson believed in the ideal of self-governability .
 He trusted the majority of people to govern themselves and wanted to keep the government simple and free of waste . He said he wanted the government to be a simple, free and simple .
 Jefferson loved liberty in every form, and he worked for freedom of speech, press, religion, and other civil liberties . Jefferson loved freedom in all forms, including speech and press .
 Jefferson strongly supported the addition of the Bill of Rights to the Constitution of the U.S. Jefferson was a strong supporter of the Constitution . Jefferson was born in 18th century .
 During Jefferson's two terms as President, the U.S. almost doubled in area with the purchase of the vast Louisiana Territory . The purchase of Louisiana Territory was the largest purchase of all of the nation's land .
 America preserved its hard-won neutrality while France fought most of Europe . Napoleon's armies led the French invasion of Europe in Napoleon's 18th century .
 First successful voyage of Robert Fulton's steamboat signaled a promising new era in the history of transportation . The Clermont became famous as the first steamboat to sail from New York to New York .
 Thomas Jefferson was born on April 13, 1743, at Shadwell, the family farm in Goochland (now Albemarle) County, Virginia . He was born in 1743 on the farm .
 He was the third child in the family and grew up with six sisters and one brother . He was born into a family of six children .
 Thomas Jefferson's mother, Jane Randolph Jefferson, came from one of the oldest families in Virginia . Thomas came from a family of one of Virginia's oldest families .
 Thomas developed the normal interests of a country boy—hunting, fishing, horseback riding, and canoeing . Thomas developed his own interests of hunting, fishing and horseback .
 At age 9, he went to live with a Scottish clergyman, who taught him Latin, Greek, and French . He was also taught Latin, French, and Latin .
 After his father died, Thomas entered the school of James Maury, an Anglican clergyman, near Charlottesville, Virginia . Thomas entered his father's Anglican boarding school .
 Jefferson was born in Goochland County, Virginia, in 1743 . He died in 18th century in Virginia . Jefferson was a slave .
 The Louisiana Purchase, territorial agreement with France, doubled the size of the U.S. in 1803 . Louisiana Purchase was territorial agreement between France and the United States .
 Dalton’s Theory of the Atom, one of the foundations of chemistry, was developed in 1803 . Dalton's theory of the atom is one of chemistry's foundations . The Theory of Atom was developed by Dalton in the early 1800s .
 English chemist John Dalton proposed that all matter was made up of atoms . He proposed that atoms were made of atoms in order to form atoms .
 Marbury Madison, a Supreme Court ruling, established the court's right to declare laws unconstitutional . The decision was made in the 19th century .
 The Lewis and Clark Expedition crossed the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean . The expedition crossed much of the vast northwestern wilderness . The men and women were the first explorers to explore the Pacific .
 Richard Trevithick invented the steam-powered locomotive in 1804 . The steam locomotive was invented by an English engineer .
 American inventor Robert Fulton began the first commercially successful steamboat service in 1807 . Fulton was the first steamboat operator in the United States . Fulton's steamboat company was founded in the early 1800s .
 Sir Walter Scott's The Lay of the Last Minstre/ and William Wordsworth’s Poems in Two Volumes , stressed imagination, passionate feeling, and unusual experiences . The Lay Of The Last Minstree/ and The Poemes in Two .
 Embargo Act of 1807 prohibited ships from entering or leaving U.S. harbors . Act was passed in 1807 . It was the first time ships were allowed to enter or leave the United States harbors.
 It sought to end interference with U.S. shipping by Britain and France, who were at war . It sought the end of interference with United States shipping by France and Britain .
 In 1760, when he was 16, Jefferson entered the College of William and Mary at Williamsburg . Jefferson was 16 when he first entered the college at the time .
 Jefferson met two men, William Small and Judge George Wythe, who would have a great influence on him . Jefferson met Small and Wythe in the early days of his presidency .
 Jefferson's birthplace was this house at Shadwell, a family estate of more than 2,500 acres in central Virginia .
 Jefferson inherited the property when he was 14 years old . He inherited it from Governor Francis Fauquier .
 The four spent many evenings at the governor's mansion, talking and playing chamber music .
 His studies and the companionship of cultured men stimulated his eager mind, he said . He said: "His studies and companionship . stimulated him greatly."
 Jefferson had been reared in the Anglican Church, but he developed a distrust of organized religion . Jefferson was reared as an Anglican, but had an unsecured faith in organized religion, he said .
 Jefferson studied law with George Wythe after finishing college in 1762 . After finishing college, Jefferson studied with Wythe . Jefferson was born in New York City .
 Ae. jefferson collected clever devices throughout his lifetime . He collected clever gadgets throughout his life .
 Jefferson gathered the swivel chair shown here and other items Jefferson gathered are on display at Monticello . Jefferson gathered many items from his private collection at the plantation .
 Monticello, the home Jefferson designed and built between 1768 and 1809, is a 35-room brick mansion on a hilltop near Charlottesville, Virginia .
 In 1765, Jefferson heard Patrick Henry give his famous speech against the Stamp Act . Jefferson heard the speech in 1765 .
 He practiced law with great success until public service began taking all his time . "He practiced law ... but public service took all of his time," he said .
 Jefferson's estate, like that of his father, lay in the rolling hills of Virginia’s Piedmont region . Jefferson was born in 17th Century Virginia .
 The ScotchIrish and German immigrants of this section had hacked their small farms out of the wilderness . The area was largely populated by Scotch and German settlers .
 Their ideas conflicted with aristocratic beliefs of the wealthy landowners of the Tidewater region . Their ideas clashed with those of the rich and powerful landowners .
 Jefferson was related to many Tidewater aristocrats and was accepted in their society . Jefferson was a member of the Tidewater aristocracy . He was accepted by Tidewater society .
 His political sympathies tended to be closer to those of his Piedmont neighbors . But his sympathies tend to be toward those of those in the North Carolina Senate .
 She was the daughter of John Wayles, a prominent lawyer who lived near Williamsburg, Virginia . She was born in 1926 .
 According to legend, Jefferson's love of music helped him win his bride . Jefferson's passion for music is said to have been his love of the music .
 Two rival suitors came to call one day but left without a word when they saw the couple playing a duet on the harpsichord and violin . The couple were engaged for more than 20 years .
 Jefferson died in 1782, after only 10 years of marriage . Jefferson reared his two daughters .
 For many years, some historians thought that Jefferson might have had children with one of his slaves, Sally Hemings . Hemings was a slave owned by Jefferson's slave, Sally .
 In 1998, scientists conducted a DNA study to help learn if this was so . The study was conducted by scientists in 1998 to find out if this is true .
 Study compared DNA of male descendants of Sally Hemings with DNA of Jefferson's uncle . The study compared the DNA of Hemings' descendants with DNA from Hemings uncle's descendants .
 The study could not include male descendants of Jefferson and his wife because they had no sons who lived to adulthood . Jefferson's wife and Jefferson's daughter were not included in the study .
 Certain characteristics of Jefferson’s DNA and that of his uncle, brother, and their descendants would be the same . Jefferson's uncle and brother's descendants would also have the same characteristics .
 Jefferson or one of his relatives fathered at least one of Hemings’s children, Eston Hemings . The study suggested that Jefferson or a relative fathered one of the Hemings's children .
 The Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, which oversees Monticello, has appointed a committee to review the study . The committee was appointed by the foundation .
 Committee members examined historical and scientific documents and interviewed descendants of Monticello slaves and others . Committee members examine historical documents and interviews descendants of slaves and slaves .
 The likelihood is very strong that Jefferson and Sally Hemings had a long-term relationship, the foundation says . Jefferson was the father of one, if not all six, of Hemings’s children, it says .
 Jefferson was elected to the House of Burgesses in 1769 and served there until 1775 . Jefferson served as a member of the Burgesses of the United States .
 He was not a brilliant speaker but proved himself an able writer of laws and resolutions . He proved himself to be able to write laws, resolutions and laws, he said .
 Jefferson often showed a talent for clear and simple English that the more experienced legislators quickly recognized . Jefferson was a well-known speaker who often spoke with clear English . Jefferson often spoke in clear, simple English .
 Jefferson became a member of a group that included Patrick Henry, Richard Henry Lee, and Francis Lightfoot Se eo . He became a leader of the American Revolution .
 These men challenged the control that Tidewater aristocrats held over Virginia politics . These men challenge the control they held over Tidewater .
 They took part in disputes between the colonies and the United Kingdom . They also took a keen interest in disputes with the colonies .
 Together with other patriots, they met in the Apollo Room of Williamsburg’s Raleigh Tavern in 1769 . They joined against the United Kingdom in a nonimportation association against the UK .
 Jefferson took the lead in organizing another nonimportation agreement . Jefferson says he hopes to continue to work on non-discriminatory agreements .
 He was chosen to represent Albemarle County at the First Virginia Convention . The convention was to elect Virginia delegates to the First Continental Congress . In turn, the delegates were elected to the Congress .
 He became il] and could not go to the meeting, but he sent a paper giving his views . He could not attend the meeting because he was not allowed to go .
 Jefferson argued that the British Parliament had no control over the American Colonies . Jefferson argues that the Parliament was not in charge of the American colonies .
 He declared that when the original settlers came to America, they had used their ‘natural rights” to emigrate . The original settlers used their "natural rights" to move to America .
 Jefferson claimed the colonies still owed allegiance only to the king, to whom the original settlers had freely chosen to remain loyal . Jefferson claimed that the colonies were still loyal to the King of England .
 Jefferson said the first English settlers in America were like the first Saxons who had settled in England hundreds of years before . Jefferson: The first Saxon settlement was like that of the first Anglo-Saxon settlers .
 Jefferson claimed the British Parliament had no more right to govern America than the German rulers had to govern England . Jefferson claimed that the British parliament had no right to rule the U.S.
 Jefferson attended the Second Virginia Convention in the spring of 1775 . Jefferson was a member of the First Virginia Parliament .
 The members of this convention chose Jefferson as one of the delegates to the Second Continental Congress . Jefferson was chosen to be a delegate to the Congress in 17th century .
 The Virginia Assembly asked him to answer a message of peace from Lord North, the British prime minister . Before he left for Philadelphia, he was asked to answer the question .
 North proposed that Parliament would not try to tax the settlers if they would tax themselves . North had proposed that the settlers would not be taxed if they paid themselves .
 Jefferson insisted that a government had been set up in America for the colonists, not for the British . Jefferson insisted .
 The more moderate John Dickinson drafted a substitute, which included much of Jefferson’s original version . Jefferson's original version of the poem was published in 17th century .
 During the spring of 1776, sentiment rapidly grew stronger in favor of independence . In the spring, sentiment grew stronger toward independence . The war of independence was declared in 1776 .
 Congress appointed a committee to draw up a declaration of independence . Congress appointed committee to draft a declaration .
 Jefferson, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman, and Robert Livingston were on the committee . The committee included Benjamin Franklin and Benjamin Franklin .
 The committee unanimously asked Jefferson to prepare the draft and approved it with few changes . The draft was approved by the committee unanimously .
 Congress began debating the declaration on July 2 and adopted it on July 4 . The declaration was adopted by the U.S. House of Representatives .
 "It set forth with moving eloquence, supported by strong legal argument, the position of the American revolutionaries," the book says .
 In September 1776, Jefferson resigned from Congress and returned to the Virginia House of Delegates . Jefferson was elected to Congress in 1776 . Jefferson served in Congress from 1776 to 1777 .
 He had no interest in military life and did not fight in the Revolutionary War . He did not serve in the war and had little interest in the military .
 The people in this largest colony suffered from uneven distribution of land . People in the largest colony lived on uneven land in the colony .
 colonial government closely restricted voting privileges and limited educational opportunities . The colonial government restricted voting rights and education opportunities .
 Jefferson sponsored a bill abolishing entail, which requires property owners to leave their land to specified descendants, rather than disposing of it as they wish . Jefferson sponsored the bill .
 The legislature passed another bill providing that immigrants could become naturalized after living in Virginia for two years . The bill was introduced by Jefferson .
 Jefferson aroused hostility not only among Anglicans, but also among other denominations, which feared that a separation of church and state would loosen all religious ties .
 Virginia ended the Anglican Church’s position as a state church in 1779 . Virginia ended its position as an Anglican state church .
 It took the church's clergymen off the public payroll and exempted Virginians from paying taxes to support the church . Virginians were exempt from paying tax for support from church .
 In 1786, when Jefferson was in France, the assembly passed his Statute of Religious Freedom, which guaranteed religious liberty in Virginia . Jefferson's Statute was passed in 1786 when he visited France .
 He pushed through many reforms, especially in land law and criminal law . He pushed for reforms in the 1970s .
 The legislature defeated his plan for a system of free public education with a state-supported university, but parts of this plan later became law .
 Jefferson was born into a slave society in which he continued to own slaves while opposing slavery . Jefferson opposed slavery, but was born in a society where he still owned slaves .
 He never justified owning slaves, but he felt that freeing his slaves would not have ended slavery as an institution . He said he felt freed slaves would have not ended slavery, but that it would have helped end slavery .
 He said he hoped the younger generation would end society's dependence on this system .
 The Virginia Assembly elected Jefferson governor for one-year terms in 1779 and 1780 . Jefferson was elected governor of Virginia in 1780 and 1779 . Jefferson served as governor of the state from 1779-1780 .
 During his administration, the state suffered severely from the effects of the Revolutionary War . The state suffered severe effects of that war .
 Jefferson stripped Virginia of its defenses to aid the American army . At the request of George Washington, General George Washington had stripped Virginia .
 James Monroe was among those who recruited Virginians for military service . James Monroe recruited Virginia men to join the military in 18th century .
 British troops under Benedict Arnold and Lord Cornwallis invaded Virginia in 1781 . The invasion was part of a British invasion of Virginia . British troops invaded Virginia .
 Jefferson barely escaped capture on June 4 when troops led by Lieutenant Colonel Banastre Tarleton swept down on Monticello . Jefferson was captured by Tarleton's troops in 1877 .
 Thomas Nelson Jr., Jr., the top officer of the state militia, was chosen to succeed Jefferson . The Virginia legislature chose Thomas Nelson, Jr. to succeed him in 17th century .
 Jefferson was criticized for the state's lack of resistance against the British invasion . Jefferson was the first president of the state to be elected .
 Jefferson regained prestige in his own state . But many years passed before he regained his state's prestige .
 "The criticism wounded him deeply, and he left public office with genuine relief," he said . "I'm not going to give up my job, but I'm going to do it," he added .
 Jefferson returned to Monticello embittered and determined to give up public life forever . Jefferson was determined to end his public life and become a writer .
 This book included much information on Virginia and his own beliefs and ideals . It included much of Virginia's beliefs and ideas .
 The death of Jefferson's wife in September 1782 left him stunned and distraught . Jefferson was devastated by the death of his wife .
 He accepted the office because he felt it would take his mind off his personal tragedy . He accepted it because he wanted to take his attention off his own tragedy .
 During his year in Congress, he devised a decimal system of currency that Congress approved . Congress approved it .
 He piloted through Congress the Treaty of Paris, which ended the Revolutionary War . He also piloted the Treaty through Congress .
 Jefferson's work on the Ordinance of 1784 and the Land Ordinance was most important . Jefferson also worked on the land and land laws of 1785 .
 The problem of western lands had troubled the colonies from the beginning of the war . The British colonies had a long history of problems with western lands .
 Problems of how to govern the area and how to dispose of its land then arose . Problems were solved after the discovery of the site .
 Congress appointed two committees to consider the issues . Jefferson was chairman of both committees .
 In 1784, Jefferson submitted a draft of an ordinance for the political organization of the lands . Jefferson submitted the draft in 1784 to Congress .
 Each state would eventually be admitted to the Union on a basis of complete equality with the original 13 states . The original 13 would be admitted into the Union based on equality .
 Jefferson's provision forbidding slavery west of the Appalachians lost by one vote . Jefferson's proposal was defeated by a vote of one vote in the Senate .
 In May 1784, Congress sent Jefferson to France to join John Adams and Benjamin Franklin in negotiating European treaties of commerce . Jefferson was sent to France by Congress to negotiate European treaties .
 The next year, Franklin resigned as minister to France, and Jefferson succeeded him in Paris . Jefferson succeeded Franklin in Paris, France .
 Jefferson came as close as anyone could to replacing Franklin . Yet Jefferson came close to replacing the honored Franklin .
 The United States was suffering from a weak central authority under the Articles of Confederation . The U.S. suffered from a weakened central authority . The Articles of the Confederation was formed in 1861 .
 French reformers regarded Jefferson as a champion of liberty because of his political writings and his legal reforms in Virginia . Jefferson's writings and legal reforms were among the most significant reforms in American history .
 The Marquis de Lafayette, who had fought for American independence, and other moderates often sought his advice . His advice was often sought out by the Marquis of Lafayette .
 He did draft a proposed Charter of Rights to be presented to the king . But he also drafted a proposed charter of Rights for the king to present .
 Jefferson felt that the French were not yet ready for a representative government of the American type . This document and his other suggestions urged moderation . Jefferson urged moderation because of the French not ready for representative government .
 He sympathized with the revolution, feeling it was similar in purpose to the Revolutionary War in America . He felt the revolution was similar to that of the American Revolution .
 Jefferson had taken his daughter Martha to France with him, and Mary joined them in 1787 . Mary joined him in France .
 He broadened his knowledge of many subjects, especially architecture and farming, to include farming and farming .
 He wanted to settle his affairs in America and take his daughters back home . The father-of-two wanted to take them back to the UK .
 Americans at home were busy reorganizing the government during Jefferson's stay in France . Jefferson was a national statesman during his stay .
 Jefferson was secretary of state under President George Washington . Jefferson served as Secretary of State under George Washington in 17th century . Jefferson died in 18th Century .
 The Cabinet of the U.S. sembled in 1787 and drew up what became the Constitution of the United States . The Cabinet was, /eft to right, Henry Knox, Jefferson, Edmund Randolph and Alexander Hamilton .
 He objected strongly to the lack of a bill of rights and wrote letters urging one . But he objected strongly . The bill was not passed .
 Madison introduced 10 amendments that became the Bill of Rights . Madison introduced the 10 amendments shortly after the Constitution went into effect .
 President George Washington asked Jefferson to be secretary of state in the new government . George Washington wrote Jefferson a letter asking him to join the new administration . Jefferson died in 1842 .
 Jefferson received the invitation “with real regret,” but he finally yielded to Washington's urging . Jefferson received this invitation ‘with real regrets,’ but he accepted it .
 Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton had sharp differences of opinion . Jefferson and Hamilton met in Washington, DC, in 17th century . Jefferson was the first president of the United States .
 Hamilton, though younger than Jefferson, had gained prominence as a spokesman for the Constitution . Hamilton was a younger man than Jefferson . Hamilton had been an advocate for the U.S. Constitution .
 Hamilton believed that the U.S. would be best governed by an aristocracy of the rich and well-born . Hamilton believed the United States should be governed by a well-educated aristocracy . Hamilton was assassinated in 1918 .
 Jefferson supported Hamilton's plan for funding all the debts of the previous national governments . Jefferson supported the plan to fund all the previous governments .
 He reluctantly agreed that Congress should also accept responsibility for the debts taken on by the states during the Revolutionary War . The Revolutionary War was the first time Congress accepted responsibility .
 This proposal aroused considerable opposition, especially in Virginia and other Southern Jefferson states . The proposal was opposed by many of the states that had paid off their debt .
 Some Southern members of Congress agreed to vote for paying the state debts in return for having the national capital located in the South . The nation's capital is located in South .
 Jefferson helped carry out this compromise, and the capital was located in the District of Columbia . Jefferson helped create this compromise .
 Jefferson opposed Hamilton's plans to encourage shipping and manufacturing . Jefferson opposed the plans . Hamilton wanted to encourage manufacturing .
 He feared that such a bank would encourage financial speculation and hurt farming interests . The bank is expected to be set up by the end of the year .
 Washington asked Cabinet to submit opinions on constitutionality of national bank . Washington asks Cabinet members to weigh in on national bank constitutionality .
 Jefferson developed his “strict construction’s theory, which held that the government should assume only the powers expressly given it by the Constitution . Jefferson developed the theory in 18th century . He said the government must assume only powers it has been given by Constitution .
 Hamilton replied with his ‘loose’ interpretation of the Constitution, declaring that the government could assume all powers not expressly denied it . Hamilton replied that he could assume the government’s powers not explicitly denied .
 Washington generally favored Hamilton in domestic affairs and approved the bank . The bank was founded in 17th century .
 The differences between Jefferson and Hamilton grew into a bitter personal feud . Jefferson was Jefferson's first president . Hamilton was assassinated in 1877 .
 Their conflicting points of view led to the development of the first political parties . The first political party was formed in 1903 after a series of political disputes .
 Washington supported most of Jefferson's policies in foreign relations . Washington supported Washington's foreign policy .
 Jefferson urged recognition of the new revolutionary government of France . Jefferson urged France to join the revolutionary government .
 Jefferson tried to persuade the British to abandon their forts in the Northwest Territory . Jefferson also tried to convince the British that they should abandon the forts .
 Jefferson joined Cabinet members in urging Washington to accept a second term as President . Jefferson joined his fellow Cabinet members urging D.C. President to accept second term .
 In 1796, his Democratic-Republican supporters nominated him as a candidate for President to run against John Adams, the Federalist candidate . He was nominated for President in 1796 .
 Adams received 71 electoral votes in this first party contest for the presidency . Adams was elected President of the U.S. Adams was the first party to hold a presidential election . Adams won the presidency in 1964 .
 Jefferson took no active part in the new Administration because it was largely Federalist . Jefferson was not active in the administration because of the Federalist Party .
 He found strong support among small farmers, frontier settlers, and Northern laborers . He was found to be popular with small farmers and laborers .
 His relations with Adams grew more and more strained, until the men broke completely in 1800 . Adams' relationship with Adams ended in 18th century .
 To aid deliberations, he wrote his famous Manual of Parliamentary Practice, which is still in use . It is still used by the British Parliament .
 These laws in effect deprived the Democratic-Republicans of freedom of speech and of the press. These laws deprived them of freedom, he said .
 Jefferson led the attack against them . They aroused much opposition, and Jefferson led them to attack them . Jefferson led his attack on them, and led the fight .
 He prepared a series of resolutions that were passed by the Kentucky legislature . His friend Madison prepared similar resolutions for Virginia .
 The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions set forth the “compact” theory of the Union . They asserted the right of the states to judge when this compact had been broken . The resolution was passed by the states of both states .
 Jefferson’s Manual of Parliamentary Practice, a handbook of rules for the Senate, was published in 1801 . MbDcccl. a _— \ r Virquita State dibtary .
 The Federalists warned Americans that Jefferson was a revolutionary, an anarchist, and an unbeliever . Jefferson was an atheist and revolutionary, according to Federalists .
 This party quarrel helped the Democratic-Republicans, as did the unpopular Alien and Sedition Acts . Party quarrel helped Democrats and Republicans, but it also helped Republicans .
 Jefferson won the presidency by receiving 73 electoral votes to 65 for Adams . Adams received 65 electoral votes, Jefferson received 73 . Adams was elected president in 1877 .
 Each Democratic-Republican elector had cast one vote for Jefferson and the other for Burr . Burr was Burr, Jefferson was Jefferson, Burr was Jefferson . Burr won the presidency in 18th term in 1877 . Burr had been Burr's first president . Burr died in 1881 .
 The result was a tie between Jefferson and Burr . Burr was the vice president of the U.S. Burr was Burr's vice president . Jefferson was elected to the presidency and Burr to the vice presidency . Burr died in 1842 .
 Burr was technically also a candidate for President according to the voting procedures of the time . Burr was also a presidential candidate in the early 1900s . Burr died in 1953 in a landslide .
 He failed to withdraw his name as a candidate, and the House of Representatives had to settle the election . The election was settled in the House after he failed to pull out .
 Federalists still controlled the House because the newly elected Democratic-Republican Congress had not yet taken office . The Federalists were still in control of the House .
 Federalist members of Congress preferred Burr to Jefferson because they thought Burr would be more manageable . Burr was a Federalist member of Congress . Burr would have been more manageable than Jefferson, according to the Federalist .
 Jefferson won election on the 36th ballot . He threw his influence to the support of Jefferson, who won election . Jefferson was elected president of the United States in 2008 .
 Democratic-Republican victory after 12 years of Federalism would save the nation from tyranny, he said . He felt that the Democratic-Republicans victory would save America from tyranny . He also felt that he felt that a Federalist government would stop tyranny .
 Jefferson spoke more moderately in his inaugural address than he did during the political campaign . Jefferson's inaugural address was a speech that he spoke more modestly during the campaign .
 Jefferson declared in his speech that “every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.” Jefferson declared that every difference of opinions is not an issue of principle . Jefferson declared ‘every difference is not of principle’
 Democratic-Republicans had adopted or accepted many ideas of the Federalists . Within a short time, they had adopted, or at least accepted, many of the ideas .
 Jefferson, a poor public speaker, was the first President to send his annual message to Congress, rather than deliver it in person . Jefferson was the President of the 18th century .
 Later Presidents followed this procedure until 1913, when Woodrow Wilson resumed the practice of appearing before Congress . Wilson was the first President to appear before Congress in 1913 .
 The so-called “President's House’s House” was only partly built when Jefferson moved in when he moved in . Jefferson's house was only partially built when he was moved into the White House .
 Martha Randolph, Jefferson's daughter, sometimes served as hostess at the White House . Martha Randolph was Jefferson's older daughter . Jefferson felt lonely in what he described as “a great stone house, big enough for two emperors, one pope Thornes fetterson .
 Randolph served as hostess of the White House from time to time . His daughter Martha Randolph was hostess at the time of his presidency .
 Jefferson's most popular hostess was Dolley Madison, the wife of his secretary of state . Jefferson's wife was his wife of the day .
 Jefferson's grandson, James Randolph, was the first child born in the White House . James Randolph was born in 17th century .
 Jefferson kept a French steward and chef, but he tried to eliminate some of the formality in White House protocol . Jefferson tried to keep a French chef and steward in the White House .
 He began the practice of having guests shake hands with the President instead of bowing . The practice has been a success in the United States .
 He also placed dinner guests at a round table so that everyone would feel equally important . He placed guests at the round table to ensure everyone felt equally important.
 Jefferson had some ideas for the addition of east and west terraces and a north portico to the White House . Jefferson was always interested in architecture .
 Jefferson believed government should play the smallest possible role in national life . Jefferson believed that government should be played the smallest role possible .
 With the help of Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, he began a policy of strict economy . He began to be strict economy with a strict economic policy .
 The government sharply reduced department expenditures, especially those for the Army and Navy . The government cut department expenditures in 2010 .
 The Louisiana Territory was purchased from France, by a treaty predated April 30 . The territory was purchased by the French government .
 The Non-Intercourse Act was passed, banning trade with France and Britain . 1808 1809 1809 payments on the national debt were made .
 The Federalists repealed excise taxes, which had aroused opposition under the Federalists . The repeal of excise taxes was repealed in 18th century .
 Jefferson believed appointments to federal jobs should be based on merit . Jefferson believed that appointments should be made on a merit basis .
 A ceremony honoring the Louisiana Purchase took place in New Orleans in 1803 . Federalists held all the offices, and he quickly discovered that vacancies “by death l raat arrtccFMlefin ical Society Society”
 The United States had bought French territory between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains . The U.S. had bought the territory from French territory .
 He removed some Federalists, and generally appointed Democratic-Republicans to vacancies . He generally appointed Democrats to fill vacancies .
 By the end of Jefferson's second term, his party held most federal offices . Jefferson's party was in control of most of the country's top offices .
 Jefferson told them to consider their appointments as never having been made . Jefferson said they should consider their appointment as never being made . He told them they should not have been appointed .
 William Marbury was one of 42 justices of the peace appointed to five-year terms in the District of Columbia . He was appointed by President Adams in 17th century .
 Marbury did this in accordance with the Judiciary Act of 1789, which gave the Supreme Court power to issue such writs . Marbury was the first Supreme Court to issue writs in 1789 . The Supreme Court was given the power of issuing writs by 1789.
 Marbury’s action led to one of the most important Supreme Court decisions in American history, that of Marbury Madison in 1803 . Marbury's action was one of America's most important court decisions .
 In its decision, the court declared unconstitutional the section of the Judiciary Act of 1789 that gave the court power to issue writs of mandamus . The decision was declared unconstitutional .
 The court refused to force Madison to deliver Marbury’s commission . Therefore, the court refused .
 On the surface, Chief Justice John Marshall's decision should have pleased Jefferson and his fellow Democratic-Republicans . The decision was made by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court .
 The decision meant that the Jefferson Administration did not have to deliver commissions to the “midnight judges” appointed by the Federalists . The decision was made in 17th century .
 Democratic-Republicans were disturbed by the idea that the Supreme Court could declare unconstitutional a law passed by Congress . The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case on Thursday .
 This principle placed a powerful weapon in the hands of the courts, which the Federalists still controlled . The Federalists were still controlled by the courts .
 Many Democratic-Republicans feared that the Supreme Court would use its power to help the Federalists . The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Federalist Party .
 Democratic-Republicans tried impeachment as a way of checking the federal courts . The Democratic-Republican-led Congress tried impeachment .
 John Pickering was a New Hampshire judge who was a victim of insanity . He was impeached by the Supreme Court . Pickering is a former judge who served as a judge in the state of New Hampshire .
 The House impeached Justice Samuel Chase of the Supreme Court . The Senate removed Pickering from office, but the House brought impeachment charges against Chase .
 The House charged that he had criticized the Jefferson administration unfairly . The House accused him of being unfairly critical of Jefferson's administration .
 This helped establish the precedent that political changes do not affect the tenure of judges . It helped establish a precedent for political changes not to affect judges' tenure . The case was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Jefferson had urged the U.S. to act against the Barbary corsairs of North Africa . Jefferson had been minister to France .
 These corsairs attacked trading ships, demanding tribute and ransom from all countries . Corsairs demanded tribute from all nations .
 The U.S. had paid Tripoli, the most unruly of the Barbary States, $2 million in 10 years . The United States had been paying Tripoli in the past 10 years.
 Tripoli opened war on American shipping in 1801 because it wanted more tribute money . In 1801, Tripoli attacked American shipping because of the lack of tribute money from Tripoli . Tripoli was defeated in the war .
 The little United States Navy blockaded Tripoli’s ports, bombarded fortresses, and eventually forced Tripoli to respect the American flag . The little U.S. Navy blocked the ports, bombed fortresses and bombed the fortresses .
 Notes on the State of Virginia: . Were it left to me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers, or newspapers without a government, . should not hesitate to pre_ fer the latter .
 Letter to the American statesman James Madison, Jan., 1787 . Determine never to be idle. James Madison .
 "No person will have occasion to complain of the want of time who never loses any," says President Obama . "No one will ever complain of time," says Obama .
 Letter to his daughter Martha, May 5, 1787: The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants . Letter to daughter Martha: "The tree of freedom must be renewed from time of time"
 Letter to Colonel William Stephens Smith, an American diplomat, Nov. 1787 . " delay is preferable to error," he wrote .
 Letter to President George Washington, May 16, 1792: "Unmerited abuse wounds, while unmerited praise has not the power to heal"
 Letter to Edward Rutledge, an American political leader, Dec., 1796 . The second office of the government is honorable and easy, the first is a splendid misery .
 Letter to American statesman Elbridge Gerry comparing the vice presidency with the presidency, May 13, 1797 .
 Benjamin Rush, American physician and political leader, wrote that the minority possess their equal rights, which equal laws must protect, and to violate which would be oppression . Rush: "Though the will of the majority is in ali cases to prevail, that will, to be rightful, must be
 First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801 ... error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free .
 First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801, is written by President Abraham Lincoln . Lincoln made the address to the nation in 1801 .
 Never buy what you do not want, because it is cheap; it will be dear to you . Never buy it because it will not be a thing that you don't want, never buy it .
 Resistance to tyrants is obedience to God, Smith wrote in 1825 letter to his namesake Thomas Jefferson Smith .
 Saying found among Jefferson's papers, date unknown . Jefferson, Thomas 85 but it brought prestige to the U.S. Navy .
 Jefferson had shown great interest in the West since his days in Congress . Jefferson was shown interest in West since he was a member of Congress .
 He obtained a grant from Congress early in 1803 for exploration of the region all the way to the Pacific Ocean . In 1803, he was granted a grant to explore the region .
 Meriwether Lewis and William Clark sent to the headwaters of the Missouri River, then across the Rockies to the Pacific . Clark sent Lewis and Clark to headwaters, then to the startwaters of Missouri River . He sent them across the Rocky Mountains and across the Pacific Ocean .
 Anyone with $80 in cash could make the first payment on a frontier farm . The frontier farm will be open to anyone who has $80 to pay .
 The Louisiana Purchase ranks as one of Jefferson's greatest achievements . Jefferson's Louisiana Purchase was one of his most important achievements .
 Louisiana Territory, a vast region between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains, was transferred from France to Spain in 1762 . The Louisiana Territory was transferred to Spain from France in 1763 .
 Jefferson learned in 1801 that Spain planned to cede the area back to France . Jefferson learned that Spain had ceded the area to France after learning it was cede back to Spain .
 When Louisiana belonged to Spain, it offered no threat to the United States . When Louisiana was Spanish territory, it was not a threat to America .
 Under Napoleon, it might block American expansion and threaten American democracy . Napoleon might block U.S. expansion, threaten democracy .
 Monroe sent James Monroe to Paris to help the American minister, Robert Livingston, negotiate with France . Monroe sent Monroe to France to help Livingston negotiate with the United States .
 He at least wanted to get a perpetual guarantee of free navigation of the Mississippi and various commercial privileges at New Orleans .
 Before Monroe reached Paris, Livingston proposed a modest purchase of New Orleans . Livingston proposed to buy the city .
 For the province of Louisiana, the United States paid $11,250,000 and gave up claims on France estimated at $3,750,000 . The U.S. also gave up France's claims on the province, Louisiana, estimated at around $3.7 million .
 For about $15 million, the government gained control of the Mississippi River . The government almost doubled the nation’s size .
 He doubts whether the government had a right under the Constitution to add this vast new territory to the Union . He doubted whether the U.S. has a right to add it to the United States .
 The treaty was ratified by the Senate by a vote of 24 to 7 . President Obama had doubts about the treaty, but he submitted it .
 There seemed little doubt that a prospering nation would reelect Jefferson in 1804 . Jefferson was reelected to the presidency of the U.S.
 Federalists feared that the purchase of Louisiana would weaken New England's influence . But a group of northeastern Federalists opposed the purchase .
 They felt that the time had come to break up the Union and sought an ally in Vice President Burr . Burr was Burr's Vice President . Burr is Burr's first President of the Confederacy .
 Aaron Burr killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel in July 1804 . Burr, already discredited in politics, had further damaged his reputation by killing Alexander Hamilton . Burr had already been discredited by the death of Hamilton in the duel . Burr was already discredited by his killing of Hamilton .
 He then became involved in a mysterious scheme, the purpose of which is still not clear . The purpose of the scheme is still unclear, but he was involved in it .
 He may have wanted to take the West away from the United States, or perhaps to conquer the Spanish Southwest . He may also want to take part in the West .
 Burr tried to get support from the British, French, or Spanish against his own government . Burr tried unsuccessfully to get the support of the British or Spanish . Burr died in 1881 .
 Burr set off down the Ohio River for New Orleans in 1806, hoping to gather recruits along the way . Burr traveled to New Orleans to recruit new recruits . Burr died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head in 1807 .
 General James Wilkinson, the governor of the Louisiana Territory, had encouraged Burr to expect his support . Burr's support was expected by Wilkinson . Burr was killed by Burr's assassination in 1818 .
 Chief Justice Marshall interpreted the charge of treason so narrowly that the jury had to acquit Burr . Burr was acquitted of treason . Jefferson and others were disgusted with Marshall's interpretation .
 Jefferson found that his chief tasks were to keep the United States out of the war, and uphold the country's rights as a neutral . Jefferson found his chief task was to stop the U.S. being involved in the war .
 A large part of the West Indies-Europe trade fell into American hands . One result was that a large portion of the trade fell to American hands.
 American shipbuilding and commerce grew rapidly, and thousands of sailors needed . Thousands of sailors were needed in the early 1900s .
 Most of the men came from New England, but many had deserted from British ships . Most of these men were men who deserted from the British ships. Most of them were men of New England .
 Britain, desperately needing seamen, began stopping American ships on the high seas and removing sailors suspected of being British . Britain stopped American ships and removed sailors suspected to be British .
 The struggle in Europe soon became so intense that neither side cared much about the rights of neutral nations . The struggle was so intense it became too much of a priority for neutral countries .
 Napoleon announced his intention to seize all neutral ships bound to or from a British port in 1806 and 1807 . In the Berlin and Milan decrees of 1806, 1807, Napoleon announced plans to seize neutral ships .
 In practice, the British would try to seize any ship bound for the European continent . The French would do their best to seize ships sailing almost anywhere else .
 The British frigate Leopard launched an unprovoked attack on the American ship Chesapeake in June 1807 . The attack was the first of its kind in the history of the American warship .
 Leopard fired on the Chesapeake after the captain of the American vessel refused to let the British search his ship for deserters . The Leopard opened fire on Chesapeake at the end of the 17th century .
 In any case, it would have been hard to decide whether to fight France or Britain . France and Britain would have had to choose whether to join forces .
 Jefferson believed he could bring the warring nations to reason by closing American markets to them, and not selling them any American supplies . Jefferson believed that he could close American markets and not sell them any supplies .
 This law prohibited exports from the U.S. and barred American ships from sailing into foreign ports . This law also prohibited American ships entering foreign ports in the United States .
 The embargo injured the U.S. far more than it did either Britain or France . The embargo hurt the United States more than any other nation .
 Ships lay idle, sailors and shipbuilders lost their jobs, and exports piled up in warehouses . Shipbuilders and sailors lost jobs and shipyards lost jobs . Shipbuilding and shipbuilding lost jobs in the 1980s .
 The government had to pass additional laws to increase the nation’s coastal defenses and to enforce the embargo . The embargo was imposed by the U.S. government .
 After 14 months, it became clear that the embargo would force no concessions from either Britain or France . The embargo was forced to be imposed after 14 months .
 Congress repealed the measure in March 1809 by passing the milder Non-Intercourse Act . Public clamor against the measure grew overwhelming .
 He chose to follow George Washington’s example and retire from office after two terms . But he chose to stay in office after the end of his second term .
 Jefferson made it clear that he expected James Madison to be the next President . Jefferson expected Madison to succeed him as President .
 Jefferson was 65 when he retired from the presidency in 1809 . He was 65 years old at the time of his retirement .
 He felt free at last to cultivate those ‘tranquil pursuits of science’ for which, he said, nature had intended him .
 Leisure gave Jefferson Jefferson a chance to enjoy his countless and varied interests . Jefferson is a self-taught master of travel .
 He turned to music, architecture, chemical experiments, and the study of religion, philosophy, law, and education . He also turned to science, architecture and chemical experiments .
 During his long absence, Monticello had run down, and Jefferson worked energetically to repair the damages of long neglect . Jefferson worked tirelessly to restore the site after his absence .
 He also experimented with new crops and new farming techniques, and improved his flower and herb gardens .
 Jefferson carried on an immense correspondence with people in all parts of the world . Jefferson had an enormous correspondence with many people throughout his life .
 He entertained an endless stream of guests who came to pay their respects to him . He entertained a stream of people from all over the world to pay his respects .
 In 1811, Jefferson was reconciled with John Adams, and the two men renewed their old friendship . Jefferson and Adams reconciled in 1811 .
 Their letters ranged widely over the fields of history, politics, philosophy, religion, and science . Letters ranged widely .
 The remarkable correspondence continued until they died July 4, 1826 . Both died on the same day, July 4 .
 Jefferson withdrew from politics, but he was consulted constantly on public affairs . Jefferson had withdrawn from politics . Jefferson was considered constantly by Jefferson .
 Madison and Monroe, his successors in the White House, frequently sought his advice . Monroe and Madison's successors sought him advice from him .
 He had made additions to Monticello, entertained lavishly, and supported members of his family .
 Monticello passed out of the hands of his family after his death . Public contributions aided him in later years, but his family kept him out of his hands .
 Jefferson's most important contributions in his later years were probably in the field of education . His most important contribution was probably in education .
 As a young legislator, he had worked for reform of Virginia's system of public education .
 In time, he became convinced that the state needed an entirely new university . He became convinced of the need for a new university, he says .
 Jefferson reorganized the curriculum, hired the faculty, and selected the library books . Jefferson reorganized the curriculum and hired the library staff .
 Jefferson drew the plans for the buildings and supervised their construction . Jefferson also drew the drawings and supervised the construction .
 As a result of his efforts, scholars from other countries were persuaded to teach at the university . The university was founded in 1903 .
 On July 4, 1826, just 50 years after the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson died . Jefferson died in 1826 .
 These were accomplishments that he ranked higher than being president of the United States. "These are accomplishments that were higher than anything else," he said .
 Colonial statesman A Revolutionary leader B The Declaration of Independence . Virginia lawmaker lll. A Virginia legislator lll . A Colonial stateman A Colonial leader .
 Jefferson's first Administration A Life in the White House E Western expansion B New policies F The Louisiana Purchase C The courts G Election of 1804 D War with Tripoli V Jefferson's second Administration A The Burr conspiracy B The struggle for neutrality C Commercial retaliation Vi.
 Thomas Jefferson is named for the third president of the United States, Thomas Jefferson . It lies near the center of the state, along the Missouri River .
 The U.S. Capitol is built of white limestone and resembles the United States Capitol . It is built in white limestone .
 On the building's third floor, famous murals by American painter Thomas Hart Benton portray Missouris history .
 Near the Capitol are the Governor's Mansion, which is a fine example of French-Italian architecture . The Harry S Truman State Office Building is a modern example of the Truman State Building .
 The city’s products include automobile parts, cotton swabs and other health-care items, textbooks, transformers, truck radiators, washing machines .
 Jefferson City became the capital of Missouri in 1826, when it was a tiny settlement . Jefferson City was the first city to become the state capital .
 It grew after it became a stopping point for stagecoaches and steamboats in the 1830's . It became a stop point for steamboats and passengers in 18th century .
 Jefferson City is the county seat of Cole County, Missouri . Jefferson City has a mayor-council government . Jefferson County is a city of Jefferson City .
 Jefferson Memorial, in Washington, D.C., is a shrine to the third president of the United States and author of the Declaration of Independence . Jefferson Memorial is the Jefferson Memorial in Washington .
 The memorial is a white marble building on the south side of the Tidal Basin near the Potomac River . It is located in the area known as the National Mall .
 The shrine was designed by architects John Russell Pope, Otto R Eggers, and Daniel P Higgins . The shrine is located in central London .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt spoke at a ceremony that marked the start of construction in 1938 . The memorial was built at a cost of $3 million .
 It was dedicated on April 13, 1943, the 200th anniversary of Jefferson’s birth . The Jefferson memorial was dedicated to Jefferson in 1943 .
 This design is based on the classical style of architecture, which Jefferson introduced into the United States. Jefferson introduced the style into the U.S.
 Three broad flights of steps with level platforms at intervals lead from the edge of the Tidal Basin to the portico . The steps are steps that lead from edge of Tidal basin to portico.
 A 19-foot statue of Jefferson by the American sculptor Rudulph Evans stands inside the memorial . The statue is part of the Jefferson memorial in Washington, DC .
 Four quotations from Jefferson's writings are engraved on panels inside the shrine . The shrine is dedicated to Jefferson's memory .
 Jefferson Territory proposed in 1859 for the area that covered the present state of Colorado and large parts of what are now Nebraska, Utah, and Wyoming . Jefferson Territory was the name of the area .
 Thousands of Americans rushed into the Rocky Mountain region of Colorado in 1858 and 1859 . Rumors and reports of gold discoveries fueled the rush .
 In 1859, residents established a provisional government and elected Robert W Steele as governor . Robert Steele was elected governor in 1859 .
 Congress failed to grant the request, partly because its members were involved in a bitter dispute over the spread of slavery to new territories . The request was denied by Congress, partly due to a dispute over slavery .
 It was the first time in Senate history that control of the Senate shifted when a senator changed parties . The Senate is now in the balance of power .
 He says he left the party to best serve Vermont and his own principles . He said he left Vermont to serve his own party and its principles .
 As a result of the 2000 election, the Senate had been made up of 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans . The 2000 election saw the Senate make up 50 Democrats, 50 Republicans and 50 Democrats .
 Jeffords became chair of the Committee on Environment and Public Works in 2001 . Jeffords has been in charge of the committee since 2001 .
 He is also a member of the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee and the Finance Committee . He is a Democrat and Republican .
 He supported a family leave bill that was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Bill Clinton . President Clinton signed it into law in 1994 .
 He also supported an increase in the legal minimum wage that Clinton called for and Congress approved in 1996 . The minimum wage increase was also approved by Congress .
 Jeffords received a law degree from Harvard Law School in 1962 and began to practice law . Jeffords began practicing law at the age of 18 .
 From 1964 to 1966, he chaired the Rutland County, Vermont, Board of Tax Appeals . He chaired the board of tax appeals from 1964-1966 .
 Jeffords was a member of the United States House of Representatives from 1975 to 1989 . Jeffords served in the U.S. House from 1975 until 1989 . He was elected to Congress in 1975 .
 He won the championship on June 9, 1899, by knocking out Bob Fitzsimmons in 11 rounds . He won by knocking him out of 11 rounds in 1899 .
 Jehovah Jehovah, jih HOH vuh, is a form of Yahweh, the sacred Hebrew name for God . Jehovah is the name of God and the sacred name for the creation of God .
 By the 200’s B.C., they were using the word Adonajas a respectful substitute when reading from the scriptures . The word was used in reference to the word 'Adonaja' in the Bible .
 Jewish scribes mixed the vowels of Adonai and Elohim with the consonants of YHWH, the traditional spelling of Yahweh . When writing the word, scribes used the consonant of YWH .
 This mixing resulted in the Latin spelling, Jehovah, which carried over into English . The Latin spelling of Jehovah was also added to the English .
 Jehovah's Witnesses, ji HOH vuhz, are members of a religious group that uses the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society as its corporate body . Jehovah's Watch Watchtower is a Jehovah's Witness .
 Witnesses believe there is one God, called Jehovah . Joseph M Hallman is a member of the Witnesses .
 They consider the resurrected Jesus to be divine in nature but, as God's Son, not equal to God as Father as Father . They consider God's son, Jesus, to be divine in nature, but not divine .
 Jehovah's Witnesses consider Abel, the son of Adam and Eve, as the first of the Witnesses . They cite Hebrews 11 and 12:1 as their source . Abel is considered the first Jehovah's Witness .
 They believe God's war of Armageddon will rid the earth of all wickedness in this generation . The group believes God's battle of Armageddon is the end to wickedness .
 The modern group now called Jehovah's Witnesses was started in Pennsylvania in the 1870's . Charles Taze Russell and his associates started the modern group in 18th century .
 The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was incorporated in 1884 with Russell as president . Russell served as president of the society . Russell died in 1883 .
 He commanded the British Grand Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 . It was the only time the main British and German fleets met in combat in combat .
 Jellicoe directed the campaign against German submarine warfare until December 1917 . He directed the war against German submarines until the end of the war .
 He served in Egypt in 1882 and in the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 . He also fought in Egypt, China in 1881 and in 1900.
 Jellicoe was knighted in 1907 and was made a member of the British nobility in 1918 . He was also knighted and made a British nobility member .
 Jelly and jam are made from many kinds of fruit, including apples, apricots, blackberries, boysenberries, cherries, grapes, oranges, peaches, raspberries, and strawberries . Jelly is made from fruit such as apples and apricot .
 The proper firmness of jelly and jam is achieved by mixing sugar and thickener with fruit juice that has a high acid content, and then boiling the mixture . The mixture is then made of sugar, thickener and fruit juice .
 Jelly and jam serve as a means of preserving fruit because their high sugar content allows them to be stored at room temperature for months without spoiling . Jelly can be used to preserve fruit in a variety of ways .
 Margaret McWilliams Jellyfish is the name of a type of sea animal that biologists call a medusa . The jellyfish is a common name for a jellyfish . It is the same name as a jelly fish .
 Jellyfish range in size from species that are no larger than a pea to an arctic jellyfish that may be about 7 feet in diameter . Jellyfish species are no smaller than pea sized than peaches and may be 7 feet wide .
 Jellyfish get their names from the jellylike material beJellyfish 89 tween the two layers of cells that make up the animal's body . Jellyfish are known for their jellylike nature .
 This substance serves as a skeleton to support the fragile body wall and help the jellyfish maintain buoyancy in the water . Jellyfish's jellyfish is known as a jellyfish in the world .
 A short tube, which contains the mouth, hangs from the center of the body like a bell clapper . The mouth is attached to the body and hangs from a short tube in the middle of the mouth .
 Another group of projections, called tentacles, hang down from the edges of the body . Another group, known as tentacles, hangs down from edges of body .
 Jellyfish are classified as cnidarians, a phylum that includes corals, sea anemones, and hydras . Jellyfish is classified as a cnodarians, which include corals and sea anemsones .
 Large jellyfish make up the class Scyphozoa (pronounced sy fuh ZOH uh) and are called scyphozoan jellyfish . They are known as large jellyfish in the class of Scyphozoans .
 Scyphozoan jellyfish are often seen at the coast and are sometimes called sea nettles . They are also known as sea nettle jellyfish in the form of sea nets .
 About the size of a soup bowl, they may be pale orange, pink, blue, or other colors . They may also be pale pink, orange or blue .
 Its body, shaped like an open umbrella, is supported by a thick layer of a jellylike substance called mesogloea .
 The jellyfish’s tentacles contain stinging cells that inject a paralyzing poison into its prey . The tentacles of the jellyfish are thought to be paralyzing prey .
 Jellyfish swim by expanding the body like an opening umbrella, then pulling it together again rapidly . Jellyfish swimming by expanding their body like opening umbrella then pulling together rapidly .
 This squeezes water out from beneath the body and the jellyfish moves upward . The jellyfish squeezes the water out of beneath the surface of the body .
 On its way down, it catches small animals that touch its tentacles or oral arms . On the way down it can catch small animals with its tentacles .
 These parts contain stinging cells that explode when touched, driving tiny toxic threads into the victim and paralyzing it . When touched, the victim's body parts explode and burst into the air, paralyzing them .
 Some jellyfish can inflict painful and even dangerous stings to people . Jellyfish stings can be painful and dangerous for people .
 Jellyfish called sea wasps inject their victims with a poison that is deadlier than any snake venom . Jellyfish injected victims with poison that kills more than any other venomous snake . Sea wasps are a jellyfish that injects deadly poison into victims .
 The sea wasp is a jellyfish found mainly in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef off the coast of Australia . The jellyfish is found in waters off the Australian coast .
 A severe sting from a sea wasp can kill a person within three minutes of venom . The sting is a severe sting that can kill within a minute of being stung .
 People have died less than three minutes after being stung by a sea wasp . Some people have died within three minutes of being hit by the wasp in the past .
 Sea wasps are found near the coasts of northern Australia and the Philippines . They are found in northern Australia, the Philippines and Australia .
 Each egg develops into a tiny polyp, a stage in which the animal looks like a hollow cylinder . The animal is then known as an egg-shaped cylinder .
 The jellyfish, when they reach a certain size, detach from the polyp and develop into adult jellyfish . Jellyfish are born from a polyp that forms into a jellyfish when they are larger than the size of their polyp . Adult jellyfish are then known as jelly
 See also Animal ; Hydra; Portuguese man-of-war; Sea anemone . L Muscatine is the name of a Portuguese island .
 Mae Carol Jemison was the first black woman to travel in space . Jemison, Mae Carol, was an American astronaut and physician .
 In September 1992, she made an eight-day flight on the spacecraft Endeavour . She was the first woman to fly on a space shuttle .
 Jemison conducted the first experiment that fertilized frog eggs in space . Aboard the spacecraft, Jemison carried out the experiment on board .
 She also studied the loss of bone tissue experienced by people and other animals in orbiting spacecraft . The study also found bone tissue is lost during space travel .
 Her research is aimed at determining how gravity affects the development of complex organisms . Her research was aimed at finding out how gravity can affect development .
 Jemison was born in Decatur, Alabama, and moved to Chicago as a young child . Jemison is best known for his role in the television series "American Horror Stories"
 From 1983 until 1985, she was the Area Peace Corps Medical Officer for Sierra Leone and Liberia . She was a Peace Corps medical officer from 1983 to 1985 .
 She became the director of the Jemison Institute for Advancing Technology in Developing Countries at Dartmouth College . She is also a director at Dartmouth University .
 She was born at sea while her parents were coming from Ireland to America . Her parents were traveling to America when she was born .
 Like most children who were taken captive, Mary was adopted into a family of an Indian family . Mary was taken captive and adopted by a family from an Indian tribe .
 When white settlers moved nearby, they became interested in her life story . White settlers became interested when they learned of her story .
 Thomas Thomas was a Maryland signer of the Constitution of the United States . Thomas signed the Constitution in 17th century .
 He attended nearly every session of the Constitutional Convention in 1787 . He was a member of the Founding Party .
 Jenifer did not play a leading role in the debates, but he consistently supported efforts to develop a strong national government . Jenifer was a strong supporter of efforts to form a strong government .
 Jenifer Jenifer was president of the Maryland Council of Safety from 1775 to 1777 . Jenifer served as president of Maryland's council of safety .
 From 1778 to 1782, he was a member of the Second Continental Congress and the Congress of the Confederation . He was one of the first members of the Continental Congress .
 Joan Gundersen Jenkins, Roy Harris, is a British political leader and author . Roy Harris is the leader of the British Labour Party . He is also a British politician .
 He was chancellor of the exchequer from 1967 to 1970 and home secretary from 1965 to 1967 and from 1974 to 1976 . He was also home secretary and chancellor of ex-ministers from 1965 and 1970 .
 From 1977 to 1981, he served as president of the Commission of the European Community . The economic organization was later incorporated into the European Union .
 Mae Carol Jemison Jenkins was born in Abersychan, Wales, near Merthyr Tydfil, Wales . She was born .
 Richard Rose Jenne, jeh NAY, also called Djenné, is a small city in Mali . The name of the city is also called Djenné .
 From the 1200's to the 1700's, West Africa was one of the centers of Muslim civilization in West Africa . The city was a center of Islamic civilization in the 1200-1600's .
 Jenne protected from military attack by high river waters during the rainy season and by a wall . Jenne was protected by river waters and a wall to protect itself from attack .
 Salt from desert mines and cloth, copper, and silver from north of the Sahara were traded in Jenne for gold, kola nuts, leather, and other products of regions south of the desert . Salt from the desert mines was traded for gold and leather .
 Jenne Jenne had a school that was famous in the study of law, medicine, and Islam . Jenne was famous for her studies in law and medicine .
 Jenner, Edward discovered vaccination as a means of preventing smallpox . Jenner was a British physician who discovered vaccination .
 Before his time, no parents counted their children safe until all had passed through smallpox . No parents count their children alive until all of them have died of the disease .
 Edward Jenner gave the first vaccination for smallpox to James Phipps in England in 1796 . This disease was Lansiné Kaba . Jenner was the first person to vaccinate against smallpox in England . Jenner gave Jenner the vaccine to James Pipps .
 Jenner used cowpox matter that had been taken from the infected hand of Sarah Nelmes, be/ow right . Jenner used the matter to cure the cowpox .
 Jenner's time was known that a person could catch smallpox only once . Jenner was able to catch the disease only once, Jenner said in his time . Jenner died of smallpox at the age of 50 in 1918 . Jenner's death was the first time smallpox had been caught in
 Many people tried to inoculate themselves with matter from smallpox sores . Many people used to try to cure smallpox from sores. Many tried to do so using matter from a smallpox skin .
 They hoped to catch a light case of the disease, and then be immune to it for the rest of their lives . The team hopes to catch the light case and then become immune to the disease .
 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu introduced this method into England in 1718 . Lady Mary Montagu, an English author, had introduced it into England .
 Jenner began experimenting in his home town, Berkeley, Gloucestershire . Jenner was inspired by his work in the early days of his life .
 Many people believed dairymaids who had caught cowpox could not catch smallpox . Many people in India believed that cowpox victims could not get smallpox.
 Cowpox is a minor disease that causes a few sores on the hands . It carries little danger of disfigurement or death but carries little risk of disfiguring .
 Jenner took matter from the hand of Sarah Nelmes, a local dairymaid, in 1796 . Jenner took matters from the . hand of a local . dairmaid .
 Jenner then made two cuts on the arm of James Phipps, a healthy eight-year-old boy, and inserted the matter from one of Sarah's cowpox sores . Jenner then cut the matter out of the boy's arm and inserted it into his mouth .
 Jenner introduced smallpox matter into the boy's arm . Forty-eight days later, Jenner used it to cure smallpox in his arm .
 Ordinarily fatal, smallpox matter had no effect, because the boy had been vaccinated with cowpox matter . The boy had to be immunised against the smallpox, which is normally fatal, to prevent his death .
 He then went to London to make his discovery known to the medical world . He then travelled to the UK to reveal his discovery to the world .
 In 1799, he published Further Observations on the Variolae Vaccinae or Cowpox, which he wrote chiefly as a reply to people who opposed vaccination .
 After 1800, vaccinations became accepted as a means to prevent smallpox . Vaccinations were accepted as means of preventing smallpox in 1800s .
 Parliament granted him 10,000 pounds in 1802 and 20,000 in 1806 . He devoted so much of his time to his discovery that he lost income from his regular medical practice .
 In 1770 he went to London to study medicine under John Hunter, a British surgeon . He studied medicine at Saint George's Hospital in London .
 He returned to Berkeley, where he began practicing medicine, and he remained there most of his life . He remained in Berkeley, California, until his death .
 Jenner studied certain acute communicable diseases and did much to advance their treatment . Jenner, Sir William, was a British physician . Jenner was a physician .
 Jenner's efforts have made possible a more practical treatment of these diseases . Jenner's work has led to more practical treatments for these diseases, such as cancer .
 His works include the papers “On the Identity and Non-Identity of Typhoid Fever’ and “Diphtheria, Its Symptoms and Treatment,’ as well as clinical lectures .
 He served as president of the Royal College of Physicians from 1881 to 1888 . He was the first physician to hold the post in England .
 Jennet Jennet became a successful and prominent practitioner in the field of medicine . He became an extremely well-known and prominent medical practitioner .
 He designed the Home Insurance Building in Chicago, often considered the world’s first metal-frame skyscraper . He also designed the Chicago Home Insurance building .
 Jenney's design used metal columns and beams, rather than traditional stone and brick, to support the building's upper floors .
 This method greatly reduced the building's weight, making it possible to build taller structures . This method was used to reduce the weight of a building, reducing it's weight .
 In 1868, he established an office in Chicago, specializing in commercial buildings . He established his office in 1868 .
 During the 1870's, he trained several men who later became leaders of a style of architecture called the Chicago School . Daniel Hudson Burnham, William Holabird, Martin Roche, and Louis Henri Sullivan were trained by him .
 J Hans Jensen, a German physicist, shared the 1963 Nobel Prize in physics with Maria Goeppert Mayer and Eugene Paul Wigner . Jensen, YEHN zuhn, J Hans . Jensen was the first German physicist to win the Nobel Prize .
 Jensen and Mayer prepared almost identical papers on the shell structure of atomic nuclei . Their work was published in the same year as their own .
 atomic nuclei possess shells similar to the electron shells of atoms, scientists say . They showed that atomic nucleis possess shells like those of atoms . The study was published in the US National Institute of Science Education and Technology .
 This allows a systematic arrangement of nuclei according to their properties . This allows the nuclei to be arranged according to the properties of each nuclei . The nuclei are nuclei nuclei cells that form a nucleus .
 Nicolas Jenson, /EHN suhn suhn or zhahn SAWN, Nicolas (1415?1480), was a French printer who perfected roman-style type . Jenson was born in France .
 In 1470, he designed a style of type that influenced nearly all later roman types . The type was created in 1470 and influenced by many later types .
 In 1458, he went to Mainz, Germany, to study the process of printing books with movable type . He spent time in Germany studying the printing process .
 Peter M VanWingen Jerboa, juhr BOH uh, is a mammal that looks like a tiny kangaroo . The mammal is a small, tiny mammal that resembles a kangaro .
 Jerboas are fawn-colored (light, yellowishbrown) and have pointed ears, buttonlike eyes, and long whiskers . Jerboaas are also known for their button-shaped button-like eyes and long, pointed ears .
 The jerboa looks like a tiny kangaroo, but it is really a rodent . They live in deserts in the wild .
 Like the kangaroo, the jerboa leaps away on its strong hind legs when startled . It uses its long tail for balance in dry areas in Africa, Asia, and eastern Europe .
 The feather-footed jerboa is found from the central part of Russia through Mongolia to northern China . It is one of the most widespread species in the world .
 Jerboas and kangaroo rats, which live in the United States, are so similar that it is hard to tell the two animals apart . The two animals live in different parts of the U.S. and live in California .
 Study of skulls and teeth of the two animals show that they had quite different ancestors . Study of the skulls shows that they were quite different from each other .
 Similar features developed in both animals in dry regions in which they live . But, in the dry regions they live, similar features developed .
 Jeremiah perceived that the sin of the people of Judah, like that of all nations, would bring about punishment . Jeremiah perceived, to his great sorrow and pain, that the . people of . Judah, he said, would be punished for their sin .
 When he proclaimed this message and called for repentance, he was arrested and nearly lynched as a traitor . He was arrested when he proclaimed his repentance, and called upon repentance .
 He survived the destruction of Jerusalem, and his prophecies became ones of comfort, restoration, and hope for a new moral order . His prophecies were of comfort and restoration for the Jewish community .
 Much of what is known about Biblical prophets and prophecy comes from the book . Much of the information about Biblical prophecies is based on this book .
 Jeremiah consists of four main sections, collected during the prophets life and in the century following . Jeremiah is a collection of four major sections of the Bible .
 The first 25 chapters mostly record Jeremiah’s haunting visions, oracles of judgment, and laments . Jeremiah's vision is recorded in Jeremiah's writings . Jeremiah is known for his haunting visions .
 Chapters 26 to 45 consist mostly of speeches by Jeremiah and stories about him . Chapters 25 to 45 consists of speeches and stories .
 Last chapter is an appendix describing the fall of Jerusalem . The last chapter is a historical appendix to the book .
 Israel defeated Jordan, Egypt, and Syria in 1967 in a war and occupied the West Bank and other Arab territory . In 1967, Israel defeated the three countries and occupied most of the Arab world .
 In 1993, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed an agreement that named Jericho as the first West Bank area to be given a form of Palestinian self-rule . Jericho was the first area in the West Bank to have been given the form of West Bank self rule .
 In May 1994, Israeli occupation of Jericho ended and Palestinian control began . Israeli occupation ended with Palestinian control of Jericho in 1994 .
 Peter Gubser Jeroboam, jer uh BOH uhm, is the name of two kings who ruled the northern kingdom of Israel . Peter Jubser Jobser Jerobam was the first king of Israel from the Bible .
 He opposed Solomon's policies and took refuge in Egypt . He had been an official under Solomon, but he opposed his policies and fled .
 Jeroboam revived two ancient shrines, one at Bethel and one at Dan, to free his people from dependence on the religious center in Jerusalem .
 The nation made economic advances but also experienced political corruption and oppression of the poor . The nation's economic advances were also seen as a result of political corruption .
 J Maxwell Miller Miller Jerome, Saint Jerome, was a great Biblical scholar of the Christian church . Jerome was a Christian scholar . He was also a great scholar in the Bible .
 Jerome’s version, known as the Vu/gate, served as the authorized translation of the Bible in the Roman Catholic Church for hundreds of years . Jerome's version served as an authorized translation for the Catholic Church .
 Jerome produced many important religious works besides his Bible translation . Jerome's translation of the Bible is one of the most important works of his life . Jerome also produced numerous other works of religious works .
 Jerome wrote against ideas of the British monk Pelagius and the early Christian philosopher Origen . Jerome also wrote against the ideas of British monk Pelagius and the philosopher Origen .
 Saint Jerome was a great Biblical scholar of the early church . Oil painting on wood panel by Jan van Eyck; Detroit Institute of Arts, City Appropriation .
 In the 370s, he lived for several years as a monk in the Syrian Desert . He lived in the desert in the region .
 Saint Paula founded monasteries for men and women and established a resthouse for travelers . He and Saint Paula also established monasticies for women and men .
 It is the southernmost island of the group and lies off the west coast of Normandy . It lies in the English Channel in Normandy, a region of France .
 It has an area of about 45 square miles and a population of about 80,000 . It has been known to be a tourist hotspot for years .
 Farmers on the island grow early potatoes, tomatoes, and other vegetables . The island is home to a host of early-season farmers .
 The chief executive is a lieutenant governor appointed by the British ruler . Chief executive is the chief executive of the state .
 Jersey was originally made from wool, but now it is made from a variety of fibers . Jersey is now made from various types of fibers, including wool .
 First used to make clothing for fishing crews on the island of Jersey in the English Channel .
 It is often used to make such garments as dresses, suits, lingerie, and sportswear .
 During the 1630's, Dutch settlers arrived in what is now Jersey City, Jersey City .
 Jersey is the largest of the Channel Islands in the English Channel off the coast of France . The city was named after Jersey, the largest Channel Island in the Channel .
 Leading industries produce chemicals, clothing, electrical equipment, food products, paper products, and textile products . Its leading industries include clothing, clothing and electrical equipment .
 Tunnels under the Hudson River serve cars, buses, trucks, and trains traveling between Hudson River and New York City . The tunnels are under the riverbed .
 The voters elect the mayor and the nine council members to four-year terms . The mayor and nine members of the council are elected to four years each .
 Delaware Indians lived in what is now the Jersey City area before the Dutch set up a trading post there in the 1620's . The Dutch established the trading post in 1620s .
 Two railroad terminals were established there in 1834 and helped bring industry to the area . The terminals helped bring the area's industry to prosperity .
 Rapid industrial growth caused the city’s population to rise from 6,856 in 1850 to 29,226 in 1860 . The population of the city rose from  6,000 in 1851 to 6,800 in 1864 .
 Frank Hague served as mayor of Jersey City from 1917 until 1947 . Hague was one of the nation's last city political “bosses’s” Frank Hague .
 The population declined from the 1950's through the 1980's because many people and businesses moved to the suburbs . The population dropped in the 1960s to the 1980s .
 Journal Square Transportation Center opened in 1974 . It consists of a rapid transit railroad station, bus terminal, and shopping area . Journal Square is located in Journal Square, New York .
 This program, continuing into the 2000's, has increased the city’s affordable commercial and residential space . This program has attracted many corporations to the city .
 This view shows Jerusalem from the east as seen from the Mount of Olives . This view was captured by a helicopter flying over the Mount Olives in 1967 .
 The golden Dome of the Rock, a Muslim shrine, rises above the walls of the Old City, Jerusalem’s oldest district . It is one of the holiest places in the country's history, Jerusalem's Old City .
 Jerusalem is the capital and largest city of Israel and one of the world’s holiest cities . Jerusalem Jerusalem is one of Israel's holiest cities and is considered to be the birthplace of Jesus Christ .
 It is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world . It is also one of world's oldest continually inhabited cities .
 For centuries, Jerusalem has been a spiritual center to Jews, Christians, and Muslims . Jerusalem is home to the holy city of Jesus Christ and the Bible .
 Jews consider Jerusalem a holy city because it was their religious and political center during Biblical times . Jews consider the city as their religious, political and religious center .
 Christians consider Jerusalem holy because many events in the life of Jesus Christ took place there . Many events in Jesus Christ's life took place in the city of Jerusalem .
 Muslims also revere the city and believe that the Prophet Muhammad rose to heaven from there . Muslims also believe that Muhammad rose from the city to be the Prophet .
 The remainder of the population is mostly Muslims, plus a small number of Christians . Roman Catholics, Eastern Catholics, Protestants and members of Eastern Orthodox Churches .
 After it begins Friday night, much of Jerusalem closes down and most public transportation stops . After the start of the festival, most public transport stops .
 The city is surrounded on the north, east, and south by the West Bank . The West Bank is a disputed territory inhabited by Palestinians and Israelis .
 In 1949, at the end of the first Arab-Israeli War, Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan . Jerusalem was also divided between Jordan and Israel .
 The Western Wall in the Old City is the holiest site in Judaism . Jerusalem's mayor is elected by the people to a four-year term .
 Jews from throughout the world come to pray at the wall and insert messages and prayers in its crevices . Jews from all over the world visit the wall to insert prayers and messages into it . The wall was built in the 1930s and is located in New York City .
 Mount a TOMBS of TH PROPHETS is to MUSEUM”, oO Qe Qe 5 Miles B Kilometers western part of the city . St. George'S CATHEORAL is a 5-miles west of city .
 Jordan controlled the eastern section, including the Old City, a walled section of Jerusalem dating from Biblical times . The Old City was walled in Biblical times, and Jordan controlled it .
 Jerusalem today is claimed by both the Palestinians and the Israelis as their capital . Jerusalem is claimed today by both Israel and the Palestinians . Palestinians and Israelis claim Jerusalem as their national capital .
 The Old City occupies much of the area of Biblical Jerusalem, is the historical heart of the city . it covers a rectangular area of about 5 square mile (1 square kilometer) in the eastern part of Jerusalem .
 The Old City is enclosed by stone walls about 40 feet high and 2; miles {4 kilometers) long . The walls are 40 feet tall and 2.4 kilometers long .
 Jerusalem has always been a walled city, but its present walls were built during the 1500's . Jerusalem's present wall was built in the 15th century .
 Until the late 1800's, these gates were closed at night to protect inhabitants . The gates were also closed to protect the inhabitants .
 The skyline of the Old City is dominated by a Muslim shrine known as the Dome of the Rock . The Dome is located in the heart of the city's Old City and is known for its religious architecture .
 The shrine stands on a raised area called the Temple Mount, the site of the first and second Jewish Temples in ancient times . The area is known as The Temple Mount .
 The Old City is divided into four neighborhoods -- the Armenian, Christian, Jewish, and Muslim quarters . The Armenian, Jewish and Christian quarters are located in the Old City .
 The Armenian quarter is occupied primarily by members of the Armenian Church, an Eastern Orthodox Church . The quarter is located in the Armenian quarter .
 The largest religions in the Christian quarter are the Roman Catholic Church and Greek Orthodox Church . The largest religion in the city is Roman Catholicism and Orthodox Christianity .
 Most inhabitants of the Jewish and Muslim quarters are followers of Judaism and Islam, respectively . Most inhabitants are Jews and Muslims .
 The narrow cobblestone lanes that wind through the Old City have remained largely unchanged for hundreds of years . The narrow lanes have been largely unchanged since the 1800s .
 The busiest streets are the suqs(markets), which have small, windowless shops that sell food, pottery, jewelry, and souvenirs . The busiest street is the Suqs, which has small windowless stores with windowless windows .
 The area had a poor sanitation system and inadequate supplies of electric power and water . The area also had poor sanitation and poor sanitation systems .
 After |srael took control of Israel in 1967, it expanded public services into the Old City . Public services include modern electric and water systems, garbage collection, and social welfare programs .
 The main downtown area of Jerusalem centers on a triangle formed by King George Street, Jaffa Road, and Ben-Yehuda Street in West Jerusalem . The triangle is made up of King George St. and Jaffah Road .
 Fashionable shops, hotels, restaurants, and tall office buildings line these streets . The streets of New York City are filled with high-end restaurants and hotels .
 Several modern public buildings in West Jerusalem are located in a neighborhood called Givat Ram . The neighborhood is located in the area . Several modern buildings are located there .
 The Old City contains many sites sacred to Christianity, Islam, and Judaism . Jerusalem 95 1/2 Mile 1 Kilometer is one of the world's most famous landmarks .
 The city is divided into the Armenian, Christian, Jewish, and Muslim quarters . The city has a large Armenian population of about 80,000 .
 A neighborhood known as Mea Shearim, north of downtown, is the home of many Orthodox Jews . The neighborhood is known for its Orthodox Jewish traditions .
 The huge Hadassah Medical Center stands nearby, with its famous stained glass windows designed by Marc Chagall . The Russian-born artist designed the windows .
 Also in the area is Yad Vashem, a memorial museum dedicated to the victims of the Holocaust, the Nazi campaign to exterminate the Jews . Also in Israel, the Holocaust museum is dedicated to victims .
 East Jerusalem, north of the Old City, is where most of Jerusalem's Arabs live . East Jerusalem is home to most of the city's Arab population .
 Some neighborhoods in East Jerusalem are run-down, with old, neglected housing . East Jerusalem is one of the poorest parts of the city .
 Israel built several modern Jewish neighborhoods, including Ramat Eshkol and Gilo, after taking control of East Jerusalem in 1967 . Israel took control of the city in 1967 and built several new Jewish neighborhoods .
 Jerusalem has a central place in the worship, doctrine, and daily practice of Judaism, Christianity, and islam . Holy places Jerusalem is central to the worship and doctrine of all three major religions .
 The city’s large number of synagogues, churches, mosques, and other religious institutions reflects the significance of the city for all three faiths . The city has more than 1,000 synogues .
 According to tradition, Jerusalem is where God ordered the patriarch Abraham to sacrifice his son, Isaac, to Him . The city is where Abraham's son Isaac was sacrificed to God .
 The Jews built their Temple, the center of Jewish worship in ancient times, at the site of Abraham's sacrifice on the Temple Mount in the Old City . The Temple Mount is the site where Abraham's sacrificed to the Jews .
 Two successive buildings, the First Temple and the Second Temple, stood at the site . The First and Second Temple were built at the same time .
 The First Temple housed the Ark of the Covenant, a sacred chest holding the tablets inscribed with the Ten Commandments . The Ark was housed in the First Temple, the sacred chest containing the tablets . It was the first temple to be built in the city's First Temple .
 The Western Wall is the only surviving part of the Second Temple and Judaism’s most sacred shrine . It is considered the most sacred and most sacred of all holy places in Judaism .
 It is a stone retaining wall that reinforced the western side of the Temple Mount in ancient times . The wall was built on the west side of Temple Mount . It is one of the largest retaining walls in the world .
 The wall is sometimes called the Wailing Wall because of the sorrowful prayers said there to mourn the destroyed Temple . It is sometimes known as the Wail Wall .
 Other sites in the city sacred to the Jews include King David's tomb on Mount Zion in West Jerusalem and the Jewish Cemetery and the Tombs of the Prophets on the Mount of Olives .
 Many sites associated with Biblical figures are sacred to Christians, too . They include those associated with biblical figures such as Jesus Christ .
 Many monasteries, convents, shrines and religious seminaries in Jerusalem mark events in the life of Jesus Christ and in the formation of the Christian Church .
 The Last Supper supposedly took place in a room known as the Cenacle (also called Coenaculum/ on Mount Zion) on Mount .
 The Church of the Holy Sepulcher in the Old City occupies the site said to be the place of Jesus's Crucifixion . The church is said to have been the place where Jesus was crucified .
 Church of the Holy Sepulcher is in the Christian Quarter of the Old City . The building stands at The Church of The Holy Separcher .
 The church stands on Calvary, the site where, according to Christian tradition, Jesus Christ was crucified . The church is located on the site of the crucified Jesus Christ .
 Jesus was last seen by His followers on the Mount of Olives before He ascended to heaven . Jesus last seen on Mount Olives on the mountain .
 Jerusalem is Islam’s third holiest city, after Mecca and Medina in Saudi Arabia . Jerusalem is the capital of Islam's holiest city and is Islam's third holiest .
 According to tradition, the Prophet Muhammad originally selected Jerusalem as the qib/a, the direction the faithful should face during prayer . Jerusalem was originally chosen by Muhammad to be the focus of prayer during the prayers .
 The prophet redirected his followers to face Mecca instead of Jerusalem when praying, to symbolize the independence of Islam . However, the prophet changed his followers' view of Mecca .
 This change helped ease the tension that had existed between Muslims and Jews . This change was the first time Muslims had been allowed to marry a Jewish family .
 Muhammad is said to have as} cended to heaven from a stone now enclosed by a golden-domed shrine called the Dome of the Rock . Muhammad is believed to have cended from the stone .
 Nearly three-fourths of Jerusalem's people are Jews . The people of Jerusalem are predominantly Jewish .
 Palestinian Arabs make up nearly all of the remaining onefourth of the population . Palestinian Arabs also make up almost all of Israel's population .
 Growing numbers of Jews also live in new neighborhoods in East Jerusalem . East Jerusalem is home to growing number of Jews .
 The central business district, in West Jerusalem, is almost entirely Jewish . The markets of the Old City are mostly Arab, and the markets are mostly Jewish .
 Ben-Yehuda Street is a popular commercial area in downtown Jerusalem . The population of Jerusalem has grown substantially since the city was founded .
 The portion of the street shown above is a mall closed to automobile traffic . The mall is closed to car traffic in the area .
 Residents of Jerusalem and tourists visit the street for its shopping and to relax at the area's many cafes and restaurants .
 The Cardo in the Jewish Quarter of the Old City is a street dating back to Roman and Byzantine times . It is located in Jerusalem's Jewish Quarter, the Cardo .
 Arab market in the Old City attracts shoppers seeking traditional arts and crafts . It is now the main entry to the Jewish Quarter from the Christian and Muslim sections .
 According to Christian tradition, Jesus Christ carried His cross down this street on the way to His Crucifixion . Since Israel became independent in 1948, the street has become a symbol of the nation's identity .
 The city continues to add to its population through both natural growth and immigration . The city is home to more than 1,000 people .
 Many others are Jews who have immigrated to Israel from countries around the world . Israel is home to thousands of Jews from all over the globe .
 Large numbers of people have come from Poland, Russia, and other Eastern European countries . Large numbers also come from Middle Eastern countries and from northern Africa .
 Jerusalem's Jewish citizens represent a mixture of cultures and nationalities . Jerusalem’s Jewish citizens are a mix of cultures, nationalities, says Jerusalem's mayor . Jerusalem is a city of culture and culture, says mayor .
 Jerusalem's Jewish citizens also differ in the extent of which they follow the laws and practices of Judaism . Jerusalem's Jews differ in how they follow Jewish law and practices .
 Some people, called secular Jews, have a strong sense of Jewish identity but observe few religious traditions . Some secular Jews observe few Jewish traditions, such as a Jewish identity .
 A group of extremely traditional Orthodox Jews called haredim make up about a third of Jerusalem’s Jews . They are the fastest-growing group in the city and are the most traditional Jews .
 Many haredim follow ways of life that developed among Jewish communities in Eastern Europe, Spain, and North Africa hundreds of years ago .
 Many haredim speak a Germanic language called Yiddish along with Hebrew . They dress in traditional styles of the 1800's .
 Many of the men wear long black coats, black or fur-trimmed hats, and beards or dangling side curls . The men wear beards, beards and dangling side hair .
 The women typically wear long coats and dresses, black stockings, and headscarves or wigs to follow religious laws that call for modesty .
 Confrontations have occasionally developed between Jews of different religious convictions over observances of Jewish law . Jews of differing religious convictions sometimes confront each other over observance of law .
 Many extremely religious Jews believe that only a life of prayer and religious study is proper for the holy city .
 They also have demanded that their neighborhood streets be closed to traffic during the Jewish Sabbath, from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday .
 They believe only the Messiah, whom God will send, can establish the Jewish state . They believe that only God will establish the state .
 The Old City contains architectural examples from each major period in the city’s history . Architectural examples include examples from the city's architectural history .
 Many ancient historical sites and places of worship stand near modern shopping centers and industrial zones . Ancient historical sites are often found near modern industrial zones and shopping centers .
 Architecture from late 1800s and early 1900s displays European influences . Architecture from the late 1800's to early 1900's displays European influence .
 Usefulness rather than style characterizes new apartment buildings constructed by the government as housing for immigrants . New apartment buildings are constructed by government as homes for immigrants.
 Culture Jerusalem can be described as a vast open-air museum because of the many archaeological sites throughout the area . Culture Jerusalem is described as one of the largest archaeological sites in the world .
 99 Mea Shearim is a center of Orthodox Jewish life in Jerusalem . The city also has many indoor museums, some of which are on display .
 Mea Shearim includes many religious schools called yeshivas as well as stores that sell religious books and religious articles . Ministry of Tourism deals with the city's Biblical history .
 Notable museums include Rockefeller Museum and Bible Lands Museum . L A Mayer Museum of Islamic Art displays Islamic textiles, pottery, and other arts and crafts .
 Housing developments have been constructed on the outskirts of Jerusalem to accommodate the large population increase in the city since the 1967 war . The Israel Museum includes a white museum .
 Ramat Polin in northwestern Jerusalem houses many Orthodox Jewish families . The distinctively designed development houses many of the city's Orthodox Jewish communities .
 Students from throughout the world attend seminaries there to become rabbis, ministers, priests, or Islamic religious leaders . Students from all over the world are attending seminaries .
 Jerusalem's Islamic seminaries are supported by Muslim foundations called wagfs . Wagfs receive income from endowed land and other property throughout the Islamic world .
 The foundations also support Islamic law schools, prayer rooms, colleges, orphanages, homes for the poor, public fountains, baths, mosques, and tombs . The foundations are also supporting mosques, schools, colleges and orphanages .
 Jerusalem also has many schools called yeshivas for study of the Talmud . The Talmud is a collection of Jewish religious and civil laws . Yeshivas are also known as yeshiva schools for studying religious and religious law .
 The Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra plays regular concerts at Henry Crown Symphony Hall . The orchestra is based in Jerusalem, Israel .
 Music lovers can also enjoy concerts by chamber music ensembles and choirs, and performances by several dance companies . Music lovers will also be able to watch chamber music and dance performances .
 Night life flourishes at many of the city’s restaurants and cafes, and at motion-picture theaters . The city is known for its restaurants, cafes and theaters .
 Local and international festivals provide a wide variety of cultural events . Events range from opera and theater to classical music and rock music . Festival events include opera, theater and classical music .
 The city has hundreds of hotels, restaurants, travel agents, taxis, and guides to serve tourists . The city is a tourist hotspot .
 Construction has become a major source of employment as the city continues to grow . Construction is a major industry source of jobs in the city .
 Jerusalem is also the headquarters of many technology companies and government-related activities . Jerusalem is home to many government and technology companies . It is also home to a range of government and tech companies .
 Jerusalem has almost no heavy industry but does have some modern factories . Jerusalem has a history of heavy industry, but has some modern industrial facilities .
 They produce chemicals, clothing, leather goods, machinery, and plastics . They also produce clothing, clothing and machinery .
 There are also printing, diamond-polishing, and food-processing industries .
 OldYad Vashem is a memorial in western Jerusalem to the Jews who were killed during the Holocaust, the mass murder of European Jews by the Nazis . The Holocaust memorial is located in the city of Jerusalem .
 Yad Vashem's Holocaust memorial includes an archive, a shrine, a monument, the Avenue of the Righteous Gentiles, and a Museum of Holocaust Art . The scene at the left comes from the permanent exhibition called “Warning and Witness”
 The citizens of Jerusalem elect a 31-member Municipal Council for fiveyear terms . The citizens vote for the council .
 King David captured the city from a people called the Jebusites in 1,000 B.C. He made it the capital of the Israelites . King David made it a capital of Israelites and made it Israel's capital of Jerusalem .
 David's son, King Solomon, built a magnificent place of worship, the First Temple, in his capital city . The First Temple was built in David's first city, Jerusalem .
 Solomon also built a great palace complex consisting of many buildings . Solomon's palace complex was also built in his time .
 The returning Jews then rebuilt their center of worship, the Second Temple . Returned Jews rebuilt their Second Temple after fleeing the city .
 Alexander granted administrative power to the priests and allowed the Jews to follow their own religion . Alexander and the kings who succeeded him granted the priests administrative power . Alexander granted the Jews administrative power and allowed them to follow the religion .
 Judah Maccabee’s family, the priestly Hasmoneans, established an independent state that lasted about 80 years . The Hasmonean state was established in the mid 1800s .
 Pompey the Great captured Jerusalem and made it part of the Roman Empire . Pompey captured Jerusalem in 63 B.C. The city is now a Roman capital in the Roman empire .
 In 54 B.C. Roman general Marcus Licinius Crassus stole the Temple's funds . The Temple was taken over by the general who stole the funds from the Temple .
 Herod began a huge building program and made major architectural changes in the city . Herod also made major changes to the city's architecture . Herod was the first king of the Roman Empire .
 Roman rule was generally peaceful, but riots were sometimes set off by leaders who claimed to be sent by God to preserve Judaism . Roman rule generally peaceful but sometimes violent .
 Romans arrested most of these leaders, who were called Zealots, and crucified them . The Romans arrested them, crucified most of them, and called them Zealots . They were crucified .
 Jesus of Nazareth arrived in Jerusalem in about A.D. 28 and declared the coming of the Kingdom of God . Jesus arrived in the city about a century ago and declared his coming .
 They brought Him before the Roman procurator, Pontius Pilate, who sentenced Him to be crucified . They brought him before the procurators, Pilate .
 Jerusalem remained largely uninhabited until about 130, when the Roman emperor Hadrian announced plans to build a Roman city on the site . Hadrian's city was planned for about 130 years .
 He renamed the city Aelia Capitolina and built temples to Roman gods, including one to the god Jupiter on the Temple Mount .
 Hadrian tried to end all Jewish hope of regaining Jerusalem by prohibiting Jews from visiting or living there . Hadrian drove out the rebels three years later and tried to impose a ban on Jews .
 By the early 300’s, the ban against Jews visiting the city was no longer strictly enforced . The ban was lifted in early 300s .
 After Constantine the Great became the sole emperor in 324, he made Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire . Christianity was made official religion in Roman Empire in 324 . The Roman Empire was ruled by the Roman Catholic Church .
 He replaced Jerusalem's Roman structures with Christian monuments and built several churches there . The Church of the Holy Sepulcher is one of the most famous churches in the world .
 In 395, the Roman Empire split into the West Roman Empire and the East Roman Empire, also called the Byzantine Empire . The Roman Empire was also known as the West and the Eastern Roman Empire .
 Byzantine forces regained control but lost Jerusalem again in 638, this time to Muslim Arabs . Byzantine forces lost control but regained control of Jerusalem in 639 .
 The Caliph Abd al-Malik constructed the Dome of the Rock, which was completed in 691 . The Dome was built by the Caliph of the Islamic State of Islam .
 During the 900’s and 1000's, a number of Muslim groups fought for control of Jerusalem . The city was occupied by Muslim groups during the 9th and 10th century .
 Crusaders killed both Muslims and Jews and established a Crusader state called the Kingdom of Jerusalem . The Crusaders established the kingdom of Jerusalem in Jerusalem in the Middle Ages .
 Jerusalem served as capital of the kingdom until 1187, when Muslim leader Saladin reconquered the city . Jerusalem was the capital of Jerusalem until Saladin captured it in 1187 . Jerusalem is now a UNESCO World Heritage of Peace .
 Saladin repaired the city walls, and Muslims and Jews returned to the city in large numbers . Muslims, Jews and Muslims were allowed back into the city after Saladin's victory .
 The city was controlled by the Mamelukes, Muslims from Egypt, from 1250 to 1516 . The Mameluke ruled the city for 1250-1516 .
 The Ottoman Empire, a Muslim empire centered in what is now Turkey, took the city . Then the Ottoman Empire took it, and the city was taken over .
 At first, most of the city’s population were Muslims, and even Christians greatly outnumbered Jews . At the beginning of the 20th century, the population was mostly Muslims .
 By the mid-1800's, construction had spread outside of the walls of the Old City . Construction had spread to outside the walls .
 Yemin Moshe was built in 1860 with the financial assistance of Sir Moses Montefiore, a Jewish philanthropist from England . Yemin was constructed in 1860, with the help of a philanthropist .
 Orthodox Jews built several neighborhoods north and west of the Old City . Mea Shearim, established in the mid-1870's, was a popular neighborhood of Jewish Orthodox Jews .
 Christian and Muslim groups also built new communities outside the walls . Christian, Muslim groups built communities outside of prison walls .
 In December 1917, during World War I, British troops under General Edmund Allenby captured Jerusalem . British troops ended Ottoman control of the city .
 A month earlier, the British government had issued the Balfour Declaration, a document supporting a national homeland for Jews in Palestine . The Declaration was issued by British government in 1917 .
 The League of Nations, a forerunner of the United Nations, made Palestine a mandated territory . Palestine was an area administered by Britain, under the League’s supervision, in preparation for self-government .
 Jewish immigration to Jerusalem increased during the 1920's and 1930's . Jewish immigrants to Jerusalem were mainly from Israel .
 One factor was the increasing strength of the Zionist movement, which advocated a Jewish homeland in Palestine . Another was the increase of the growing popularity of the movement in Israel .
 The other was the rise of the Nazi regime in Germany, which had anti-Jewish policies . The two main reasons for the rise in Nazi Germany is to blame for their policies .
 Many new Jewish neighborhoods, such as Rehavia and Beit Hakerem, were established, primarily in West Jerusalem . Many of these neighborhoods were established in Jerusalem .
 Anti-Zionist feelings developed among the Arabs in Palestine who wanted to create an independent Arab state . The Arab state was formed from the Arab population of Palestine .
 UN voted to end the British mandate and divide Palestine between the Arabs and the Jews . The UN voted in favour of the Arab-Israeli split .
 In May 1948, British control ended and Israel declared its independence . Israel became Israel in 1948 .
 By the end of 1948, Israeli soldiers held West Jerusalem, and Jordanian troops controlled East Jerusalem and the Old City .
 The loss of the Western Wall and other Jewish shrines bitterly disappointed the Israelis . Israel's loss of Western Wall has bitterly disappointed many Israelis .
 Armistices between Israel and neighboring Arab countries ended the war in 1949 . Israel and Arab countries fought each other in the Arab-Israeli conflict .
 This strip of land formed the frontier between Israeli and Jordanian territory . It was the border between Israel and Jordan when it was formed .
 The border ran along the west wall of the Old City and extended north and south of the wall . The border was between the west and south .
 Many countries refused to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital because of UN plan to make it an international city . However, many countries refused the plan because of the UN plan .
 These countries instead established their embassies in Tel Aviv, Israel's chief commercial, financial, and industrial center . Tel Aviv is Israel's top commercial and financial center .
 After a brief conflict that Israelis call the Six-Day War and others call the June War, Israel captured the Old City and East Jerusalem . Israel captured East Jerusalem in the Six Day War .
 Huge crowds of joyful Jews entered the Old City for the first time in 19 years to pray at the Western Wall . The Old City was closed to Jews for the last 19 years .
 Israel extended the boundaries of Jerusalem to make East Jerusalem, the Old City, and nearby villages part of the city . East Jerusalem was made part of Jerusalem in the 1950s .
 The people of East Jerusalem were granted the same rights and responsibilities that all other Israeli residents had . East Jerusalem residents were given the opportunity to apply for Israeli citizenship .
 In 1980, the Knesset passed a law restating Israel's position that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel . Jerusalem is Israel's capital, and Israel says it is the birthplace of the Quran .
 The law also guaranteed protection for the holy places of all religions and continued free access to them . It also guaranteed the protection of the holy sites of all faiths .
 The future of Jerusalem remains one of the most complex and delicate issues in the Arab-Israeli conflict . Future of Jerusalem is a complex and sensitive issue .
 The Palestine Liberation Organization would like to establish an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital . The PLO wants to establish a Palestinian state .
 The Israeli government remains committed to keeping Jerusalem as both the Israeli capital and undivided city . Jerusalem is both Israel's capital and the city of Jerusalem, Israel's largest city .
 Arab-Israeli conDavid Mount of Olives flict Gethsemane Muslims Ark of the Hezekiah Palestine Covenant Israel Saladin Balfour DeclaraJesus Christ .
 The plant gets that part of its name from the potatolike tubers it produces underground . The plant is called the Potatolite plant .
 The tubers are also used as food for livestock, and in the production of fructose (also called /evulose) a type of sugar . The tubs are used in production for livestock and for fructose production .
 Jerusalem artichoke is related to the sunflower . The plants grow quickly in Jerusalem .
 This plant produces yellow flowers from tubers left in the earth and can become a serious weed pest . It can be found in the wild and can be a serious pest .
 Growers remove the tubers from the soil each year and plant new ones the following year to control the plants’ growth . The tubers are removed from soil and planted in new ones each year .
 Jester was a person whose duty it was often to amuse kings, queens, nobles, and their family and guests . The jester was sometimes called the court fool .
 Jesters earned their support with their wit and by performing antics much like those of today’s clowns . Jesters were known for their humor and antics, much like today's clowns.
 He wore a hood, sometimes decorated with an ass’s ears or the head or comb of a cock . The hood was decorated with the head of an ass's ears .
 He also wore bells attached to his skirts, the elbows of his coat, his long, pointed shoes, and the peak of his hood . He wore bells to his waist, elbows, coat, and pointed shoes .
 History of William the Conqueror names his court fool, Goles . Goles was a court fool in the 10th century . William lived in the 1000's and died in 12th Century .
 He was almost a member of the family, taking part in private gatherings, sharing family secrets, and playing with the children . He was also almost a family member, sharing secrets with the family .
 Yorick's skull was found in the skull of his father's jester, Yorick . The skull of Yorick was discovered by gravediggers in Hamlet's father's grave .
 Jesuits, /EHZH u ihts or JEHZ uh wihts, are members of a Roman Catholic religious order of men . Don B Wilmeth Jesuits are the Jesuits of the Netherlands .
 Order operates more than 4,000 schools, colleges, and universities throughout the world . The order operates 4,500 schools and colleges around the globe .
 Jesuits direct about 45 high schools and 28 colleges and universities in the United States . In the U.S. Jesuits have directed about 45 schools, 28 universities . Jesuits also direct schools in Europe, Africa and Africa .
 The Order has produced many important explorers, missionaries, scientists, theologians, and writers . The order has produced important explorers and missionaries .
 St. Francis Xavier converted thousands of people in the Far East during the 1500s . Saint Francis Xavier, a Spanish Jesuit, converted thousands .
 Jacques Marquette, a French Jesuit, helped explore the Mississippi River in the late 1600's . Marquette explored the river in the 16th century . He was the first Jesuit to explore the river on the Mississippi .
 Gerard Manley Hopkins, an English Jesuit, was one of the leading poets of the 1800's . Hopkins was a Jesuit and Jesuit . Hopkins is one of England's most famous poets .
 Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, a French Jesuit, became a leading pa/eonto/ogist (expert on prehistoric life) and theologian in the 1900s . He was a leading expert in prehistoric life .
 The best-known Jesuit saints include Robert Bellarmine, Peter Canisius, and Isaac Jogues . The Jesuit saints are known for their work in Spain .
 Jesuit begins two years of spiritual training after entering the order . Membership and training is required for the order's members .
 After training, he takes vows of poverty and obedience to his superiors . After training he vows to be poor and obey orders of obedience .
 The brothers are full members of the order but not ordained to the priesthood . They are not ordained as priests . The brothers have been married for more than 20 years .
 The professed take a vow of special obedience to the pope in addition to taking vows of celibacy, obedience, and poverty .
 Jesuits must study for many years before becoming spiritual coadjutors or professors . Jesuits have to study for years before they become professors or spiritual leaders . Jesuit must study in order to become a professor or spiritual leader .
 This period of study, which usually lasts about 15 years for a high school graduate, provides both spiritual and academic training . This period, which lasts 15 years, is usually 15 years .
 Jesuits superiors determine if he is qualified for the rank of professed . A Jesuits superior decides whether he is a professed member .
 They base their decision on the individual's record in his studies and on his qualities of spiritual leadership, they say . The decision was made on the basis of their decision .
 For administrative purposes, the order is divided into regions called provinces, viceprovinces, and mission territories . The provinces are called provinces and viceprovvinces .
 An official called a provincial supervises each province and vice-province . The official supervises the provinces and vice provinces .
 Provinces that share a common Janguage or cultural background are grouped together into ass/stancies . Provincing provinces that share common language or cultural backgrounds are grouped into ass-stancies.
 An assistant serves as an adviser to the superior general on matters involving each assistancy . An assistant is a member of the supervisory council .
 The superior general is elected for life by a congregation made up of assistants, provincials, and delegates from the order . A congregation of delegates is also elected delegates from order .
 The congregation elects several principal assistants to the superior general . The congregation also elects a principal assistant .
 In 1544, the pope authorized the order to increase its membership without limit . The pope also authorized the pope to increase the membership of the order .
 Ignatius wrote the order's constitutions, which have become models for hundreds of other Roman Catholic religious communities . The order was founded in 1881 and is now based in New York City .
 Under Ignatius, the Jesuits grew to almost 1,000 members . The Jesuits were founded in 17th century . Ignatsius was the first Jesuit to become a leader .
 By the time he died in 1556, the order had become firmly established in Europe . It was primarily through its activities in education .
 Jesuits conducted widespread missionary work in Africa, Asia, and North and South America . Jesuits also conducted work in Asia, Africa and North America .
 Jesuits aroused opposition as their membership and influence increased . The Jesuits became more prominent in Europe in the 1930s and 1940s .
 From 1814 until the 1960's, the Jesuits steadily increased their membership . The Jesuits' membership has steadily increased since the mid 1800s .
 Today, the largest concentrations of Jesuits are in the United States and India . The Jesuits were born in France, India and Italy .
 Most Christians believe that He is the Son of God who was sent to earth to save humanity . He is believed to have been sent to the earth to help humanity .
 Even many people who are not Christians believe that He was a great and wise teacher . Even people who were not Christians believed that he was a good teacher .
 Christis a title which was so closely associated with Jesus that it became part of His name . The term Christis is a title associated with the Jesus Christ . The title was so close to Jesus it became a part of the name of his name .
 Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, regarded JeSus as a great prophet and adopted many of His ideas . Muhammad was born in Mecca, Saudi Arabia .
 Moral standards of equality, responsibility, and care for the weak owe much to Jesus lessons in brotherhood and kindness . Jesus taught brotherhood, kindness and brotherhood in Jesus' teachings .
 Four short books of the New Testament tell nearly all we know of the life of Jesus . The New Testament tells nearly all about Jesus' life in the Bible .
 Christian tradition attributes the Gospels of Matthew and John to men who followed Jesus during His life . The Gospels are said to have been written by followers of Jesus .
 The other two Gospels are attributed to men who became followers of Jesus after His death . The Gospels were written by men who followed Jesus after He died .
 Scholars doubt any of the writers of the Gospels knew Jesus during His lifetime . Today, many scholars doubt that any of them knew Jesus in his lifetime .
 The Last Supper was the final meal that Jesus shared with His 12 apostles . Other New Testament writings include the Epistles .
 This painting shows Jesus, seated in the center, just after He had told the apostles that one of them would betray Him . The painting was commissioned by the Roman Catholic Church in Rome .
 Leonardo da Vinci finished painting the scene of Paul and the Acts of the Apostles in 1497 . The famous Italian artist painted the scene on a monastery wall about 1497.
 They tell us about the early followers of Jesus after His death and include information about Jesus . They also include details about Jesus' life in the early days .
 Jesus was born during the lifetime of Herod the Great, who ruled Palestine . Herod was the ruler of Palestine during the reign of Jesus Christ .
 Herod died in 4 B.C. so Jesus must have been born no later than the year of Herod's death . Jesus was born in the same year as Herod's birth, according to Bible .
 The day of His birth was first celebrated on December 25 in the early 300s . He was first born in the 300s, and the day of his birth was celebrated in his honour .
 The Gospels of Matthew and Luke tell of the people, places, and events connected with the birth of Jesus .
 According to Matthew, Mary was betrothed (engaged to be married) to Joseph . Mary was engaged to Joseph, according to the Bible .
 When Joseph discovered that Mary was pregnant, an angel appeared to him in a dream . Joseph's dream came true when he found out that he was pregnant .
 After Jesus was born, wise men traveled from the East to see the newborn Messiah . Wise men traveled to the East for the birth of Jesus Christ .
 They had been warned not to go to Herod, and so they took another route home . But they had to take another route to avoid Herod .
 He ordered the deaths of all boys in Bethlehem 2 years old and younger . He ordered all boys to be killed in Bethlehem .
 An angel had appeared to Joseph in another dream and warned him about this decree . Joseph had been warned about the decree by an angel in a dream .
 After Herod died, they returned to Nazareth in Galilee . They settled in the town of Nazareth after Herod died .
 The angel Gabriel visited Mary and announced that her child would be the Son of God and the Messiah that was promised in the Hebrew Bible . The baby was born in Bethlehem, Bethlehem, and is expected to be the Messiah .
 After Mary and Joseph had done everything commanded by Jewish law, they returned with Jesus to Nazareth . They returned to Jesus with him and Mary, Mary, Joseph and Joseph .
 Luke says that when Jesus was 12 years old, He went with Mary and Joseph to Jerusalem for the feast of Passover . Luke says he went to Jerusalem when He was 12 .
 He sat among the scholars in the Temple and amazed them with His knowledge of religion . He sat with the scholars, amazed them .
 The Adoration of the Shepherds is an oil oainting on canvas by Rembrandt . The birth of Jesus, called the Nativity, took place in a stable in Bethlehem, a small town in Judea .
 This painting shows Mary and Joseph watching over Jesus while several shepherds worship Him . The painting was commissioned by the National Geographic Geographic Geographic Society .
 At the age of 12, He went to Jerusalem with Joseph and Mary to celebrate the feast of Passover . He went there with Joseph, Mary and Joseph to celebrate Passover with Mary .
 Landon Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist with water from the River Jordan . He met with scholars in the Temple, above, and amazed them with His knowledge of religion .
 Three angels at the left watch the baptism while the Holy Spirit, in the form of a dove, appears above Jesus's head .
 Christian tradition says Jesus was born in Bethlehem and raised in Nazareth . According to Christian tradition, Jesus was raised in the Nazareth area .
 Jesus probably grew up in Nazareth and helped Joseph in his carpentry work . Jesus probably helped Joseph build a house for Joseph .
 Jesus' public life began after He was baptized by John the Baptist in Judea with water from the River Jordan . Jesus’ public life started after he was baptized in the Bible .
 John the Baptist preached repentance and baptized those who accepted his message . John the Baptist preached repentance .
 The mission of Jesus was to announce that the Kingdom of God was coming, and that it had begun to arrive even as He announced it . The Kingdom had begun even as Jesus announced it, he said .
 He did this both in words and actions, by His miracles and His teaching . He did it both in the words and the actions of His miracles, according to the Bible .
 By the “Kingdom of God,” Jesus meant a new state of affairs on earth, which God would bring about . Jesus said the kingdom of God would be brought about, and God would do so .
 After Jesus baptism, He went to Galilee to begin to spread His message . After Jesus was baptised, He began to spread his message .
 According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, the first part of Jesus’ ministry was in Galilee and the area around it . Jesus was born in the city of Galilee, Galilee .
 At the end of His ministry in Galilee, Jesus traveled to Jerusalem, where He died . Jesus died in Jerusalem .
 According to John, Jesus traveled between Galilee and Judea several times . Jesus traveled to Judea many times, according to the Bible .
 "His miracles showed that what He said about the Kingdom of God was true," says the author of the book .
 In each miracle, the Kingdom of God broke into human life in a small way, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 According to the Gospel of John, Jesus’ first miracle took place at a wedding feast at Cana . Jesus' first miracle is said to have taken place at the wedding feast of Cana, according to John .
 According to the Gospel of Luke, Jesus performed another early miracle at the Sea of Galilee . Jesus performed the same miracle in the same place, according to the Bible .
 Peter caught so many fish that the weight of the fishing net almost sank the boat . The apostle Peter caught the fish so many that the boat almost sank . Peter's fishing net was almost full of fish .
 Jesus divided five loaves of bread and two fishes among 5,000 people so that everyone would have food . Another time, Jesus divided 5 loaves and 2 fishes to feed people . Jesus divided bread and fish to feed the hungry with everyone .
 Jesus performed other miracles that healed sick people or relieved them from other kinds of suffering . Jesus performed the same miracles in the Bible .
 The Gospel of John tells of Jesus’ miracle that brought His friend Lazarus back to life after Lazarus had been dead and buried for four days . Lazarus died and was buried four days after he was buried in a shallow grave . Lazarus was brought to life by Jesus after Lazarus was buried for
 Jesus used His power to perform miracles in order to show the love and mercy of God . Jesus performed miracles to show His love for the love of God in the Bible .
 Jesus proclaimed the Kingdom of God by His teaching . In addition to His miracles, Jesus proclaimed it by His teachings .
 One of Jesus’ well-known parables, 7he Prodigal Son, is found in Luke 15:11-32 . One of the parables is a parable of the prodigal son .
 Parable describes a father’s great joy at the return of his wayward son . The parable is a parable of a father's joy at his son's return .
 Jesus used this story to teach God's love and forgiveness for sinners who repent . Jesus taught God to love and forgive people who repent for their sins .
 Jesus told His followers what kind of life they would have to live in the Kingdom of God . Jesus also told them what they would need to live a life in the kingdom of God.
 Jesus stressed that each person should treat others as he or she wished to be treated . Jesus said that each of his followers should be treated as he wished to treat others .
 Bearded beggars were able to see for the first time after being blinded in the eye . They now hope to be able to fight back if they are attacked by attackers .
 The Passion Jesus proclamation of the Kingdom of God was good news for many people . Jesus proclaimed of the kingdom of God in the proclamation of Christ .
 They believed Jesus changed accepted religious practices, such as the Sabbath laws . They believed that Jesus' role in changing accepted practices was to change accepted practices .
 Leaders feared that His popularity would encourage a rebellion against the Roman Empire . But most of the leaders feared that He would encourage rebellion against them .
 Jesus felt that He had come to save other people by giving His own life . Jesus felt He had to save others by giving his own life to save them from harm .
 The Passion is a term used to indicate Jesus’ suffering during the final days of His life . It is also used in the Bible to indicate the suffering of Jesus during His final days .
 People cheered Him and covered His path with clothing and the branches of palm trees . People cheered him and covered him with clothing .
 Many of them believed that He would bring a better life to the Jewish nation . Many of the Jewish community believed He would be a better man .
 Jesus went into the Temple and drove out the men who were changing money and selling doves . Jesus then drove them out of the Temple .
 He taught that the house of God must be for prayer, and not for making money . He said that God's house must not be for profit, not for profit .
 Jesus spent part of His time teaching in Jerusalem . Jesus spent the next few days teaching in the city .
 His followers Peter, James, and John are shown sleeping in the foreground .
 Jesus’ betrayer Judas Iscariot leads the soldiers to the garden . Judas is seen in the background of the scene with the soldiers .
 According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, this supper was the Passover meal . According to the Bible, this is the meal for Passover people .
 After the meal, Jesus and His disciples went to Gethsemane, a garden on the slope of the Mount of Olives, opposite the Temple . The garden is a garden where Jesus was crucified .
 According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, Jesus prayed there in agony, knowing the things that were to happen to Him, but He submitted himself to God's will . Jesus prayed for God in agony and submitted himself, according to the Bible .
 According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, they asked Him if He was the Messiah . They asked him if He would be the Messiah, according to the Bible .
 The Jewish leaders took Jesus before Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea . Pilate was the head of the Roman Roman state of Judean . Pilates was the governor of the region .
 They said Jesus claimed to be King of the Jews and charged Him with treason against Rome . They said that Jesus claimed that he was King of Jews . Jesus was charged with treason by Rome for his actions .
 Simone Martini painted Christ on the Road to Calvary (1340), a tempera painting nn wood hy Simone . Martini painting .
 A Roman soldier pierced Jesus body in the side with his spear, right to Herod Antipas, the ruler of Galilee . According to the Gospel of John, a Roman soldier later pierced Jesus' body in his side .
 Herod mocked Jesus, dressed Him in a kingly robe, and sent Him back to Pilate . Herod mocked him, dressed him in a robe and sent him back to the Pontiff . Jesus was mocked by Herod, dressed as a king .
 It was the custom for the Roman governor to release one Jewish prisoner at the Passover season . The Roman governor was to release the prisoner at Passover .
 Pilate took Jesus and a condemned criminal named Barabbas onto the steps of his palace and told the crowd to choose which one should go free . Pilate told Jesus to choose between the two criminals .
 According to Matthew, Mark, and John, the Roman soldiers mocked Jesus for claiming to be King of the Jews . Jesus was mocked by Roman soldiers for saying he was King of Israel . The soldiers mocked him for claiming the title of King of Jews .
 They dressed Him in a red robe, placed a crown of thorns on His head, and put a reed in His hand . They also put a red roar and a crown of thorns on His head .
 Gospel of John says Jesus carried His own cross to the place of the Crucifixion . Jesus carried his own cross when he was crucified . Jesus was the only person to carry the cross with him .
 According to the other Gospels, the soldiers made a man named Simon of Cyrene carry the cross . The soldiers made the man carry it, according to the Bible .
 According to both Matthew and Mark, Le Coup de Lance occurred on the third day after His Crucifixion . The Resurrection of Jesus, as related in the Gospels, occurred in the wake of the Christ's death .
 In this picture, Jesus greets an angel on His tomb, while Roman guards collapse on the ground in fear and awe . The Roman guards collapsed on the floor in fear .
 After Jesus died, a disciple named Joseph of Arimathea took His body to a new tomb and sealed the tomb with a stone . The tomb was sealed by a stone, and the body was found in a new location .
 Christians refer to Jesus's return to life as His Resurrection, and celebrate it on Easter Sunday . Christians celebrate the resurrection of Jesus and his resurrection of Christ .
 Gospels tell how Mary Magdalene went to Jesuss tomb on Sunday morning . The Gospels say she visited the tomb of Jesuss on the day of her death .
 The Gospels also record various appearances of Jesus after the discovery of the empty tomb .
 According to the Acts of the Apostles, Jesus stayed on earth during the next 40 days and taught His disciples . Jesus stayed with His disciples during that time .
 The Resurrection of Jesus convinced His disciples that He was not only the one who announced the coming of the Kingdom of God, but also the Messiah, who would bring the Kingdom into being . The early Christians believed Jesus was the Messiah .
 They believed that through His death and Resurrection, Jesus began to free the human race from all suffering and evil . They believed through his death and resurrection, Jesus was free from evil .
 The disciples also believed that He would come again to complete the work He had begun . The disciples believed He would return to the work he had begun.
 The missionary activity of the apostle Paul helped to spread Christianity throughout the eastern Mediterranean area within 30 years after the death of Jesus .
 Emperor Constantine the Great gave the Christians freedom of worship in 313 . Emperor Constantine gave Christians freedom to worship in the Middle Ages .
 He was not only the Messiah, but also the Son of God in a special sense not shared by anyone else . Eventually they came to see that He was the Messiah .
 Christians explained the relationship of Jesus to God by means of the doctrine of the Trinity . The Christians explained Jesus' relationship with God through the doctrine .
 The doctrine of the Trinity explained why Jesus had absolute authority for His teachings and absolute power to forgive sins and give eternal life . Jesus had the power of forgiveness and eternal life in the Trinity .
 Annunciation Holy Grail New Testament Apostles Apostles Apostles Holy Week Palm Sunday Beatitudes Jerusalem Parable Bible (The New Testament)
 Jet is a kind of coal so hard and uniform that it can be carved and polished to look like black glass . Jet is so hard that it is so uniform that the coal can be polished and polished . Jet coal is a type of coal that can look like a piece of black glass
 Jet-propelled airplanes can reach much higher speeds than propeller-driven ones . Jet-powered planes can reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 Jet propulsion also makes flight possible at extremely high altitudes . Jet propulsion can also be used in outer space and in space space .
 Jet engines cause less vibration than do piston engines, which are used in some airplanes to turn propellers . Jet engines are used to make planes fly and make them fly .
 This smoothness of operation results in a safer and more comfortable ride . This smooths the operation of the car and results in safer, more comfortable rides .
 A jet engine burns more fuel than a piston engine that creates an equal amount of thrust . However, a jet engine can burn more fuel . A piston engine can create equal thrust with a jet .
 Hero of Alexandria built a toylike device that was probably the first jet engine . Hero built the device about A.D. 60, which is believed to have been the first engine .
 The first flight of an airplane powered by a jet engine occurred in Germany in 1939 . First flight of a jet powered by an engine was made in 1939 in Germany .
 Since then, jet propulsion has powered aircraft of all types, including supersonic airliners and spacecraft that have journeyed to other planets .
 The principle of jet propulsion can be demonstrated with a garden hose connected to a water supply . A garden hose can be used to demonstrate the principle .
 When the nozzle at the end of the hose is closed, the water pushes in all directions against the inside of the nozzle . The water pushes against the outside of the closed nozzle in a bid to push the water inside .
 It also pushes back against the water in the hose that is trying to squeeze into the nozzle . The nozzle is also pushing back against water that's trying to get into the hose .
 When the nozzle is open, some of the water squirts out through the opening of the opening . The nozzle is used to spray water out of the nozzle when it is open .
 The nozzle releases the pressure pushing forward just inside the nozzle opening . The nozzle is then released to release the pressure inside .
 Water that is still in the nozzle continues pressing backward and to the sides of the nozzle . The nozzle is still pressing forward and back, but the water continues to press forward and to sides .
 If you let go of the nozzle, the unbalanced, backward-pushing pressure will propel it backward . The nozzle will move backwards if it is not balanced and unbalanced .
 The nozzle will move in the direction opposite that of the jet of water escaping from the nozzle . The nozzle of water will move opposite the direction of the nozzle of a nozzle .
 The principle of jet propulsion was first described in 1687 by Sir Isaac Newton in his third law of motion .
 This law states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction . This law says for every reaction, there should be an equal or opposite reaction to every action .
 The equal and opposite reaction is the backward movement of the nozzle . The equal reaction is to the movement of a nozzle .
 The pressure pushing in one direction is released in a powerful stream of jet exhaust . Jet exhaust is released by a powerful jet stream that pushes in one way .
 The action of this exhaust escaping from the rear of the engine causes an equal and opposite reaction that pushes the engine forward . The action is similar to the action of the opposite reaction pushing the car forward .
 Airplanes with jet engines cannot fly outside the earth's atmosphere . For this reason, airplanes with jets cannot fly out of the atmosphere . The reason for this is because they cannot fly in the air .
 The combustion gases push in all directions but can escape only at the rear of the engine . The combustion gas pushes all directions, but can only escape at the back of the car's engine .
 The action of these gases accelerating as they leave the engine creates a reaction that pushes the engine in the opposite direction . The reaction is the result of the action of the gases accelerating in the engine .
 Power in a jet engine is produced by burning fuel in a combustion chamber . World book diagram by William Graham .
 Hot gases created by the burning of the fuel with a supply of air then rush out through a nozzle, creating jet thrust . The hot gases create by the . burning of fuel with the . supply of . air . rush out of a nozzle creating a jet thrust.
 It is compressed until it has from 3 to 40 times as much pressure as that of the outside air . It is then compressed until the pressure is 40 times more than that of outside air.
 A liquid petroleum fuel similar to kerosene is the most commonly used jet engine fuel . Liquid petroleum fuel is similar to a liquid petroleum liquid fuel .
 The mixture of fuel and air is ignited and the fuel burns, releasing a large amount of energy . The fuel is ignited by a mixture of air and fuel mixed with air and air .
 The remainder of the compressed air is mixed with the hot combustion gases to lower the temperature of the gases by about 50 percent . However, the rest of the air will be mixed with hot combustion gas to reduce the temperature .
 This process cools the walls of the combustion chamber and other parts of the engine . This process cooled the walls in the engine's combustion chamber .
 The mixture of gases then escapes through a nozzle at an extremely high speed . The mixture then goes through the nozzle at a high speed to escape the gas mixture .
 The first jet-propulsion engines created thrust by accelerating a small amount of gas to great speeds . They were created by accelerating small amounts of gas at great speeds. They were the first jet engines to create thrust thrust .
 Modern jet engines approach the efficiency of propeller engines, which move a large amount of air at a low speed, leaving little unused energy in the air . Modern aircraft engines are more efficient than propeller propellers .
 The amount of thrust produced by a jet-propulsion engine is about the same at all flight speeds . The amount produced by an engine is the same as a jet engine at all speeds .
 The amount of thrust generated by a propeller drops off as the flight speed increases . A propeller can generate thrust, but it can also generate thrust if it is at a higher speed .
 Jet-propelled aircraft can reach much higher flight speeds than propeller-driven aircraft can . Propeller-powered aircraft can also reach higher speeds .
 The thrust produced by an aircraft engine is expressed in pounds or newtons . The thrust is produced by the thrust of aircraft engines .
 A test stand holds a running turbofan engine in order to measure the thrust the engine produces . The test stand is held by a test stand to measure thrust thrust .
 Turboprops and turbofans generate most of their thrust by turning propellers or propellerlike fans rather than by pure jet propulsion . Most of the thrust is generated by propeller-like fans or propellers .
 Jet engines also differ in the way they compress the air that enters the intake ducts . Jet engines are different from jet engines to jet engines that compress air into the air .
 An inlet duct scoops air into the turbojet and carries the air to the compressor . The air is carried by the inlet inlet to the air inside a turbojet . The ducts are used to get air from the turbo jet into the jet .
 The job of the inlet duct becomes more complicated in jet fighters and other aircraft that fly faster than the speed of sound .
 Supersonic flight causes shock waves to develop in the air as it rushes through the inlet duct . The shock waves are caused by shock waves from the air rushing through the air .
 Shock waves remove energy from the air, which can reduce the engine's thrust . These shock waves can also reduce the thrust of the engine .
 A turbojet can reduce the loss of energy caused by shock waves by adjusting the shape of the inside of the inlet duct . The shape of a turbojet duct can also be adjusted to reduce energy loss caused by such shock waves .
 Turbojets are equipped with either an axia/flow compressor or a centrifugal-flow compressor . Turbojet is equipped with two-compound compressors: axia-flow and centrifugal flow compressors .
 An axial-flow compressor consists of several wheels with many small, winglike blades attached, as in an electric fan . The compressor is a compressor with several wheels attached to it . The blades are attached to the wheels of the compressors .
 These wheels are arranged one behind another along a shaft that runs through their centers and turns them at high speeds . The shaft is used to turn the wheels along a path that turns them around .
 Some axialflow compressors raise the air pressure to a level about 40 times that of the air entering the inlet duct . Some compressors can also raise the pressure to 40 times the level of air coming into the ducts .
 A centrifugal-flow compressor squeezes the air by taking it in near the center of a rapidly spinning wheel and throwing it out toward the rim . The air is squeezed by the air in a centrifugal flow of air .
 They are used less frequently in turbojet engines than axial-flow compressors are . As a result, they are less frequently used as compressors in turbo engines .
 After the air leaves the turbojet compressor, it enters the combustion chamber . After the compressor, the air enters the chamber of the jet .
 The photographs on the opposite page show examples of aircraft that use these types of engines . The photographs are shown on the other page .
 A ramjet engine must be brought up to high speed by a rocket or another jet engine before it can operate . Ramjet engines need to be brought to a high speed before they can operate properly . A rocket or other jet engine can also be brought into high speed .
 In the combustion chamber, the compressed air is mixed with fuel supplied by the fuel injector and burned . In the chamber, compressed air and fuel are mixed and burned in a combustion chamber .
 The pressure produced by the burning fuel and air sends hot exhaust gases out of the jet nozzle and drives the engine forward . The pressure produces the exhaust gases that are sent from the nozzle .
 For this reason, they have been used chiefly to propel guided missiles, such as the one shown at the right . The missiles are used mainly to propel missiles such as guided missiles .
 Turbojet engines have a compressor with fanlike blades that squeeze the incoming air . Turbojet engine compressors are fanlike fanlike fans that squeeze incoming air out of the air .
 The compressor blades also force the compressed air into a set of combustion chambers . The compressed air can also be used to blow up a car or plane .
 Compound air mixed with fuel and ignited, forming burning gases . There, compressed air and fuel are mixed together to create the gases .
 The gases expand rapidly and rush through the blades of a turbine, making it spin . They rush through blades of the turbine in a bid to make it spin in a turbine .
 The turbine is connected by a shaft to the compressor and keeps the compressor turning . It is connected to a shaft connected to the turbine and keeps it turning .
 Afterburner gives a turbojet extra thrust by supplying the hot exhaust gases with extra fuel . An afterburner can be used to boost the performance of the turbojet . Afterburners are used to provide extra fuel to the exhaust gases .
 Metal grids called flame holders prevent the fast-moving gases from blowing out the flames . Metal grids are used to keep the flames alive . The grids prevent the flames blowing out .
 Turbojet engines power the F-5E Tiger Il fighter aircraft pictured at the right . Turbojet engine is the engine that powers the F.5E .
 Turbofan engines resemble turbojet engines but have a huge propellerlike fan at the air inlet . The engines have a similar fan to a turbojet engine .
 Most of the air drawn through the fan passes around the rest of the engine, creating thrust . The fan fan can also be used to create thrust from the engine .
 The rest of the air enters the enclosed engine, which operates like a turbojet to produce thrust . The other part of the engine is operated by an enclosed engine in the vehicle .
 It consists of a compressor, combustion chambers, and two kinds of turbines . It is the first of its kind to be built .
 One turbine drives the compressor and the other, called a fan turbine, turns the fan . The two turbines are used to drive compressors and turn the fan fan blades .
 By using two methods to produce thrust, a turbofan can create more thrust at low speeds than a turbojet can . By using using two ways to create thrust, turbofans can create much more thrust than turbojets can .
 The turbojet engine is used chiefly to turn the propeller . The propeller supplies most of the turboprop’s driving power .
 The propeller rotates when burning gases from the combustion chambers turn the power turbine . It rotates in the process of turning the propeller into a propeller .
 This turbine is connected to a shaft that drives the propeller by a system of gears . The propeller is powered by a turbine that is connected by a shaft and a shaft .
 When the hot gases escape from the engine, they provide a small amount of additional thrust . Turboprop engines are most efficient at relatively low flight speeds . The hot gases are released from the engines .
 The engines are smaller and lighter in weight than piston engines that produce the same amount of power . They are smaller, lighter and lighter than piston engine engines .
 Turboprops are widely used in small business aircraft, such as the Beechcraft Super King Air . The aircraft is powered by two-by-two propellers .
 The rest of the air from the compressor is then mixed with these gases to cool them . The air is then used to cool the gases and cool them away from each other .
 The combustion gases spin the turbine wheels, which rotate the shaft that turns the compressor . The turbine wheels spin the combustion gases, which turn the wheel that turns a compressor .
 A small amount of cold air bled from the compressor through holes in the turbine blades to keep them from melting . Cold air is bled into the blades of the turbine to keep the blades cool .
 After passing through the turbine, the combustion gases rush out through the nozzle . The nozzle is the nozzle of the turbine .
 Nozzles designed for flight speeds below the speed of sound narrow gradually to the opening of the nozzles . The nozzle is designed to be able to reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 Nozzles designed for supersonic flight narrow narrow and then flare out again . They flare out of the nozzles to narrow and flare out into the air .
 This widening of the nozzle helps accelerate the gases beyond the speed of sound . The nozzle is used to accelerate gases beyond sound beyond sound .
 In a turbojet, the afterburner sits between the turbine and the nozzle . The afterburners sit in between turbine and nozzle in a turbo jet .
 In the afterburner, additional jet fuel is mixed with these gases and burned, greatly raising the temperature . In this case, the fuel is added to the mix of gases and other gases .
 The energized gases then accelerate through the nozzle, reaching extremely high speeds . They then travel through a nozzle at extremely high speed .
 The process of accelerating the gases uses a large amount of fuel . However, the process of acceleration of gases uses large amounts of fuel.
 For this reason, turbojets are used only for short periods, such as during emergency maneuvers, rapid take-offs, or steep climbs . Turbojets can only be used during emergency maneuverary maneuvers or during steep climbs. For the sake of safety, turbojet is used only
 Turboprop is a turbojet that uses nearly all its power to turn a propeller . Turbopedrop is basically a turbo jet that uses almost all its energy to turn its propeller. It is a very low-tech turbojet .
 The arrangement of the compressor, combustion chamber, and turbine in a turboprop is similar to that in a turbojet . The arrangement in the turbine is like that of a turbo jet .
 The turboprop also has a second turbine just to the rear of the turbine that turns the compressor . The second turbine is also used to turn the compressor into a turbine .
 Combustion gases spin the second turbine, which is sometimes called the power turbine . The second turbine spins a second turbine which spins a third turbine that spins the other turbine .
 This spinning motion is transferred by a shaft and a gearbox to the propeller . The propeller's spinning motion can be transferred by shafts and gearboxes .
 There is still a little energy left in the combustion gases after they have turned the power turbine .
 These gases shoot out of the nozzle, adding a small amount of jet thrust to the thrust produced by the propeller . These gases are added to the nozzle of a propeller to create thrust . The nozzle shoots out of a nozzle adding thrust to a jet thrust .
 The turboprop is smooth running, reliable, and economical, but it is limited to subsonic flight speeds . It is also a reliable and economical aircraft .
 Turboprops are much smaller and lighter than piston engines that produce the same amount of power . Turbops are much lighter and smaller than piston-powered engines that make the same power .
 The Cessna Conquest, a small business airplane, and the Beechcraft 1900, a 19-passenger commuter airliner, use turboprops . The Beeccraft 1900 is a 19 passenger commuter airliner .
 Turbofan is essentially a turbojet that uses part of its power to turn a large fan . It is essentially an engine that turns a fan into a jet that can be turned into a fan .
 The fan is powered by a turbine and is enclosed in a duct at the front of the engine . It is enclosed by a duct in a front-of-the-engine fan .
 Most of the air is forced back along the outside of the engine, creating thrust . The plane's thrust is created by thrusting the air inside the engine .
 Fuel is mixed with compressed air and burned, and the hot gases are released to generate thrust . Fuel and compressed air are mixed and burned to create thrust .
 A turbofan achieves some of the efficiency of a turboprop aircraft without sacrificing the high-speed performance of a turbojet . By combining the two propulsion methods, the aircraft can be more efficient and faster .
 The speed of gases leaving a turbofan is lower than the speed of turbojet exhaust . The speed left the exhaust of a turbojet engine is also lower than that of a jet jet .
 Most military jets, including the Grumman F-14 Tomcat fighter and the Lockheed Martin F-16A Fighting Falcon, also are powered by turbofans .
 This air is compressed by the ramming action of more air trying to enter the duct as the ramjet travels at high speed . The ramjet ramjets compress air in the air as they travel at high speeds .
 Fuel is mixed with compressed air and burned, and the combustion gases are accelerated through the nozzle to create thrust . Fuel and compressed air are mixed and accelerated through a nozzle . The nozzle creates thrust with the mixture of fuel and air .
 The major disadvantage of the ramjet is that it functions poorly at subsonic flight speeds . The ramjet has a long history of failure to perform well at subsistic speeds .
 If sufficient airflow is not achieved, the combustion gases will exit both ends of the engine, and the engine could explode . The engine explodes if not enough airflow is achieved in the engine compartment .
 Such an occurrence is avoided by first accelerating a ramjet to supersonic operating speed by a turbojet or rocket . Such an accident could be avoided by accelerating the ramjet . The ramjet is the first vehicle to accelerate a ram jet at supersonetic speed .
 Ramjet engages after there is an adequate highpressure flow of air through the engine . The ramjet engages when there is a sufficient high pressure flow through the air . The Ramjet is the most powerful jet in the world .
 In one type of ramjet, combustion takes place at supersonic air velocities through the engine . The scramjet is a type of combination ramjet or scramjet . It is called a combination ram jet .
 A scramjet has flown at more than 7 times the speed of sound . Scientists believe scramjets may be able to fly at speeds approaching 15 times the sound of sound.
 The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration Hyper-X program is devoted to developing such aircraft . The program is being developed by the U.S. Department of Transportation .
 It was powered by steam escaping from a hollow sphere through two nozzles that pointed in opposite directions . Steam escaped from the hollow sphere and was powered to escape from the sphere .
 The steam turned the sphere in much the same way that jets of water spin a rotating lawn sprinkler . The steam turns the sphere into a sphere .
 Hero’s invention of jet engines was not used to power aircraft for nearly 1,900 years after his invention . Hero's invention was the first jet engine to be powered by a jet engine .
 The growing tensions that led to World War II (19391945) accelerated the development of jet engines to propel aircraft . The development of the jet engines was the result of the growing tensions in the world .
 The Heinkel He-178 was powered by a turbojet designed by Hans von Ohain, a German physicist . The plane was built by Heinkel Heinkel and Heinz Heinz-Heinkel .
 In Italy, the jet-propelled CaproniCampini CC2 airplane was built and flown in 1940 . The plane was built in Italy, Italy .
 A more successful turbojet soon was developed by Frank Whittle, an officer in the United Kingdoms Royal Air Force . The turbojet was developed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 His engine powered the Gloster E 28/39, an experimental airplane that first flew in 1941 . The plane was powered by the engine of an experimental plane . It was the first airplane powered by his engine .
 The first successful jet fighter was the German Messerschmitt Me262, Wright-Patterson Air Force Museum . The first jet aircraft was a German Heinkel He-178 .
 The plane was powered by a turbojet designed by Hans von Ohain, a German physicist . The plane began to fly combat missions near the end of World War I .
 During World War II, Germany pioneered the use of jet propulsion for guided missiles . During WWII, the Germans used jet propulsion to launch their missiles .
 In 1947, the Bell X-1, built in the United States, became the first airplane to fly faster than the speed of sound . The rocket-powered Bell X1 was built by the U.S. government in the 1950s .
 During the 1950's, turbojets and turboprops began to power some commercial airliners . Turbojets began to be used during the 1950s .
 ramjets propelled such early U.S. guided missiles as the Bomarc and Talos . Ramjets were also used for guided missiles such as the Talos and Bomarc .
 During the 1960's, the turbofan began to replace the turbojet on commercial and military aircraft . During the 1970s, it was replaced by a turbojet, which replaced the jet .
 Because of the turbofan’s efficiency and low noise, it came into widespread use in the 1970's . Because of its efficiency, it was used in many aircrafts .
 Aerodynamics Motion (Newton's Jaws of moAircraft) Airplane Rocket Aviation {A new age of flight) Space exploration Guided missile Guided Missile Outline .
 In 1958 and 1959, the laboratory sent two probes on a mission to explore the space between the planets . Two probes were sent on missions to explore space between Earth and Earth .
 Engineers at the center guided the Ranger space probes that photographed the moon . Engineers guided the missions that took pictures of the moon from the base station .
 Engineers guided Surveyor spacecraft that made the first unmanned U.S. moon landings . Engineers guided first unmanned unmanned landings on the moon . Surveyor also guided Surveyors that made first unmanned United States moon landing landing .
 These missions, flown from 1962 to 1968, prepared the way for astronauts to land on the moon . These missions were flown by astronauts from 1961 to 1968 .
 Mariner probes controlled from the laboratory have reached Venus, Mars, and Mercury . Mariner probe controlled from a laboratory has reached Venus and Mars .
 The laboratory also controlled the Viking probes, which studied the atmosphere and soil of Mars during the mid-1970's .
 PioneerSaturn and the Voyager probes flew past Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune in the late 1970's and the 1980's .
 Magellan probe, controlled from the laboratory, began mapping the surface of Venus in 1990 . It was controlled by the laboratory in the laboratory . Magellan probes began mapping Venus in 1987 .
 The laboratory also participates in missions to observe the earth's atmosphere and surface from satellites .
 A tew students at the California Institute of Technology established the laboratory in 1936 as a place for rocket research . The laboratory was set up in 1936 .
 Jet stream is a band of fast-moving air currents that occur at high altitudes . Jet stream occurs at a high altitude .
 Jet streams flow in wavelike fashion around the Northern and Southern hemispheres . Jet streams travel in a similar way around the world .
 They change position constantly and move both vertically and horizontally . They are constantly changing their positions constantly .
 A jet stream’''s core of strongest winds is about 60 miles wide and about 1 mile (1. kilometers) thick . The core of the strongest winds in a jet stream is about 1.5 miles thick .
 There are three main jet streams in the upper troposphere, the layer of the atmosphere nearest the earth .
 They occur at altitudes of 6 to 9 miles (10 to 15 kilometers) above the ground . They can be seen in the U.S. National Park .
 These three jet streams are the polar jet, subtropical jet, and equatorial jet . The polar jet stream is the one of the three main jet streams in the world . These three streams are known as the equatorial jets .
 The polar jet and subtropical jet both weaken during the summer and move farther north . The sub-tropical jet and polar jet weaken in the summer, moving further north .
 Other jet streams occur at higher altitudes than those found in the troposphere . Jet streams are found at higher altitude than the tropospheric jet streams .
 For example, the po/ar night jetis is in the stratosphere, the atmospheric layer above the troposphere . For instance, it's in the atmosphere of the Earth .
 Jet streams were not widely known until World War II . American and German pilots encountered them at high altitudes . Jet streams are not known until WWII .
 The jet streams shown on these maps occur in the troposphere, the layer of the atmosphere closest to the earth . These maps are based on data from the International Meteorological Organisation .
 These air currents flow from west to east, except the one nearest the equator . These currents flow to the north and south of the world's poles .
 The force of the winds in and near jet streams may cause aircraft in their vicinity to experience turbulence .
 Air currents are often associated with storms and even tornadoes . These air currents often accompany storms and are associated with tornadoes.
 Wayne M Wendland Jetty is a pier or wal] built out from the shore of a river, lake, or ocean to control the flow of water . It is built out of the shore from a river or lake to control water flow .
 A jetty at a river mouth or harbor entrance may deepen a channel leading into the river or harbor so that ships will not run aground . It may be used to keep ships from running aground at the mouth of a river .
 A jetty also may extend a channel in order to prevent sand from blocking the channel's mouth . The channel may also be extended to avoid sand blocking the mouth .
 A type of jetty called a groin protects shores from erosion by trapping sand and silt . A groin is a type of jetties that trap sand, silt and sand from shorelines .
 Jetties may be made of timber, stone, concrete, or steel, sometimes in combination with sand . They are made of concrete, timber, concrete or steel .
 A jetty deepens a channel by narrowing it, causing the water flowing out of the channel to move faster . The water flowing from the jetty can be seen flowing faster in the channel .
 The faster-moving water picks up more particles of sand or mud from the bottom of the channel, thus deepening it . It picks up particles from bottom of channel, so deepening it, so deeper it can be deeper .
 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Portland District make the current carry sand away from the mouth of a channel . In areas where currents deposit sand around a channel's mouth, a jetty can extend the length of the channel .
 The Columbia River, which empties into the Pacific Ocean, has one of the world’s longest jetties . Columbia River is the longest in the world .
 The harbor has a mechanically dredged channel 55 to 60 feet (17 to 18 meters) deep . The harbor is 55-60 feet deep and has a mechanical dredging channel .
 Jewels are generally set in precious metals and worn primarily as ornaments for personal adornment . /ewe/ also refers to the pivot bearing in a watch . Jewels also refer to the pivoting bearing of the watch .
 John S Lizzadro Jewel Cave National Monument, in western South Dakota, contains one of the longest cave systems in the United States . The national park is located in western S. Dakota .
 The most common types are bracelets, brooches, earrings, necklaces, and rings .
 A jetty is used to extend or deepen a channel by increasing the current . It has also been worn for religious or magical purposes, or as a symbol of wealth or wealth .
 This photograph shows the jetty located at the mouth of Oregon's Umpqua River . This photograph was taken at the site of the UMPqua River.
 Chinese hair ornaments were made of amber, metal, pearls, feathers, and feathers . They were made from amber and metal .
 Indians of Peru wore gold and turquoise ear ornaments . Naples National Museum, Naples, Italy, shows how the Indians wore them . Indians of Peruvian Indians wore gold or turquine ear decorations .
 Fine jewelry consists of precious metals and gems created in artistic designs . Most fine jewelry is made from precious metal and gems .
 Gold is the chief metal used, but silver and platinum are also widely used . Silver and platinum is the most common form of gold .
 Prehistoric jewelry consisted largely of crude necklaces and bracelets . Pre-historic jewelry was largely made from crude necklovers .
 They were made of leather or reeds strung with pebbles, berries, feathers, shells, or animal bones . The reeds were made from reeds and reeds, made from leather .
 People used decorative thorns or sharp bones to hold clothing together . People used sharp bones or sharp thorns to hold clothes together .
 People pierced their ears, lips, and noses to wear such objects . Eventually, people pierced their ear and lips to wear them .
 They believed certain jewelry could prevent sickness and protect them from bad luck . The jewelry was believed to protect people from sickness .
 As early as 3500 B.C. craftworkers discovered that gold heated with fire could be pounded into thin sheets and then shaped . Craftworkers discovered it could be used to shape gold .
 People believed that gems had magical powers and wore them for good luck . They believed that gemstones were to be worn with them in good luck.
 The ancient Egyptians made jewelry from a variety of gemstones as well as from glass, faience, and enamel . The ancient Egyptian jewelry was made from gemstones .
 They wore beaded co//ars, which covered the shoulders and chest, and breast ornaments called pectora/s; and crownlike diadems .
 The Egyptians included jewelry in tombs because they believed it would be useful in the afterlife . The Egyptians believed jewelry would help them in their tombs in the future .
 The Greeks valued fine metalwork in their jewelry and rarely used inlaid gems . The Greeks used only fine metal work in jewelry .
 Greek jewelry featured beautiful f/igree, a lacelike decoration made by twisting fine wires of gold or silver into patterns . F/igree is a lac-like decoration made from wires twisted into patterns by twisting them into patterns.
 The highly decorated necklace shown at the left was made of enameled gold and jewels during the 1500's . It is one of the most decorated jewels in the world .
 The modern silver necklace shown at the right reflects the streamlined design that became fashionable in the 1900's . their jewelry .
 They used gold settings but placed greater emphasis on precious stones . The settings were placed in gold settings, but placed more emphasis on gold .
 The Romans were probably the first to use rings as a symbol of engagement . The Romans used them as a way of expressing their love .
 During the early Middle Ages, beginning in the A.D. 700's, the wearing of jewelry was almost entirely restricted to royalty and members of the royal courts .
 This class began to acquire jewelry, wearing it as a sign of social status . This class acquired jewelry as a way to show their status . The jewelry was worn by this class .
 Gold was still the most prominent precious metal, though some bronze and silver was also used . Gold was the most popular precious metal used in the 1800s .
 Jewelry most often took the form of brooches, buckles, head ornaments, and rings . Jewelry was often taken in the form form of buckles and brooch .
 Jewelers often set gems in heavy pendants that were fastened to the sleeve, as well as on a chain around the neck . Jewelers also used to place gems in pendants fastened on sleeves and chains .
 During the 1600's and 1700's, diamonds became popular as a result of advances in gem cutting . Diamonds became popular in the 1600s and 1700s .
 Chinese jewelry was very delicate and elaborate and often took the form of ornate headdresses . The jewelry was often taken in the shape of an elaborate headdress .
 The Japanese first used jeweled objects to decorate swords and ceremonial objects . However, the use of jeweled items was first used in Japan .
 Japanese jewelry consisted primarily of earrings, hair ornaments, necklaces, pendants, and rings . Earrings were worn in Japan .
 American Indian art created before A.D. 1500 is called pre-Co/umbian because it’s produced before Christopher Columbus arrived in the New World in 1492 . Pre-Columbian art is produced before the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas .
 Indians of the Inca empire inhabited large parts of South America . During pre-Columbian times, the Incas lived in large areas of the region .
 Inca cultures were highly skilled in working with metals, especially gold and silver . The Inca culture was highly skilled at working with gold, silver and gold .
 Most of the Inca jewelry was melted down by Spanish conquerors in the 1500's . Most of it was melted away by Spanish conquests in 1500s .
 Large round rings, armbands, headdresses, masks, masks and ornate necklaces, and earrings .
 Maya Indians made jewelry of gold, jade, and other materials in the region . Maya Indians of southern Mexico and Central America made jewelry from gold and jade .
 The Maya created bracelets, large necklaces, and ceremonial masks with geometric designs . The Maya made bracelets and large necklovers with geometric geometric designs with geometric patterns .
 Costume jewel/ry, which is inexpensive mass-produced jewelry, is also popular . Costume jewelery is popular in the U.S. market .
 Cameo Etruscans Gold Platinum Indian, American Ring Lapidary Silver Pearl Pearl Pearl Watch Pin Pin .
 She became known for her short stories about the seaport villages and rural communities of New England, especially her native Maine .
 Jewett dealt with her subjects in a colorful, yet honest, realistic, and unsentimental way . Jewett deals with subjects in an honest and realistic way .
 Local color writing describes customs and other characteristics of a particular time or place . It describes the customs of a local color writing .
 Jewett established her literary reputation with Deephaven , a collection of sketches about life in rural Maine . Jewett's work includes sketches of life in Maine .
 Her most important work is 7he Country of the Pointed Firs . She sketches and tales about the people who live in an isolated Maine seaport .
 Jewett was born on Sept., 1849, in South Berwick, Maine, and died there on June 24, 1909 . Jewett died in 1909 at home in Maine .
 Jewetts' visits to New England deepened his sympathetic understanding of the lives of New Englanders . Those visits deepened Jewetts sympathies with New England residents .
 Jewish community centers offer a range of cultural, educational, recreational, and social activities . JCCs are agencies that offer Ronald T Curran JCC Association services . Jewish community center services include cultural activities .
 Adults assist children with art projects at a JCC summer camp in California . The children's art project was created by adults at the summer camp .
 Jewish community centers offer informal programs in such areas as arts and crafts, dance, drama, health, literature, music, and Jewish culture and education .
 Activities include camping and such sports such as basketball, racquetball, softball, swimming, tennis, and volleyball . Activities are also included in camping, camping, and tennis .
 The centers offer group discussions and lectures, and special programs for people with disabilities . The centers also offer group discussion and lectures .
 The activities are directed by social workers and by specialists in the arts, child education, adult Jewish education, and health and physical education . The activities include art and child education .
 JCC Association provides published program materials, professional guidance in program planning, and technical advice on administration, building construction, and operation of camps . JCC association provides JCC Center materials, technical advice, and professional guidance .
 JCC Association also recruits and places social workers, health and physical-education instructors, Jewish education specialists, and cultural arts workers for the centers . JCC association also recruits social workers and instructors .
 Jewish community centers trace their origin to 1854, when the first Young Men's Hebrew Association opened in Baltimore . Community centers are now located in Baltimore, Maryland .
 Jewish Theological Seminary of America is the academic center of Conservative Judaism . The Seminary is the center of the Conservative Judaism movement .
 National Council of, is a volunteer organization in the United States . It sponsors educational and community service programs for children, teen-agers, and the elderly .
 The organization is also concerned with such subjects as constitutional rights, women's issues, the aging, Jewish life, and Israel .
 The National Council of Jewish Women has also supported affordable, quality child care .
 In 1983, the NCJW established the Center for the Child, which promotes the well-being of children and families in the U.S. In 1983 the center for the child was established in the United States .
 The structure, also called the Wailing Wall, is all that remains of the Jews holy Temple from Biblical times . The structure is also known as the "Wailing Wall"
 During Biblical times, the Hebrews—who came to be called Israelites—lived in what is now Israel . The Hebrews came to Israel in Biblical times .
 Jews scattered throughout the world. But their country fell to a series of conquerors, and the Jews scattered .
 By the A.D. 700's, they had established communities as far west as Spain and as far east as China .
 The Hebrew Bible is a cornerstone of two world religions, Christianity and Islam . It was produced by the Bible's founders, Moses Moses, Moses and Moses . The Bible's belief in one God and its moral teachings was the basis of Christianity and Islamic religion .
 Jews were a minority group almost everywhere they settled, and they often suffered persecution . The Jews were often persecuted in many of their settlements .
 During World War II, about 6 million Jews died in the Nazi campaign of mass murder known as the Holocaust . About 6 million people were killed in the Holocaust, including 6 million children .
 Beginning in the late 1800's, many Jews from Eastern Europe immigrated to Israel, then called Palestine . Israel was then known as Palestine .
 Because of the long and varied history of the Jews, it is difficult to define a Jew . The Jewish community has a long history of its own history, including the Holocaust .
 Jewish identity is a mixture of religious, historical, and ethnic factors . Jews identify themselves as Jews . Jews are Jewish people who identify themselves through religious and historical factors .
 According to Jewish law, anyone born to a Jewish mother or converted to Judaism is considered a Jew . Anyone born to Judaism or converted is considered to be a Jew by law .
 Ashkenazim are descendants of members of Jewish communities of central and Eastern Europe . Most Ashkenaziim descendents of Jews in central and eastern Europe . Ashkenazarim are Ashkenasim .
 Sephardim are descendants of Jews from Spain, Portugal, or other Mediterranean countries and the Middle East . Sephardims are descendants from Spain or Portugal and the Mideast region .
 Other groups of Jews include those descended from Jewish communities of Ethiopia and India . Jews descended from Ethiopian and Indian communities .
 The largest Jewish population in the U.S. lives in the United States . About 6 million people live in the country .
 Other countries with large numbers of Jews include France, Russia, Britain, Canada, Canada and Argentina . Israel is one of the world's largest Jewish communities .
 This article traces the history of the Jewish people throughout the world . Jewish people have lived in the Middle Ages and throughout Europe .
 According to the Bible, God told Abraham to leave Mesopotamia and settle in Canaan, the area that later became Israel . The Bible says Abraham was told by God to move to Canaan and settle there .
 Abraham, his son Isaac, and his grandson Jacob—also named Israel— are the patriarchs of the Jewish people . Abraham and Isaac are Abraham, Isaac, Isaac and Jacob, also named Israel .
 By order of birth, they were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Levi and Judah, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Joseph .
 During the early centuries of their history, the Hebrews were organized into groups that traced their descent to Jacob’s sons . The Hebrews trace their descent from Jacob's sons .
 The Bible describes how Jacob's son Joseph was sold into slavery in Egypt . Joseph's son was sold to Egypt in 18th century .
 Joseph's wisdom and honesty enabled him to become prime minister to the Egyptian pharaoh . Joseph's honesty and honesty allowed him to be prime minister . Joseph was the Egyptian king's most successful king .
 The Israelites lived peacefully in Egypt for many vests until a new pharaoh enslaved them . The Israelite lived peacefully for many years in Egypt until a pharaoh freed them .
 The Bible tells how a leader named Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt . The Bible says Moses led them out of the country .
 The Jewish festival of Passover celebrates their deliverance, called the Exodus . Passover is a Jewish festival celebrating the deliverance of the Exodus, the Exodus.
 According to tradition, God dictated His laws to Moses in a collection of teachings called the Torah after the Israelites left Egypt . The laws were passed on to Moses by Moses, Moses' son Moses .
 The Bible says that after receiving the Torah, the Israelites wandered in the wilderness for 40 years . The Israelites are said to have wandered for more than 40 years before they received the Torah .
 Moses died before his people entered Canaan, but his successor, Joshua, led them into their old homeland . Joshua led the people into Canaan, leading them to the old homeland of Canaan .
 Judges served as judicial and military leaders who united the Israelites in times of crisis . Judges were Judges of Israelites who united them during times of crises . Judges are Judges of Judges of the Bible, Judges of Abraham Abraham Abrahams, Moses Moses and Moses .
 Saul was king of the Israelites in 1029 B.C. The Israelites chose a king to lead them against the Philistines . Saul was the Israelite king of Saul .
 Saul's successor, David, unified the people and founded the kingdom of Israel . Saul’s successor, King David, was the son of Saul . David unified the Israel with the people .
 David and his successor Solomon grew in size and power under Solomon . David and Solomon were the first king of the Bible's kingdom .
 David captured Jerusalem from a people called the Jebusites and made it his capital . David captured the city of Jerusalem from the Jebuites and became its capital .
 The Temple, known today as the First Temple, served as the center of religious life . The Temple was known as the first Temple, and is now known as First Temple .
 About 1000 B.C. they united to form the King4 dom of Israel, later called Judah or Judea . The King4 Dom of Israel was later known as the King of Israel .
 The southern tribes kept Jerusalem as their capital and called their kingdom Judah . They called the kingdom Judah and called it Judah .
 In the kingdom of Israel, there were struggles for power between various families . In the Bible, Israel was ruled out of power by its rulers .
 During this period, religious teachers called prophets developed many of the principles of Judaism . During this time, religious . teachers developed many . principles of Jewish law .
 The Bible contains the teachings of the major prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and 12 minor prophets . The Bible's teachings are based on teachings of three major prophets .
 Unlike the ten lost tribes, the people of Judah did not lose their identity . The people of the ten tribes lost their identity, but they still retain their identities .
 Inspired by prophet Ezekiel, they continued to practice their religion . Inspired by the prophet Ezekiel they continued their religion. They were inspired by Ezekiel .
 Many Jews returned and rebuilt the Temple, which became known as the Second Temple . The Second Temple was built in the area known as Jerusalem .
 This was the first time since the Exodus that Jews had chosen to live outside Israel . Jews chose to leave Israel for Israel for the very first time in their lives .
 Later, the communities of Jews scattered outside Israel became known as the Diaspora . The communities of Jewish communities scattered outside of Israel are now known as Diasporations .
 Alexander and his successors, the Ptolemies in Egypt and the Seleucids in Syria, brought Hellenistic culture to the Jews . Alexander's successors brought the Hellenism to the Jewish community .
 The Jews, led by the warrior Judah Maccabee, revolted and overthrew the Syrians . The Jews led the revolt against the Syrians in the Bible . The revolt was led by a Jewish warrior known as the Jewish leader of Israel .
 Judah Maccabee’s family, the Hasmoneans, established an independent state that lasted about 80 years . The Hasmonean family established a state of independent Israel in 18th century . The state of Israel lasted 80 years and lasted about eight years .
 The divided kingdom resulted from a split in the 900's B.C. between Israel in the north and Judah in the south . Israel was ruled by Judah and Israel was divided in the 9th century . Judah was the most populous kingdom in the Bible, with Israel in north and south
 The groups disagreed over such matters as the ora/ /aw—the traditional interpretation of the Torah . The groups also disagreed over whether or a//aw is the traditional interpretation .
 The Pharisees believed God had revealed the oral law along with the Torah . The oral law was believed to be the law of the Bible and the law itself .
 Pharisees taught in synagogues and were supported by the common people, according to the Bible . Pharisee was supported by people who believed in their faith .
 The Sadducees accepted only the Torah and found support among the rich and the temple priests . They were also supported by the priests and the rich .
 A third group, the Essenes, stressed personal holiness through strict rules that included the sharing of property in communities apart from society . The Essenes were the most devout Christians in the world, with strict rules on property sharing .
 In 63 B.C., the Romans conquered Judah, which they called Judea . Judea is now known as Judea, or Judean .
 Herod the Great is the most famous ruler of Judea during this time . He is known for both his ruthlessness and his building activities . Herod the great was known for his ruthless tendencies .
 The Romans executed Jesus because they thought he was a threat to their rule . Jesus was executed by the Romans at the time of his death . Romans executed him because he was considered a threat .
 Most Jews kept their traditional beliefs and did not accept Jesus as the Messiah . Most Jews believed Jesus was the Messiah, but accepted him as Jesus Christ .
 In 70, the Roman general Titus conquered Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple, and took many Jewish captives to Rome . But in 70, Titus took many of the Jewish captives back to Rome, taking many of them to the city of Rome .
 The Western, or Wailing, Wall in Jerusalem is all that remains of the Temple . The Western Wall is the last vestiges of the temple .
 Some Jews, called Zealots, refused to surrender even after Jerusalem fell . Some Jews refused to give up even after the city fell .
 As the Romans were about to conquer the fortress, the defenders supposedly committed suicide rather than surrender . The defenders of the fortress are said to have committed suicide .
 After the defeat of Bar Kokhba, the Romans prohibited Jews from living in Jerusalem . Jews were not allowed to live in Jerusalem during the Romans rule .
 New centers of Jewish learning arose in Galilee, an area in northern Palestine; and Babylonia .
 In about 200, the head of the Sanhedrin, Rabbi Judah ha-Nasi, wrote down the oral law in a book called the Mishnah . The Mishnah was published in about 200 .
 For many centuries, Jews throughout the world turned to the Babylonian Jewish community for religious and scholarly leadership . For centuries, Jewish leaders turned to Babylonian Jews for religious leadership .
 Jews sent questions to scholars at Babylonian academies called yeshivas . Jews asked questions of law and interpretation to scholars . Jews sent them to yeshiva academies in Babylonian cities .
 Saadia Gaon lived in the late 800’s and early 900’''s . The greatest scholar was Saadia .
 Arabian Muslims founded an empire that soon included southwestern Asia, northern Africa, and Spain . In the mid-600's, Arabian Muslims ruled southwestern Asia and northern Africa . The empire included Spain, Morocco, Spain, and southern Africa .
 Muslims allowed Jews and Christians to practice their own religions . Muslims permitted Jews, Christians and Jews to practise their own religion . Muslims allowed Christians, Jews, Jews to practice themselves .
 Both Jews and Christians had to pay a special tax and were not equal to Muslims under the law . Muslims were not allowed to pay the same tax as Jews or Christians . The law was passed by Muslims in the 1930s .
 Large Jewish communities existed in such Muslim lands as Babylonia, Egypt, Morocco, and Yemen . Large Jewish settlements existed in Babylonian, Egypt and Morocco .
 The period from the 900’s to the 1100's in Spain is known as the Golden Age of Jewish history . The period between the 900's and the 1100s in Spain was known as 'The Golden Age'
 Jews worked in crafts, in medicine and science, and in business and commerce . Jews also worked in craft and medicine . Jews were also involved in science and medicine, and business .
 Outstanding writers of the time included Moses Maimonides, Solomon ibn Gabirol, and Judah Halevi .
 After the fall of the Roman Empire, the Christian Church became the most powerful force in Europe . The Christian Church is now the largest force in the world .
 In the early Middle Ages, the Jews lived fairly peacefully with their Christian neighbors . Jews lived peacefully with Christian neighbors in the Middle Ages . Jews and Christians lived peacefully for centuries .
 Some Christians blamed Jews for the death of Jesus and mistrusted them because they would not accept Christianity . But some Christians blamed the Jews for Jesus' death and mistusted them .
 The situation of the Jews became worse beginning in 1096, when a series of military expeditions called the Crusades began . The Crusades were a military campaign of 1096 against Jews .
 The campaigns to free the Holy Land from the Muslims stirred a wave of intense feeling against non-Christians . These campaigns to . free . the Holy land from Muslims stirred . intense feelings against non .Christians.
 Crusaders killed many Jews and sometimes massacred entire Jewish communities . Crusaders massacred many Jewish communities in Crusades .
 In the mid-1300’s, a terrible plague, now known as the Black Death, swept Europe, killing from a fourth to half of the population . The Black Death was a plague that killed a fourth of Europe's population, killing up to half .
 Many Christians unfairly blamed the Jews for the Black Death, and mobs killed thousands of Jews . Many Christians wrongly blamed Jews for Black Death .
 Christians commonly accused Jews of murdering Christian children as part of their religious rituals . Christians often accuse Jews of murder of children during religious rites . Jews were accused of murdering Christians during religious rituals, but Christians were never accused Jews .
 This accusation, known as the blood libel, was used as an excuse to attack Jews . It became known as 'blood libel' and was used by the Jewish community to attack .
 Political and religious leaders required Jews in certain areas to wear badges or special clothes that identified them as Jews . Jewish leaders often required Jews to wear special clothes or badges to identify them .
 In numerous cities, Jews were forced to live in separate communities that became known as ghettos . Jews were able to live separate communities in cities such as New York and Washington .
 Beginning in the late 1200's, Jews were expelled from England, France, and parts of central Europe . Jews expelled from parts of Europe in the 1200's .
 Some Jews in Spain and Portugal pretended to convert to Christianity but continued to practice Judaism secretly . To avoid persecution, some Jews in the countries pretended to be Christians .
 Ferdinand and Isabella, the king and queen of Spain, established a special court called the /nquisition to punish people suspected of not following Christian teachings . The court was established to punish those who did not follow Christian teaching .
 The Inquisition used torture to force confessions from its victims, many of whom were Marranos . The Inquisition was known for its use of torture, torture and torture .
 Jews who had not converted to Christianity were expelled from Spain in 1492 . Jews who did not convert to Christianity had not been allowed to leave Spain . In 1492, Jews who were not converted were expelled .
 In the 1500's, a movement called the Reformation led to the development of Protestantism in Europe . In the 15th century, the Protestant movement led to Protestantism .
 When Jews failed to convert to the new branch of Christianity, persecution continued . persecution continued when they did not convert to Christianity . The Jews were persecuted for not converting to Christianity in the Bible .
 In 1648 and 1649, the massacre of thousands of Jews in Ukraine, then a part of Poland, began a time of crisis for Polish Jews . Thousands of Jews were killed in the 1648-1649 massacre .
 Hundreds of thousands of Jews in Europe and the Middle East believed in Shabbetai . Hundreds of Jews believed in the concept of the day .
 Throughout Jewish history, learning and study had formed the foundation of Jewish life and culture . Learning and study was the foundation for Jewish life, culture .
 In the mid-1700's, a movement called Hasidism developed among Jews of Eastern Europe . The movement developed among Eastern Europe's Jews .
 Hasidism was founded by a Polish teacher known as Ba‘al Shem Tov . It stressed joyful worship over the study of the Talmud . Hasidicism is a form of Judaism that stresses joyful worship .
 Opponents of Hasidism, called Mitnaggedim, considered noisy praying and dancing undignified . Opponents considered Hasidicism’s noisy praying, dancing and dancing . Hasidists are considered to be the most conservative Hasidim sect .
 Today, some Jews in Europe, Israel, and the United States still practice Hasidism .
 At about the time that Hasidism developed in Eastern Europe, a movement called the Haska/ah arose in Western Europe . The movement arose in the early 1900s .
 The Haskalah was founded by German Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn . It called on Jews to modernize their religious thinking . The modernist movement was founded in Germany in 1925 .
 The movement stressed the importance of nonreligious, as well as Jewish, education . Jewish education is important in Jewish communities .
 As the Haskalah modernized Jewish religious thinking, other forces were working to free the Jews from discrimination . Jews were freed from discrimination in the 1930s .
 In France, the ideas of liberty and equality that took hold during the French Revolution (17891799) led many Christians to demand equal rights for all . Many Christians demanded equal rights in France .
 By the end of the 1800's, most Western and Central European Jews had been emancipated . Most Western European Jews were emancipulated . The emancipation of Jews is a form of emancipation .
 During the early and mid-1800's, two new branches of Judaism developed . During the 1800's, the Jewish community was split into two separate branches .
 During the Revolutionary War in America (17751783), many Jews fought in the colonial army . Many Jews fought for the British government in the 17th century . Jews were also involved in the American Revolution .
 Haym Salomon gave much of his fortune to help the newly established U.S. government . Salomon was a Jewish financier who helped establish the United States .
 Jews gained full legal equality in the new nation, and many Jews immigrated to escape anti-Semitism in their native lands . Jews gained legal equality and many immigrated from their native countries .
 By the 1920's, U.S. Jews were the largest and most secure Jewish community in the world, though they still suffered discrimination .
 Anti-Semitism became a powerful force in European politics during the late 1800's . Anti-Semitic anti-Semitism was a powerful factor in Europe's politics, especially in Germany and Austria .
 Anti-Semitic writers tried to prove that Jews were inferior to Germans and other peoples of northern Europe, whom the writers called Aryans . Many anti-Semitic works were published in the late 19th century .
 Unlike Jews of Western Europe, those of the east had never been emancipated . Unlike the Jews of . Western Europe . Europe's Jews of the . east had . never been emancipationated .
 In Russia, Jews were crowded in an area along the western border called the Pale of Settlement . Jews crowded in the area along Russia's western border . Jews were also crowded in areas known as the Pale .
 Beginning in 1881, many Jews were killed in a series of massacres called pogroms . The massacres were known as pograms . Jews were murdered in the massacres known as 'pograms'
 The pogroms caused hundreds of thousands of Jews to flee to the United States . Hundreds of thousands fled to the U.S. in the aftermath .
 Many Jews saw an independent Jewish state in Palestine as the best escape from anti-Semitism . Israel was the only Jewish state to escape anti-Semitic attacks .
 In the late 1800s, Palestine was a poor, thinly populated region ruled by the Turkish Ottoman Empire . In the 1800s it was a thinly populated area of Palestine .
 The Zionist movement grew out of the Jews’ longing for a national homeland . Most of its people were Mus Mus Mus, most of them Jewish .
 Zionists bought Jand in Palestine and established farming communities . Jand was established by the Zionists in the early 1900s . It was the first of its kind in Palestine .
 In 1894, the trial of Alfred Dreyfus, a French army officer and Jew, helped convince Theodor Herzl, an Austrian Jewish journalist, that Jews could never be secure until they had a nation .
 In 1897, at the First Zionist Congress, Herzl organized the Zionist movement on a worldwide scale . Herzl was inspired by the idea of Zionism in 1897 .
 During World War 1, many Jews in Palestine fought with the British against the Ottomans . During WWI many Jews fought with British against Ottoman Turks in Palestine .
 In 1917, Britain issued the Balfour Declaration, supporting the idea of a Jewish national home in Palestine .
 The League of Nations gave Britain temporary control of Palestine in 1920 . The League was a precursor to the United Nations .
 In the 1920's and 1930's, Jewish immigration to Palestine increased, despite Arab opposition . Arab opposition to Jewish immigration increased in the 1920s and 1930s . In the 1930s and 1940s, Jewish immigrants increased in Palestine .
 Germany's defeat in World War and a worldwide depression in the 1930's left the German economy in ruins . Many Germans were angry and resentful after their economy was left in ruins in Germany .
 He blamed the Jews for Germany's troubles and began a vicious campaign against them . He blamed them for the country's troubles . He began a campaign against the Jews .
 Depression led workers to fear that Jewish refugees would take their jobs . Most nations had restrictive immigration policies, and workers feared that they would be taken jobs .
 Beginning in 1939, Britain bowed to Arab pressure and limited immigration to Palestine . The Holocaust was a vicious campaign against the Jews and others by the Nazis .
 Pictures show piles of bodies at Dachau concentration camp after it was liberated in 1945 . The camp was one of the largest concentration camps in Nazi Germany .
 Israel's declaration of independence in 1948 led to the first Arab-Israeli war . Israel declared independence from Israel in 1948, which led to Arab-Arab conflict .
 Hours after David Ben-Gurion read the declaration, Arab forces invaded Israel . The declaration was read by David Ben Gurion, who was in charge of the army .
 The Nazis soon conquered large parts of Europe, bringing most European Jews under their domination . Most European Jews were under the Nazis .
 By 1945, about 6 million Jews had been murdered—two of every three European Jews . About 6 million people were murdered in Europe .
 Several Jewish revolts against the Nazis took place in ghettos, slave labor camps, and death camps . Several revolts took place during the Nazi regime in Nazi Germany .
 Jews were surrounded and poorly armed, some held out for about four weeks . Although the Jews held out, they were surrounded by a small group of men and women .
 Many Jews who managed to escape the ghettos joined bands of fighters called partisans who performed acts of sabotage . Many Jews managed to leave the ghetto to join the partisans .
 In most occupied countries, the local people were indifferent to the Holocaust . The Holocaust was a major source of Holocaust denial in Nazi Germany .
 The Danish underground saved | 7,000 Jews, most of the Jews of Denmark . The Danish Jewish community was saved by the underground . The underground saved more than a third of Denmark's Jews .
 The Holocaust left the Jewish people wounded in spirit and greatly reduced in numbers . Jewish people were left wounded and reduced in spirit by the Holocaust . The Holocaust was the only major Jewish settlement in Europe .
 Out of the tragedy came a new determination to establish a Jewish state in Palestine . The tragedy came from the tragedy of the Second World War .
 The Arabs there continued to oppose this plan, and violence often broke out between Arabs and Jews . The Arabs continued to opposed this plan .
 U.N. recommended that Palestine be divided into Arab and Jewish states . In 1947, the United Nations recommended that the Arab-Jewish state of Palestine be split .
 Israel declared its independence on May 14, 1948 . The Jewish state, which called itself Israel, declared itself Israel in 1948 .
 Israel defeated the invaders, and hundreds of thousands of Jews flocked to the Jewish state . Israel became Israel in 1948, and Israel became the nation of Israel .
 The Arabs continued to oppose Israel, and full-scale wars broke out in 1956, 1967, and 1973 . The Arab Spring was the first Arab-Arab conflict to break out in Israel .
 Israel is one of the most prosperous countries in the Middle East . Despite its constant struggle with its neighbors, Israel kept a democratic form of government . Israel became one of its most prosperous states in the region .
 Today, Jewish life continues to thrive, both in Israel and in the Diaspora . Jewish life is thriving in Israel, both Israel and Diasporations .
 The Jews of Israel still face the threat of conflict with neighboring Arab states . The Jews face the same threat as Arab nations in the Middle East .
 Israel must confront social, military, and moral issues stemming from conflict with Palestinian Arabs . Israel must also confront conflict with Palestinians living in lands occupied by Israel . Palestinians must confront the social, moral, and military issues stemming out of conflict .
 Among the most recent immigrants are hundreds of thousands of Jews from Russia, Ukraine, and other former republics of the Soviet Union . Jews from the former Soviet Union have been in Israel for decades .
 The large number of immigrants has led to overcrowding and unemployment in the area . The large numbers of immigrants is leading to overcrowded and unemployment .
 For many years, the main centers of Jewish life in the Diaspora were the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United States and Soviet Union were the two main centers for Jewish life .
 The government discouraged religious practice, and it restricted emigration to other countries . It also discouraged emigration from other countries.
 In the 1970's and 1980's, Soviet Jews attracted worldwide attention with demonstrations demanding the right to emigrate and to observe Jewish customs . In the 70's and 80's, demonstrations were held in the Soviet Union .
 In 1987, the government began to permit an increasing number of jews to emigrate to Israel . In 1987 the government allowed an increase in jews emigrating from Israel .
 Jews continued to move to Israel from former Soviet republics after the Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991 . Jews moved to Israel in the wake of the collapse of Soviet Union .
 Jews have increasingly adopted the culture of the non-Jewish society in which they live in the U.S. In the United States, Jews have become more accepting of non-Jewy society .
 Some Jews fear that assimilation will cause Jews to lose their identity . Some fear that this process, called assimilation, will cause them to lose identity . Jews fear the process will lead them to assimilate .
 Many American Jews are experiencing a renewed interest in their heritage . But many other American Jews have experienced a new interest in heritage .
 A growing number worship in religious groups called Aavurot . Many send their children to Jewish day schools .
 See Israel, Judaism, and Palestine and their lists of Related articles . See Israel and Palestine for more details .
 Jew's-harp is a small musical instrument that is used mainly in folk music and by children . It is used by folk musicians and children . The instrument is used for folk music .
 The jews-harp consists of a flexible, metallic reed at one end of a curved metal frame . A flexible, metal reed is placed on the end of the curved, flexible metal frame.
 Other end of the reed is tapered and bent forward at a right angle . The other end of a reed has a right-arrowed edge .
 Players hold metal frame against their lips and make the reed vibrate by hitting its forked end with their free hand . Players hold the metal frame and make it vibrate with their hand to vibrate .
 Players are able to produce different notes by changing the size and shape of the mouth cavity . Different notes can be produced by players changing the shape of their mouth cavities .
 Musical instruments similar to the jew’s-harp have been Cameramann International, Ltd. Musical instruments such as the jew's-harp have been used in the past . Cameramans International, Limited.
 The jews-harp consists of a flexible metal strip within a metal frame . Caryle Calvin is the creator of the jewsarp, which is made from a flexible strip of metal .
 A player holds the frame in the mouth and creates musical notes by striking the metal strip with the finger . found in various parts of the world, including Borneo, China, Japan, and Siberia .
 The jews-harp has been played in China since the 1100's and in Europe since the 1300's . It has been used in China and Europe since 1100's .
 Valerie Woodring Goertzen Jiang Qing, jee ahng cheeng, also spelled Chiang Ching, was a Chinese political leader . She was also known as the leader of China's Second Communist Party .
 She was married to Mao Zedong, Chinas top political leader, from about 1939 until Mao's death in 1976 . She was also married to the Chinese leader, who died in 1976, Mao's wife .
 Many Chinese dramas and operas were rewritten so that they presented examples of the changes in Chinese government and Chinese society favored by Mao . Under Jiang’s leadership, many dramas were rewritten to present examples of changes in government and society .
 In 1969, she was elected to the Politburo, the most powerful ruling body of China . She is one of China's most powerful political leaders .
 After Mao's death, Hua Guofeng and Deng Xiaoping became China’s main leaders . After Mao died, they became the country's main leaders. After Mao’d death, they were the main leaders of China .
 The government referred to Jiang and her followers by the scornful name of the Gang of Four . Jiang's followers were referred to as the 'Gang of Four' by the government .
 It accused the Gang of Four of failing to follow Mao’s teachings and of harming China's development . It also accused them of not following Mao's teachings .
 In 1980, the government charged them with treason and put them on trial . They were put on trial for treason in 1980, but were acquitted .
 Jiang and Zhang were sentenced to life imprisonment in January 1983 . In January 1983, the sentences of the pair were reduced to life sentences .
 Jiang succeeded Zhao Ziyang, who was dismissed as general secretary for supporting a prodemocracy movement in 1989 . Zhao was dismissed by the party for supporting the pro-democracy movement . Jiang succeeded as general general secretary of the party .
 This movement involved large demonstrations by students and other citizens in which many people were killed by Chinese troops . This movement was led by students, other citizens .
 In 1990, he succeeded Deng as chairman of the Chinese government's Central Military Commission . He succeeded Deng in 1990, when he succeeded him as head of the country's military council .
 Deng resigned from these posts to strengthen Jiang’s ties to the military, which is dominant in Chinese politics . Deng resigned to strengthen his ties to Jiang's ties with the military . Deng is a former member of the Communist Party of China .
 Jiang was named to the largely ceremonial government post of president in 1993 . In 1993, Jiang became president of China . Jiang is a former president of the country .
 He was appointed mayor of Shanghai in 1985 and proved to be an effective leader . He has been in charge of Shanghai since 1985 .
 The jicama plant is cultivated in Mexico, Central America, China, and India . It is also cultivated in Central America and China .
 It is a legume and bears seeds in pods . It is also called yam bean and Mexican turnip .
 The tubers are either round like beets or long and slender like icicles . They are either long or slender, round or round, like icicle-shaped tubers .
 The tubers of jicama plants are rich in calcium, iron, vitamin C, and protein . Jicama tubers are high in vitamin C and calcium .
 Rotenone is a natural insecticide, and so jicama plants resist insect attack . Rotenones is used in plants to protect plants from insect attacks . Jicama is a plant that resists insect attacks by eating it .
 Jidda, //H duh , is the chief seaport and air terminal of Saudi Arabia . It is located in Saudi Arabia's capital city, Jedda .
 Jidda is the gateway to the Muslim holy cities of Mecca and Medina . It is also spelled Jeddah and Juddah . Jiddah is also known as Juddah, Juddah.
 Muslim pilgrims pass through Jidda on their sacred journeys to these cities . Muslim pilgrims from throughout the world pass through the holy city .
 Today, Saudi Arabia is one of Saudi Arabia's major business and industrial centers . Today, the city has become one of its major business centers .
 The city’s most important industries include oil refining, paper manufacturing, and shipbuilding .
 King Abdul Aziz International Airport, one of the world’s largest airports, serves Jidda . The airport is located in the city of Saudi Arabia, Saudi Arabia .
 Jim Crow refers to practices, institutions, or laws that result from or support segregation of blacks from whites . Jim Crow is a term used to refer to practices that resulted in or supported segregation of whites .
 The term came into common use in the 1880's, when racial segregation was made legal in many parts of the Southern U.S. States .
 The term originally referred to a black character in a popular song composed in the 1830's . The term was originally used to refer to a character in the song .
 Most of these laws were declared invalid by several Supreme Court decisions in the 1950's and 1960's and by the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1968 . However, most of the laws have been declared invalid .
 Juan Ramon, Spanish poet, won the 1956 Nobel Prize for literature . Jiménez, hee MAY nayth, was Spanish poet .
 His poems were identified with the literary movement called modernism because of their elegant style and profound emotion . He was identified with modernism .
 Jiménez’s poetry reflects his belief in . the simplicity of nature and an awareness of God's eter— nal presence, he says .
 Jiménez constantly revised his poems, and his works greatly influenced later poets . His works often influenced other poets .
 A good introduction to Jiménezs poetry is Forty Poems, translated in 1967 by the American poet Robert Bly . The poet's work was published in 1967 .
 In his most famous work, Platero and 1, the poet chats with his donkey, reminiscing about life in the village of Moguer, where he was born . Jiménez was born in Moguer .
 He created lyrical descriptions that were transformed into perceptive prose poetry . His work was translated into prose poetry.
 Dick Gerdes Jiménez de Quesada, hee MAY nayth duh duh kay SAH thah, Gonzalo, gawn THAH /oh, was a Spanish conqueror . Gonzalo was a Spaniard .
 He established the first Spanish set tlement in the interior of what is now the South American nation of Colombia .
 By 1538, Quesada’s party had defeated the Indians and gained control over the area . The party was able to take control of the area in 1538 .
 From 1569 to 1572, he went to eastern Colombia to search for E] Dorado, a fictitious kingdom of great wealth . He was in eastern Colombia from 1569-1572 .
 Jimmu Tenno, also called /immu, was supposedly the first emperor of Japan and founder of the family that has ruled Japan throughout its history . He is believed to have been the first Japanese emperor .
 Folk tales say he led a force of men from Kyushu in southwestern Japan to Yamato . The area surrounding Nara and Osaka is said to be Yamato, the area surrounding Osaka .
 The tales are not wholly true, but a force from the southwest did form a government in Yamato .
 Jimson weed, also called thorn apple, is a large, bushy, poisonous plant . The thorn apple is also a large bushy plant .
 It grows throughout North America and is common in the central part of the U.S. It grows in central parts of the country .
 The jimson weed reaches a height of 5 feet (1.m) and has erect white or violet trumpet-shaped flowers about 4 inches long . The weed has white or blue flowers about four inches long and is called a "Jimson Weed"
 The jimson weed is a large, bushy poisonous plant . It's a large bushy, poisonous plant that is thought to be the largest in the world .
 The drug Stramonine, also called daturine, is made from the leaves and seeds of the jimson weed . The drug is also known as Stromonine .
 The name jimsonis a popular shortening of Jamestown, which was an early Virginia settlement . The name is a popular shortened version of the name of the early Virginia town .
 The British government hesitated to interfere in a war between Russia and Turkey . Benjamin Disraeli was the prime minister of the British government .
 We dont want to fight, But, by jingo, if we do, we've got the ships, Weve got the men, we're got the money, too . We've got a ship, men, money, and ships, too. We're not going to fight
 The same attitude of militant superiority toward other nations was called spread-eagleism in the U.S. during the 1800's . The attitude was similar to that of spreading eagleism .
 Jinnah, //HN nuh, Mohammad Ali, was a leader in India’s struggle for independence . He has been called the great leader and the founder of Pakistan . Jinnah was born in Pakistan .
 Jinnah was the first governor general of Pakistan when it was created in 1947 . Jinnah became the first president of the country when Pakistan was created as a Muslim majority nation .
 Jinnah became permanent president of the Muslim ‘League of India’ in 1934 . Jinnah was the leader of the League of India . He was the first Muslim leader in India to become permanent president .
 Jinnah began demanding a separate Muslim state in 1940 because he feared that the Hindu majority would dominate an independent India . Jinnah feared that he would be the first Muslim state to become independent India in 1947 .
 Jinrikisha is a light two-wheeled cart once widely used as a taxicab in East Asian cities . It is once used as an East Asian taxi in many cities .
 The jinrikisha usually had a top, or hood, to protect passengers from the weather . It was also known as a top or hood for passengers .
 The runner, or hiki, often pulled an occupied jinrikisha 20 to 30 miles a day . The runner often pulled the hiki out of an occupied hiki to pull an occupied runner . The hiki was often pulled out of a hiki at the time of the
 The use of jinrikishas was declared illegal in many Chinese cities because authorities felt using ‘human horses’ was undignified . Authorities felt using "human horses" was a form of disrespect .
 Jivaro Indians, HEF vuh roh, are a tribe famous for their fierceness and for their head shrinking . The tribe is known for their fierce fighting spirit .
 They live in tropical forests on the eastern slopes of the Andes Mountains in Ecuador . The Andes mountains are located in the eastern part of Ecuador .
 Although the Jivaro are spoken of as a tribe, they are split into many small groups which used to fight among themselves . They are not a tribe but a group of small groups of people who fight among them .
 Jivaro Indians are a South American people who live in the tropical forests of Ecuador . In early times, they lived like tropical-forest Indi128 Joan of Arc .
 The Jivaro fished with traps and with barbasco, a drug that stupefies fish so they can be speared easily . The drug is used to make fish easier to speared .
 Inca of Peru probably taught the Jivaro how to keep llamas and guinea pigs . Inca also taught the Inca how to maintain llamas, guinea pig .
 A typical Jivaro village had only one large dwelling, which housed 40 to 80 people . A typical village was only one dwelling, housed 40-80 people .
 The Jivaro were famous warriors who fought mainly to avenge the death of a relative . They were mainly warriors mainly fighting for avenge a relative's death .
 "Most of them have given up warfare and live peaceably among themselves and with their neighbors" Most of them live peaceable among themselves, with neighbors .
 Joan of Arc was a French national hero who became a saint of the Roman Catholic Church . Joan became a French saint in the 17th century . Joan was a member of the French Resistance .
 She was a simple peasant girl who rescued France from defeat in one of the darkest periods of the Hundred Years’ War .
 Her first great triumph was to lead a French army against the English who had laid siege to the city of Orléans . She led the French army to defeat the English in the French Revolution .
 She has often been called the Maid of Orléans in honor of that victory in France . She has also been called The Maid of the Orleans .
 Jeanne d‘Arc, as she was known in France, was born at Domrémy, near Nancy . Jeanne d'Arc was born in France in 17th century .
 She grew up as a devout Catholic under the strong influence of her deeply religious mother . She was raised in a loving Catholic family .
 Some historians believe Joan may have been a c/airvoyant . Joan's knowledge of events happening far away or in the future without using any of the five senses . Joan is believed to have known events far away and far in future .
 Joan was having religious visions and hearing what she believed were the voices of saints at the age of 13 . Joan believed she had visions of saints and heard voices from saints .
 Joan believed God had chosen her to help King Charles VII of France drive the English from French soil . Joan believed she had been chosen by God to help Charles VII defeat the English in France .
 She went to the town of Vaucouleurs to ask the military commander for an escort because she had to see the king . She had to ask for a military escort because of her desire to see him .
 Much of southern France had recognized young King Charles VII as their ruler since 1422 . Charles VII was King of France from 1422 to 1483 .
 His enemies, the English and the Burgundians, controlled Paris and the northern part of France . The English and Burgundian controlled Paris, but his enemies controlled Paris .
 Charles had never been crowned, because the city of Reims, where French kings were crowned, lay in enemy territory . Charles never was crowned because of the city's position in Reims . Charles was not crowned because he was not king of the French .
 "The quarrels of his advisers paralyzed his government, and the treasury was empty," he says . "In addition, the quarrels . of his . advisers paralyzed him, and his government was empty. In addition, he said, "the quarrels ... paralyzed his . government,
 If the English captured Orléans, Charles's position would be desperate . Charles would be in a desperate position .
 His situation was so hopeless that he was willing to listen to the young girl who had arrived at his castle in Chinon claiming to have heard the voices of saints . The young girl had arrived in the town of Chinon, Chinon .
 Slipping into the ranks of his courtiers, he let one of his nobles occupy the throne . Slipped into his ranks of courtiers and became a courtier .
 Joan, however, was not deceived, and quickly identified Charles as her king . Joan was not fooled by the deception, but quickly identified him .
 When she told him exactly what he had asked God when he prayed alone, he realized she had unusual powers . She told him what he'd asked her to do .
 People at that time often feared such powers were the work of the devil . People at the time feared that such powers would be the work .
 Charles gave Joan armor, a banner, and the command of troops . But members of the clergy accepted Joan's beliefs, so Charles gave her armor and a banner .
 Joan set out with her army in April 1429 to rescue Orléans from the English . Joan's army set out to rescue the city of Orléan from the French . Joan died in 1429 .
 They soon realized that all went well when they followed her orders . However, they soon realized they had to follow their orders .
 Joan's forces broke the siege of Orléans in only 10 days, and the English fled . Joan was able to break the siege in less than 10 days .
 Joan of Arc believed that God had chosen her to free her country from English rule for a coronation . After this victory, she persuaded Charles of the need for her coronation.
 To a deeply religious person like Joan, Charles was not a true king until he was crowned in the cathedral at Reims . To Joan, he said: "I am not a king until I am crowned in Reims"
 She led Charles and his military escort through enemy territory . Her troops defeated the English in several battles along the way . Charles died in 1777 .
 Joan entered the city in triumph and stood beside Charles when he was crowned king on July 17, 1429 . Joan was the first woman to be crowned king of Spain .
 After the coronation, Joan became anxious to free Paris from English control . Joan was anxious to release Paris from French control .
 The king doubted her chance of success at this time, but he allowed her to make an attempt on Paris . Joan was able to make a successful attempt to get to Paris .
 The English were determined not to give her up to the French . Although important prisoners could bring high ransoms, the English were not prepared to hand her over .
 Despite bullying of her English captors, she continued to insist that her visions and voices had come from God . Despite the bullying, she insisted that her British captors were God .
 A tribunal of French clergy sympathetic to the English sentenced her to death . However, a tribunal of the French clergy had her executed . She was sentenced to death by a French tribunal sympathetic to English .
 Joan was burned at the stake before a large crowd in Rouen, France, on May 30, 1431 . Joan died in 1431 at the hands of her family members . Joan's daughter Joan was also burned at stake .
 Her courageous death led many to fear that they had witnessed the martyrdom of a saint . Her death led to the death of many who feared she had been a martyr .
 Joan's ashes were thrown into the Seine River in France . Joan's remains were thrown in the river because she was a heretic . Joan was not allowed to receive a Christian burial .
 Joan's family asked for a new trial to reconsider the charges against Joan . Joan died in 1455 . Joan was accused of witchcraft in 1454 .
 Beatification is a preliminary step toward canonization in the Roman Catholic Church . Beatification can be a step toward the possibility of being canonized .
 Saint Joan is a famous play by Irish-born playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw . It shows Joan as a woman with Protestant beliefs who opposed the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church . Joan was a woman opposed to the authorities .
 Joan of Arc is admired by patriots, supporters of womens rights, and even people who study the supernatural . Joan of the Arc is a hero of women's rights and the arts of witchcraft .
 She is also memorialized in monuments and works of art throughout the world . Her memory is also commemorated in monuments around the world, including Australia .
 Some people claimed that another person had died in her place at Rouen . Even during the 1400's, some people claimed to have died in the place .
 These questions include why righteous people suffer and why evil exists in the world that is governed by an all-powerful God .
 In the prologue, God allows Satan to test Job’s faith by inflicting a series of misfortunes on the man . Job is the son of Job, Job, and Job's wife, Job's daughter .
 Job's friends cannot believe that his misfortunes are undeserved, and they urge him to repent . In the dialogues, Job's . friends cannot . believe that Job's mis . fortune is undeserved . Job's best friend, Job, is Job's father, Job
 Job is accused of daring to question God's will . God then appears to Job in a whirlwind and criticizes Job for questioning His will . Job was Job's creator of Job, Job's life .
 Scholars believe that there is no direct relationship between right actions and reward in human history . Many scholars believe that the book teaches that there are no direct relationships between right and reward .
 Humanity can question God's will but never truly understand God's ultimate design . Humanity can still question the design of God's design, but never fully understand it .
 Job Corps is a U.S. government program that provides job training, education, and other services for disadvantaged young men and women . Job Corps was created by the United States Department of Justice in 1964 . The Job Corps program is a federal government program .
 The basic goal of the program is to teach job skills to people who range in age from 16 to 22 years old . The program is aimed at teaching people job skills in the workplace .
 Job Corps also offers counseling, health care, job placement, and classroom instruction to finish high school . The Job Corps is also offering counseling and health care .
 More than 75 percent of the people who complete the program find a job, return to school, or join the armed forces .
 Job Corps provides its services in residential centers in the United States and Puerto Rico . The Job Corps is based in Puerto Rico and the U.S.
 Most of the young men and women stay at a center for six months of training, but some remain as long as two years . Most of them stay at the centers for about six months . Some of the training centers are located in the United States .
 Most of the centers serve people from a particular state or region and design their programs to meet job needs in that locality . The centers are designed to meet the job needs of people in that area .
 At many centers, labor unions offer special apprenticeship programs in such construction trades as bricklaying, carpentry, and the operation of heavy equipment . At some centers, for example, labor union offers special apprenticeships programs .
 The corps was administered by the Office of Economic Opportunity until 1969 . It was transferred to the Department of Labor in 1969 .
 Job's Daughters is an organization for girls associated with the men’s fraternal society of Masons . The organization is closely reviewed by the Department of Labor . Job/Hbz is a girls' organization associated with a men's fraternity society .
 Girls between the ages of 11 and 20 with a relative who has earned at least the degree of Master Mason may become members . Girls can join the group at the age of 11 or 20 .
 Job's Daughters promotes the desire for knowledge, respect for parents, community spirit, and reverence for the Bible . Job Daughters promote knowledge and respect for the parents .
 It has about 24,000 active members and about 1,200 bethels in several countries, including Australia, Canada, and the Philippines .
 The chief executive officer of Job's Daughters is called the Supreme Guardian . Job’s Daughters are a Christian-led group of women in the United States .
 The International Order of Job's Daughters reviewed by the IOPD . See also Masonry.
 Jodl, YOHD uhl Alfred, signed the unconditional surrender of Germany in Reims, France, in 1945 . Alfred, Alfred and Alfred signed an unconditional surrender to the Germans .
 At that time, he was chief of the Operations Staff of the German Armed Forces High Command . He was also the chief of operations staff at the time .
 As Hitler's personal military adviser, he failed to try to curb the dictator's evil ambitions . He failed to stop Hitler from becoming a dictator . Hitler's military adviser failed to curb his evil ambitions.
 Otis C Mitchell Jodrell Bank Observatory, /OH druhl, near Manchester, England, is one of the world’s leading radio astronomy observatories .
 The Lovell telescope, the first giant radio telescope, began operating there in 1957 . It is located in the Lovell Observatory, located in Lovell, Texas . It was the first radio telescope to be built in the city .
 Today, astronomers at Jodrell Bank study the radio emissions from celestial objects called pu/sars and gas and dust in galaxies . They study the emissions from objects such as Pulsar and Pulsars .
 The official name of the observatory is the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories, Jodrell Bank . The observatory's official name is the National Observatory Observatory .
 The book is part of a collection called the Prophets in both Jewish and Christian editions of the Bible .
 Many scholars believe the account refers to an actual plague, which Joel believed was a warning of God's anger against His sinful people . Joel believed the plague was God's warning of His anger .
 The prophet calls upon the priests, the elders, and the people to repent their sins and seek God's mercy to end the plague .
 God's anger will pour down on all others, especially the heathens who exiled the Israelites, Israelites . Israelites were exiled by heathens, the Bible says .
 Joffre’s reputation grew when he defeated the Germans in the First Battle of the Marne in 1914 . The French general won the Battle of Marne at the end of that war .
 He was the first French general to defeat a German army in a major battle since Napoleon Bonaparte did so in the early 1800's . He defeated the German army at the Battle of St. Maurice in July 18th, 18th and 18th .
 By 1915, the opposing armies had reached a stalemate on the Western Front . The opposing armies were engaged in a battle of attrition in the trenches .
 Joffre attempted to break the stalemate with offensives in Artois and Champagne, but they were failures . The French royal family have been in a stalemate for more than a decade .
 In 1916, the French government replaced Joffre because it thought he was wasting French strength in exchange for minor gains . The French government thought he had wasted French strength .
 Joffre was named marshal of France and given largely ceremonial duties . He was the French president of the French Republic in 1883 . He died in 1944 .
 Joffre was promoted to chief of the general staff in 1911 . After a career spent mainly in the French colonies, he spent most of his career in the colonies .
 His original name was Anver Bey Abdullah Jaffa Khan, but his family, who were Afghan American, changed his name to Robert Joffrey . His family was Afghan American and he was born in Afghanistan .
 Joffrey formed a school, the American Ballet Center, in 1953 and also taught there . He also taught at the center .
 He and the American dancer Gerald Arpino created the Robert Joffrey Ballet in 1956 . He created the ballet company in 1956 with Gerald Arpinino .
 Jogging is a popular form of exercise and recreation in which a person runs at a steady, moderate pace . Jogging is an exercise form of recreation and exercise .
 The actual pace depends on the individual's ability, but it should be one at which the jogger can talk without becoming breathless . It should be a jogger at a pace that can be sustained without becoming fatigued .
 The popularity of jogging stems from its healthful benefits and its simplicity . Jogging is a simple way to get out of the saddle .
 The only equipment needed is loose clothing and well-cushioned, flexible shoes that fit properly .
 Jogging builds and maintains physical fitness by improving the function of the circulatory and respiratory systems . Jogging is a great way to build and maintain physical fitness .
 Jogging also helps relieve mental stress and provides an opportunity to enjoy the outdoors . Jogging is also a great way to relieve your mental stress, according to the author .
 To obtain the full benefits of jogging, an individual should develop a program that includes at least three jogs of 2 miles every week .
 A beginner should start with short distances and gradually work up to 2 miles or more . Beginner should start at a distance of two miles or two miles .
 Persons more than 35 years old should have a complete medical examination before starting a jogging program . Persons over 35 should also have a full medical examination .
 Jesuit missionary worked among Huron Indians in Canada . Jogues, zhavwg, Saint Isaac, was a Jesuit missionary .
 He was born on Jan., 1607, in Orléans, France, and went to Canada after he was ordained in 1636 . He was also born in France .
 He returned with a second delegation later the same year, and the Iroquois took him prisoner and killed him . He returned to the same place, but was killed by the Indians .
 It is also the most important industrial, financial, and commercial center in Africa south of the Sahara . The country is also an important economic and financial center .
 Johannesburg is the capital of the province of Gauteng in northeastern South Africa . Johannesburg was the first city to be named in South Africa's history .
 According to 1991 census figures, the city of Johannesburg had 712,507 people, and the metropolitan area population was 1,907,229 . Johannesburg has a population of 7,000 people .
 In 1994, the city’s boundaries were extended to include surrounding areas populated by poor black Africans . The city was expanded to include areas populated mainly by poor blacks .
 These areas had been administratively separate under South Africa's apartheid policy .
 The enlarged City of Johannesburg has a population of nearly 3 million . Johannesburg is the largest city in South Africa . It has an enlarged population of about 3 million people .
 The city has two universities, an art gallery, several museums, an international convention center, and a well-known medical research institute . The city is home to two universities and a large art gallery .
 The city's location near valuable gold deposits has made it the nation’s industrial center . The city is located near valuable deposits of valuable gold .
 Johannesburg rapidly became southern Africa’s largest city . Gold mining drew laborers and fortune seekers to the area . Johannesburg is now the largest city in southern Africa .
 Peter Sullivan Johanson, Donald Carl, is an American anthropologist . Donald Carl is an authority on human origins . He is an anthropologist who has published numerous books .
 A 1974 expedition led by Johanson at Hadar, Ethiopia, discovered the fossilized remains of what is now commonly regarded as one of the earliest types of humanlike creatures that walked upright .
 The fossils, from a creature nicknamed “Lucy, are between 3 million and 3,600,000 years old . The fossils are from an ancient creature nicknamed Lucy . They are thought to be between 3,000,000 and 3 million years old, dating back to 3,
 Johanson also has added to knowledge of Homo habilis, a species that many anthropologists consider one of the oldest members of the genus to which modern human beings belong . The species is considered to be among the oldest in the genus .
 In 1986, anthropologists that Johanson led to Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, discovered the first set of skull and limb bones belonging to a single Homo habilis individual .
 The length of the limb bones indicated Homo habilis was more apelike than scientists had previously believed . The length was more than the length of limb bones found to be greater than previously thought . Scientists say the length and shape of the limbs were more apalike than previously believed
 The charter marked an important step in the development of constitutional thought and individual liberties in England .
 John was unpredictable and often cruel, but he showed administrative ability . He was unpredictable, but showed administration ability . John was often cruel but showed he could be a good administrator .
 He improved methods of tax collection and financial recordkeeping, and strengthened the courts of law . He improved tax collection, recordkeeping and recordkeeping .
 John succeeded his brother Richard the Lion-Hearted as king of England in 1199 . In 1199, John succeeded Richard as King of England . He was also Duke of Normandy, Duke of Aquitaine, Count of Anjou and Count of Normandy .
 King John quarreled over his French territories with Arthur and King Philip Il of France . King John and King Arthur of France were at odds over his territories . King Philip I of France was king of France in France .
 John’s mismanagement led to the loss of most English holdings in France . Rumors he murdered Arthur led to rumors that he murdered him .
 John disagreed with Pope Innocent II over who should become archbishop of Canterbury . John disagreed over who would be archbishop . He disagreed with Innocent II .
 In 1208, the pope placed England under an /nterdict, which banned church services throughout the country . The decision was made in 1208 by the pope .
 The pope supported John in return for liberties granted the church . The pope then supported John, in exchange for the liberties granted by the church. John died in the early days of his life .
 Many English barons and some clergy revolted anyway when the king's plans to reconquer the lost territories in France failed . But many barons, some clergy and some barons revolted against the king .
 In June 1215, John grudgingly approved the settlement that became known as Magna Carta . The settlement was the result of a dispute between the king and the king of England .
 Sobieski, saw BYFHS kee, was king of Poland when the Turkish menace to Christendom was at its height . Sobiesk was king in Poland during the height of the Ottoman invasion .
 Heading a Christian alliance, he defeated the Turks at the gates of Vienna in 1683 . Heading Christian alliance against the Turks, he led the Christian alliance .
 He trained for a military career and fought against Cossacks, Tatars, and Turks . He fought against Tatars and Cossack, fought against Turks, Cossacs, and Tatars .
 John J Kulezycki John VI , also known as Joao VI, was king of Portugal from 1816 to 1826 . He was known as the Portuguese king of 1816 .
 He assumed power in 1792, when his mother became unfit to rule due to mental illness . His mother died of mental illness and he assumed power .
 Emperor Napoleon invaded Portugal in 1807 because the Portuguese had supported Britain in a war between the French and British . Napoleon invaded the Portuguese because they supported the British in the war .
 In 1815, John made Portugal and Brazil a single kingdom called the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algarves . John made the country part of a united kingdom .
 Pope Francis was the second pope to spend his reign in Avignon, France, instead of Rome . He was the first pope to have spent his reign there, spending his time there in France .
 A conflict with the German emperor Louis IV of Bavaria lasted from 1322 until John’s death . John was killed in 1322 after a conflict with Louis .
 Louis had attempted to assert imperial authority in Italy over the church, and John excommunicated him in 1324 . John ex-communicated Louis after he tried to establish imperial authority over church .
 John also had a serious dispute with the Franciscan religious order over the issue of poverty . John also also had an issue with the order of Franciscans over poverty .
 A number of Franciscans refused to conform to papal definitions of poverty, seceded from the order, and allied themselves with the emperor . The emperor's rule of poverty was based on the papal definition of poverty .
 In 1317, he issued a significant collection of church laws, which dealt with the decrees of the Council of Vienne and those of Clement V, the preceding pope . The laws were issued in 1317 .
 An antipope is a man determined to have improperly claimed to be or served as pope . Pope Francis was elected to the Pontiff of the Roman Catholic Church in Rome, Italy .
 John had been an adventurer and accomplished soldier before his election . He enjoyed the support of France, England, and several Italian states .
 John agreed to call the Council of Constance to resolve the rival claims to the papal throne . Under pressure from the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, John agreed . John was forced to call Constance in order to resolve rival claims .
 The council published revolutionary decrees that asserted its authority over the pope and accused John of serious crimes . John was accused of crimes by the council of the pope .
 Many people thought that John would have a short, uneventful reign because he was nearly 77 years old . John's reign was short because of his age at 77 .
 John surprised the Roman Catholic Church and the world early in 1959 by calling an ecumenical council . The council was the first of its kind in the world and was held in 1959 .
 St. John’s place in the church and in history rests on his courage and foresight in calling the Second Vatican Council, which met in 1962 . John's place in church and history rests upon his courage .
 He rarely interfered with the council's activities but reserved the right to approve its final decisions . The council rarely interfered in its activities but rarely interfered .
 Pope Paul VI continued the council and approved its decrees after it ended in 1965 . Pope Paul V. continued to continue the council after the end of the council .
 St. John’s other notable acts included his order to insert the name of Saint Joseph in the Canon of the Mass . St. Joseph's name was inserted into the Canon .
 St. John also explored the possibility of unity with the Eastern Orthodox Churches . John also explores the possibility for unity with Eastern Orthodox Christians .
 John’s personal impact of his reign was the personal impression he made on people . John's personal impact was that he made a personal impression on people, especially himself himself .
 "He clearly recognized his limitations and displayed a lively sense of humor," he said . "He was clearly aware of his limitations. He clearly recognized that he had to accept his limitations"
 Beginning in 1925, he held a series of appointments as diplomatic representative of the Vatican . He was appointed by the Vatican in 1925 .
 Elton John, Elton, is an English pop singer, composer, and pianist . He made unusual eyeglasses and flashy costumes his trademarks . Elton is a multi-singer and composer .
 His melodic songs, superb piano playing, and showmanship have made him one of the most successful performers of his time .
 In 1967, John started a long collaboration with lyricist Bernie Taupin . John started to collaborate with Taupin in 1967 . John and Bernie started to write together in '67 .
 John performed an updated version titled “Candle in the Wind 1997” at the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales . Diana died in an automobile accident in 1997 .
 The recording of the new version became the biggest seller in music history . It was the biggest sell-out of all records made in the world .
 John and Rice won the 2001 Grammy award for best musical show album for Ada . Ada won the award for Ada in Ada, Ada, which was released in 2001 . John and
 Epistles of, are the 23rd, 24th, and 25th books of the New Testament . Don McLeese John is the author of the epistles . He is also known as the "Epistles" of the Bible .
 Although the first and longest of them is called an epi/st/e , it is really a theological essay . The first and the longest is called a epi/.st .e . It is really the longest of the two .
 The author of the second and third Epistles calls himself the presbyter, or elder . The author calls himself himself a presbyter .
 He wrote to a church he calls the “elect lady’ and to an individual named Gaius. He wrote a letter to the church he called the "elect lady" and to a person he calls Gaiuus .
 All three documents come from the circles that produced the Gospel of John . The Gospel was written in the early days of Jesus Christ .
 The first and second Epistles call for mutual love among Christians and for the recognition that Jesus Christ was truly a human being . Jesus Christ is truly a man, according to the Bible .
 Terrance D Callan John, Saint, was one of the 12 apostles of Jesus Christ . He was a member of the apostles of Christ .
 According to Mark 3:17, Jesus called John and James the “sons of thunder” apparently because of their rashness . Jesus called them “the sons of thunder,” according to the Bible .
 John is usually associated with Peter and James as one of a select, inner group of disciples . John is one of Peter's inner group, and is associated with James and Peter .
 The Acts of the Apostles reporis that John was arrested with Peter because of his preaching in Jerusalem . John and Peter were both arrested because of their preaching .
 Many Biblical scholars believe that these works were written by followers of John, not by John . But many Biblical scholars say they are not John's works .
 John has often been considered the “beloved disciple” mentioned in the fourth Gospel, but scholars are unsure of this reference . John is often considered to be John's ‘beloved’ disciple .
 Later tradition records that John preached in Ephesus in Asia Minor until he was very old . In addition to the Biblical evidence, later tradition records .
 In the Eastern Orthodox Churches, John’s feast day is celebrated on September 26 . The Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates John's feast day in honor of him .
 John Bull is the name used for England and the English people, just as Uncle Sam stands for the United States and its people . John Bull stands for John Bull and the people of England . Uncle Sam is also the name of the American people .
 Scottish writer John Arbuthnot fixed the popular idea of John Bull . John Bull was a popular character in the early 1800s .
 In 1712, Arbuthnot published pamphlets advocating the end of the War of the Spanish Succession . The pamphlets were published in 1712 .
 The pamphlets were republished in 1712 as The History of John Bull . John Bull, representing England, appears as a jolly, honest, plaindealing, hot-tempered farmer .
 Sir John Tenniel, famous cartoonist of Punch magazine in the 1800's, pictured John Bull as a dignified gentleman . John Bull was the subject of a series of famous cartoons by the cartoonist .
 The John Bull usually seen today appeared in the drawings of Sir Francis Carruthers Gould in the late 1800s and early 1900s . Gould's drawings of the John Bull were published in the Westminster Gazette .
 His trousers are tucked into riding boots, and the British flag sometimes appears on his waistcoat .
 John Day Fossil Beds National Monument includes three areas in north-central Oregon that contain fossils of animals and plants that lived from about 55 million to about 10 million years ago . Fossils of animals, plants and animals were found in the area from 55 million years old to 10 million
 Scientists have found fossils from five prehistoric epochs that followed one another consecutively . Established in 1974, it is the first national monument in which scientists have found the fossils . It is also the first place in which fossils have been found in which they have found .
 John Howard Association is a private, nonprofit agency that works for fair and effective correctional programs in the U.S. John Howard is based in Washington, D.C.
 It monitors and investigates prisons and jails and reports on conditions in them . Prisoners and jails are monitored and investigated by the organisation .
 “John Bull’ is a symbol of the English people. It also works to develop and promote just policies on important correctional issues, such as the treatment of John Bull .
 The public education program sponsors speakers and publishes a newsletter and special reports .
 tt was named for John Howard, a British prison reformer of the 1700's . The association was founded in 1901 .
 John of Gaunt, gawnt or gafnt , Duke of Lancaster, was an English soldier and political leader . He was a member of the Royal Family . He died in 1783 .
 He was the power behind the throne during much of the reign of his nephew, King Richard II of England . Beginning in 1377, he was the king's power behind his nephew .
 For nearly 10 years, Richard fought under Richard in the Hundred Years’ War against France . He fought in the war against the French . Richard died in France in 16th century .
 He became Duke of Lancaster after the father of his first wife, Blanche of Lancaster, died in 1361 . He was married to Blanche's first wife in 1363 .
 By his marriage in 1372 to Constance, daughter of King Pedro | of Castile, John claimed the Castilian throne . By 1372 he claimed the Spanish throne .
 His son Henry IV was the first English king from the House of Lancaster . He was the son of Henry VIII, Henry VII, Henry VIII and Henry VIII .
 After Constance’s death, John married Katherine Swynford, his mistress, in 1396 . John married his mistress in the 1396 after she died .
 John Paul I was elected pope of the Roman Catholic Church in 1978 . He was elected as pope in 1978 after Pope John Paul II was elected .
 His reign from his election on August 26 to his sudden death on September 28 was one of the shortest in papal history . Pope Francis was elected in August 26 and died in September 28 .
 John Paul was born in Forno di Canale (now Canale d’Agordo), Italy, near Belluno, of working-class parents . He was born to a working class Italian family .
 He was named bishop of Vittorio Veneto in 1958 . In 1969 he was appointed patriarch of Venice . He was also named patriarch of the city .
 John Paul II was elected pope of the Roman Catholic Church in 1978 . He was elected to be the first pope to be elected to the papacy of the Catholic Church .
 John Paul, who was born in Poland, became the first non-Italian pope since Adrian VI . Adrian VI was a Dutchman elected pope in 1522 . John Paul was the first Polish pope to be elected in Italy .
 More than any other pope in history, John Paul made the papacy part of the world scene . John Paul traveled to over 60 nations, the majority of them developing nations . The majority of those countries were developing nations, many of which were developing .
 The pope used these journeys to show the universal character of the Roman Catholic Church and to personally deliver the message of the Gospel to many peoples .
 He skillfully used television and other media to convey his vision of faith to the modern world . He skillly used television, other media .
 In 1984, John Paul negotiated with the Italian government a new concordat recognizing the separation of church and state . John Paul: In 1984 he negotiated with Italy's government to recognize separation of state .
 Also in 1984, the pope and President Ronald Reagan of the United States announced the establishment of diplomatic relations and the exchange of ambassadors between the U.S. and Vatican .
 The Vatican established full diplomatic relations with the state of Israel in 1994 . In 1994, the Vatican became the first Vatican to officially recognize Israel as a nation of Israel .
 John Paul Paul has an outgoing personality that has made him enormously popular . John Paul has been known for his outgoing personality . He has been a popular figure in the U.S.
 He attracted such large crowds to his weekly audiences that the audiences had to be moved from St. Louis to New York City .
 He has opposed changes such as allowing priests to marry or admitting women to the priesthood . He has strongly upheld traditional teachings and opposed changes .
 In 1992 he approved a new catechism, a detailed statement of Catholic belief . In 1992, he approved the creation of a new Catholic statement of belief .
 Many of John Paul's speeches, encyclicals (letters to the entire church), and other messages have reflected his progressive social views . John Paul was a Catholic leader of the Catholic Church .
 Several encyclicals have urged governments to improve the condition of the world’s poor . They have called upon the rich nations to work toward a new world economic order . The world's poor are among the most vulnerable in the world .
 The pope strongly defends human rights and stresses the solidarity of all human beings as one family created by God . Pope: "All human beings are one family"
 Many people believe he played an influential role in the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union .
 He was ordained a priest in 1946 and taught ethics and philosophy for a number of years at universities in Krakow and Lublin . He was also ordained as a priest and was ordained in 1946 .
 He became auxiliary bishop of Krakow in 1958 . He became archbishop in 1964, archbishop and cardinal in 1967 . He was also a cardinal in 1964 .
 In 1994, his written responses to interview questions were published as Crossing the Threshold of Hope . In 1994 he wrote a book of interviews with the author .
 John the Baptist was a prophet regarded as the forerunner of Jesus Christ . He was regarded as a forerunner to Jesus Christ and a prophet .
 John baptized Jesus, seen as the start of Jesus's ministry . In his public ministry, John baptised Jesus, the event is seen as a start of his ministry .
 John was probably raised in a Jewish community in the wilderness of Judea . John was likely to have been raised in the Jewish community .
 Pious Jews fled to these wilderness communities to escape the sinfulness they saw in their nation . Jews were forced to live in the wilderness communities .
 John urged people to repent, to turn away from their old lives, and to adopt new lives of piety and obedience to God . John urged them to repent .
 All this was in preparation for the coming of one who they believed would baptize them in the Holy Spirit . They believed that they believed that one of them could baptize one of their children .
 Many people were attracted to John and his call for repentance, and a large body of followers grew up around him . John's followers grew around him, and he became a major figure in the world .
 Within the larger group, John had a smaller group of disciples whom he instructed in pious living and who observed Jewish religious practices . John instructed them to live pious living .
 The political authorities were suspicious of the crowds John attracted . John was arrested in 2008 after a series of incidents involving him .
 They feared the possibility of a popular uprising against the Roman rulers of Palestine . The Roman rulers feared the possible uprising against them .
 John was arrested by Herod Antipas, the governor of Galilee, imprisoned in a fortress, and executed . John was imprisoned by the governor and executed in Herod's fortress .
 The Baptism of Christ about 1472), a tenypera painting on wood, Uffizi Gallery, Florence (Scala/Art Resource) John the Baptists baptism of Jesus was portrayed in this painting .
 After John’s death, many more of his followers apparently joined Jesus's movement . Jesus's followers are believed to have joined the movement .
 John's followers still made up a movement that continued after his death . John’s followers still make up a group that continued to follow him after he died .
 Saint Paul found a group of John’s followers in the Greek city of Ephesus in the A.D. 50's . The group was found by Saint Paul .
 Johns, Jasper , is an American artist famous for his paintings of common objects, such as flags, targets, numbers, and maps . He is also known for his works of target numbers, maps, and targets .
 He sought a new content for painting that would not communicate emotion, he said . He sought to create a new way to communicate emotion .
 He challenged viewers to make distinctions between the real world and art . He challenged them to make real-life and art distinctions .
 Johns is also noted for his sculptures, prints, and drawings . Johns is known for his paintings and sculptures .
 Johns tested the limits of what painting could accomplish by narrowing the gap between an object and its depiction . In his paintings, Johns tried to narrow the gap from an object to a depiction .
 Johns restricted his themes to patterns, such as flags and targets, that were already flat, abstract designs . Johns restricted himself to patterns that already had already been painted on the canvas .
 He also chose shapes that fit precisely into the proportions of the canvas .
 In isolating such objects from their normal setting, Johns called attention to them, and to their function, forms, and meanings . Johns calls attention to objects that are different from normal settings .
 Johns gave his pictures a recognizable subject matter that had been absent from much American painting since the rise of Abstract Expressionism in the late 1940's . Johns' pictures give his subjects a recognizable . subject matter . Johns gave
 Johns created sculptures depicting commonplace subject matter such as beer cans and light bulbs .
 The two worked closely together, sharing ideas and criticizing each other’s work . The two shared ideas and criticized each other's work .
 He began to paint more personal works about memory, aging and the life cycle .
 The Whiting School of Engineering, the School of Medicine, and the Paul H Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, the Peabody Institute, are among the schools of medicine, nursing, and nursing .
 C Whiting School of Engineering are on the Homewood campus on Baltimore's north side . The Whiting school is located in Baltimore, Maryland, on the north side of Baltimore .
 They offer engineering, natural sciences, social and behavioral sciences, quantitative studies, and the humanities . They offer studies in engineering, . natural sciences and social and . behavioral sciences .
 The Schools of Medicine, Hygiene and Public Health, and Nursing are in east Baltimore .
 They share a campus with the Johns Hopkins Hospital, a separate but closely associated institution . Johns Hopkins is home to a large number of medical students .
 The School of Hygiene and Public Health offers graduate-level education in public health . The school is located in Washington, D.C.
 The School of Nursing has integrated study programs with three Baltimore hospitals . The school of nursing is located in Baltimore, Maryland .
 Founded as an independent graduate school in 1943, it became part of the university in 1950 . Founded in 1944, it was part of University of Wales in 1950, and is now a graduate school .
 The Peabody Institute, in Baltimore, is the oldest chartered music school in the United States . It is based in Baltimore and was founded in 1877 .
 It was established in 1857 as the Peabody Conservatory of Music . It became affiliated with Hopkins in 1977 and became affiliated in 1977 .
 Applied Physics Laboratory, in Howard County, Maryland, is devoted entirely to research and development . The Applied physics Laboratory is dedicated to research, development and technology .
 It is noted for contributions to national security, space exploration, and development of medical devices .
 The university is also the home of the Space Telescope Science Institute . University is also home to the space telescope Science Institute.
 Johns Hopkins left a $7-million gift to found a university and hospital . Baltimore merchant Johns Hopkins died in 1873 . Johns Hopkins donated $7million to the hospital .
 Johnson inherited the wartime dispute between Lincoln and Congress over how to treat the South after the war . He inherited the dispute between Congress and Lincoln over treatment of the South .
 More and more Republicans in Congress came to oppose Johnson's views . This disagreement soon intensified .
 The division became so wide that the United States House of Representatives voted to impeach him . The division in the U.S. House was so high that the House voted to impeachment him .
 Johnson aroused either strong support or fierce dislike throughout his life . Throughout his life, especially his presidency, Johnson aroused both strong support and fierce dislike .
 Some view him as an unfit leader who was too generous to the Southerners after the war . Others say he was generous to his Southerner friends .
 Others have portrayed him as a leader of unusual vision who accurately saw that harsh treatment of the Southern States would increase divisions in the Union . Others have said he accurately saw the harsh treatment would increase division .
 Some scholars believe Johnson's acquittal in the impeachment trial preserved the independence of the presidency .
 A tailor by profession, he lacked formal schooling and educated himself with the help of his wife . The tailor by himself, he is a father-of-two .
 His faith in the Constitution guided his actions during his 20 years as a U.S. representative, a governor, and a United States senator . An unshakable faith in Constitution guided him to his actions .
 During Johnson's term, the United States purchased Alaska, and Nebraska became a state . Alaska was purchased during Johnson's presidency .
 Southerners worked to repair their ruined towns and farms, and reorganize their economy without slavery . They worked to rebuild their farms and towns and rebuild their towns and businesses .
 Important ‘firsts’ during this time included the first oil pipeline, practical typewriter, and railroad refrigerator car . The first 'firsts' during this period included the . first . oil pipeline .
 Tailors usually employed someone to read to the workers as they sat at their tables stitching clothes . Tailors used to read books to their workers while they worked at their sewing tables . Tailor workers often had to read the books as they worked in their work .
 Andrew became familiar with the Constitution, American history, and politics through reading newspapers and a few books . Andrew's family is proud of his work in Washington, DC .
 He ran away from home after two years, in part because his youthful pranks were getting him in trouble with the law . He ran from home two years after his parents ran him out .
 Johnson set himself up as a tailor at Carthage, North Carolina, and then at Laurens, South Carolina . Johnson was a tailor in North Carolina .
 Johnson brought his poverty-stricken mother and stepfather to Tennessee in 1826 . Johnson brought poverty stricken mother and father to Tennessee .
 The United States flag had 35 stars when Johnson took office in 1865, even though the country had 36 states . They settled in Greeneville .
 On May 17, 1827, Johnson married Eliza McCardle , the daughter of a Scottish shoemaker . Johnson died in 1827 .
 With hard work and thrift, Johnson built a profitable tailoring business . Johnson bought property in town .
 He was a devoted father who worried about the health, education, and values of his children . He was devoted father to his family .
 Even when away from home on government service, he wrote them letters of advice . He wrote them to them when away with government service .
 One son developed tuberculosis, another was an alcoholic, and a third died when thrown from his horse . Another died when he was thrown from a horse .
 Andrew Jackson, a fellow Tennessean and Democrat, became Johnson's political role model . Andrew Jackson was a fellow Tennessee Democrat, and a fellow Democrat .
 He saw himself as the champion of small white farmers and craftworkers against the great landowners who controlled Tennessee . He was a champion for small farmers, craftworkers .
 Johnson was born in Raleigh, North Carolina, in 1808 and died in 1827 . Soon he attracted many admirers .
 Antiseptic surgical methods were developed in 1865 by | the English physician Joseph Lister . Lister developed the surgical techniques in 1865 .
 Literature published during Johnson's Administration included Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll of England and Little Women by Louisa May Alcott .
 The first diamond field in South Africa was discovered in a bed of the Vaal River in 1867 . First diamond field discovered in the bed of a river bed in 1866 .
 Dominion of Canada was established in 1867 by the British North America Act . Canada was the first country to become a Dominion of the Dominion . Canada is now the most populous country in the world .
 Austria and Hungary formed the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary in 1867 . Austria-Austria was the first country to form a state of its own . Austria became the first nation to have a state in its own country of Hungary and Austria .
 Other inventions of this period included the first practical typewriter, developed in 1867 . The railroad refrigerator car was created in 1868 .
 In 1829, the year Jackson became President, Johnson won his first election . Johnson won the election in 1829 .
 In 1835, voters elected him to the Tennessee House of Representatives . He was elected in 1835 .
 He opposed state assistance in the construction of railroads because he feared dishonesty, monopolies, and wasteful spending . He opposed a bill for state assistance .
 Johnson represented eastern Tennessee, which needed railroads because of its mountainous isolation . But Johnson was not the only senator in the state .
 His vote contributed to his defeat for reelection in 1837, the first of only two times in his 45-year political career that he ever lost a popular vote . He lost the popular vote only twice before .
 Whigs and Democrats had almost equal numbers in the state legislature . At that time, Whigs were in the majority of the legislature . The state legislature was elected by Democrats and Whigs .
 In 1843, Johnson won the first of five terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . Johnson was elected to Congress in 1843 .
 He favored limited spending by the federal government and the lowest tariff rate possible . In the House, he favored limited government spending and a low tariff rate .
 He favored a revision of the Electoral College to permit direct election of the President and a runoff if necessary . He also favored a revamp of the electoral college .
 He proposed popular election of senators 62 years before it became part of the Constitution . The popular election was proposed before the Constitution was part of it .
 Johnson often complained about lack of presidential leadership . Johnson believed that party considerations counted for more than national issues . Johnson often said party considerations mattered more than issues .
 The issue of slavery became increasingly important during Johnson's years in the House . The issue was important during his years in Congress .
 Johnson's votes on slavery questions reflected his belief that individuals had a right to own slaves . But he also believed that states should protect the institution, he said .
 In 1846, he introduced a homestead bill to help poor white settlers obtain public land . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in 1846 .
 Southerners bitterly opposed the bill, knowing that such settlement would add free states to the Union . The bill was passed by Congress in 18th century .
 Johnson's wife and his oldest daughter shared the duties of hostess at White House functions during his presidency . As governor, he favored laws to pro-pro-Johnson laws .
 His daughter, Martha Patterson, /eft, often served in place of her mother . Culver vide free public education .
 He also fought unsuccessfully the use of prison labor to compete with free labor . He fought unsuccessfully to use prison labor as a form of labor .
 His courage and speaking skill were valuable in the rough and tumble politics of the day . His courage, speaking skill and speaking skills were valuable, he says .
 The campaign was a bitter one, with rumors that Johnson would be shot at a public meeting . Rumors that he would be killed were rumors that he was shot .
 In 1857, Johnson returned to Washington as a U.S. senator and continued to push for the Homestead Act .
 It finally passed in 1862, after the Civil War had begun and Southerners had resigned from Congress . It was finally passed after the war had begun .
 As the slavery question became more critical, Johnson continued to take a middle course . As the slave question became critical, he took a centrist course .
 At the same time, he made it clear that his devotion to the Union exceeded that of slavery . At the time, slavery was still a problem .
 Johnson's stand in favor of both the Union and slavery might have made him a logical compromise candidate for President . Johnson would have been a reasonable compromise candidate .
 He was not nominated in 1856 because of a split within the Tennessee delegation . However, he was nominated for the presidency in 1858 .
 The Tennessee delegation nominated Johnson for President at the Democratic National Convention in 1860 .
 The convention and party broke up completely, and he withdrew from the race . But the convention and the party split up completely and he quit .
 In the election, Johnson supported Vice President John C Breckinridge of Kentucky, the candidate of most Southern Democrats . Johnson supported the Vice President of Kentucky .
 Johnson believed until almost the last minute that the South would not secede from the Union . Johnson believed almost until almost almost the final minute that it would not break the South .
 In December 1860, he made a powerful speech in the Senate pleading for unity . He made the speech in December 1860 .
 Johnson stood by his principles when the Southern States started to leave the Union . He stood by principles when Southern States left the Union.
 Johnson returned to Tennessee in April, just before a special state election to decide if Tennessee would remain in the Union . Johnson returned in April to Tennessee just before the election .
 Angry mobs stopped Johnson's train again and again as he traveled across the state speaking against secession . Johnson was stopped by angry mobs as he spoke out against secession in the state .
 Eastern Tennessee supported Johnson's position, but the state as a whole voted to secede . Eastern Tennessee voted to separate from Tennessee .
 The Tennessee militia had orders to arrest Johnson as a traitor, but he escaped . Johnson escaped . He was ordered to be arrested by the Tennessee militia .
 Johnson was the only Southern senator who refused to secede with his state . He was the first Southern senator to reject the idea of an independent state .
 Lincoln appointed Johnson military governor of the state, a position designed to give Johnson extensive civil and military authority . Lincoln appointed him to the position in order to give him military and civil authority .
 His main task was to organize loyal Unionists, assure their protection, hold free elections, and restore federal authority in the state .
 Johnson's policy required Tennesseans to sign an oath of loyalty in order to vote . Johnson's policies were a mixture of harsh and mild treatment, including harsh treatment .
 His policy required Tennesseans to accept emancipation of the slaves . His policy also required Tennessee residents to accept the emancipation of slaves .
 He had control over very little territory, and only after liberation of the whole state from Confederate troops in late 1864 could meaningful elections occur .
 Johnson was ideally suited to run as a vice presidential candidate with Lincoln in 1864 . Johnson was ideal suited to be a candidate for Lincoln in the election .
 He had strongly supported the Union, he was a Southerner, and was a leading member of the War Democrats . He had strong support for the Union .
 The War Democrats were Democrats who had been loyal to Lincoln throughout the war . They were Democrats loyal to the Lincoln administration . The war Democrats were the War Democrats .
 He had recently recovered from an attack of typhoid fever and was still weak . He had been recently recovering from a typhoid attack and was weak .
 In the heat of the Senate chamber, Johnson became tipsy because of his weakened condition . Johnson was tipsy in the chamber because of the heat .
 For many years, Johnson's opponents accused him of drunkenness, but the accusation was unjustified . Johnson was accused of being drunk at the time of his death . Johnson's supporters say he was drunk when he died .
 The next morning, Johnson took the presidential oath of office in his hotel room . Johnson was the first president to take the oath in a hotel room in Washington .
 At the beginning of his Administration, Johnson kept Lincoln's Cabinet . Johnson's Cabinet was kept by Lincoln .
 It had to repair the damage of four years of war and determine the place in society of the newly freed blacks . The war had to take place in the war's first place in America .
 For the background of the period following the war, called Reconstruction, see Reconstruction . For the history of Reconstruction in the U.S. see Reconstruction. For the rest of the world, see reconstruction.
 Lincoln had not firmly decided on the details of a Reconstruction plan at the time of his death . Lincoln's Reconstruction plan was not fully decided on when he died at the age of 18 .
 His wartime plan filled a temporary need but was not adequate for the postwar solution . His wartime solution was not enough for a postwar solution, he said . His plan was filled with temporary needs but not adequate, he added .
 Lincoln would have expected assurances of future loyalty, recognition of the end of slavery, and protection for Southern Unionists and blacks . Lincoln expected as a minimum assurances of loyalty and protection, he said .
 Widely regarded as a moderate, he could favor restricting rebel leaders without desiring punishment . Widely considered a moderate .
 Radical Republicans favored more extreme measures . But there were many shades of opinion in President Johnson's party . Radical Republicans were in control of the White House .
 Radical leaders included Representative Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania and Senators Charles Sumner of Massachusetts and Benjamin Wade of Ohio . The Radical leaders of the 18th century included Representative Stevens and Senator Wade .
 Radicals regarded black suffrage as a way to ensure that the Republicans would not become a minority party of the restored Union . The Radicals believed that the suffrage was a way of ensuring that the Republican Party would not be a minority .
 Radicals thought Johnson would cooperate with them in their plan for a harsh Reconstruction . The Radicals believed he would cooperate .
 Johnson had often expressed his belief that the common people of the South had been led into rebellion by the rich and powerful planters . But Johnson had also often said he believed that the South was being led into revolt by the wealthy and powerful .
 It soon became apparent that he favored generous treatment to all former rebels except military and political leaders . The former rebel leader's treatment of ex-reporporporters was a priority .
 Congress was not in session when Johnson became President, so he proceeded with his mild Reconstruction plan .
 On May 29, 1865, he granted a general amnesty to rebels who would sign a loyalty oath . Those Southerners whose property had a value greater than $20,000 were exempt from the amnesty .
 President Johnson granted pardons to criminals in the U.S. Even they could apply for special pardons, which he granted .
 He appointed provisional governors and set forth conditions that the reorganized state governments must meet . The new governors must also meet conditions that they must meet, he says .
 Johnson took a limited view of the goals of the war and what the federal government could require afterwards . But these conditions were minimal because of Johnson's limited view on the war .
 The provisional governors carried out their duties, including arranging for the election of representatives to Congress . In the summer and fall of 1865, the provisional governors were in charge of the U.S. Senate .
 Many Northerners questioned Johnson's plan, especially after the beginning of the 1866 .
 They doubted the fitness of the Southern States for readmission because of reports of violence against blacks and their white supporters . The Southern States have passed laws unfair to blacks, they said .
 When Congress met in December 1865, it rejected Johnson’s plan and would not seat newly elected Southern congressmen . Some congressmen criticized Johnson's plan .
 From February 1866 to March 1867, Congress and the President argued over a number of bills designed to replace Johnson’s plan .
 Congress pushed through, over presidential vetoes, several of these bills . President Barack Obama has vetoes on several of the bills .
 One of the Freedmen’s Bureau, which assisted the former slaves, continued in the 1800s . One of them continued the freedmen's bureau, which helped former slaves .
 Another, the Civil Rights Act, provided broad federal protection for civil rights . The act also provided broad protection for African-Americans .
 Johnson thought it was wrong to pass such laws when the South was not represented . Johnson thought such laws were wrong when he was not representing the South .
 He believed such subjects were not appropriate concerns of the federal government . He said such subjects should not be an appropriate concern for federal government concerns .
 It laid a basis for far-reaching changes in the relationship of state and federal governments to the individual . The amendment barred former rebels from holding political office .
 Johnson strongly objected to the 14th Amendment, though the President has no official function in the constitutional amending process . Johnson objected strongly to the amendment, though he was not a president .
 Johnson decided to present his view to the people before the congressional elections of 1866 . Johnson presented his views to the public before the elections of the 1866 election .
 The President lost his temper when hecklers tried to break up his meetings . The President was angry at hecklers trying to break him up .
 Increased tension developed after March 2, 1867, when Congress passed two laws that Johnson considered unconstitutional . Johnson considered the laws unconstitutional .
 The First Reconstruction Act put the Southern States under military rule . It established strict requirements for their readmission to the Union . The Southern States were put under military control .
 This act disfranchised the rebels whom the proposed 14th Amendment prohibited from holding office . This act also disfixed the rebels who were proposed to hold office . The rebels were also banned from being elected to office .
 It did this by barring these people from voting to elect delegates to new state constitutional conventions and from serving as convention delegates . It also barred them from voting for state constitutional convention delegates and serving as delegates . This is the first time the U.S. Congress has barred delegates from state constitutional
 It required Senate approval before the President could fire members of his Cabinet and other officials who had been confirmed by the Senate . Senate approval was required before the president could fire Cabinet members .
 On Aug., 1867, Johnson suspended Secretary of War Edwin M Stanton, with whom he no longer could work harmoniously, with . Stanton . Johnson suspended Stanton because he felt he could not work with Stanton . Stanton died in 1867 .
 Grant was unwilling to hold the office when the Senate would not approve Stanton’s suspension . Grant allowed Stanton to reclaim the office in January 1868, but Grant allowed him back in 1868 .
 Stanton was formally dismissed by the President of the United States . General Lorenzo Thomas was appointed as Stanton's replacement .
 Stanton locked himself in his office and would not allow Thomas to take over . Stanton locked his office in order to prevent Thomas from taking over . Thomas is the son of Stanton .
 Stanton continued to serve as secretary of war until after Johnson’s impeachment trial . Impeachment had long been a goal of the Radicals .
 The most important articles were the first, which charged that the President had violated the Tenure of Office Act by dismissing Stanton . The 11th, which claimed that he had conspired against Congress and the Constitution .
 On March 5, 1868, the Senate organized itself as a court to hear the impeachment of President Lincoln . The Senate was called a court for the impeachment .
 Seven representatives, including Thaddeus Stevens, Benjamin Butler, and George Boutwell, led the attack .
 A team of lawyers, including Benjamin Curtis and William M Evarts, defended Johnson, who did not appear at the trial .
 An admission ticket for the first day of Johnson's impeachment trial entitled the bearer to watch the proceedings from the Senate gallery . Library of Congress: The ticket was purchased for the trial of the former president .
 Some of Johnson's accusers tried to implicate him in Lincoln's murder, but failed . Some of his accusers also tried to accuse him of the murder of Lincoln .
 As the trial went on, it became clear that the Radicals had a weak case and were no match for Johnson's skilled lawyers . The Radicals were not a match for the skilled lawyers of Johnson .
 Johnson's defense team argued that Johnson had not violated the Tenure of Office Act because it was unconstitutional and did not apply to Stanton . Johnson was sentenced to life in prison without parole for violating the act .
 They emphasize issues over which honest individuals might differ, including whether the act applied to Stanton . They emphasized issues that might differ from honest individuals .
 This tactic offered the best opportunity to gain the support of senators whose minds were not already made up . This tactic was the best chance to gain support of Senators whose minds had already been made up.
 Conviction required a two-thirds vote, or 36 votes from the 54 members of the Senate . Conviction was required by a majority of the 54 senators in the U.S. Senate .
 Acquittal required only 19 votes, and Johnson knew he could count on 9 Democrats and 3 conservative Republicans . Acquittal requires only 19 Republicans, including 9 Democrats, 3 Republicans .
 He also needed the support of at least 7 of the 12 “doubtful’s Republicans . He needed to win the vote in order to pass the bill .
 Because it charged a general intent to obstruct the will of Congress, opponents believed it had the best chance of passing . Johnson's opponents believed the bill would have best chance at passing .
 The roll call vote lasted over an hour, and the outcome was in doubt until the very end . The roll-call vote was the first of its kind in the Senate .
 The final tally of 35 “guilty’s” and 19 “not guilty” acquitted Johnson by one vote . Johnson acquitted by a single vote in the Senate .
 The Senate voted on the second and third articles, with the same result . Ten days later, following the Republican National Convention, the Senate voted for the same .
 The verdict ensured that something more serious than political opposition to Congress would be necessary to justify removing a President from office .
 Seward made two important achievements by Secretary of State William Seward . Seward was secretary of state of state in 18th century . Secretary of state Seward had a successful career in diplomacy .
 Napoleon Ill named Maximilian of Austria as emperor of Mexico in 1864 . A French army had overthrown the Mexican government, and Napoleon's army overthrown it .
 Seward warned that the U.S. Army would drive out the French by force if necessary . In 1865, Seward said the United States would drive the French out by force .
 Seward’s second accomplishment was the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867 . Seward purchased Alaska from Russian in 1866 .
 The Russians feared they might lose the colony to Great Britain and offered it to the U.S. for $7,200,000 . The Russians wanted to keep the colony from losing it to Britain . The United States offered the colony for $8,000,000 in exchange for
 For many years, Americans called Alaska “Seward’s folly,” little dreaming that it would one day be one of the states . Alaska is now one of America's 11 states .
 Life in the White House became livelier during Johnson's Administration than it had been during the gloomy war years . Life in Johnson's White House during the war years was livelier .
 The household included the Johnson's two surviving sons, Robert and Andrew; their daughters, Mrs. Mrs. and Mrs. Johnson . The Johnson family died at the age of 92 .
 The impeachment trial of President Johnson lasted from March 13 to May 26, 1868 . The trial was held in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, DC .
 The President's supporters and enemies both brought great pressure on the Republican senators who were undecided on whether to convict him . The President was convicted of a federal crime on Friday .
 The President's wife had been an invalid for many years and lived in quiet seclusion . She had lived in seclusion in the White House .
 The final months of Johnson's Administration after the impeachment trial were uneventful . Johnson's administration was largely quiet during the trial .
 Johnsons last important official act was a proclamation on Christmas Day in 1868 of a complete pardon for all Southerners who had taken part in the Civil War and were still unpardoned .
 Lincoln pardoned three men still in prison for their part in Lincoln's assassination . He also granted pardons in 1869 to three men who were involved in the assassination of Lincoln . Lincoln's pardon was granted in 1868 .
 These actions showed Johnson's desire to end the sectional bitterness dividing the nation . Johnson's actions showed that he wanted to end sections of the nation divided .
 Johnson indignantly refused to give up on bribery offer to change votes . Assured by friends that bribery would induce two state legislators to change their votes, Johnson refused .
 Johnson ran for the U.S. House of Representatives as an independent in 1872 . Johnson was an ex-Confederate general and a Republican .
 He won election to the U.S. Senate in 1875, and thus became the only former President to serve as a senator . But he won't serve in the Senate until 1875 .
 Johnson attended a short special session in March 1875, along with 13 of the 35 senators who voted for his conviction in 1868 . Johnson attended the special session along with a 13 of 35 senators .
 Many fellow senators greeted his entrance with applause, and bouquets of flowers decorated his desk .
 Johnson was buried in Greeneville wrapped in a United States flag and with his well-worn copy of the Constitution under his head . He was buried wrapped in the flag and buried with a Constitution under him .
 Impeachment Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln, was President of the United States . Lincoln was President Abraham Lincoln of the U.S. from 1861 to 1868 .
 Military governor B United States representative of Tennessee C Governor F Vice President D United States senator Illinois senator Ill. Governor of Illinois . Governor of Tennessee of Illinois of Tennessee .
 Castel, Albert E The Presidency of Andrew Johnson . Additional resources . Castel and Albert E. Castel .
 The Historic Ilmpeachments of Justice Samuel Chase and President Andrew Johnson . Justice Chase was impeached by the President of the U.S. President of 18th Century .
 Charles Spurgeon was an American sociologist and educator . He studied and wrote about the life of blacks in the U.S. He was a sociologist .
 Johnson was director of research for the National Urban League from 1921 to 1928 . Johnson worked for the Urban League in New York City, New Jersey .
 Johnson founded Opportunity, the league's journal, in 1923, and edited it until 1928 . Johnson edited the journal until 1928.
 The journal featured works by young black artists, musicians, and writers . The journal was published in the 1990s .
 Herschel Vespasian was the Northern Democratic candidate for vice president of the United States in 1860 . He was Herschel Johnson, Herschel .
 Northern and Southern Democrats split and ran separate sets of candidates in 2010 . That year, Democrats ran candidates in both parts of the country .
 He and presidential candidate Stephen A Douglas lost to Republicans Abraham Lincoln and Hannibal Hamlin . Abraham Lincoln was the only Republican to defeat Douglas .
 Johnson served as a U.S. senator from Georgia in 1848 and 1849 . He filled a vacancy in the Senate .
 He was elected to the United States Senate in 1866 but was not permitted to serve . He was not allowed to serve in the U.S. Senate .
 Hiram Warren was governor of California from 1911 to 1917 . He was also a United States senator from 1917 to 1945 . He served as a U.S. senator from California .
 Johnson helped pass a series of progressive reforms . Elected governor as a Republican, Johnson was elected to office in 1994 . Johnson was governor of New Jersey .
 As a senator, he was an /solationist (one who resisted involvement in international affairs) He opposed U.S. membership in the League of Nations and the United Nations .
 In the 1930's, he favored many early programs of the New Deal, President Franklin D Roosevelt's domestic economic policy . He favored many of FDR's domestic programs .
 Robert W Cherny Johnson, Hugh Samuel, was an American government administrator and soldier . He was also a government administrator . He served in World War II .
 Johnson also worked for the U.S. Army General Staff and served on the War Industries Board . During the war, Johnson was also a member of the War Industry Board .
 In 1933 and 1934, Johnson directed the National Recovery Administration . Johnson was in charge of the government during those years .
 Johnson was born in Fort Scott, Kansas, and graduated from the U.S. Military Academy in 1903 . Johnson was a member of the United States Military Academy .
 Johnson’s defeat of Jeffries resulted in racial violence in many U.S. cities . Johnson defeated Jeffries in a landslide .
 In 1913, Johnson was found guilty of violating the Mann Act, a law that banned the transporting of women across state lines for immoral purposes . Johnson was convicted of violating that law .
 Many scholars believe Johnson was unjustly accused and convicted of this violation . Johnson was found guilty of a violation of freedom of expression .
 Johnson returned to the U.S. in 1920 and served 10 months in jail for his 1913 conviction . Johnson was jailed in 1913 for his conviction .
 After 1928, Johnson was primarily a lecturer and show-business performer . After 1928 he was primarily known as a lecturer .
 James Johnson was an American pianist and composer . He was born in New York City, New York .
 Johnson made important contributions to ragtime, jazz, and popular music . Johnson was a pioneer of ragtime and jazz .
 He was part of a group of ragtime pianists on the East Coast who created a solo jazz piano style called stride . He was a member of a ragtime group who created the style of jazz pianist .
 As a youth, he studied classical piano, but was exposed to blues, ragtime, and show music . He studied ragtime and show tunes as a teenager .
 Johnson wrote the lyrics for the song “Lift Every Voice and Sing” - sometimes called the Negro national anthem . Johnson also wrote lyrics for “The Negro National Anthem’s ‘Lift every Voice and sing’
 The novel tells of an attempt to escape racial discrimination against black Americans . The novel provides an understanding of cultural attitudes of black Americans in the early 1900's .
 In his hometown, he was a school principal, a newspaper editor, and a lawyer . He was a lawyer, principal, newspaper editor and lawyer .
 There, he wrote songs for musicals and vaudeville with his brother, Rosamond . He also wrote songs with his sister, who later died in a car crash .
 Johnson was United States consul to Venezuela and to Nicaragua from 1906 to 1913 . Johnson was consul in both countries from 1906-191919 .
 James Weldon Johnson was president of the U.S. Department of State of Columbia University . He died at the age of 92 at the time of his death . Johnson died at age 93 .
 Johnson, John Harold , is one of the leading publishers in the United States. Johnson is also known as the publisher of American children's books .
 The magazines include Ebony, a monthly picture and news magazine; Ebony /r/. a monthly children’s magazine; and Jet, a weekly news magazine . Ebony is one of the world's most popular magazines .
 Johnson began his publishing career in 1942 when he founded the Johnson Publishing Co. in Chicago . He also started Negro Digest, a literary magazine, in the same Chicago area .
 Johnson represented the U.S. on trips to Africa, Poland, and the Soviet Union . Johnson traveled to Africa and Poland .
 He became President on Nov., 1963, following the fatal shooting of President John F Kennedy in a street in Dallas, Tex. He became president on Nov. 1963, after the shooting of JFK in Dallas .
 A stunned nation rallied behind the energetic and ambitious new President, a product of the Texas hill country . President Barack Obama is a proud Texas native . President Obama is the son of a Texas congressman .
 They received more than 61 per cent of the votes cast— the largest percentage in U.S. history . They received the highest percentage in United States history .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson had served in Congress for almost 24 years before he was elected Vice President in 1960 . Johnson served as Vice President of the U.S. from 1964 to 1964 .
 In 1937, at the age of 29, he won election to the United States House of Representatives . He was elected to the U.S. House in 1937 .
 At 44, he was made Senate Democratic leader at the age of 44 . He was the youngest person ever elected to lead either party in the Senate . Five years later, he became the youngest leader in either party .
 Johnson led the Democratic-controlled Senate during the Administration of Republican President Dwight D Eisenhower . Johnson was a member of the Senate during Eisenhower administration .
 Johnson was powerful and shrewdly mixed the demands of party politics with a sense of cooperation between Democrats and Republicans . Johnson was a powerful leader of the Democratic Party and Republican Party .
 As President, his image as a master politician caused many people to mistrust him . His image as President, he had many people mistrust him. As President he was seen as master politician .
 After Kennedy's assassination, Johnson moved with poise and confidence to hold a shocked nation together . Johnson held the nation together after Kennedy's death .
 He turned his attention to the urgent domestic problems facing the country .
 He was highly successful in getting Congress to approve many of the social programs Kennedy had proposed, as well as many of his own proposals .
 The words Great Society became the slogan of the Johnson domestic program . The words 'Great Society' became the phrase of the Great Society .
 Johnson's skill in congressional politics was not enough, however, to overcome the problems raised by the Vietnam War . Johnson's skills were not enough to overcome Vietnam War problems .
 His failure to explain the deepening U.S. involvement in the war cost him much support and cost him many support .
 With over half a million U.S. troops in Vietnam in what appeared to be an endless struggle, disagreement at home increased . With over 50,000 United States troops in the country, disagreement increased .
 Johnson surprised the nation and the world on March 31, 1968, by giving up politics and removing himself as a candidate for a second full term . Johnson surprised everyone by retiring from politics in 1968 .
 He recognized that he had become the symbol of the unpopular war, as well as other divisions in the country . In a dramatic televised speech, he said: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 Johnson said he hoped his withdrawal from the presidential race would help solve these problems . Johnson: I hope his withdrawal will help solve this problem .
 Johnson's presidency ended in frustration and division, but he left a vivid imprint on the nation . Johnson left a lasting imprint on his legacy .
 He became widely known by his initials, LB/ LB/ His wife, called Lady Bird, had the same initials . His two daughters, Lynda Bird and Luci Baines, also had the initials, also called LB/
 His Texas ranch bore the 1B) brand, and two family dogs were called Little Beagle Johnson and Little Beagles Junior .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson was born on Aug. 27, 1908, in a farmhouse near the central Texas town of Stonewall . He was born in 1908 in Texas .
 Samuel Ealy Johnson Jr. served five terms in the Texas House of Representatives . He was the eldest of the five children of a farmer and schoolteacher who served in the state .
 Lyndon was an active, healthy child . He also had three sisters—Rebekah , Josefa , and Lucia .
 The Beatles toured the United States in 1964, creating a sensation everywhere they went . The Beatles, a British rock music group, toured the U.S.
 The most destructive riots included those in the Watts section of Los Angeles in 1965 and in Detroit in 1967 .
 The Second Vatican Council, a meeting of Roman Catholic Church leaders, ended in 1965 . It was the second Vatican Council meeting of the Catholic church leaders .
 The church has issued a series of proclamations to modernize and revitalize the church . It has been criticized for not doing so .
 American combat troops entered the war in 1965, and U.S. planes started to bomb North Vietnam . North Vietnam was invaded by North Korea in 1965 .
 Many Americans opposed the new U.S. role, and antiwar protests began to break out . Many Americans oppose the new United States role .
 The National Organization for Women, founded in 1966, fought to end discrimination against women . Women's rights groups fought for women's rights .
 The Six-Day War between Israel and three Arab nations broke out on June 5, 1967, and ended on June 10, 1967 . Israel and Egypt, Jordan, and Syria won the war .
 Israel gained control of Jerusalem and the surrounding area, the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights, and the Sinai Peninsula . Israel also took control of the Gaza strip, the Israeli-occupied Sinai Peninsula and the G.E. G.C. Sinai Peninsula, Sinai Peninsula.
 When Lyndon was 5, his family moved to nearby Johnson City, founded by his grandfather . Lyndon moved to Johnson City when he was 5 years old .
 Lyndon Johnson attended public school in Johnson City, but he did not like to study . He did not enjoy studying .
 His mother made him do his lessons, however, and he usually made good grades . He was always happy with his grades, but his mother made sure he had to do it .
 At the Johnson City high school high school, he and a friend won a countywide debating competition . At the same high school he won a debate competition in Johnson City .
 Lyndon’s parents wanted him to go to college, but the boy wanted no more studying . Lyndon's parents wanted Lyndon to go into college . The boy wanted to study, but he wanted to stop studying .
 Johnson's birthplace, a small frame house near Stonewall, Texas, was torn down in 1935 . Lyndon picked grapes for a short time, then worked as a clerk for his cousin Tom Martin .
 A replica of the house, built on the original foundation in 1966, was built in 1966 . The replica was built on a foundation in 1964 .
 He borrowed $75 from the Johnson City bank to get himself started at college . He borrowed the money to start his own life at college.
 Johnson developed an interest in campus politics, and became the star debater among the students . Johnson was a student at U.S. College of Technology .
 This group took control of campus politics from the Black Stars, an organization dominated by athletes . The Black Stars are a group of athletes who have taken over campus politics .
 Johnson also edited the college newspaper and became a leader in other campus activities . Johnson was a student at the University of Columbia .
 After saving money from his teaching job, he returned to college . Then, after saving money, he went back to his college .
 Johnson taught public speaking and debate in Sam Houston High School in Houston, Texas . After graduation, Johnson taught in public speaking .
 As a schoolteacher in Cotulla, Texas, in 1928-1929, Johnson saved money te complete his college education . That year, Richard M Kleberg, a Democrat and own White House, was a Democrat .
 Formerly taught at the Sam Houston High School in Houston. er of the famous King Ranch, ran for the United States House of Representatives.
 Kleberg won the special election of November, 1931, and took the 23-year-old Johnson along to Washington as his secretary . Johnson was 23 when he was sent to Washington by Kleberg in 1931 .
 Johnson asked Taylor for a date immediately after meeting her, but she could not accept . Johnson asked Johnson to date Taylor for the first time . Johnson said Taylor would not accept Johnson's request .
 After Johnson returned to Washington, he began to make long-distance telephone calls to her .
 Johnson proposed to her when he went back to Texas again . Two months later she accepted the proposal .
 The Johnsons were married on Nov. 30, 1934, and took a honeymoon trip to Mexico . The couple was married in 1934 .
 Johnson put about 12,000 youths to work in such projects as playgrounds, roadside parks, and soil conservation . Johnson, the youngest NYA state administrator, is the youngest state administrator .
 His organization helped about 18,000 young Americans go through high school or college . His organization also helped about18,000 people go through college or university .
 He ran in a special election to fill the seat of James Buchanan of the 10th Congressional District of Texas, who had died . Mr Buchanan died in 2010 .
 Johnson faced nine opponents, many of whom were better known and had more money for campaigning . Johnson had nine opponents - many of them better known .
 Johnson supported Roosevelt's program, including the President's proposal to reorganize the Supreme Court . Johnson supported FDR's plan, including reorganizing the court .
 Johnson's opponents charged Roosevelt was trying to “pack” the court with justices who would always favor the New Deal . They attacked Johnson for favoring the plan .
 Two days before the election, Johnson entered an Austin hospital for an emergency operation to have his appendix removed . Johnson entered the hospital for the surgery to remove his appendix .
 He was lying in his hospital bed when the election returns came in on the night of April 10, 1937 .
 He had won election to the House of Representatives with almost twice as many votes as his nearest opponent . He was elected to the U.S. House in 2012 .
 When Johnson left the hospital, President Roosevelt was on a fishing cruise in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Texas . Roosevelt was also on the cruise when Johnson was hospitalized .
 The President let it be known that he wanted to see the new congressman . The President wanted to visit the congressman .
 Johnson went aboard the presidential yacht at Galveston, then rode through Texas with Roosevelt on the President's special train .
 President Roosevelt and the young congressman developed a warm, lasting friendship . Roosevelt and Roosevelt were both men in the early years of their careers .
 Johnson was sworn in as a United States Representative on May 14, 1937 . Johnson was a member of the House of Representatives of the United States .
 Johnson sponsored projects that gave his Texas district soil conservation, public housing, lower railroad freight rates, and expanded credit for farmers . Johnson also sponsored projects .
 In 1938, Johnson was elected with no opposition to his first full term in the House . He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1938 .
 As a member of the House Naval Affairs Committee, Johnson helped plan a huge naval air training base at Corpus Christi, Tex. Johnson was a congressman who helped plan the base . The base will be used as a training base for the Navy .
 During the 1940 election campaign he served as head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee . He also served in the 1940 campaign for the Democrats .
 The next year, Johnson announced his candidacy for the unexpired term of United States Senator Morris Sheppard of Texas, who had died in April 1941 . Johnson was elected to the Senate in 1941 .
 Johnson lost the election to Governor W Lee O’Daniel, a New Deal foe, by only 1,311 votes . Johnson was defeated by Governor O'Daniel by only a single vote .
 On Dec. 1941, the Japanese bombed the Pearl Harbor Naval Base in Hawaii . Pearl Harbor was bombed by the Japanese on Dec. 25, 1941 .
 An hour after the U.S. declared war, Johnson asked to be called up for active duty . Johnson had been a member of the Naval Reserve for several years .
 Three days later, Johnson was sworn in as a lieutenant commander, the first congressman to go into uniform . Johnson was the first Congressman to go in uniform . He was sworn into office as a Lieutenant commander .
 As a special representative of President Roosevelt, Johnson went to New Zealand and traveled through the Pacific area of operations . Johnson visited New Zealand as a representative of Roosevelt .
 After a mission aboard a bomber that was attacked by Japanese fighter planes, MacArthur personally awarded Johnson the Silver Star for gallantry . Johnson was awarded the award for his bravery during a mission .
 In the spring of 1942, while Johnson was overseas, his supporters entered him as a candidate for reelection to the House . Johnson was in the U.S. House of Representatives when he was in service .
 In July 1942, Roosevelt ordered all members of Congress in the armed forces to return to Washington . Roosevelt ordered the return of Congress to Washington in July 1942 .
 He was opposed in the primary election by 10 men, including Coke Stevenson . Coke Stevenson was a popular former governor .
 Stevenson did not get a majority of the total votes cast . However, a runoff election between the two candidates was necessary . Stevenson won the election in a runoff .
 Lady Bird, whose maiden name was Claudia Taylor, came from a wealthy Texas family in the Cold War with the Soviet Union . Her maiden name is Claudia Taylor .
 After the Korean War began in 1950, he called for more troops and for improved weapons . The Korean War started in Korea in 1950 .
 His chief job was to see that party members were present when a bill came up for a vote . He was also responsible for ensuring that a bill was voted on .
 While serving as whip, Johnson increased his ability to persuade people to reach agreement . He increased his abilities to persuade others to reach agreements .
 Johnson supported Governor Adlai E Stevenson of Illinois against General Dwight D Eisenhower in the 1952 presidential campaign . Johnson supported Stevenson against General Eisenhower .
 During one three-day period, Johnson made more than 20 campaign speeches for Stevenson . During that period, he made 20 speeches .
 Eisenhower, a Republican, won the election, and the Democrats lost their majority control of the Senate . Eisenhower's victory was the first time the Democrats had a majority in the Senate since Eisenhower took office .
 In January 1953, Senate Democrats unanimously elected Johnson minority leader . Johnson was elected minority leader in January 1953 .
 At the age of 44, he was the youngest man either party had ever chosen Senate leader . He was chosen by both parties at the time of his selection .
 He won the Democratic primary by a margin of nearly three to one over his closest opponent . Hillary Clinton won the primary by nearly three-to-one over her closest rival .
 In the election campaign, Johnson worked hard for Democratic candidates in many states . Johnson: "I'm not a Democrat. I'm a Democrat," he said .
 Johnson became majority leader of the Senate in January 1955 . He had the responsibility of keeping the legislative process running smoothly .
 He also decided when various bills would be taken up and who would sponsor the bills . He decided when bills would take up and when they would be introduced .
 Johnson paved the way for bills before they reached the Senate floor for voting . Johnson was skilled in the techniques of give and take, giving and giving .
 Democratic Senator takes on controversial measures . He checked the views of each Democratic Senator on controversial proposals .
 Johnson delayed Senate voting until he had done everything he could to persuade Senators to vote his way . Johnson delayed the vote until he could convince Senators to back him in the Senate .
 He spent five weeks in the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Mad., then went to his Johnson City ranch to recuperate .
 He returned to Washington and resumed his post as Senate majority leader . After he had recovered, he returned to his post .
 Johnson helped establish the Senate Aeronautical and Space Committee . A strong supporter of outer space exploration, Johnson was first chairman of the committee .
 In 1957, Johnson put through the Senate the first civil rights bill in more than 80 years . Johnson's bill was the first bill to pass the Senate since the Civil Rights Act of 1957 .
 In 1960, he beat down a Southern filibuster, and the Senate passed another civil rights measure . Three years later, in 1960, the Senate also passed a civil rights bill . In 1964, he passed a bill that would have allowed African Americans to vote in the Senate .
 Vice President Johnson announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination a week before the party‘s 1960 national convention . Johnson announced the candidacy a week prior to the convention in 1960 .
 Kennedy's choice of Johnson as his running mate was intended to attract Southern votes . Kennedy chose Johnson as a presidential candidate in order to win Southern votes in 1964 .
 Kennedy was a liberal Bostonian and Roman Catholic . Johnson was more conservative, a Southerner, and a member of the Disciples of Christ .
 Kennedy and Johnson narrowly defeated the Republican team of Richard M Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts . In the November election, JFK and Johnson defeated Nixon and Lodge .
 Johnson was reelected to a third term in the Senate in the same election . Johnson was elected to the Senate for the second time in the past .
 In January 1961, Johnson resigned from the Senate and was sworn in as Vice President . Johnson resigned in January 1961 to be Vice President of the United States .
 He took a more active role in the government than had any previous Vice President . He took more active roles in government than any previous vice president .
 He served as chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, the Peace Corps National Advisory Council, and the Presidents Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity . He also served as chair of the Peace Corp. and the President of the United States .
 On Nov. 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated while riding in an open automobile through Dallas, Tex. On Nov., 1963, 1963, he was assassinated in Dallas .
 Governor John Connally of Texas, riding in the car with Kennedy, was wounded . Governor John B Connally was wounded in the attack . Connally died in the shooting .
 Secret Service agent guarding Johnson shoved him to the floor of the car and lay over him . After the assassin fired his first shot, the Secret Service officer lay over Johnson . Johnson was shot in the head by the assassin .
 An hour and 39 minutes after Kennedy died, Johnson was sworn in as the 36th President of the United States .
 The ceremony took place at 2:39m. aboard the presidential Air Force jet at Love Field in Dallas .
 At Johnson‘s request, the oath of office was administered by an old friend, United States District Court Judge Sarah T Hughes .
 The Cold War with the Soviet Union and other Communist countries kept the world in danger of a nuclear war . The world was at risk of nuclear war during the Cold War .
 In Vietnam, Communist rebels fought troops supported by the U.S. in Vietnam . They fought against the government's efforts to defeat the Communist government .
 Racial tension and a high unemployment rate were the main problems that plagued the U.S. The United States was plagued by racial tension and unemployment rates .
 Major parts of the Administration's program were bogged down in Congress . The Administration's plan for the program is still under way in the process .
 Communist agents in Central and South America threatened democratic governments . Communist agents threatened governments in South America . Communists were behind the rise of the Soviet Union .
 As the first days passed, the country felt the impact of a new, but experienced, leader . President Barack Obama took office in December .
 Stock prices went back up when the exchanges opened after the funeral . Stock values had dropped sharply at the news of Kennedy's death .
 The President pushed hard for legislation that had been proposed by President Kennedy . President Kennedy pushed for legislation .
 He urged quick passage of a tax cut and a strong civil rights bill, both Kennedy measures . The president also called for a strong tax cut . Kennedy urged the passage of both measures .
 This was $500 million less than the previous budget, and $2 billion less than most people had expected . The budget was $1.2 billion lower than expected . This is the first time the budget has been reduced to $1 billion .
 This program included creating new jobs and building up areas where the economy had faltered . This program includes creating jobs in areas that had falered .
 Congress also passed a new civil rights law . It cut taxes for both individuals and corporations .
 This law opened to blacks all hotels, motels, restaurants, and other businesses that serve the public . This law was passed by Congress in 1996 .
 The railroad crisis, in April 1964, plunged Johnson into one of the toughest U.S. labor disputes . The rail crisis was the first of its kind in the United States .
 The railroads and the union members who ran the trains had been battling over work rules for almost five years . Railroads and union members had been fighting over the rules for years .
 The companies say outdated rules forced them to hire workers no longer needed . The companies said outdated rules made them hire workers that are not needed .
 Under pressure from Johnson, the two negotiating teams settled the dispute in only 12 days . The dispute was settled in just 12 days after Johnson's intervention .
 Johnson conferred with many of the world leaders who came to Kennedy's funeral . Johnson confer with world leaders .
 Johnson telephoned Panama's president and agreed to discuss outstanding problems . Tensions eased after Johnson agreed to meet with Panama's leader to discuss issues .
 The United States continued its technical and financial assistance to South Vietnam against the Viet Cong . The U.S. continued to assist South Vietnam in the war .
 The Viet Cong were Communist-supported guerrilla forces from North and South Vietnam . Viet Cong was a Communist-backed guerrilla force from the communist-supported South Vietnam.
 On August 4, Johnson announced that the North Vietnamese had again launched an attack in the gulf, this time against the Maddox and another U.S. destroyer, the C Turner Joy .
 Some Americans doubted that the August 4 attack had occurred, and the attack has never been confirmed . The attack was never confirmed .
 Johnson ordered United States planes to bomb North Vietnam's torpedo-boat bases . Nevertheless, Johnson ordered U.S. troops to bomb the bases . Johnson ordered the bombing of the bases in Vietnam .
 On August 7, Congress approved these powers in the Tonkin Gulf Resolution . Congress also approved the resolution on August 7 .
 Johnson used the resolution as a legal basis for increased U.S. involvement in the war . The resolution was used to justify increased US involvement in Afghanistan .
 He showed great energy, often speaking several times a day at widely separated places, then going back to his desk in Washington .
 He entertained many guests there, and usually gave them big, wide-brimmed Texas hats . He entertained them there .
 Johnson's two attractive daughters added youthful zest to the White House . Johnson's daughters were born into the family .
 Lynda often cornered her father's visitors to ask them about current affairs . Lynda would often ask them what they thought the world was going on .
 Johnson tried to keep life normal for her daughters, but this was sometimes impossible . Johnson: "I'm sorry for what happened to me, but I'm not so sure about it"
 Secret Service agents had to accompany the girls on their dates . The girls' dates were accompanied by the Secret Service .
 Luci was married to Patrick J Nugent in the Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C., on Aug. 31, 1966 . Luci married Patrick Nugent on August 18, 1966, in Washington DC .
 She was the first daughter of a President to marry while her father was in office since Eleanor Wilson in 1914 . She was first daughter to marry during her father's presidency since 1914 .
 Johnson entertained graciously, and usually included dancing at White House social functions .
 President Johnson danced with many of the women guests . He often selected dancing partners for his guests .
 Johnson added some of the family’s favorite paintings to the White House decorations . The family's favorite paintings were added to the decorations . Johnson added them to the collection of his paintings .
 She gave up active direction of the family investments during her husband's presidency . She also gave up control of family investments .
 In 1964, President Johnson easily won nomination for his first full term . President Johnson was elected to a full term in 1964 . Johnson was nominated for his second full term, 1964 .
 In a sad, solemn ceremony, Johnson took the presidential oath of office 1 hour and 39 minutes after President John F Kennedy was assassinated .
 He stood between his wife, /eff, and Jacqueline Kennedy, the widow of the slain President . He stood next to his wife and the Kennedy widow . He said he stood between the two women .
 The term Great Society caught on, and was used to describe many of the President's domestic programs . The term 'Great Society' caught on .
 These programs included continuing the War on Poverty, improving the educational system, providing for elder citizens, and providing for urban areas .
 Johnson was extremely successful in getting his proposals passed by the 89th Congress in 1965 and 1966 . Johnson's proposals were passed by both chambers of Congress in both 1965 and 1967 .
 Congress passed his Appalachia bill, a measure to improve living standards in an 11-state Appalachian Mountain region . The bill was passed by Congress in March .
 It also passed his proposals for increased federal aid to education, a cut in excise taxes, stronger safety measures for automobiles . The proposal also includes the establishment of two new executive departments .
 Congress passed a voting rights law designed to ensure voting rights for blacks in 1965 . In 1965, the law was passed by Congress to ensure the rights of blacks .
 Among other things, the law outlawed literacy tests as a voting requirement . The law also outlawed literacy testing as a voter registration requirement .
 The Civil Rights Act of 1968 was designed to end racial discrimination in the sale or rental of houses and apartments . The act was passed by Congress in 1968 .
 A new housing law, also passed in 1968, provided over $5 billion in federal funds to help the needy buy houses and rent apartments . The law was passed by Congress in 1968 .
 When he became President, U.S. forces in Vietnam consisted of about 16,300 military advisers . in the spring and summer of 1965, he ordered the first United States combat troops into South Vietnam to protect United States bases .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson Library was bombed by U.S. planes in 1968 . Lady Bird, daughter Luci, daughter Lynda and grandson Patrick Nugent were among the victims .
 By 1968, there were more than 500,000 U.S. troops in South Vietnam . The U.N. troops were stationed in Vietnam .
 A bitter debate developed in the United States over the U.S. role in the war . The United States played a key role in World War II .
 Many Americans became hawks, favoring sterner military action to end the war . Many Americans now believe the war should be ended .
 Many called for a cutback in the fighting and eventual U.S. withdrawal from the war . Many others became doves, calling for an end to the conflict .
 In mid-1965, rebels tried to overthrow the government in the Dominican Republic . The government was overthrown by rebels in the mid-1960s .
 All U.S. troops were withdrawn by mid_ 1966, after order was restored and elections were held .
 Johnson named the first black to the Cabinet when he made Robert C Weaver secretary of housing and urban development in 1966 . Weaver was the first African-American to be named to Cabinet . Weaver made the Cabinet secretary in 1966.
 In 1967, he appointed Thurgood Marshall to the Supreme Court of the United States . He was appointed in 1967 to fill the vacant Supreme Court seat .
 In October 1966, he discussed the Vietnam War with six Asian Allied leaders in Manila, Philippines . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the region to be fought in Vietnam .
 In June 1967, he met Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin in Glassboro, N.J., to discuss world problems . He met Soviet premier in June 1967 in New York City .
 Republicans were elected to the 90th Congress, many of them opposed Johnson's Great Society programs . Many of them were Republicans who opposed the program .
 Some members of Congress said government spending at home should be cut to help absorb the costs of the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was a major source of funding for the war effort .
 The government could continue programs to help the people at home while paying the war costs . That is, according to the government, while paying for the war . That's what the government could do .
 In 1968, Congress voted a temporary surtax in addition to the regular income tax to help pay for the war and check inflation . The surtax was a temporary measure to help fund the war, check inflation and pay for inflation .
 Opposition grew to the increasing U.S. role in the Vietnam War, and racial unrest increased . Opponents of the war increased in Vietnam .
 Johnson had to send federal troops to Detroit in July 1967, to stop a riot there . Johnson sent troops to stop the riot in Detroit .
 Governor Otto Kerner of Illinois appointed a commission of prominent Americans to try to determine causes of riots . He appointed a special commission to investigate the riots . Governor Kerner appointed the commission to look into the riots in Chicago .
 The war and racial problems at home caused many Americans to question both foreign and domestic poli_ cies . The war also caused many to question the government's policies .
 Many began to doubt statements by Administration officials on the progress of the war . Many doubted statements from Administration officials about progress .
 President Johnson announced on March 31, 1968, that he would not run for reelection . Johnson shocked the nation by announcing he would never run for president .
 For me, it is a deep personal tragedy. I know that the world shares the sorrow that Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline has suffered, she says . For more information, visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 Speech on Nov., 1963, after the assassination of President John F Kennedy . All i have [ would have given gladly not to be standing here today. All i could have [ given gladly [ not to] be standing today].
 It will not be a short or easy struggle, no single weapon or strategy will suffice, but we shall not rest until that war is won . No single weapon will suffice in this war, but no single strategy will be enough, says President Obama .
 The challenge of the next half century is whether we have the wisdom to use that wealth to enrich and elevate our national life . We have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society, he said .
 "I shall not seek, and [ will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President," says President Obama . President Obama will not seek to be re-elected to another term .
 Television broadcast on March 31, 1968 Pove vision in the American house” and that he was withdrawing in the name of national unity . Television broadcast that he withdrew from the U.S. in the “name of the national unity”
 At the same time, he announced a reduction in bombing of North Vietnam . The bombing of the North Vietnam was also announced .
 Johnson's order to reduce bombing led to talks between U.S. and North Vietnamese representatives . Johnson ordered bombing reduced to less bombing in Vietnam, resulting in talks .
 Johnson halted all bombing and other U.S. attacks on North Vietnamese territory on Nov. 1968 . Johnson halted bombing of North Vietnam in November 1968 .
 Johnson retired to his Texas ranch after Republican Richard M Nixon’s inauguration as the 37th President on Jan., 1969 .
 Johnson avoided active participation in politics after leaving office . After leaving office he avoided active politics .
 The family cemetery at the ranch, where Johnson is buried, is part of the national historic park . Johnson was buried in the family cemetery .
 Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston was renamed the Lyndon B Johnson Space Center after his death .
 The Texas state legislature made August 27, Johnson’s birthday, a legal holiday in the state . August 27 is also a legal day of Johnson's birthday .
 African Americans (The civil Kennedy, John F rights movement) are African Americans . Texas Great Society Vice President of the United States Humphrey, Hubert H Vietnam War Johnson Space Center Outline .
 Full-term President A The Great Society B The widening Vietnam War Vill. Vill. A President . A President of the United States . A Full Term President . Full term President .
 Dwight D Eisenhower, John F Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Dwight D. Eisenhower and John D. Kennedy were both assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy was assassinated in the early 1960s .
 Magic Johnson, Magic , ranks as one of the greatest players in basketball history . Magic Johnson is one of NBA's greatest players .
 Johnson revolutionized the guard position because no player of his height had previously blended quickness and agility with superior dribbling, passing, and shooting skills . No player had previously been able to blend quickness, agility and superior dribbles, passing skills .
 He was nicknamed “Magic’ after a sensational performance in high school . ‘Magic” was nicknamed for his sensational high school performance .
 Johnson won the NBA‘’s Most Valuable Player award for the 1986-1987 and 1988-1989 seasons . Johnson was named NBA MVP in both 1986-87 and 1989-1989 .
 His career total of 9,921 assists was an NBA record until it was broken by John Stockton in the 1994-1995 season . His career career total was a record of 9.921 .
 He returned to competition as a member of the “Dream Team,’ the United States basketball team that won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympic Games . He played for the U.S. basketball team in the '90s .
 He returned to the Lakers as a player early in 1996 but again retired at the end of the season . He also played for the Lakers in 1996, but retired from the NBA in 1998 .
 Pauline Johnson, Pauline , was a Canadian writer known for poetry about Indian life . Johnson was known for his work on the subject of Native Americans .
 She was born on March 10, 1861, on an Indian reservation near Brantford, Ontario . Her name is believed to have been the first name of an Ontario Native American .
 She also wrote Legends of Vancouver , a series of stories about Canada’s Squamish tribes .
 Rosemary Sullivan Johnson, Philip Cortelyou , is an American architect . She is also known as the founder of the National Institute of American Architecture . She was married to Philip Cortlyou .
 The catalog defined and named the style that dominated European and American architecture in the early and mid-1900's . The catalog is a catalog of the architectural styles that dominated Europe and America .
 Johnson based the design on the works of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, a leader of the International Style . Johnson's design is based on the work of Mies Van Der Rohe .
 Many of his buildings reveal a romantic quality and an emphasis on historical elements not found in typical examples of the International Style . However, many of these buildings have romantic qualities .
 In the 1970's, Johnson became a leader of a movement called postmodernism . Johnson was a leader in the 1970s of the movement .
 Postmodern architects make free and explicit use of the arch and other archi-tectural elements . Architects make free use of arch, arch, and other traditional elements of their designs .
 Nicholas Adams was born Nicholas Adams . He is the son of architect Richard Adams . Adams is the author of Architecture (introduction)
 Johnson won the 1995 Cy Young Award as the best pitcher in the American League . Johnson was named the American Baseball Hall of Fame pitcher .
 Johnson has led the major leagues in strikeouts eight times, from 1992 through 1995 and from 1998 through 2001 . Johnson has also led the majors in strikeouts eight times before .
 In 2000, he became only the 12th pitcher in major league history to strike out 3,000 batters during a career . He is the only pitcher in MLB history to have done so so so far .
 Pitcher is one of baseball's most intimidating pitchers . His size and powerful fast ball make him one of the most intimidating players in baseball .
 He was signed by the Montreal Expos in 1985 . He pitched in the minor leagues until 1988, when he made his major league debut with the Expos .
 Richard Mentor was vice president of the United States from 1837 to 1841 under President Martin Van Buren . Dave Nightingale johnson was the first president to hold the post .
 In the election of 1836, no vice presidential candidate got the majority of electoral votes required by the 12th Amendment . In the same election, the election was held in 1836. No vice president got majority of the votes required for the election .
 Congress presented him with a sword for his bravery during the War of 1812 . Congress also gave him a sword .
 Johnson served in the U.S. House of Representatives at various times and in the Senate from 1819 to 1829 . Johnson was elected to the Senate in 1819 .
 Samuel Johnson, Samuel , was the greatest English writer of his day . He was the subject of a famous biography by James Boswell .
 Boswell preserved the wit and brilliance of Johnson’s conversation; the sharpness of his opinions on people, politics, and literature; and the vigor of his personality . Boswell: Johnson's wit, brilliance and sharpness preserved .
 Johnson outshined even the most gifted people of his age, including Sir Joshua Reynolds, Edmund Burke, David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith, and members of the Literary Club .
 Johnson was a remarkable man, but his achievements as a writer are even more impressive . Johnson's achievements include writing, writing and writing for the BBC .
 Johnson said he talked for pleasure and wrote for bread—and yet he did both very well . Johnson: "I talk for pleasure, write for bread and write for pleasure. Yet I did both well"
 His style marked a high point in English prose, and he wrote with a sense of the moral and intellectual responsibilities of authorship . His style was a high-point of English prose .
 Johnson was born on Sept., 1709, in Lichfield, England . He was the son of a bookseller .
 He contributed to The Gentleman’s Magazine from 1738 to 1743 . He served chiefly as a reporter of parliamentary debates .
 Juvenal's poem London was written in the style of the Roman satirist Juvenal . His poem was published in the early 1900s in Rome .
 His most famous poem, The Vanity of Human Wishes, was a Christianized imitation of Juvenal’s Tenth Satire . The major productions of this early period were a biography of his friend Richard Savage and a biographer .
 Between 1747 and 1755, Johnson produced almost single-handedly his massive Dictionary of the English Language . Johnson established his fame as a scholar as a result of his work .
 The works are notable for their keenness and strength of judgment, and the force and polish of the writing . But they are also notable for the keenness of judgment and force of writing .
 Walter Johnson, Walter , was one of the greatest fast ball pitchers in baseball history . Johnson was known for his fast ball ability . He was also one of baseball's greatest pitchers .
 He held the major league record for most career strikeouts with 3,508 until Nolan Ryan broke it in 1983 . Nolan Ryan also held the record until he broke it with Nolan Ryan .
 Johnson won 20 or more games each season, with a high of 36 in 1913 . From 1910 to 1919, Johnson won an average of 36 games each year .
 Johnson pitched 55 4 consecutive innings without allowing a run, an American League record . Also in 1913, Johnson pitched a record 55 innings without a run .
 Johnson led the league in shut-outs 7 times and holds the major league career record with 110 shutouts . Johnson holds the record for most shut-out shutouts in major league history with 110 .
 He defeated the French at the Battle of Lake George . He was a major general in the French and Indian War .
 Johnson helped bring the Mohawk Indians over to the British side in the wars against France . He helped bring Mohawk Indian over to British side .
 The British government made him superintendent of Indian affairs in the North .
 Johnson acquired more than 250,000 acres (100,000 hectares) of land in the Mohawk and Susquehanna val, leys . Johnson acquired the land .
 William Samuel was a signer of the Constitution of the United States . He was a lawyer, political leader, and scholar from Connecticut .
 He attended nearly all the sessions of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, where he became an effective supporter of the Great Compromise .
 This compromise gave the states equal representation in the U.S. Senate . It was a compromise to give the states an equal representation . This compromise was the first in the United States Senate .
 Johnson was chairman of the committee on style, which drew up the final form of the Constitution . Johnson also served as chairman of a committee that drew up a new Constitution .
 Johnson largely educated himself in law and opened a legal practice in Stratford, Stratford . Johnson was born in 1946 .
 He also entered politics and served many terms in the Connecticut legislature between 1761 and 1789 . He was also a member of the legislature .
 From 1767 to 1771, Johnson acted as a special agent for Connecticut in London . Johnson served as an agent for the state of Connecticut in 1767 .
 Johnson served in the Congress of the Confederation from 1785 to 1787 and in the United States Senate from 1789 to 1791 . Johnson was a member of the U.S. Congress of 1785 and 1787 .
 Jere Daniell johnson Foundation is one of the largest private charitable organizations in the United States and the largest one devoted to improving health and health care . Jeredson is the founder of the Jeredan Johnson Foundation . The foundation is based in Atlanta, Georgia .
 It focuses on populations most vulnerable to illness, specific diseases of regional or national concern, and broad national issues .
 The foundation was established in 1936 by Robert Wood Johnson, chairman and CEO of Johnson & Johnson . The foundation is a large health and medical-care products company .
 His estate of more than $1 billion was donated to the foundation in 1972 . He died in 1968, and his estate was donated in 1972.
 Johnson Space Center is the headquarters for all astronaut projects conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States . The center is headquarters for NASA's space exploration efforts .
 The space center serves as training headquarters for United States astronauts . It is located in California, California .
 Mission Control Center at the space center controls the flight . Mission Control controls the launch of a space flight from Cape Canaveral, Florida .
 Mission Control monitors the various systems that keep the astronauts alive and the spacecraft functioning . Mission Control is responsible for the mission to the Mars Mars mission .
 Engineers supervise the design, development, and construction of spacecraft . Engineers at the space center supervise space center's spacecraft design .
 The vehicles are built in factories and then checked thoroughly at the space center . They are then sent to the space lab for testing .
 Special chambers reproduce flight vibrations, the vacuum of space, and the great temperature changes in space and on the moon . Special chambers at the space center reproduce flight vibration and the temperature changes of space and moon .
 Construction of the Manned Spacecraft Center began in 1962 . The center became the headquarters of the U.S. astronaut program in 1964 .
 Scientists and engineers at the center directed the first landing of astronauts on the moon in July 1969 . The first landing took place on July 4, 1969 .
 The space center was renamed in February 1973 after the death of former President Lyndon B Johnson . It was renamed after former President Johnson .
 In April 1862, he attacked General Ulysses S Grant's forces at Shiloh, Tennessee . He attacked General Grant in April 1862 .
 Grant held a strong position with an army nearly as large as Johnstons . Grant's army had a large force of men and women . Grant held on to his position with a large army of men .
 Johnston drove Grant's troops from their positions and almost won the battle . Yet, Johnston almost defeated Grant's forces .
 He served in the Black Hawk War and then in Texas's war for independence from Mexico . He fought for Texas from Mexico to become president .
 Johnston fought in the Mexican War and served in Utah from 1858 to 1860 . Johnston served in the Utah Senate .
 He commanded the main Confederate Army in Virginia in 1861 and early 1862 . He was a major commander of the Confederate Army .
 In 1863, he was sent to relieve Vicksburg, Mississippi, which was besieged by General Ulysses S Grant . In 1863 he was stationed in Mississippi .
 In December 1863, he took charge of the Army of Tennessee . In 1864, he began a long retreat in front of General William T Sherman’s advance toward Atlanta .
 President Jefferson Davis believed Johnston was afraid to fight and relieved him . Johnston was relieved of duty by President Davis . President Davis was assassinated in 1918 .
 He did not command again until 1865, when he fought at Bentonville, North Carolina . He did command again in 1865 .
 He graduated from the United States Military Academy and became quartermaster general of the U.S. Army just before the Civil War . He was a major force in the American Civil War and a major factor in American history .
 Tourism, coal mining, and the production of steel, textiles, transportation equipment, and wood products contribute to the city’s economy . Tourism and coal mining contribute to tourism .
 Johnstown is the corporate headquarters for two major real estate developers . Johnstown has a history of real estate development . The city is home to the headquarters of two major developers .
 Johnstown was named for a Swiss immigrant, Joseph Johns, who settled there in 1793 . Johnstown is named for Swiss immigrant Joseph Johns .
 In the 1850's, William Kelly developed a new method of making steel . The process was similar to the Bessemer process . Kelly developed the process in the 1850s .
 The dam of the South Fork Reservoir, about 12 miles east of the city, burst during heavy rains in 2010 . That same year, the dam of a reservoir in the city also burst . The dam is located near the city's South Fork reservoir .
 The resulting flood killed more than 2,000 people, and destroyed property worth more than $10 million . More than two dozen people were killed in the flood .
 The flood killed 85 people and caused damage of more than $300 million . 85 people were killed and more than 300 million were damaged in the floods .
 William C Rense Joint is the place at which two or more bones meet in the skeleton of the body . Joint is a place where bones meet at a joint in the body's skeleton . Joint joint is a joint place at the place where two bones meet .
 Fixed joints are seams between bones that lie directly against each other, or are separated only by a thin layer of connective tissue . Fixed joints can be found in the U.S. National Museum of Medicine .
 These joints absorb just enough shock to keep the bones from breaking . In case of a blow or an accident, these joints may absorb enough shock .
 The joints of the cranium (covering the brain) are fixed and protect the brain . The joints of the brain are fixed, protecting the brain from harm .
 Hinge joints are those that permit a forward and backward motion in one plane, like the motion of a door on its hinges . The hinge joints allow a backward and forward motion, like a door hinge .
 Pivot joints give a rotating motion, such as the movement of the head from side to side . The joints are used to move the head of a person from side-to-side .
 These joints are made up of a large round end of a long bone that fits into the hollow of another bone . These joints can be found in the bones of a person with a large bone .
 The arms of the body can move more freely than the legs because of the way that the joints are arranged, and because the shoulder blade is only loosely attached to the chest wall . The arms are more likely to move freely than legs because the way they are arranged .
 A smooth layer of cartilage covers the ends of bones that move over one another . Cartilage is a smooth layer that covers the end of bones moving over each other .
 Bones are held together at the joint by strong, fibrous tissues called /igaments . Fibrous tissues attach above and below the joint to hold the bones together .
 Pivot joints, such as those found in the elbow, permit a rotating kind of movement . The elbow joint is one of the most important joints in the world .
 Ball-and-socket joints, like the shoulder, provide swinging and rotating movements like a collar to keep the joint in place . Ball and socket joints provide swinging movements like those of the shoulder .
 A sprain occurs when the ligaments around a joint are torn or badly stretched . The sprain is a sprain when ligaments are torn, stretched or torn . The injury occurs when a joint joint is torn or stretched .
 Serious sprains are painful, and if neglected may result in instability of the joint . If neglected, they may also lead to instability in the joint joint .
 Dislocated joints should be treated as soon as possible by a physician . Dislocate joints are a sign of life for a person with dislocated joints .
 Inflammation of the joints may result from infections or from such disorders as arthritis . Inflammated joints may also be caused by infections, such as arthritis or infections .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff is the highest military advisory group in the United States . Joint Chiefs are the highest-military advisory group .
 The chairman of the JCS is the principal military adviser to the U.S. president, the secretary of defense, and the National Security Council . He is also the principal Military Adviser to the United States president .
 Other members include the chiefs of staff of the Army and Air Force, the chief of naval operations, the commandant of the Marine Corps, and the vice chairman of the Joint Force .
 Joint Chiefs prepare military plans and review overall military requirements . Joint Chiefs review military plans for the first time . Joint chiefs also review overall requirements for the military .
 They represent the United States on military committees of international organizations . The U.S. military has been involved in more than 50 wars since 2001 .
 They direct the unified and specified combatant commands under the secretary of defense . They also direct the . unified . and specified . combatant commandant commands . The U.S. military says it is committed to the United States .
 The chairman regularly reviews these commands and makes appropriate recommendations to the president . The chairman of the National Security Council regularly reviews them .
 It includes directorates of personnel, intelligence, operations, logistics, plans and policy, and communications-electronics . The U.S. military is the largest military organization in the world .
 Previously, the commandant had been only a member only when the JCS discussed Marine Corps matters . The commandant is now a member of the Joint Joint Service Committee .
 In 1986, Congress strengthened the chairman's position and added the vice chairman position . The vice chairman was added to the chairman in 1986 .
 Joint-stock company was a form of business organization in which the funds to carry on business were obtained by selling shares of stock to a number of individuals . Joel Slackman was the founder of the first joint stock company .
 See also Colonial life in America . East India Company; Hudson's Bay Company . Hudson Bay Company. East India company .
 Joint tenancy is the ownership of a piece of property by two or more people . Joint tenancy involves ownership of pieces of property owned by two people .
 Each owner has equal rights to the use of the property during their lives . Each owner is entitled to use the property in their lifetime .
 The last survivor becomes the sole and exclusive owner of the property . He has the absolute right to sell or give it to anyone .
 Joint tenancies were once limited to real estate, but today they may be created in personal property as well . Joint tenancy is no longer limited to the real estate market .
 Two or more people might own a painting as joint tenants with the right of survivorship . For example, a painting might be owned by a group of people .
 The right of survivorship distinguishes a joint tenancy from the ordinary tenancy in common . The right to survivorship distinguish between the two types of tenancy . A joint tenancy differs from a common tenancy .
 Each tenant's share passes to his or her successors at the death of the tenant . Under a tenancy in common, each tenant's shares pass to his successor at death of tenant .
 While living, a joint tenant can convey the share in the joint-tenancy property to another person . Joint tenants can convey their share in a joint tenancy to another .
 In the United States, a few states do not recognize the joint tenancy of real estate . In the U.S., real estate is a joint tenancy, not a joint residence .
 Joel C Dobris Jojoba, hoh HOH buh, is an evergreen shrub that grows wild in desert regions of northwestern Mexico and southwestern United States .
 In 1971, the United States government banned whaling and the import of whale products . The U.S. government banned the practice of whaling .
 As a result of the ban, jojoba oil has become a valuable substitute for sperm whale oil in lubricants, cosmetics and many industrial chemicals .
 Joliot-Curte, zhaw LYOH koo REE, trene, ee REHN , was a French physicist . She was known for her work with radioactivity, especially the production of radioactive elements .
 She was the daughter of the Nobel Prize-winning physicists Marie and Pierre Curie . She was born in 1944 and died in 1944 .
 JoliotCurie and her husband, Frédéric, shared the 1935 Nobel Prize for chemistry . Joliot Curie and husband shared the prize .
 Joliot-Curies determined conditions under which positrons could be emitted when high-energy radioactive particles passed through matter . In 1933, the Joliot Curies determined the conditions under . which positron were emitted .
 In 1934, they demonstrated that the bombardment of boron by alpha particles created a radioactive isotope of nitrogen . The bombarded with borson created a nuclear isotope .
 The discovery led to the production of artificial radioactive elements . This led to their being awarded the Nobel Prize for their discovery .
 She served as her mother's assistant at the Radium Institute (now the Curie Institute) She met Frédéric Joliot at the Radium Institute where she met him .
 Under the direction of this group, France put a nuclear reactor into operation in 1948 . France put the first nuclear reactor in operation in 1946 .
 Romualdas Sviedrys Jolliet, /OH lee eht, Louis, /wee , also spelled /oliet, was a French-Canadian explorer who led an expedition down the Mississippi River .
 He and Jacques Marquette were probably — the first white explorers to reach the upper Mississippi and parts of Illinois and Wisconsin . He and Marquette, a French missionary, were probably .
 From 1669 to 1671, Jolliet explored much of the Great Lakes region for the government of New France . He explored New France's Great Lakes for government purposes .
 During this time, he became a skilled mapmaker and also worked as a fur trader . He also became skilled mapmakers .
 About 1670, Jolliet established a fur-trading post at Sault Sainte Marie in what is now Ontario, Canada . The post was established in 1670 and is now in Ontario .
 He traded guns, knives, and other items to Indian trappers in exchange for beaver pelts . The pelts brought great profits in France for the French .
 The Indians of the Great Lakes region often talked about a great waterway that flowed to the sea . The Indians believed it was a great river that flowed into the sea.
 They called it the Mississippi, which in their language meant big river . In their language, they called it Mississippi, meaning "big river"
 The French thought this river might flow west to the Pacific Ocean and provide a trading route to the Far East . The French believed this river would flow west and provide trade routes .
 In 1673, Governor General Comte de Frontenac of New France sent Jolliet to find the Mississippi and trace its course . The Governor General sent him to find and trace the Mississippi .
 Jesuit priest Marquette, a Jesuit priest, was chosen to accompany Jolliet . Marquette worked among the Indians as a missionary and knew their languages . He knew the Indians' languages .
 In May 1673, Jolliet and Marquette set out in two canoes from St. Louis . Marquette and five other men set out on their way to the city .
 When the group reached the mouth of the Arkansas River, they began to encounter unfriendly Indians . The group encountered the river mouth of Arkansas River .
 A friendly Indian told Marquette that white people lived farther south on the Mississippi . Marquette: "White people live farther south of the Mississippi"
 Jolliet and Marquette assumed these people must be Spaniards who had settled near the Gulf of Mexico . Marquette thought they were Spaniards living in the area .
 Fearing attacks by the Indians and the Spaniards, the party turned back . Fears attacks by Indians and Spaniards led the party to turn back .
 His maps and records of the journey were lost when he crossed the St. Lawrence River near Montreal, Canada .
 The government of New France gave Jolliet Anticosti Island in the Gulf of St. St. Louis .
 He traveled up into Hudson Bay in 1679 and explored Labrador in 1689 and 1694 . He explored the coast of present-day Labrador .
 In 1697, he was appointed hydrographer of the king with headquarters in Quebec . He was given the title in 1697 .
 Jolson, Al, was a popular American stage and motion-picture entertainer . Jolson was a member of the Jolson family . He was born in 1918 .
 He appeared in a number of other films during the late 1920's and the 1930's . He also appeared in several other films .
 Jolson's family emigrated to the U.S. when he was 8 years old . Jolson was born in New York City, New York, in 1918 .
 The sailors decide that Jonah is the reason for the storm, and they throw him into the sea . The sailors throw Jonah out of the sea.
 God orders a “great fish,” traditionally considered a whale, to swallow Jonah . The fish is a traditional "great fish" traditionally considered to be a whale .
 Jonah lives in the fish for three days before God orders the fish to spit Jonah onto land . Jonah's three-day ordeal ends when God spits Jonah onto the land of the fish . Jonah is believed to have been Jonah's father .
 Jonah’s prophecy frightens the Ninevites into changing their sinful ways, and God spares them . Jonah's prophecy spares the ninevites from changing their ways .
 God contrasts Jonah’s sympathy for the plant with his lack of sympathy for Nineveh . God contrasts his sympathy with Nineveh with that of Jonah, Jonah .
 According to one interpretation, the story contrasts the narrow concerns of Jonah with the universal concerns of God . One interpretation: The story contrasts Jonah with God's universal concerns .
 The story calls on the Jews to reject narrow nationalism and return to their mission of preaching God's forgiveness and mercy to all people .
 Jones, Absalom, was a leader of the struggle to give African Americans control over their religious worship . Jones was the founder of the African-American movement .
 He founded the St Thomas African Episcopal Church, the first Episcopal Church for blacks in the U.S. He also became the first black Episcopal priest .
 In 1762, he moved with his master to Philadelphia, where he worked in his master’s grocery store . He moved to Philadelphia in 1762 .
 He became a lay preacher at St George's Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia, Philadelphia .
 St. George's, established the Free African Society, a service organization for blacks . The society was founded by African-Americans at the time of the first black president .
 Later in 1787, he and Allen led black members of the church in a walkout protesting a new church policy that required blacks to sit at the back of the balcony . The walkout was a protest against a new policy requiring black members to sit on the balcony of a balcony .
 Allen and the other group formed the Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church . Allen and two other members of the church formed Bethel, an African-American Methodist Episcopal church .
 Bobby Jones, Bobby , was one of the greatest players in the history of the sport . Jones was a member of the PGA Tour's most successful players .
 In 1930, Jones became the only player ever to win the United States Open, British Open, United States Amateur, and the British Amateur tournaments in one year . Jones won the U.S. Open, UK Open, and British Open tournaments in 1930 .
 After completing this ‘Grand Slam,’ Jones retired from tournament play at the age of 28 . Jones retired after completing this "Grand Slam"
 In addition to his Grand Slam, he won the United States Open in 1923, 1926, and 1929 . He also won the British Open in 1926 and 1927 . He won the U.S. Amateur in 1924, 1925, 1927 and 1928 .
 After his retirement, Jones and banker Clifford Roberts founded Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia .
 In 1934, they established an annual tournament for the course that was later called the Masters . The Masters was established in 1934 .
 Marino A Parascenzo Jones, Casey Jones, was an American railroad engineer . He gave his life in a train crash to save his passengers and crew . He was an engineer who saved his life to save the lives of his passengers .
 On April 30, 1900, he volunteered to replace a sick engineer on the train's southbound run from Memphis to Canton, Mississippi . He was the last person to be replaced by an engineer on that run .
 If Jones had not stayed in the engine to jam on the brakes, the crash would have been much worse . Jones was not in the car at the time of the crash, but he stayed inside the engine .
 Wallace Saunders, a black railroad worker, was killed in the wreck . Saunders was the only black man to survive the train wreck . The train wreck might have been forgotten except for Wallace Saunders .
 He wrote a song about Jones that was based on a number of earlier ballads . He also wrote about Jones in a song that he wrote about him .
 The vaudeville team of T Laurence Seibert and Eddie Newton rewrote Saunders's ballad and added it to their act .
 They published the song in 1909 . It became the basis of many ballads about Jones by singers in the United States, Europe, and South Africa .
 John Luther Jones was born on March 14, 1864, in southeastern Missouri . He was born in 1864 .
 Jones, Davy, in sailors folklore, is a wicked spirit who rules over the souls in the ocean deep . Davy is also known as Davy the spirit of the sea spirit .
 Davy Jones’s locker is known chiefly through the term for the bottom of the sea . He is known for his role in the sinking of the Great Barrier Barrier Barrier in the 1960s .
 This is the final resting place of lost articles, sunken ships, and sailors who have drowned or been buried at sea . This is where lost articles are found, or sunken vessels, are found .
 Octavia N Cubbins Jones helped introduce the principles of psychoanalysis in the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States . Ernest Jones, a British physician, helped introduce psychoanalysis .
 He was a strong supporter of Sigmund Freud, the Austrian physician who developed psychoanalysis as a method of treating mental illness . He was also a friend of Freud and a strong advocate of psychoanalysis .
 Jones wrote The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud . Jones also wrote a three-volume biography of Freud .
 Jones was born on Jan., 1879, in what is now Gowerton, Wales, near Swansea . He was born in 1879 . Jones was a pioneer in Wales .
 He later studied neurology and psychiatry . He later became interested in psychoanalysis . He studied psychoanalysis and was interested in psychiatry .
 Jones met Freud in 1908 and worked from then on to promote psychoanalysis . He met Freud at the age of 19 and became famous for his work in Freud's work .
 His efforts contributed to the acceptance of Freud's theories by physicians and other scientists . Freud's work contributed to acceptance of his theories .
 Jones helped establish the American Psychoanalytic Association in 1911 and the British Psycho-Analytical Society in 1913 . Jones was a member of both the American and British Psychoanalistic Association .
 He also served as editor of the /nternational Journal of Psycho-Analysis .
 Jones wrote many articles supporting his theory that psychoanalysis provides greater understanding of art, literature, and other creative fields . Jones: "Psychoanalyanalysis provides great understanding of creativity"
 Hannah S Decker Jones, Inigo, was the first major architect of the English Renaissance . She was the architect of Inigo's Inigo .
 Jones studied the designs of the Italian architect Andrea Palladio in northern Italy during trips he took about 1600 and again in 1613 and 1614 . Jones visited Italy in 1600 and 1613, 1614 and 1615 .
 The Banqueting House at Whitehall Palace in London is one of Jones's most admired buildings . Its qualities appear in Jones' most admired building .
 He served as surveyor to King James from 1615 to 1642 . He was surveyor of King Charles and King James . He served from 1625 to 1643 .
 Jones influenced later theatrical design with his designs of sets, costumes, and stage machinery . Jones was in the service of the English court at the time of his work .
 His heroism against a larger and better-equipped fleet established a tradition that has never been forgotten . His heroism set a precedent that never has been forgotten.
 His reply to a British demand to surrender, “I have not yet begun to fight,” has become a famous Navy slogan . His reply is ‘I have yet to fight’ is a famous naval slogan .
 He went to sea when he was 12 years old . He was given command of the merchant ship John in 1769 .
 On a trip to the West Indies, a sailor died a few weeks after Paul had flogged him . The sailor died shortly after he had been flogged .
 The crew of the Betsey mutinied, and one of the members of the crew was killed . The Betsey was the first ship to take part in a mutiny . The crew mutined .
 The outbreak of the Revolutionary War in America in 1775 gave Jones a chance to go back to sea . Jones was able to go to sea again after the start of the war .
 He received a commission as a lieutenant in the Continental Navy on Dec., 1775 . He became first lieutenant of the A/fred, the first naval ship bought by the Continental Congress . He was commissioned as first lieutenant .
 In May 1776, Jones took command of the Providence, and in August he was made captain by Congress . Jones was made a captain in 1776 .
 He received command of the Ranger in June 1777, with orders to sail to France . He sailed the Ranger to France in 1777 .
 Also in the Ranger in 1778, Jones raided Whitehaven on the Irish Sea coast of England . Jones did not succeed in burning the ships in the harbor .
 In 1779, Jones took command of the Bonhomme Richard, which he named in honor of Benjamin Franklin . Jones named the ship in 1779 after taking command of his ship .
 On September 23, his squadron met a large British convoy in the North Sea . He says he was killed in a collision with a British convoy .
 The Bonhomme Richard attacked the leading ship of the force, the Serapis . The Serapas were the first ship to take part in the attack on the island .
 The Serapis was larger and better armed than Jones's ship, so Jones took his vessel alongside . Jones's vessel was bigger and better equipped than his ship . Jones was able to take his vessel with him to sea in the Mediterranean .
 The ships were so close that their rigging became entangled and the muzzles of their guns touched . The rigging of the two ships were entangled and their guns muzzled .
 In 1781, Jones took command of the America, the ship whose construction he supervised . Jones oversaw the ship's construction and oversaw its construction .
 After the war ended in 1783, a move to promote Jones to rear admiral was defeated, and the American Navy was soon abolished .
 In 1787, Empress Catherine of Russia persuaded Jones to serve as rear admiral in the Black Sea fleet, which was fighting the Ottoman Turks .
 Russian officers made Jones's position difficult, and his experience was disappointing . Jones's experience in Russia was disappointing, and he was disappointed .
 Jones was appointed United States commissioner to Algiers in 1792 but died before the appointment reached him in Paris . Jones died before he could receive the appointment in France .
 Mary Harris was a well-known figure in the U.S. labor movement during the late 1800's and early 1900's . She was a labor leader in the United States labor movement .
 She helped found the Industrial Workers of the World, a labor organization formed to oppose conservative policies in the labor movement . She also helped found an organization that opposes conservative policies .
 Jones persuaded many laborers to strike for better working conditions, higher wages, and shorter hours . Jones convinced many to strike in favor of better conditions, shorter hours, and better wages .
 She was jailed in West Virginia in 1902 and 1913, and in Colorado in 1913 and 1914, for leading miners’ strikes .
 The jailing of a woman who was more than 70 years old aroused sympathy for the labor movement . She was jailed for more than 60 years .
 She taught school in Monroe, Michigan, and in Memphis before marrying George Jones, an ironworker, in 1861 . She married George Jones in 1863 .
 In 1867, her husband and their four children died of yellow fever in Memphis . Her husband and four children were also killed in Memphis, Tennessee .
 James G Scoville Jones is one of the most versatile talents in American music . Quincy Jones is known for his versatility in music .
 He is a composer, arranger, musician, conductor, and record and film producer . He is also a composer and arranger .
 Jones has succeeded in jazz, popular music, rhythm and rhythm and blues music, musical theater, motion pictures, and television . Jones is a multi-generational success .
 He began his musical career as a teen-ager playing trumpet in Culver Pictures Mary H Jones 1598 Jonson .
 In 1956, Jones became musical director for Dizzy Gillespie's jazz orchestra . He toured the Middle East and South America with Gillespie's orchestra .
 In the late 1950's and early 1960's, Jones led his own band, touring the U.S. and Europe . Jones toured the United States and Europe with his band .
 He was the first African American to hold such a high executive position with a major white-owned record company . He rose to vice president in 1964, the first black president of a major record company.
 Jonquil, /AHNG kwuhL, is any of several yellow narcissuses that came from southern Europe and northern Africa . It is a yellow narcissus that is usually found in southern Europe .
 In the United States, the best-known types are a species named jonquil/and a species called campernelle jonqil . The campernelsle jonsquil is a hybrid bred from different species . In the U.S., the best
 The jonquil has bright yellow flowers and sword-shaped leaves . The flowers’ petals are grouped around a tube about 1 inch AP/Wide World Quincy Jones Frank Tirro .
 He was proud of his Greek and Latin learning and severely criticized other playwrights of his day, including Shakespeare, for errors and carelessness he saw in their writing .
 In 1616, Jonson became the first playwright to prepare an edition of his own works for publication . Jonson was the playwright's first play to be published in 1616 .
 He advanced the claim of the drama to serious consideration as literature, he said . He thus advanced the claims of the play as literature . The drama is now considered literature .
 He was center of the first literary "club" at the Mermaid Tavern in London . He was also center of first literary ‘club’ at Mermaid Tavern .
 Sir Walter Raleigh and playwrights Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher were members of the group . Other members included Walter Raleigh, John Fletcher and Sir Walter Rector .
 It is a realistic and satiric comedy of London life in which each character is motivated by a single /umour, such as jealousy .
 In Jonsonss later satiric comedies, Vol/pone , The Silent Woman and The A/chemist, the humours are generally an aspect of universal human failings, such as greed, ignorance, or superstition .
 Jonson's most famous song, ‘Drink to Me Only with Thine Eyes,” shows his classical style with its deceptively simple form and vocabulary . Jonson wrote the most famous classical song, 'Drink To Me Only With Thine eyes'
 His superb epitaph on the death of his 7-year-old son shows the same skill used to hide his deep grief . The father-of-one says he will always remember his son's death .
 Joplin, Scott Scott was the leading composer of ragtime . Ragtime is a lively rhythmic kind of music written chiefly for the piano .
 He left home at the age of about 14 and played piano in various Mississippi Valley saloons . He played in saloons in the Mississippi Valley .
 He became increasingly depressed because no one would produce 7reemonisha . He was also depressed because of the lack of interest in the project .
 An edition of the complete works of Joplin in 1971 revived interest in the composer's compositions . The complete works were published in 1971 .
 The Advisory Board on the Pulitzer Prizes awarded Joplin a special citation for his contribution to American music in 1976 .
 Jordan is an Arab kingdom on the East Bank of the Jordan River in the heart of the Middle East . It is one of the largest Arab countries in the world .
 The country is bordered by Syria, Iraq; Iraq; Saudi Arabia; Israel; and the West Bank . The West Bank is west of the Jordan River .
 Much of Jordan's modern history has been shaped by events in an area often called Palestine . Jordan has been ruled by Jordan's rulers since 1948 . The region is often referred to as Palestine, and Jordan is now Jordan .
 Israel, the West Bank, and the tiny Gaza Strip cover this region . Israel, West Bank and the Gaza Strip are all part of the Israeli-West Bank region .
 Jordan was once called 7ransjordan because it lay across the Jordan River from Palestine . Jordan once lay on the edge of the Jordan river .
 Jordan lost the West Bank during the Arab-Israeli war of 1967, and Israel occupied the territory . The West Bank is Jordan's land in West Bank .
 In 1974, Jordan officially gave up political responsibility for the West Bank . Jordan gave up responsibility for West Bank in 1974 .
 Jordan continued to play important roles in the administration and financial support of the West Bank . But Jordan has continued to support the Palestinian government .
 In 1988, King Hussein of Jordan broke Jordan's ties with the West Bank . Jordan broke the ties with West Bank in 1988 .
 Jordan's varied terrain includes deserts, mountains, deep valleys, and rolling plains . Jordan is home to Jordan's largest city, Jordan .
 It mines phosphates and potash but lacks the petroleum deposits of its Arab neighbors . The country has a history of unrest, but lacks petroleum deposits in its borders .
 Service industries, such as government and commerce, employ the largest number of workers in the country . Service industries employ the most people in the U.S. government .
 Agricu/ture—barley, cabbages, citrus fruits, cucumbers, eggplants, grapes, melons, olives, tomatoes, wheat . Manufacturing—batteries, cement, ceramics, detergents, fertilizer, petroleum products, pharmaceutical
 Jordan's capital and largest city, Amman, /eft, features modern office buildings and apartment houses . Amman is the country's largest city and most populous city .
 The treasury at Petra was carved into the cliffs of this trading center during the A.D. 100°'s. oe AE . He appoints a prime minister to head the government, as well as members of the Council of Ministers or cabinet .
 The Senate is one house of the National Assembly, Jordan’s legislature . Jordan's legislature is one of the most powerful chambers in the country .
 80 members of the Ay people are elected to four-year terms . The other house is the Chamber of Deputies . 80 members are elected by the majority of the population .
 The coat of arms displays king heads each district . A governor appointed by the — Jordan's flag was adoptedin . Jordan's president is expected to be in office in the future .
 The judicial system consists-of civilprelipointed star . It features a seventhe shield, helmet, and eagle eee dans judicial system .
 The holy Arabic is the king's prayer for mercial, criminal, and civil cases . Civil courts handle most com_erses of the Quran, the holy Arabic .
 The Jordan Arab Army consists of an army of about 90,000 men, an air force with more than 13,000 members, and a small navy . Jordan is one of the most powerful Arab nations in the Middle East .
 The military employs a high percentage of Jordan's work force, thereby placing a burden on the economy . Jordan's economy is heavily dependent on the military, which employs a large part of its workforce .
 Jordan has fought wars with Israel and has faced rebellions by its own Palestinian population . But Jordan has faced rebellion from its own population .
 Because of these threats, the government maintains large armed forces despite the cost . Government maintains large forces despite cost of the country .
 Most Jordanians live in the fertile highlands of the northwest . About three-fourths of the people live in towns and cities with populations of 5,000 or more .
 Ames man, Jordan's capital and largest city, has nearly 1.1 million people . Jordan's largest city is home to nearly 1,000 people .
 Jordan is a country in the Middle East . Jordan is one of several countries with more than 100,000 people . The country is home to the largest city in the world .
 It is bordered by Iraq, Isare Az Zarga and Irbid. rael, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and the West Bank .
 The remaining population of Jordan consists mainly of Palestinian Arabs, most of whom are refugees of the Arab-Israeli wars of 1948 and 1967 . Most of Jordan's population is mainly Palestinian Arabs .
 Other Palestinians moved from the West Bank to Amman between the wars, when it was part of Jordan . The West Bank is now part of the Jordan-occupied region .
 Ethnic minorities in Jordan include small numbers of Armenian Christians and Circassian Muslims . Ethnic minorities also include Armenians and Circassians .
 In urban areas, almost all homes and apartments have electric power and running water . Almost all homes in urban areas have running water and electric power .
 In general, living conditions are better than in many other developing countries . But living conditions in many developing countries are poor .
 10 percent of Jordans population lives in Palestinian refugee camps . About 10 percent lives in crowded Palestinian camps set up by the United Nations .
 Most rural Jordanians live in villages and have homes built of stone and mud, or of concrete, or concrete . Most of Jordanians have stone or mud-made homes .
 They live in tents and move from place to place with camels and sheep in search of water and pasture . The camels, sheep and camels are among the animals who live in tent tents .
 Some rural Jordanians, including Bedouin men and women, wear traditional flowing robes . Jordanians wear flowing robes in rural areas .
 Jordanians eat a variety of foods, including cheese, cracked wheat, flat bread, rice, vegetables, and yogurt . Jordanians are known for their food choices, including cracked wheat and cracked wheat .
 A traditional Jordanian dish called manseffeatures lamb cooked in yogurt and served on a large tray of rice .
 Popular beverages include coffee, fruit juices, mineral water, soft drinks, and tea . Popular drinks include fruit juice, coffee and fruit juices .
 Jordanians enjoy watching and playing various sports, particularly basketball, camel racing, horse racing, martial arts, and soccer . Jordanians also enjoy camel racing and horse racing .
 Large families frequently gather for a meal or for a picnic in the country . Large families often gather for meals or a picnic at the family home .
 Devout Muslims pray five times a day, attend a mosque (an Islamic house of worship), fast, fast, give money or goods to the poor, and make a pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, the sacred city .
 Most of the Jordanian Christians are members of the Eastern Orthodox Church . Most of them are part of the East Orthodox Church.
 Jordan has various Christian groups, which include Roman Catholics and Protestants . Jordan is also home to various other Christian groups .
 Jordan has many community colleges, vocational schools, and technical institutions . Jordan has a large number of community colleges and vocational schools .
 Jordanians attend universities in other Arab countries, Europe, and the U.S. Many Jordanians go to universities in Europe, Europe and the United States . Jordanians also attend universities abroad .
 Jordanian craftworkers make a variety of decorative and useful objects . Items include jewelry, coffeepots, daggers, and Islamic prayer beads .
 Many mosques and other buildings feature delicate geometric designs called arabesques . The geometric designs are known as the geometric shapes of mosques and mosques .
 The Jordan River Valley is a deep, narrow valley that extends from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea . It is one of the largest valleys in the world, stretching from south of the sea to south of Jordan .
 Jordan River flows through the center of the valley and ends in the Dead Sea . The Jordan River is the source of the Jordan River .
 Jordan River Valley is part of the Great Rift Valley, a deep cut in the earth's surface . The Jordan Valley Valley is the largest valley in the world's history .
 The Transjordan Plateau rises steeply from the Jordan River Valley and the Dead Sea . It is the tallest mountain in the world, rising from the top of the country's highest mountains .
 The plateau covers a wedge-shaped area that begins at the Syrian border and narrows as it extends southward to the region around Maan . The area is also known as Maan, which borders Syria and Syria .
 It consists of broad, rolling plains that have an average elevation of about 3,000 feet above sea level . The plains are covered in rolling plains with an average altitude of 3,500 feet .
 The plateau includes Jordan's largest cities and most of the country’s farmland . The plateau is Jordan's most populated area and is home to the largest cities in Jordan .
 Rainfall on the southern plateau is less dependable and averages between 10 and 15 inches a year . Rainfall is barely enough to grow wheat in the region .
 Average temperatures range between 64 and 86 °F during the summer and between 40 and 52 °F in the winter . Average temperatures are 64 to 86°F during summer and up to 52°F in winter .
 The Syrian Desert, also called the northern Arabian Desert, is a vast wasteland to the east and south of the plateau . It is also known as the Arabian Desert .
 The desert receives less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rain annually . The desert is home to the largest population in the world .
 The economy depends on foreign aid and on the larger economy of the Middle East, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The economy depends upon foreign aid"
 Many Jordanians work abroad, in the service industries of wealthy, oil-producing Arab countries . Jordanians also work in wealthy Arab countries, such as Saudi Arabia .
 Today, irrigation and the use of plastic-covered hothouses allow farmers to grow a variety of fruits, vegetables and other crops .
 The land rises, background, toward the Transjordan Plateau east of the valley . The land is covered in thick clouds, rain and snow .
 Production of leather goods is an important industry in Jordan . Rami G Khouri is the owner of the Jordanian leather goods .
 The factory workers shown here are sewing leather pieces to make boots . The total value of economic production is estimated at $1 billion a year .
 Tourism helps support many businesses, including hotels and restaurants . Tourism is a big source of revenue for many businesses .
 Manufacturing and mining employ about 20 percent of Jordan's workers and account for about 30 percent of the total value of economic production . Manufacturing and . mining employ . Jordan's manufacturing and mining industry employs about 20% of its workers .
 Large plants include a petroleum refinery and fertilizer and cement factories . Large plants also include a fertilizer and fertilizer factory .
 Smaller industries manufacture batteries, ceramics, cigarettes, detergents, food products, pharmaceutical products, shoes, and textiles . Smaller industry also makes batteries, ceramic, cigarettes and other products .
 Mining operations produce phosphates and potash, which are used in the production of fertilizer . Mining operations also produce potash and phosphates used in fertilizer production .
 Jordan is mostly desert, only 3 percent of the land is cultivated . Only 3 percent is cultivated in Jordan . Jordan is largely desert .
 Chief crops of the Jordan River Valley include citrus fruits and such vegetables as cabbages, cucumbers, eggplants, melons, melon, and tomatoes . Chief crops are citrus fruits, such as citrus fruits .
 On the Transjordan Plateau, farmers cultivate such grains as barley and wheat . Farmers cultivate grapes, olives, and other fruits; vegetables; and nuts . Farmers also cultivate grains, wheat, barley, wheat and other grains .
 Modern farming methods have become increasingly widespread, especially in the Jordan River Valley . Modern farming techniques are increasingly widespread in Jordan Valley .
 Jordan's main exports are phosphates, chemicals, potash, fruits and vegetables, and manufactured products . The country's main export is phosphate, chemicals and potash .
 Jordan’s chief trading partners are Saudi Arabia, the U.S., Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, Germany, and India . Jordan is one of the world's largest economies .
 Al Aqabah, Jordan’s only port, has been extensively developed to handle cargo shipped through the Red Sea . The port is Jordan's only port in the country . It is the only country in the world to have a port in Jordan .
 Four daily newspapers -- three in Arabic and one in English -- are published in Jordan .
 The government owns and operates the country’s radio and television stations .
 An average of about 1 out of 5 Jordanians owns a radio and about 1 in 8 owns a TV set . About 1 of 8 Jordanians also owns a television set .
 Although the government closely controls communications, there is more freedom of expression in Jordan than in many other Arab countries in the Middle East . Jordan is one of the most prosperous countries in Arab countries .
 Jordan depends on imported oil to generate electricity . Except for one dam that produces electricity, Jordan needs to rely on oil imports . Jordan is one of the world's largest oil-rich countries .
 Written history first mentions what is now Jordan in about 2000 B.C., when Semitic nomads entered the region . The region was populated by nomadic nomads in the early 2000s .
 Ammonites, Amorites, Edomites, and Moabites traded in lands east of the Jordan River . By about 1200 B.C., four Semitic peoples had been farming and trading east of Jordan River lands .
 During the 900's B.C. Israelites under Kings David and Solomon conquered and ruled the region . The Israelites conquered the region and ruled it for over a century .
 Later, the Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Persians invaded and controlled the area . The Egyptians and Assyrians also invaded the area and controlled it .
 The Nabataeans ruled from their unique capital city carved out of the rose-colored stone cliffs of Petra . The city was carved from the walls of Petra and ruled from its capital city .
 After his death, the Seleucids ruled the northern part of present-day Jordan . The Nabataeans ruled the southern part of the country .
 Jordan became part of the Byzantine Empire when the Roman Empire split in the late 300’s A.D. Jordan was part of East Roman Empire . Jordan was one of the most important sites in the Roman empire .
 Arab Muslims from the Arabian Peninsula defeated Byzantine armies in the northern Jordan region in 636 . In 636, Arab Muslims defeated Byzantine forces in the north Jordan region .
 The conquering Arabs established their language and religion among the people who lived in the region . The conquering Arab rulers established their religion among those who lived there . The conquerors of the region are known as the Arabs .
 They developed an important route through Jordan for Islamic pilgrimages to Mecca . The route was important route for Islamic pilgrims to Mecca.
 At the close of the 1000's, Christian crusaders from Europe conquered the eastern Mediterranean coast, including Jerusalem and parts of Jordan .
 The region had great religious significance for both Christians and Muslims . The region was known for its religious significance as a Christian-Muslim enclave .
 In 1517, the Ottoman Empire easily defeated the Mamelukes, and most of Jordan became part of it . Most of Jordan was part of the Ottoman empire until 1517 . The Ottoman Empire ruled most of the region .
 During Ottoman rule, the region's only attraction for outsiders was the pilgrimage route . The region was largely uninhabited during the Ottoman rule .
 The Ottomans did not govern Jordan directly until the late 1800's . Circassian families settled in and near Amman, Jordan .
 In 1908, a railway was completed along the pilgrimage route, stimulating Jordan’s economy . The railway was built in 1908, stimulating the country's economy .
 Sharif Hussein of Mecca in Saudi Arabia led an Arab revolt against Ottoman rule . During World War . Hussein led the Arab revolt . He led the revolt against the Ottoman Empire .
 The revolt led to the defeat of the Ottomans in the Middle East and the establishment of several Arab states . With the help of the United Kingdom, the revolt ended the Ottoman rule of the region . The revolt was the first Arab revolt since the fall of the Ottoman Empire .
 In 1921, the British gave the territory east of the Jordan partial self-government by making it an emirate called Transjordan . In 1921 the British made the territory part of the Trans-Jordan emirates .
 Abdullah, a son of Hussein, ruled Transjordan as emir under British supervision . Abdullah ruled the country under British control .
 Abdullah made Amman the capital of Transjordan and established his authority with considerable help from the United Kingdom . Abdullah established Amman in Amman with help from Britain .
 In 1923, the United Kingdom declared that Transjordan should become an independent state . The country was declared an independent country in 1923 .
 The British kept control of the state's defenses, finances, and foreign affairs . But they kept control over the defense and finances .
 Transjordan gained complete independence in 1946, but still depended on the United Kingdom for economic aid . Transjordans still rely on the UK for economic assistance .
 This document supported the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine without violating the civil and religious rights of the non-Jewish population . This document was signed by the Arab League of Arab Arab nations .
 At that time, thousands of Jews had immigrated to Palestine, and after World War I, tens of thousands more came .
 Many came from Europe during the 1930's and 1940's because of German persecution . Many came to the U.S. because of persecution in Germany .
 The Jewish immigration led to fighting between Jews and Palestinian Arabs for control of the land . Jews and Arab Arabs fought over the land for control .
 Israel was established in 1948 after the British mandate of Palestine ended . That year, the Jews established the state of Israel . Israel was the first state of Palestine .
 Jordan held the West Bank, and Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan . The West Bank was held by Israel, Jordan and Jordan, but Jerusalem was split between the two .
 Jordan's population of about 400,000 more than tripled as a result of the war . The country's population now has a population of more than 300,000 . Jordan is home to the largest city in the world .
 It gained about 400,000 Palestinian residents of the West Bank and about 450,000 Palestinians from Israel . Israel gained about 450 Palestinian refugees from Israel in the 1990s .
 Palestinians competed with East Bank Jordanians who controlled the government . Some Palestinians competed for power with East bank Jordanians . Jordanians controlled the Palestinian government in the 1990s .
 The refugees burdened Jordan's economy because of the food, shelter, and services they required . The refugees burden the country's economy by providing them with food and shelter .
 Some brought valuable skills and savings to Jordan and set up businesses . But some brought valuable savings and skills back to Jordan .
 By the mid-1950's, Jordan began to develop petroleum-refining, cement, and phosphate industries . By the 1950s, Jordan developed its own cement, cement and petroleum industries .
 Other parts of the economy, including agriculture, manufacturing and tourism, began a period of steady growth . Agriculture, manufacturing, tourism, and tourism also saw steady increases .
 Talal was removed from the throne in 1952 because of mental illness . He was removed because he was mentally ill . But Talal is still in charge of the country .
 Talal’s son, 17-year-old Hussein, succeeded him but did not officially take up the duties of king until he turned 18 in 1953 . Hussein, 17, succeeded Talal as king in 1953, but not officially took up the role of king .
 Arab countries competed for political power in the Middle East . The U.S. and the Soviet Union sought to extend influence in the region . Arab countries were competing for power .
 In 1956, King Hussein replaced the Arab Legion's British officers with Jordanians and renamed it the Jordan Arab Army . The Arab Legion was replaced by Jordanians in 1956 .
 In the late 1950's, the United States became Jordan’s chief Western source of financial and military support . The U.S. became Jordan's chief Western support in the 1950's .
 Palestinian refugee camps in Jordan swelled after the 1967 war between Arab nations and Israel . Tensions between Israel and Arab nations were high during the war .
 Many Palestinians fled to camps after Israel occupied their homes in the West Bank . Many fled to these camps after Israeli occupation of their homes .
 Arabs and Israelis disagreed over rights to the waters of the Jordan River . Arab-Israeli relations have been tense for more than a decade . Arabs and Israeli-Arab relations have long been at odds over the rights of the river .
 Continuing problems of the Palestinian refugees led to the creation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in 1964 . The organization was formed in response to Palestinian refugees .
 The PLO organized raids into Israel from Jordan and Lebanon, and Israel responded with raids into Arab territory . Israel responded to the PLO's raids from Jordan, Lebanon and Lebanon .
 Jordan and other Arab nations united their armies under one command in 1964 . Also in 1964, Jordan and others united Arab nations under a single command .
 Israel defeated Jordan, Egypt, and Syria in a six-day war in June 1967 . In June 1967, Israel defeated Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Jordan and Egypt in a war .
 Jordan lost East Jerusalem and all of the West Bank to Israeli occupation . Jordan lost all of Israel's West Bank and East Jerusalem to Israel .
 About 300,000 Palestinians, both refugees and permanent residents, fled east of the West Bank . The West Bank has been occupied by Israel since the fall of 1967 .
 Jordan's economy suffered from the loss of West Bank farmlands and tourist attractions . The loss of the West Bank is seen as a major factor in the country's economy .
 After the 1967 war, many Palestinian refugees joined guerrilla groups to fight Israel and regain their homeland . Many Palestinian refugees join guerrilla groups after the war . After the war, Palestinian refugees began fighting for their homeland in Israel .
 By early 1970, these forces represented an unofficial second government in Jordan . They threatened to overthrow the monarchy and threatened to topple the monarchy .
 On Sept. 1970, the Jordanian army attacked the Palestinian guerrillas . The Jordanian army was attacked by Palestinian rebels .
 Syrian forces entered Jordan to support the Palestinians but later withdrew . Syria entered Jordan in support of Palestinians but withdrew from Jordan .
 Fighting between the army and isolated guerrilla groups continued into 1971 and beyond .
 Jordan played a minor role in the 1973 Arab-Israeli war . Drained by these ongoing battles, Jordan was forced to withdraw from Israel .
 At a meeting of Arab leaders in 1974, King Hussein lost influence in Palestinian affairs when the PLO was declared the only representative of Palestinian people .
 Hussein and other Arab leaders agreed that the West Bank should become part of an independent Palestinian state in the event of an Israeli withdrawal . The West Bank is part of a Palestinian state if Israel withdraws .
 The PLO gave the PLO responsibility for any West Bank territory from which Israel might withdraw . Israel withdrew from the West Bank from any territory Israel might pull out .
 Jordan continued to play important administrative and financial roles in the West Bank . However, Jordan still played an important role in the bank's operations .
 Jordanian government paid salaries of many West Bank public service workers, including doctors and teachers . For example, the Jordanian government also paid the salaries of doctors, teachers and doctors .
 Disagreements between Jordan and PLO over Palestinian policy led to a major break in 1986 . Jordan and the PLO broke up in 1986 after a series of disagreements .
 King Hussein tried to set up new leader in Jordan, Barbara Charline ship for the Palestinians . Charline is a former leader of the Palestinian Liberation Party . King Hussein was King of Jordan .
 The next year, the Palestinians demonstrated their loyalty to the PLO in an uprising against Israel's occupying forces in the West Bank . But the Palestinians proved their loyalty in the uprising against the occupying forces .
 In 1988, Hussein broke Jordan's political and administrative ties to the West Bank . Hussein broke the ties in 1988 . Jordan's relationship with West Bank has since been severed .
 He called for the PLO to fulfill the financial and other functions Jordan had handled . The PLO is responsible for Jordan's role in the region .
 The United States and many other countries, including many Arab nations, opposed the invasion and formed an alliance . The U.S. and Arab nations formed an anti-invasion alliance against the invasion .
 Jordan's relations with some Arab countries became strained when it remained neutral in the conflict . Jordan remained neutral during the conflict, but relations with Arab countries have been strained .
 Beginning in 1993, Israel and the PLO signed several agreements that led to the withdrawal of Israeli troops from portions of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip by early 1996 . The agreements were signed in 1993 and 1996 .
 In 1994, Jordan and Israel signed a peace treaty that formally ended the state of war that had technically existed between the two countries since 1948 . The two countries had technically been at war since 1948, but the treaty was signed in 1994 .
 People A Ancestry D. Food and drink G Education B Languages E Recreation H Recreation H The arts C Way of Life F Religion Ill. Ill.
 Texas Democrat was a member of the House of Representatives from 1973 to 1979 . Jordan was a Texas Democrat . He was elected to the Texas House in 1973 and 1979 .
 In 1976, she became the first black keynote speaker at the Democratic National Convention . She was also the first woman to speak at a Democratic National convention .
 Jordan served in the Texas Senate from 1966 to 1972 . Jordan was the first black to hold a seat there since 1883 . Jordan served as a senator from 1966 until 1972 .
 In 1992, Jordan received the Spingarn Medal for her service in Congress . Jordan was elected to Congress in 1992 .
 He helped develop quantum mechanics, a field of physics that describes the structure of atoms and the motion of atomic particles . The Nobel Prize-winning physicist is a Nobel Prize winner .
 Jordan helped two other German physicists, Max Born and Werner Heisenberg, write the first mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics . Jordan's work was published in 1925, and he is credited with the discovery of quantum physics .
 By 1928, he had developed a way of analyzing interactions between many atomic particles or waves . By 1928 he had created a way to analyze interactions between atoms and waves .
 He also added to the knowledge of subatomic particles called neutrinos and to the theory of gravitation .
 Chicago Bulls star has played guard and forward for most of his career . He has played for the Bulls since his debut in 1995 .
 His spectacular shooting, especially his acrobatic shots near the basket, has attracted huge turnouts in every NBA arena . His spectacular shots have attracted huge crowds in every arena .
 Only Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Karl Malone, and Wilt Chamberlain have scored more than 100 points . Kareem has scored more in the NBA than any other NBA player .
 He played on the United States teams that won first place in men’s basketball at the 1984 and 1992 Summer Olympic Games . He played for the U.S. men's basketball team at the Olympics .
 Jordan helped lead the Bulls to NBA titles in the 1990-1991, 1991-1992, 1992-1993, 1995-1996, 1996-1997, and 1997-1998 seasons . Jordan won NBA titles with the Bulls in 1990-91-1992 and 1995-97 seasons .
 Jordan was named NBA Rookie of the Year for the 1984-1985 season . Jordan scored 2,313 points, more than any other player in that season .
 He led the NBA in scoring average a record 10 seasons, including 8 consecutive seasons beginning with the 1986-1987 season . NBA scoring average was a record of 10 seasons .
 Jordan was named the NBA’s Most Valuable Player for the 1987 1988, 1990-1991, 1991-1992, 1995-1996, and 1997-1998 seasons . Jordan won NBA MVPs in 1987-91, 1992-93 and 1995-97-1998 .
 He decided to play professional baseball, signing a minor league contract with the Chicago White Sox in 1994 . He decided not to play professionally and signed with the White Sox .
 Jordan rejoined the Bulls in March 1995 and retired again in January 1999 . Jordan was a member of the Bulls until he was released in March 1999 .
 In 2000, he became part owner and president of basketball operations of the Washington Wizards . He also owns the Washington Capitals of the NHL and Washington Wizards of the NBA .
 In 2001, Jordan resigned his Wizards management position and announced he would join Washington as a player beginning with the 2001-2002 season . Jordan resigned from his management position in 2001, but announced he'd join the Wizards .
 Vernon Eulion, Jr. is an American civil rights leader and lawyer . He was born in Jordan Jordan, Jordan Jordan . He is also a lawyer .
 He was head of the National Urban League from 1972 to 1981, when he resigned and jcined a private law firm . He resigned from his post in 1981 .
 Jordan led drives to register African American voters in the South and raise funds for black colleges . Before Jordan assumed the leadership of the league, he had led efforts to register voters in South .
 In 1980, he was shot and seriously wounded by an unknown assailant in Fort Wayne, Indiana .
 Jordan served as chairman of the group that helped Bill Clinton prepare for his presidency in 1992 and early 1993 . Jordan was also chairman of a team that helped him prepare for the presidency in 1993 .
 In 1962, he led a boycott against stores in Augusta, Georgia, and persuaded them to hire blacks . He led the boycott of stores that hired blacks in 1962 .
 From 1965 to 1969, Jordan served as director of Voter Education Project of the Southern Regional Council . Jordan is credited with helping to develop voter education in the 1960s .
 His success in registering nearly 2 million black voters helped increase the number of black officeholders in the South from about 72 to 564 . The South has about 564 officeholders, mostly African-American officeholders .
 Jordan River is the only important river of Israel and Jordan . It rises in the springs of Mount Hermon in Syria .
 Much of the rest of the river is not more than about about about 5 feet (1.m) deep, except in March . The river is only about 1.5 feet deep in some of the world's largest rivers .
 Then, the melting snow from Mount Hermon often causes the river to flood . Then, then, the river will flood .
 The southern half of the river forms the border between the West Bank and Jordan . The southern part of the border forms a border between Jordan and Israel .
 The northern section forms part of Israel's borders with Jordan and Syria . Israel's northern section is part of the border with Jordan, Syria and Jordan .
 Peter Gubser Joseph was the husband of Mary, the mother of Jesus . He was a descendant of David, the second king of Israel . He is the husband to Mary, Mary, and the son of Jesus Christ .
 According to the Bible, Mary was found to be pregnant after she had been betrothed to Joseph, but before they were married . The Bible says she was found pregnant before she was married to Joseph .
 Joseph took steps to break the betrothal, but in a way that would not put Mary to shame . Joseph took the steps of breaking the deal with Mary and Mary .
 Joseph took Mary as his wife and legally accepted her child as his own by naming Him . Joseph then took Mary's child Mary and named him Joseph . Joseph accepted Mary's baby as his child by naming him Joseph after Mary .
 Joseph and Mary raised Jesus according to traditional Jewish customs and rites . Mary and Joseph raised Jesus using traditional Jewish rites .
 Jesus was circumcised and presented at the Temple for the prescribed rites of purification and dedication of the first-born . Jesus was the son of a man who died of a blood disease .
 Little is known about Joseph’s life after he and his family settled in Nazareth, Nazareth .
 There are no later mentions of Joseph, though the Gospels mention Mary . The Gospels also mention Mary, but there is no mention of Joseph .
 There is no mention of Joseph at Jesus's’ death and no indication of his presence among the first Christian community in Jerusalem . Joseph was not found at Jesus’s death .
 Early Christian legends portrayed Joseph as an aged widower with children when betrothed to Mary . Joseph is believed to have been a widower when he married Mary .
 Joseph must have been in his midteens when he married Mary . Based on marriage customs of the times, Joseph was in his teens . Joseph's wife was Mary's mother .
 The Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Episcopal churches honor Joseph as a saint . Joseph is a member of the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches .
 In 1962, Pope John XXiil honored Joseph by decreeing that Joseph's name be included immediately after Mary in the list of saints in the Canon of the Mass . Joseph was named a saint by the Pope in 1962 .
 Joseph was sold into Egypt by his brothers and became the great prime minister of Pharaoh . Joseph was the Hebrew boy who was sold to Egypt by brothers .
 One day, when he was 17, he appeared among them in a coat with long sleeves . One day he appeared in the crowd wearing a long-sleeved coat . He says he was inspired by his friends and family .
 Peasants or herders could not wear such a cloak, because its long sleeves would get in the way . Peasant and herders were not allowed to wear the cloak because it was too long .
 Joseph's cloak was a sign that Joseph was intended for some better occupation . The cloak was also a sign of Joseph's desire to be a better man .
 They agreed to put him in a deep pit without harming him, after taking his coat . But they agreed to do so without harming the dog . They put him down in a pit, but took his coat away .
 Their camels were carrying spices and precious things from Gilead into Egypt . The camels carried spices and other precious things to Egypt .
 Judah and some of the other brothers drew Joseph out of the pit and sold him to the Ishmaelites . Joseph was sold for 20 pieces of silver .
 The brothers then killed a goat, tore a coat, stained it with the goat's blood, and took it to Jacob . The coat was stained with the blood of the goat, and taken to Jacob.
 Joseph served his master so faithfully that he became overseer of the household . Joseph served so faithfully his master that he took over the household of his master . Joseph was a slave to his master's wife . Joseph's wife became a slave .
 Potiphar's wife was offended because he would not return her love for him . But he offended her, because he was not returning her love, she said .
 Joseph soon won the jailer's confidence and was placed in charge of all the prisoners . Joseph was placed with all prisoners at the time of his imprisonment .
 Pharaoh's chief butler and baker offended their lord, so they were also put in prison . Pharaoh also put them in prison after they offended his lord . Pharaoh was Pharaoh's butler, baker and butler . Pharaoh's son and daughter were also imprisoned .
 Pharaoh Pharaoh had two very strange dreams that no one could understand . Pharaoh had a dream of two years later that he had two strange dreams . Pharaoh's dream was so strange that Pharaoh had no idea what he was dreaming of .
 Pharaoh's first dream: Seven cows were grazing in the reeds near the river . Pharaoh dreamed of seven cows grazing in reeds . Pharaoh's dream: "Seven fat cows grazing near the River River"
 In the second dream, seven good ears of grain sprang up, but seven thin ones ate them . In the first dream, the dream was about seven thin ears . The dream was a dream of being able to grow a healthy body .
 Joseph said the dreams meant that there would be seven years of plenty in Egypt, followed by 7 years of famine . Joseph said that the dream meant that Egypt would be hit with famine and plenty again .
 Pharaoh advised Pharaoh to choose a wise man to gather extra food in times of plenty to eat when famine came . Pharaoh told Pharaoh to pick a wise person to gather the extra food when famine comes .
 Pharaoh chose Joseph to oversee the grain storing of all Egypt . Pharaoh was so pleased with Joseph's wisdom that he chose him to oversee grain storage of Egypt . Joseph was chosen by Pharaoh to oversee Egypt's grain storage .
 They did not recognize Joseph as their brother when they were brought before him because 20 years had passed . They were brought to him because they had not been recognized for 20 years .
 He pretended to think that they were spies and asked them about their home . The man pretended to be a spy and asked about his home . He then pretended to ask them if they were going to be spies .
 Benjamin was his own brother, the son of Rachel, Joseph's mother, while the others were all half-brothers . Benjamin was Benjamin's brother, while Joseph's other half-siblings were half brothers .
 Joseph's brothers were ashamed to look at Joseph, but he forgave them for their wickedness . Joseph forgave the brothers for their sins .
 After their happy reunion, he told them to bring their father and families to Egypt, where they would have plenty of food . After their reunion, they were told to bring them back to Egypt .
 At first Jacob could not believe that Joseph still lived and was a ruler in Egypt . Jacob believed that Joseph was still alive and ruled Egypt at the time .
 When he saw the wagons sent to carry his family into the new land, he said, “It is enough. It is enough."
 Joseph's children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren journeyed to the land of Goshen, Goshen . Joseph met them in Goshen where Joseph met his descendants .
 Joseph had two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, who became the fathers of the two tribes that bore their names . Joseph became the father of two tribes, the tribes that bear their names.
 Joseph, his sons, and his brothers were the legendary ancestors of the Twelve Tribes of Israel . Joseph was the legendary ancestor of the 12 Tribes . Joseph's sons and brothers were Joseph's brothers and brothers .
 Their story connects the stories of the patriarchs in Genesis and the deliverance in Exodus . The patriarchs of Genesis and deliverance of Exodus are among those who have been involved in the story .
 He became famous for a retreat he led through Idaho and Montana in 1877 . The retreat was the first of his kind in Montana .
 In June 1877, war broke out between Joseph's band and U.S. troops . Joseph was the leader of the band's first band band .
 The fighting began shortly after government officials ordered the band to move from its homeland in Oregon to a reservation in Idaho . Government officials had ordered the tribe to move .
 Joseph's forces won several battles, but he realized that they could not defeat the Army . Joseph realized that he had to accept the defeat of the army . Joseph's troops won many battles but were unable to defeat them .
 He ordered a retreat to Canada, where he hoped to join forces with Sioux Indians who had fled there . He hoped to link forces with those who fled there, including Sioux Sioux Indians .
 In October 1877, he finally surrendered about 40 miles (64 kilometers) from the U.S. Canadian border .
 In 1878, the government sent Joseph and his people to the Indian Territory in Okland .
 After about 1885, he lived on the Colville Indian Reservation in Washington, Washington .
 Joseph of Arimathea, 48 uh muh THEE uh, was a wealthy member of the Jewish Sanhedrin (ruling council) in Jerusalem at the time of Jesus . Joseph was a member of a wealthy Sanhedrine in Jerusalem .
 After the Crucifixion, Joseph received permission to take the body of Jesus . Joseph was allowed to take his son's body after the crucifixion .
 Joseph came from Arimathea, a town east of what is now Tel Aviv, Israel . Joseph is believed to have lived in the region of Israel . He came from unknown location .
 He is said to have taken care of Mary after the Ascension of Jesus until her death . He is believed to have been responsible for her care until she died .
 According to another story, Joseph kept the Holy Grail, the cup Jesus used at the Last Supper . The cup is said to have been the cup used by Jesus to drink . Joseph kept it, according to reports .
 Josephine was the beloved wife of Napoleon Bonaparte, one of French history's most important figures . Josephine is one of France's most significant figures .
 She was the daughter of a French planter in Martinique, in the West Indies . She was born in the country of Martinique .
 The vicomte was one of the last victims of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution . He died in 17th century during the reign of Terror .
 Josephine was in prison for a time and narrowly escaped being guillotined . Josephine narrowly avoided being guilledotined in prison .
 Josephine soon became friendly with Vicomte de Barras, a government leader . Josephine became a friend of the government leader in the 1920s .
 Through his influence, she got back some of her husband's property, and she became a leader in Paris society . She became a socialite in Paris .
 She was graceful and stately in her public appearances, which made her an asset to Napoleon in his climb to power . Napoleon's wife was a French aristocrat who was a model for the French .
 Napoleon often had love affairs while he was absent during his military campaigns . It was often reported that she had affairs while Napoleon was away in France .
 Josephine was also an intelligent woman and may have given Napoleon much advice . Josephine gave Napoleon much of her advice .
 Napoleon was afraid that he might die without a son, and that his empire would crumble . By 1809, Napoleon was worried that he may die without his son . Napoleon feared that he would die without son .
 Josephine then retired with imperial honors to Malmaison, the small estate near Paris, which Napoleon had bought for her . Josephine died at the end of her life .
 Josephine heard the cannon shots announcing the birth, and Napoleon sent her a special message . Napoleon sent the message to Josephine . Josephine was born in 1803 .
 He once brought his son to Malmaison, without Marie Louise's knowledge, without her knowledge . Marie Louise once brought her son to the family home without the knowledge .
 Marie Louise was not allowed to go with Napoleon to exile at Elba . She wrote a letter to Napoleon and asked permission to join him . Marie Louise wrote to Napoleon asking permission to accompany him .
 He wrote 7he Jewish War, a history of the war between the Jews and Romans, and Jewish Antiquities . He also wrote 7 he Jewish War and 7he Jew War .
 The Jews were defeated, but Josephus was spared by the Roman commander . The Roman commander spared Josephus by sparing him .
 Moses was a lieutenant of Moses, who led Israel in the conquest of Canaan after Moses’ death . Moses led Israel to Canaan after the death of Moses .
 The walls of jericho fell flat at the blast of the Israelites’ trumpets, the Israelite’s trumpets . The walls fell flat as the walls of Jericho came down .
 Israel then took all Canaan with three lightning-fast campaigns, killed the area's inhabitants . Israel then divided the land among the 12 tribes of Israel . The land was divided among Israel's 12 tribes .
 National Park is in southern California near the town of Twentynine Palms . Carole R Fontaine joshua Tree National Park .
 According to legend, Mormon pioneers named the trees after the Biblical character .
 The trees rise as high as 40 feet (12 meters) and measure up to 14 feet (14 feet) diameter . The trees can be seen in the U.S. National Geographic Geographic Geographic Network .
 The park's animal life includes bighorn sheep, bobcats, cougars, coyotes, deer, desert tortoises, foxes, and rattlesnakes . The park is home to a variety of animals, including bobcats and coyotes .
 Josiah, joh SY uh, was one of the last and most unselfish rulers of Judah . Josiah was a ruler of Judah from the Bible .
 Josiah came to the throne at the age of 8, after his father, Amon, was killed . Josiah was 8 when he became king, Josiah's father was killed.
 He stopped idolatry in Judah and reinstituted the feast of the Passover in Jerusalem in Jerusalem . He also brought the feast back to the city .
 Assyria soon became too weak to demand tribute from its many provinces . Assyria became weak and became too dependent on its provinces .
 Josiah met Josiah at Megiddo, and Josiah was fatally wounded in the ensuing battle . Josiah died in the battle .
 Carole R Fontaine Jouett, /OO eht, Jack, earned the nickname Pau/ Revere of the South . The Revolutionary War patriot was a Revolutionary War hero .
 In 1781, he learned of a British plan to capture Thomas Jefferson, former governor of Virginia, and members of the Virginia legislature . Thomas Jefferson was captured by the British in 1781 in Virginia .
 After the war, Jouett served in the Virginia assembly and the Kentucky legislature . Jouett was also a member of the Kentucky assembly .
 James Kirby Martin Joule is a unit in the metric system of measurement . It is used to measure work or energy, and is used in a metric system . Joule, joo/ or jow, is a measurement unit used in metric systems .
 The joule is used to measure all forms of energy, including heat, electrical energy, and mechanical energy . It is used in the study of all types of energy .
 A calorie is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water by 1 Celsius degree . A calorie can be found in a small amount of water .
 One joule of energy per second is required to pass an electric current of 1 ampere through 1 ohm resistance . The current is 1 ampere through the resistance of a 1-second electric current . The energy is needed to pass a current of one am
 In the inch-pound system of measurement customarily used in the United States, work or energy is measured in foot-pounds . In the U.S., energy is defined as work or work in a foot pound .
 Hugh D Young Joule, joo/ or jow/, helped prove the law of conservation of energy . James Prescott, a British physicist, proved the law .
 This law states that energy is neither created nor destroyed when it changes from one form to another . This law also says that energy can be created and destroyed in one form .
 Joule’s experiments demonstrated that energy seemingly lost is actually converted into heat . Joule: ‘Energy seemed lost but actually converted to heat.’
 His results supported the theories of German physicists Hermann von Helmholtz and Julius Robert von Mayer, and British physicist Lord Kelvin, and Lord Kelvin .
 Joule discovered a mathematical relationship between the energy of an electric current and the amount of heat produced by that current . In 1840, Joule found a relationship between a current's energy and heat produced from it . Joule was the inventor of the Joule Theory .
 In 1847, he announced the discovery of a similar relationship between mechanical energy and heat . The discovery of mechanical energy was also announced in 1847 .
 An important event may be covered by journalists from many news organizations . CNN.com will feature a photo of the day's featured events in the news . Submit your photos to CNN iReport .
 Their stories are reported in newspapers and magazines and on radio and television . Their stories will be reported in newspaper, magazine and TV .
 Journalism is gathering, writing, and editing of material for news sources, such as newspapers and television . Journalism Journalism is the gathering of, writing and editing .
 It informs citizens about events in their community, their nation, and the world . CNN.com will feature iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit a photo of your favorite travel destinations for next week .
 The reports of journalists also help people form opinions about current affairs .
 Journalists inform the public through several means of communication, especially newspapers, magazines, radio, and television . Journalists use these means to communicate with the public via various media methods .
 These means of communication are often referred to as the press or the news media . The news media is a form of communication used to communicate with people .
 Many journalists report news on the Internet, a worldwide network of computers . Additionally, many journalists use the Internet to report news .
 Journalists throughout the world gather, write, and edit material for thousands of news stories . CNN iReporters are responsible for producing thousands of stories a day .
 Local reporters cover school board meetings, fires, sports events, and other local stories . Local reporter: "I'm looking forward to this year's school board meeting, fire, school fires"
 In democratic societies, people depend on the news media for the fair and truthful reporting of current events . In democratic society, people rely on news media to report current events, says CNN.com .
 Free nations grant the press freedom to report news and opinions without government interference . The U.S. government should not interfere with press freedom, says CNN.com .
 Freedom of the press encourages the exchange of ideas among citizens, which is essential for a democracy to work . Freedom of press is essential to a democracy, says Julian Zelizer .
 In government-controlled societies, the news media presents chiefly news that supports the policies of the government . In government controlled societies, however, news media often supports the government's policies .
 Related fields include advertising, book publishing, and public relations . Related fields also include advertising and book publishing .
 Newspapers cannot compete with radio or TV to be first to report the news . However, newspapers cannot compete to be the first to do so .
 Radio and TV stations can interrupt their programs at any time to broadcast a news bulletin . The news bulletin can be interrupted by interruptions of their programs .
 A paper must be printed and distributed before it can bring a story to the public . The public must see the content of this article .
 The great advantage of newspapers over radio and TV is that they can report stories in depth . It's a great advantage for newspapers to be able to do so much more on their own .
 In most cases, a local paper has a larger staff than do the local radio and TV stations .
 A newspaper devotes more space to reporting the news than a radio or television station provides air time for newscasts . A newscast is more important to a newspaper than a television station .
 A script of a half-hour newscast would fill only part of the front page of a standard-sized newspaper . For example, the a script of an hour-long news broadcast would fill just part of a front page .
 Newspapers also have other advantages over radio and television newscasts . Newspapers have advantages over television and radio stations .
 Newspapers enable readers to absorb the news at their own pace and on their own schedule . Newspapers can be read at your own pace, on your own schedule and in your own time .
 Newspapers can print certain material that appeals to only a small percentage of readers . Newspapers therefore are able to print certain content that appeal to only small number of readers. Newspapers are therefore able to publish certain material .
 Such material includes death notices, stock market listings, and want ads . Such material is often used in death notices and other ads .
 Large newspapers, national newsmagazines, and national radio and television networks have reporters stationed in major cities at home and abroad . Large newspapers and national . radio and TV networks have national reporters stationed .
 The rest of the press relies chiefly on news services for national and international news . This is the only major news service to rely on .
 Their stories, as well as photographs, are transmitted mainly by satellite to members of the press that pay for the service . Their stories are transmitted by satellite .
 News services were formerly known as wire services because they sent news reports over wires to printing devices called te/etypewriters . News services sent over wire wire wire reports to printers .
 News services supply most of both the national and international news reported by the press . News services provide most of the national or international news .
 The major news syndicates are owned by newspapers that have a large staff of reporters at home and abroad . The syndicates include major news organizations with large staffs of reporters .
 The syndicate distributes to its clients many of the same stories that appear in its own paper . It distributes many of its own stories to its own clients .
 Feature syndicates are operated by business organizations that sell material such as advice columns, comic strips, and opinion columns . Feature syndicate is operated by businesses that sell such material . Features syndicates include advice columns and comic strips .
 Magazines, like newspapers, enable people to absorb the news at their own pace and select only the stories that interest them . Magazines are like newspapers and people can choose only stories they want to hear .
 In general, the literary quality of magazines, which are published weekly or at longer intervals, is superior to that of newspapers, says the author .
 Weekly newsmagazines especially have gained wide popularity because they summarize and analyze the biggest news stories of the preceding week . Weekly news magazines are especially popular because of their ability to analyze the most important news stories .
 Many magazines specialize in providing news or information related to a specific topic, such as fashion, television entertainment, or sports . Many magazines are specialized in providing information on fashion, entertainment and sports .
 Opinion magazines publish thoughtful articles on politics and the arts . CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery .
 Trade and business magazines provide news of a particular profession, business, or industry, such as medicine, banking, or publishing .
 For more information on the kinds of magazines and how they are produced, see Magazine.com .
 Radio is generally the first of the news media to report a local story or a news service bulletin . Radio generally is generally first to report local stories or a bulletin .
 A radio announcer can interrupt a program with a news flash as soon as the report comes in . A news flash can be interrupted by a news report .
 Millions of people depend on the radio for regularly scheduled newscasts . Millions of them depend on radio for regular scheduled newcasts . Millions rely on radio to get their daily news .
 In a five-minute broadcast, for example, the stories average less than 30 seconds each .
 Many people rely on radio for weather forecasts and traffic reports . Many people also rely heavily on weather forecasts .
 Television is the chief source of news in many households around the world . TV is the most popular way to get the news out .
 TV brings the sights and sounds of important news events to the public by means of filmed, taped, or live reports . TV does what none of the other media can do .
 Daily TV news programs provide brief accounts of relatively few stories . Like regular radio newscasts, daily TV news shows provide only brief accounts .
 The visual aspect of a TV news story can often help viewers understand the story . But the visual aspects of a news story are often important to viewers .
 TV news may have difficulty explaining complex stories that do not lend themselves to visual presentation . TV news can't explain complex stories in a brief period .
 In addition to regular news coverage, television covers special news events . Television coverage includes special coverage of special events .
 In November 1963, the major U.S. networks canceled nearly four days of scheduled programs-to cover live the story of President John F Kennedy's assassination and funeral .
 Television has presented live broadcasts of the first walk on the moon, various governmental hearings, and many other important events . Television has also presented live coverage of the First Walk on the Moon and various government hearings .
 Cable TV, a rapidly growing part of the TV industry, offers a variety of news programs . Cable TV is a fast-growing industry in the U.S.
 The newsroom of a newspaper handles stories from throughout the world . Larry Day is Larry Day, the world's leading photographer and photographer. Larry Day .
 TV is the chief source of news for about two-thirds of all adult Americans . TV news is the most popular form of news in the world .
 Online journalism can deliver large volumes of news and commentary that can be received quickly all over the world . Online journalism is a great way to get around the world quickly and efficiently .
 People can access this information via the World Wide Web, the part of the Internet that, in addition to text, includes illustrations, sound, and moving pictures . People can also access the information using the Web .
 On many Web sites and in newsgroups (online discussion groups) readers can interact with reporters, commentators, or other readers . Readers can interact in news groups, blogs, and newsgroups .
 Although much information distributed over the Web is reliable, some of it is biased or fictitious . Some of the information is not reliable and some is biased .
 Internet journalists often do not verify their sources when they rush to tell a story first . Such unreliable material exists on the Web because of Web journalists often don't verify sources . The Internet journalist says, "Internet journalists often fail to verify sources"
 Anyone with access to the Internet can deliberately distribute false information, says CNN.com.com . In addition to that, anyone who has access to Internet can . The Internet can also be deliberately distributed false information .
 Rumors and gossip appearing on Web sites and in newsgroups often leave people unsure what to believe . Rumors are often left wondering if they are true or not .
 Online reporting and commentary ranges from “secret’ tidbits about celebrities and gory details about local crimes to national and global events . Online reporting from CNN iReport.com includes ‘secret' tidbits .
 Many journalistic Web sites are operated by established, dependable print or broadcast news organizations . Many of these Web sites operate by established news organizations, such as CNN and PBS .
 Almost all news on such a Web site comes directly from the organization that operates the Web site . Almost all of the news there comes from the site that operates it .
 In a free society, a journalist is able to perform most of his or her duties without government interference . The role of journalism is defined by the role of a journalist in a society .
 These duties include informing the public, investigating wrongdoing, influencing public opinion, and entertaining the public . These duties also include investigating wrongdoing .
 Reporters represent the public at events that most people cannot observe themselves . Reporters are responsible for most of the world's most public events .
 Journalists have an obligation to be accurate and to tell all sides of a story . Journalists therefore have a duty to be truthful and to be honest, the BBC says .
 They also have the responsibility of deciding which events have enough importance or news value to be reported .
 A free nation’s citizens especially need good information about current political events to help them decide which candidates to vote for and whether to support certain government policies . A free country's citizens need good news about current events to decide which candidate to support .
 Only through reliable reporting can people make intelligent decisions about how they want to be governed, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Many people do not have background knowledge or specialized information needed to understand complicated issues . Many people, however, do not know how complicated issues are .
 Journalists not only report the news, but they often explain and analyze it through interpretive reporting . For example, a journalist might analyze what effect the speech could have on foreign policy of his or her country .
 CNN.com will feature iReporters from all over the world in a new series of investigative stories . This week's series focuses on the role of journalists in investigating wrongdoing in the media .
 Many news organizations feel a responsibility to safeguard the rights of citizens . Many of the world's most famous journalists feel they have a duty to protect citizens .
 They search out and expose dishonesty in government, mismanagement of public funds, and unfair or illegal business practices . Through investigative reporting, they search out government dishonesty .
 One of the most dramatic examples of investigative reporting occurred in the U.S. in the early 1970's . The press played a major role in uncovering the Watergate scandal .
 The management of a news organization expresses its views on current issues and attempts to convince the public of the same views . Through editorials, the management of an organization expresses the views of the public .
 Many editorials encourage actions that a news organization believes will benefit a community or the nation . This week's editorials are open for discussion . In the U.S. state of the art of art and architecture, the art and history of art is open .
 An editorial might urge citizens to approve a school bond proposal or to vote for a certain candidate for public office . For example, an editorial may urge voters to approve school bond proposals or vote for candidates for office .
 News organizations might also use editorials to fight for various social reforms . News organizations may also fight for social reforms in the future .
 Such editorial campaigning is sometimes called advocacy journalism because it advocates certain causes . It is sometimes known as advocacy journalism .
 Commentaries reflect the opinions of individual journalists rather than those of the management of a newspaper, a magazine, or a radio or TV station . Commentaries are published on CNN iReport.com and Twitter .
 Many news organizations regularly publish or broadcast commentaries that differ from management editorials . CNN.com will feature a selection of management commentaries each week .
 Newscasts are among the few kinds of radio and TV programs that are not broadcast chiefly for entertainment . They often include amusing feature stories, often with amusing features .
 Most newscasts concentrate on reporting the latest events, weather, and sports . This morning's show is the first of the morning's morning anchors .
 Newspapers may include such entertainment material as comic strips; crossword puzzles; hobby and travel sections; humor columns; and reviews of books, motion pictures, and plays . Newspapers also may include crosswords puzzles, hobby, travel sections, humor columns and reviews .
 Journalists in a free society argue that they have a right to gather news and to publish or broadcast any information they obtain . Journalists say they are free to gather information and publish it .
 A country’s government, on the other hand, prefers that certain information be withheld in the public interest . A country's government prefers to withhold certain information in its own interest .
 Information might endanger the security of the nation or jeopardize a defendant's right to a fair trial . Such information might include material that could endanger the national security, endanger the defendant's rights .
 Many conflicts between the press and the government must be settled in court, says CNN.com editor John Sutter . "Many conflicts between press and government must have been resolved in court," he says .
 Court decisions have forbidden governments to censor material before it is published or broadcast . Court cases have also banned governments from censoring material before publication .
 The courts have noted that although such prior restraint could prevent abuses by the press in some cases, it could also be used to prevent the media from reporting misconduct in government .
 The courts reasoned that prior restraint is nearly always too extreme a remedy for abuses by the press . The courts have therefore reasoned . Prior restraint is often too extreme, the courts have reasoned .
 The news media may be brought into court, however, for publishing or broadcasting material that violates a court order . News media may not be brought in court for violating court orders, however .
 In addition, the press may be held responsible if it abuses the rights of private citizens . In addition to the press, it may also be responsible for abuses of private rights by private citizens.
 Journalists or news organizations may be sued for /ibe/ if they publish or broadcast false information that harms a person's reputation . Journalists can be sued in the U.S. for publishing false information .
 News organizations are occasionally sued for invading the privacy of private citizens . News organizations have been sued for invasion of privacy privacy .
 In general, the media act responsibly and do not purposely abuse their right of freedom of the press, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 News organizations may withhold information voluntarily if the government states that reporting the material might harm the public interest . News organizations are not required to withhold information from the government .
 Press and government often differ over what information should be withheld, especially in areas of national defense and international affairs . However, the press and the government often disagree over what should be held back .
 In most cases, the press argues that the right of the people to know about the actions of their government outweighs the benefits of maintaining secrecy .
 The government often tries to keep what it considers "sensitive" information from the news media . For this reason, the government often attempts to keep it from the media .
 Journalists sometimes obtain “sensitive” material from government sources . Government sources believe the material should be made public . Journalists often obtain sensitive material .
 Sources are afraid of losing their jobs if they are discovered . But these sources are afraid they could lose their jobs in the process .
 They ask journalists to promise to keep their identity confidential . The identity of the victims is confidential .
 Reporters also use confidential sources in investigating organizations outside the government . Reporters have been called as witnesses in trials and government investigations . Journalists have been ordered to reveal their confidential sources .
 They have felt that they must protect their sources to assure other people who have confidential information that reporters can be trusted . They have also felt that . They must also feel that they . must also . protect their . sources .
 Journalists argue that confidential sources are essential to investigative reporting . Many cases of wrongdoing would never be exposed without such sources, they say .
 Some journalists have gone to jail rather than reveal the identity of a source . Some have been jailed for refusing to reveal their source's identity .
 Some people believe that the political views of management and journalists often influence what they decide to report and how they report it . Some believe that management and journalism often influence the reporting .
 Journalists believe that this mix of political views in news organizations helps keep news balanced and fair . But journalists believe that the balance is being balanced in this balance .
 Critics have accused the press of often creating a false impression of an event by emphasizing its sensational aspects . Critics have also accused the media of exaggerating the events .
 Many people feel that the press sometimes produces its own “media events’ by providing mass coverage of minor or insignificant stories . In addition, many people feel . that the . press sometimes provides its own . own ‘media event’ in some cases .
 Critics say the press invades the privacy of people struck by tragedy and is insensitive to their feelings . Critics also say that the press often invades people's privacy .
 During the late 1900's, many news organizations were purchased by corporations engaged in a variety of businesses . During the mid-century, many of these news organizations have been purchased by a corporation . This is the first time a news organization has been bought by a company .
 Reporters often told to avoid taking risks that might cost the company money or reduce its audience . Reporters are often told not to take risks, or risk losing their audience .
 The size of a news organization's audience determines how much advertisers are willing to pay the organization for advertising space or time . Advertisers pay news organizations for advertising time, space or space .
 In many countries, journalism depends heavily on advertising for its income . In many of these countries, advertising is a major source of revenue for journalists .
 Some news organizations refrain from publishing or broadcasting stories that might offend advertisers . As a result, some news organizations don't publish or broadcast stories that may offend advertisers.
 Some advertisers attempt to shape the news and information presented by an organization to suit the advertiser's needs and values . In addition, some advertisers also try and shape the content of an organization's content .
 Competition among journalists creates sensational news reports calculated to attract a large audience . Competition is often calculated to create sensational news stories .
 Many critics charge that journalism increasingly emphasizes scandals, crimes, violence, and confrontations . Many critics say that journalism now emphasizes scandals and violence .
 Experts worry that much of the news reported is inaccurate or biased . Experts also worry that some of the information is inaccurate .
 Cable television news channels broadcast 24 hours a day . Cable TV news channels require a constant flow of news and commentary . CNN.com will feature iReporters on CNN iReport .
 To meet this demand, they sometimes report facts that have not been verified . They sometimes report fact that are not verified to meet the demand of verification .
 CNN.com will feature iReporters from all over the world on iReport.com . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Please submit your photos and videos of CNN Living .
 In general, newspapers and magazines in free societies are privately owned . In free societies, they are often owned privately .
 In nearly every democracy except the United States, the government owns a radio and television network . The government owns at least one radio or television network in nearly every country .
 In most cases, however, these networks have as much independence in presenting the news as do the private media .
 Privately owned radio and TV networks also operate in many free nations . Privately-owned radio and television networks operate in most free countries .
 Some democracies, including Japan and Switzerland, do not allow prior censorship of news by the government .
 Many democracies, however, have established legal or informal limits on what the news media may publish or broadcast . Many democracies have established limits to what news media can publish . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world .
 Israeli government keeps tight controls over military news and other information that might endanger national security . For example, the Israeli government has tight controls on military news .
 In government-controlled societies, the news media have only as much freedom as the national leaders allow, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In Communist nations, news media have traditionally been owned and operated by the state . The media in these societies may be privately owned or state owned . News media has served mainly to convince the public of the virtues and achievements of government policy .
 In the late 1980's, the Soviet Union and other Communist countries of Eastern Europe began to allow the press to operate more freely . In the 1980s, the press was allowed to operate freely in Eastern Europe . But in the late 1990s, Eastern Europe allowed it to be more freely
 By the early 1990's, the Communist governments had fallen in those countries, leading to even greater freedom of the press in many cases . The Communist governments in many countries have fallen in many of those countries .
 The governments of many countries in Africa and Asia have strict controls on the press . The governments in many countries have strict restrictions on the media .
 Journalists who criticize the government may be fined or imprisoned, and their news organizations may be closed . Journalists are also subject to a fine or jail sentence .
 Censorship boards make sure that the news media follow government guidelines . The board is made up of media censors who follow official guidelines .
 The boards may also require the press to publicize official notices issued by the government . The boards can also require press to publish official notices .
 Government-controlled societies also restrict reporting by journalists from other countries . Government-run societies restrict journalists' access to information .
 Foreign correspondents may be forbidden to interview certain government officials or to visit particular parts of the nation . Foreign journalists may not be allowed to visit certain areas of the country .
 The government may also censor their reports, and it may even expel journalists from the country . The government could also expel journalists .
 History The first newspapers were probably handwritten newssheets that governments posted in public places . The first newspaper was probably handwritten .
 The Roman Senate reported the proceedings of the Roman Senate and such news such as births and deaths . It also reported such news as births, deaths and births .
 The first regularly published printed newspaper in Europe was Avisa Relation oder Zeitung of Strasbourg, Germany . The first regular published newspaper was a weekly newspaper in Germany .
 A weekly newssheet founded in 1622 was the first paper regularly printed in England . It was first to be published in England and was first newspaper to be printed regularly .
 Early newspaper publishers had to obtain a government license for anything they wanted to print . Early newspapers had to get a license from the government .
 In 1644, the English poet and political writer John Milton criticized licensing in his pamphlet Areopagitica . Milton criticized such licensing in 1644 .
 England lifted its licensing system in 1695, and several other countries ended theirs in the 1700's . Several other countries also ended their licensing system .
 Many countries tried to limit the number of people who could afford to publish newspapers by making them pay a heavy tax on each page they printed .
 As a result, publishers made their pages as large as possible to print more material for the same tax . Publishers printed more pages to print for the tax .
 By the 1800's, however, these taxes had been ended, and the press in many countries had considerable freedom . By the 18th century, the freedom of the press had been greatly reduced .
 Before the 1700's, the American colonists relied on pamphlets, handwritten newsletters, English newspapers, and town criers for the news . The American colonists used pamphlets and English newspapers for news .
 In 1690, Benjamin Harris of Boston founded Publick Occurrences Both Forreign and Domestick . Harris was the first newspaper published in America . Harris published the newspaper in 1690 .
 In 1704, John Campbell established the Boston News-Letter, the first regularly published paper in the colonies . The paper was established by Campbell in 1704 .
 John Peter Zenger founded the New-York Weekly Journal in 1733 . He soon won a victory for a free press .
 The governor's council had Zenger arrested, and in 1735 he was tried for libel . Zenger was found guilty of libel and tried for his libel .
 The jury found Zenger not guilty after his attorney argued that Zenger had printed the truth and that truth is not libelous . Zenger was found not guilty of libelous libel after a jury found him not guilty .
 The act required that special tax stamps be placed on all newspapers, legal documents, and various other written material . Special stamps were placed on newspapers and legal documents . The stamps were required by the act .
 Newspapers continued to publish without buying the stamps, and they supported the colonists . Newspapers published without buying stamps and continued to do so .
 They also sold for about 6 cents a copy— far more than working-class people could afford . The books sold for around 6 cents per copy . They sold for far less than 6 cents .
 The Sun attracted a large audience because of its low cost and its lively reports of fires, crimes, marriages, and other humaninterest news . The Sun's low cost was due to its low-cost and lively reports .
 In addition to reporting the news, the 7ribune published book reviews and poetry . It also ran editorials opposing slavery and supporting women’s rights .
 Other penny papers included the Philadelphia Public Ledger, the Baltimore Sun, and the Boston Daily Times .
 The newspapers shared the cost of receiving news from telegraph agents throughout the nation and sold the reports to other papers . The newspapers sold the news to each other .
 In the 1850's, papers from such cities as Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, and St. Louis were published in the papers of the day .
 The age of sensationalism lasted from the late 1800's to the early 1900's . The age was known as sensationalism in the early 1800's .
 American newspapers increasingly emphasized stories that dealt with crimes, disasters, and scandals . During this period, American newspapers emphasized stories dealing with crimes and disasters .
 At the same time, however, the papers started reform campaigns by hunting out and exposing corruption in business and government . The papers also exposed corruption in government and business .
 Magazines also began printing articles by reform writers, including Samuel Hopkins Adams, Lincoln Steffens and Ida M Tarbell .
 These two papers became strong rivals in the battle for readers and led the press in sensationalism .
 The competition for readers sometimes resulted in inacTT curate, exaggerated reporting that came to be known as yellow journalism . The competition also resulted in exaggerated reporting .
 Another important publisher of the time, Edward WyIlis Scripps, established the first American newspaper chain . The first newspaper chain was established by the same publisher . The company was founded in 1881 .
 Scripps organized United Press Associations in 1907, Hearst established International News Service in 1909 . Hearst also established United Press Association in 1909, Scrippes organized United News Service .
 Luce established 7ime, the first newsweekly, in 1923 . Luce and Briton Hadden established the first weekly newsweekly . 7ime was the first newspaper to be published by Luce .
 Luce founded a chain of specialized periodicals that included Fortune, Life and Sports //lustrated . Luce later founded a business publication and a pictorial magazine .
 Radio journalism began in the United States in 1920, when station KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, broadcast the presidential election returns . Station KDKA broadcast election returns in 1920 .
 During the 1920's, coverage of political and sports events became the most important type of public affairs broadcasting . Coverage of political, sports events was the most significant type of broadcasting .
 Many regular news programs consisted merely of an announcer who read stories from newspapers or wire services . Today's news programs often consisted of news stories read by an announcer .
 In the 1930's, the radio networks hired many reporters from newspapers to gather and broadcast the news . In the 30's, many newspapers were used to gather the news for radio broadcasts .
 By the start of World War II , the networks had an experienced staff of journalists .
 Murrow won fame for his on-the-scene broadcasts describing German bombing attacks on London . Murrow was famous for his broadcasts of World War II bombing attacks .
 Television journalism developed quickly after World War II . Many radio newscasters moved into TV news after the war .
 The first television interview program, “Meet the Press,’ began in 1947 . The first TV interview program was “The First Television Interview with Meet the Press’ .
 The programs in the series consisted of on-the-scene reports dealing with leading issues of the day . The programs were intended to be on the front foot of the story .
 Television played a major role in the 1960 presidential campaign between John F Kennedy and Richard M Nixon . Television was a major part of the 1960 campaign between Kennedy and Nixon .
 A nationwide audience watched as the men faced each other in the first televised presidential debates between presidential candidates . The debates were televised for the first time .
 In 1965, the launch of Early Bird, the first commercial communications satellite, made possible live broadcasts of news events between North America and Europe . Early Bird was launched in 1965, making it possible to broadcast news from North America to Europe .
 Major improvements in broadcast technology continued during the 1970's . Major improvements were made in the 1970s .
 Development of minicams made videotape practical for use on daily newscasts . Minicams were developed in the 1950s and '60s .
 A story taped with a minicam can be broadcast minutes after a reporter delivers the tape to the TV station . A minicamer can be used to record a story that can be shown to a TV station later that night .
 Minicams are often used with specially equipped mobile vans that can relay a story to the station as it happens . In addition to minicams, the vans can also be used to relay stories to CNN .
 By the late 1990's, the communications satellite had become an important tool of journalism . The communications satellite was used to provide vital information to journalists .
 A communications satellite orbits the earth and relays radio, telegraph, telephone, and television signals . It relays signals from the earth .
 Communications satellites help journalists gather information and distribute news reports . Communications satellites are used to gather information for journalists .
 Television journalists can instantly report news events to their TV stations thousands of miles away . They also enable television journalists to instantly report events to TV stations across the world . The technology allows them to do so in a matter of minutes .
 Many news services deliver reports to news organizations via communications satellite . Many news organizations deliver reports via communications satellites .
 Newspapers use satellites to transmit images of their papers to printing plants . Newspapers also use satellite technology to send images to printers and other printers .
 Recent trends in U.S. journalism include a significant decrease in the number of daily newspapers and AM radio stations .
 FM radio stations and local cable television systems have experienced rapid growth . At the same time, however, the number of stations and cable TV systems has also experienced growth .
 News-oriented Web sites and Internet newsgroups offer a huge volume and diversity of news and commentary at high speed . Throughout the world, news sites and Web groups offer a wide variety of news at high speeds . The Internet is home to a variety of Web sites, including newsgroups and
 Traditional news organizations operate Web sites in addition to their regular news media . Traditional media organizations operate both Web sites and Web sites . This is the first time a news organization has a Web site .
 A few magazines, political commentators, and independent reporters appear exclusively online . However, a few magazines and political commentators appear exclusively on CNN .
 There are ever-increasing news sources, many people are shifting away from print media . People are shifting toward print media because of the growing number of news sources .
 Most jobs in the news media require a college degree . Careers in journalism require a high school degree .
 Journalists disagree about the best course of study to follow . However, journalists disagree on the best way to study .
 Some believe students should get a bachelor's degree in journalism . Some believe that students should have a bachelor of journalism degree .
 Others recommend a four-year liberal arts program, perhaps followed with a master's degree in journalism .
 Almost all colleges advise students to get experience on their college newspaper or at their college radio or television station . But almost all advise students get experience at college radio and television stations .
 Most journalists begin working at news organizations in small towns or in rural or suburban areas . Many of them have a lifetime career with such organizations . Most journalists work at small towns and rural areas .
 Others go on to jobs with big-city newspapers, the news services, newsmagazines, or large radio or TV stations .
 Journalists in print media include columnists, copy editors, editorial cartoonists, editorial writers, feature writers, news editors, photojournalists, and reporters . Journalists in the print media are columnists and copy editors .
 Broadcast media hire journalists for such positions as assignment editors, commentators, correspondents, news directors, newscasters, newswriters, and producers . The broadcast media hires journalists on assignment editors and commentators .
 In general, the broadcast media offer lower salaries for starting positions than do the print media .
 Journalism training also provides a background for careers in advertising, book publishing, and public relations . Journalism training is also a training program for advertising and book publishing .
 Fields of journalism: Newspapers, news services, magazines, radio, radio and war correspondent . Newspapers and news services are included in the categories . Online journalism is considered a form of journalism .
 The role of journalism is to inform the public, investigate wrongdoing, influence public opinion and entertain the public . The role is important in informing the public and investigating wrongdoing .
 Journalism in free societies V. V. Journalism in government-controlled societies. Vi.
 Joyce, James, James , revolutionized the treatment of plot and characterization in fiction . Joyce's first novel, The Children's Play, was published in 1903 . Joyce was an Irish novelist .
 Many critics consider William Shakespeare his only rival as a master of the English language . William Shakespeare is considered to be the only rival to Shakespeare's work .
 He wrote all his works about that city, though he lived outside Ireland from 1904 on . He lived in Dublin, Ireland, and died in 1904 .
 Joyce lived and wrote in Paris, Rome and Trieste, Italy; and Zurich, Switzerland, where he died in 1941 . Joyce was a prolific writer and prolific author .
 Joyce Joyce suffered a painful eye disease for most of his adult life and became almost blind despite many operations . Joyce suffered from a painful disease that made him almost blind . Joyce was almost blind for many years and suffered many operations to try and cure it .
 Joyce's first major work was Dubliners, a collection of stories that reflects his concern with life among the Irish lower middle class . Joyce's work was published in Dubliners in 1959 .
 A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is a largely autobiographical novel . Joyce joyce appears as Stephen Dedalus in the novel .
 Stephen finds himself in conflict with his family, the Roman Catholic Church, and the nationalistic zeal of the Irish people . Like Joyce, Stephen has a conflict with family and the Catholic Church . Stephen is the son of a writer who writes about Ireland .
 Joyce mixed conventional realist prose with passages using techniques known as interior monologue and stream-consciousness . Joyce's son Stephen grew up to become Stephen's father and father-in-law .
 These techniques give the reader the illusion of following the character's thoughts . These techniques are used to make the reader follow the characters' thoughts .
 Joyce lived in poverty and obscurity until 1922, when the publication of U/ysses made him one of the most celebrated novelists of the 1900's . Joyce lived a life of poverty until 1922 when he published the novel . Joyce was one of Britain's most famous novelists in the
 Joyce established parallels between the adventures of his main character, Leopold Bloom, and those of Ulysses, in his novel . Ulysss takes its title from parallels Joyce established between the two main characters . Joyce's novel is set in New York, New York .
 Bloom suffers ridicule because he is Jewish and has peculiar sexual tastes . His wife, Molly, is unfaithful and he suffers ridicule for being Jewish . Bloom suffers from his wife's adultery .
 He survives the pain and sorrow of his life by a remarkable capacity to absorb suffering, and even to enjoy it . He survived the pain by absorbing suffering and even enjoying it .
 In this novel, Joyce portrayed one family and at the same time all families, everywhere, at all times in history . Joyce portrayed all families in this novel . The novel was published by Joyce at the University of New York University .
 The hero's initials, HCE, stand for Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker, a Dublin innkeeper . The HCE stands for HCH, HCH and HCH .
 Joyce crammed the book with topical and historical names, events, myths, songs, jokes, and gossip . Joyce crammed it with topical, historical names and events .
 His goal was to make all people, places, things, and times repeat and resemble each other . He said he wanted to make people and places, places and times more like each others .
 The book's last sentence breaks off in the middle but is completed by the book's first sentence . The last sentence of the book is the last sentence .
 Joyce borrowed from Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico . The device is a grammatical representation of the cyclic theory of history . Joyce borrowed Vico's theory from the Italian philosopher .
 The River Liffey flows through Dublin, past the Church of Adam and Eve, out into Dublin Bay and the Irish Sea . The above sentence traces the flow of the river through .
 Water returns to the physical starting point of the book, Howth Castle . From there, by evaporation and recirculation, the water returns .
 The reference to Adam and Eve introduces a major theme of the book, the Fall of Man . The Fall of the Man introduces the book's major theme .
 In Irish-Gaelic, the river is called Anna Liffey, meaning River of Life . t becomes interchangeable with Joyce’s major female character, Anna Livia Plurabelle .
 Jackie Joyner-Kersee became the first woman to win consecutive Olympic heptathlon championships at the Olympic Games . Joyner Kersee won the heptathathathlete gold medal at the Olympics in 1968 .
 Joyner-Kersee won the Olympic heptathlon in 1988 and 1992 . She set a world record of 7,291 points in the 1988 games . She also set the world record in 1992 games .
 In 1986, she married Bob Kersee, a UCLA track coach who became her personal coach . She married him in 1986, and he later coached her on the track .
 He became king in 1975, after the death of Francisco Franco, the dictator of Spain . He was king of Spain from 1975 to 1975 .
 Alfonso XIII served as king of Spain from 1902 to 1931, when Spain became a republic . His grandfather, Alfonso XV, was king from 1902 until 1931 . Alfonso XVI was king in Spain between 1902 and 1931 .
 Alfonso died in 1941, and Don Juan—his son and Juan Carlos’s father—claimed the Spanish throne . Don Juan claimed the throne in 1941 . Juan Carlos is Juan Carlos's first son, Juan Carlos, who is now Juan Juan's son .
 Juan Carlos declared in 1969 that after his retirement or death, Juan Carlos would become king of Spain . In 1969, he declared that after he retired or death he would become King of Spain. Juan Carlos died in 1981 .
 Juan Carlos was born on Jan. 1938, in Rome, where his parents were living in exile . He was born in 1938, where he was born .
 Stanley G Payne Juan Diego was the earliest saint of the Roman Catholic Church born in the Western Hemisphere . Juan Diego, Saint , was the first born in Western Hemisphere born in 18th century .
 Juan Diego, a Mexican Indian, was canonized by Pope John Paul II in 2002 . Juan Diego was the first Mexican Indian to be canonized in 2000 .
 In 1524 or 1525, Juan Diego converted to Christianity and was baptized, receiving his Christian name . Juan Diego was baptized in 1525 or 1524 .
 Juan Diego was hurrying over Tepeyac Hill in what is now Mexico City on Dec. 31, 1531, when he saw a vision of a beautiful woman wearing a blue mantle . According to tradition, Juan Diego saw the vision of the beautiful woman in what now is Mexico
 The bishop did not believe Juan Diego until his fourth vision, on December 12 . Juan Diego's vision was the fourth vision he received from Juan Diego .
 After this vision, an image of the woman appeared on Juan Diego's cloak appeared on his cloak . Juan Diego saw the woman in the vision .
 Our Lady of Guadalupe is Mexico's patron saint . She is also known as Our Our Lady, or the Virgin of Guadadupe .
 The cloak hangs in a frame at the altar of the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe, built on the site of the visions . The cloak is now hung in frame in frame on the altar .
 Juan Diego gave his business and property to his uncle after visions . Juan Diego died at the hands of his uncle . After visions, he gave up his business .
 He moved into a room attached to a chapel that housed the sacred image on his cloak . He moved to a room in a chapel attached to the chapel .
 Island group has an area of 56 square miles and a population of less than 1,000 . The island group has been named after the island group .
 The English writer Daniel Defoe partly based his Robinson Crusoe on Selkirk’s adventures .
 Juana Inés de la Cruz, WAH nuh ee NAYS day lah KROOS , was the greatest poet of the baroque movement .
 Juana Inés de Asbaje y Ramirez was born on Nov., 1651, near Mexico City . She became a nun in 1667 and took her religious name .
 Sor Juana was one of the greatest intellectuals of her time and, as a child, amazed adults with her love of learning . Sor Juan was a child of her own .
 She was commissioned to write poetry commemorating important events in society . She was regularly commissioned to commemorate important events .
 Using her vast knowledge of the arts and sciences, she wrote lyrical poetry and religious dramas among other writings .
 She is best known for poetry that explores human emotion from an intellectual perspective . She is known for exploring human emotion with a unique perspective .
 One of her finest prose works was Response to Sor Filotea de Ia Cruz . Her defense of learning as a proper activity of women was a brilliant defense .
 Juarez is Mexico's largest city on the border with the United States . Dick Gerdes Juarez, HWARR ehz, is the largest city in Mexico's history . Juarez was founded in 1903 .
 For most of its history, Juarez was a quiet bordercrossing town with a small population engaged in cattle raising and commerce . Juarez has a history of cattle raising, commerce and cattle trade .
 Developing industries were attracted to Juarez because of its location on the border with the U.S. Juarez is one of the most populous cities in the world .
 Juarez is a major industrial center and an important gateway for travel and commerce between the U.S. and Mexico . Juarez has been an important hub for the Mexican-Mexican exchange of commerce .
 James D Riley Juarez, HWARR ehz, Benito Pablo, bay NEE toh PAH bloh , was one of the greatest Mexican political leaders . Juarez was a member of the Mexican Revolution Movement .
 Juarez directed Mexican liberals in a civil war against conservatives and later led his country in a war for freedom from French control . Juarez also led Mexican liberals to victory in Mexico's civil war .
 He was born and educated in the state of Oaxaca and practiced law there from 1834 to 1846 . He practiced law in the same state of Mexico .
 Juarez joined the liberal movement, which sought constitutional government, reduction of military and clerical power, and redistribution of the church's huge landholdings . Juarez was the leader of a liberal movement seeking constitutional government and reduction of church's power .
 Juarez found in serious financial difficulty, and stopped payment on European loans for two years . Juarez is facing serious financial difficulties, and has been unable to repay debts .
 The French used his action as an excuse to invade Mexico and install Archduke Maximilian as emperor . The French were able to use it as a pretext for invading Mexico .
 He separated church and state, established religious toleration, and altered the land system . He also established religious tolerance, established tolerance and established religious freedom .
 Judah, /OO duh, in the Old Testament, was the fourth son of Jacob and Leah . He was born in Jerusalem .
 Judah kept his brother Joseph from being killed and suggested instead that Joseph be sold to the Ishmaelites as a slave . Joseph's brother was killed and was sold to Ishmaelsite as slave .
 He was the son of a priest named Mattathias from the ancient city of Modin . He was born in Modin and died in the city of the same city .
 The Jews were subjects of the Seleucid Empire, one of the states formed out of Alexander the Greats empire . At that time, the Jews were subject to a state known as the Selemid Empire .
 Seleucid king, Antiochus IV (called Epiphanes), wanted his subjects to adopt Greek culture and customs . Antiochus III wanted his people to adopt his subjects' customs . He wanted them to adopt more of the ancient Greek culture .
 Antiochus also wanted to get possession of the treasures in the Jews Temple . Antiochus wanted to take over the treasures from the Temple .
 The practice of Jewish law was forbidden, and copies of the law were destroyed . The practice was forbidden in Jewish law .
 War broke out when an officer of the king came to Modin and tried to make Mattathias offer sacrifice to the pagan god . The king tried to force him to give sacrifice to a pagan god, and war broke out .
 He fled to the hills, and although he died soon after, his son Judah took his place . Although he died, Judah took the throne, he died in the hills .
 Jewish family celebrates harvest festival of Sukkot by eating in a sukkah . Jews gather in their synagogue to worship on the Sabbath .
 Judaism, /OO dee ihz uhm, is the religion of the world’s approximately 15 million Jews . Judaism is a religion of around 15 million people .
 It is the oldest major religion and the first religion to teach the belief in one God . It is also the first major religion to believe in one god .
 Judaism is the religion of only one people -- the Jews . Unlike the other major religions, Judaism is only one of the world's major religions . Jews are the only people in the world .
 These religions accept the Jewish belief in one God and the moral teachings of the Hebrew Bible .
 The basic laws and teachings of Judaism come from the 7orah, the first five books of the Hebrew Bible . The 7orah is the name of the first book of the Bible .
 This article discusses the principal teachings and sacred writings of Judaism . It also discusses the teachings and teachings of the Bible .
 It also tells about the chief branches of Judaism and the structure of organized Judaism . The book is published in Jerusalem, Israel, and the United States .
 The most important teaching of Judaism is that there is one God, who wants people to do what is just and merciful . The teachings of Judaism are that people must do what they want .
 Judaism teaches that a person serves God by studying the scriptures and practicing what they teach . Judaism teaches people to serve God by reading the scriptures .
 Judaism teaches that all people are created in the image of God and deserve to be treated with dignity and respect .
 Moral and ethical teachings are as important in Judaism as teachings about God . Thus, moral and ethical teaching is as important as God's teachings .
 The covenant with God is a special agreement that Jews believe God made with Abraham, the ancestor of the Jewish people . Abraham was Abraham's ancestor, Abraham's son, the son of Jesus Christ .
 According to the Bible, God promised to bless Abraham and his descendants if they worshiped and remained faithful to God . The Bible says Abraham's descendants will be blessed if they remain faithful to the God .
 God renewed this covenant with Abraham’s son Isaac and Isaac's son Jacob . God renewed it with Abraham's son Isaac . Abraham and Jacob were Abraham's sons .
 Jacob was also called Israel, and so his descendants became known as the children of Israel or the Israelites . Jacob's descendants are called the Israelite .
 God later gave the Israelites the Ten Commandments and other laws through their leader, Moses . Moses later led them to Moses' birthplace of Jerusalem .
 These laws explained how the Israelites should live their lives and build their community . Israelites were taught how to live in order to build a community .
 The Jews are sometimes called the Chosen People, meaning they have special duties and responsibilities commanded by God . The Jews have a special role in the nation's national security .
 Jews must establish a just society and serve only God. For example, the Jewish community must be just, say the author of the book . Jews must also establish just society, serve God.
 The covenant assures the Jews of God's love and protection, but it also makes them accountable for their sins and shortcomings . Thus, the covenant assures them of the love of God and protection but also holds them accountable .
 Unlike Christianity, Judaism does not actively try to convince others to adopt its beliefs and practices . Unlike Christianity and many other religions throughout the world, Judaism is not actively trying to convince other people to adopt it .
 It does accept people who choose to convert to Judaism in certain circumstances . However, un’ der certain circumstances, it does accept conversions .
 Traditionally Jews believed that God would send a Messiah to save them . Traditionally, Jews believed they would be saved by a Messiah .
 The word Messiah comes from the Hebrew word mashiah, which means the anointed one . Messiah is the Messiah, the word Messiah, and the word "mashiah" means anointed .
 It consists of two triangles that interlace and form a six-pointed star . The star is made of triangles that are interlace to form a star .
 In Hebrew, the symbol is called the Magen David, which means the Shield of David . In Hebrew it means the shield of David and means the symbol of David in the Bible .
 The star appears on the flag of Israel. of justice and peace will come through the cooperation of all people and the help of God. of Justice and peace .
 Judaism has two major collections of sacred writings, the Bible and the Talmud . The Bible and Talmud are the most sacred writings of Judaism . The Talmud and the Bible are the main collections of Jewish sacred writings .
 The first five books of the Hebrew Bible make up the Torah, the most important of all Jewish scriptures . The Torah is one of the five most important books in the Bible .
 Scholars believe that different parts of the Torah were passed down in several collections, which were later edited into the five books we have today . Today, however, many scholars believe that many scholars .
 The Hebrew Bible contains books of history and moral teachings called the Prophets and 11 other books called the Writings . In addition to the Torah, the Hebrew Bible also contains 11 other works of the Bible .
 Talmud is a collection of legal, ritual, and ethical writings, as well as Jewish history and folklore . The Talmud was written by Jewish scholars and rabbis .
 It serves primarily as a guide to the civil and religious laws of Judaism . It is published by Jewish Publicationism Institute for Jewish Studies .
 Orthodox Jews believe the laws in the Talmud were an oral Torah,” which God gave Moses as an explanation of the written Torah . The Talmud was an explanation for Moses, according to Orthodox Jews .
 About A.D. 200, scholars wrote down these oral laws in a work called the Mishnah . Later scholars interpreted the work and interpreted it . The Mishnah is a work written by Jewish scholars .
 Modern culture has posed challenges to traditional Jewish observance and faith . The branches of Judaism are different from traditional Judaism . Modern culture is challenging traditional observance .
 Jews have made a variety of responses to these challenges that have resulted in the division into several branches of Judaism . Jews have responded to the challenges with various ways of responding to them .
 In the U.S. and Canada, the three main branches are Orthodox Judaism, Reform Judaism, and Conservative Judaism . Orthodox Judaism is Orthodox Judaism in the United States and Canada . Reform Judaism is Reform Judaism . Conservative Judaism is Conservative Judaism in Canada, with Reform and Conservative .
 Orthodox Jews believe that God revealed the laws of the Torah and the Talmud directly to Moses on Mount Sinai .
 They strictly observe all traditional Jewish laws, including dietary rules and the laws for keeping the Sabbath .
 Orthodox Jews pray three times daily: in the morning, the afternoon, and after sunset . Orthodox Jews are Orthodox Jews who pray in the Jewish Sabbath .
 The men wear hats or skullcaps (yarmu/kas or kipot) at all times as a sign of respect to God . Men wear skullcaps or skull caps as signs of respect .
 Modern Orthodoxy attempts to combine the traditional way of life with participation in the general culture . Modern Orthodox Judaism is a kind of Orthodox Judaism known as Modern Orthodox .
 Hasidic Orthodox Jews stress the joy of worshiping God and performing His commandments . Orthodox Jews, in contrast, wear traditional Eastern European Jewish clothing and stress joy of the God .
 At that time, some Jews started to question the traditional teachings of how the sacred writings of Judaism came into being . Some Jews started questioning how the teachings of Judaism were taught .
 They considered oral law a human creation rather than the revelation of God, and so its authority was weakened for them . For example, the oral law was a 'human creation' rather than God's revelation .
 Reform Jews claim that Judaism is defined principally by the Bible . Reform Jews say that the Bible is the only source of Jewish identity . Reform Judaism was founded by Reform Jews in the 1930s .
 Reform Jews believe moral and ethical teachings form the most important part of Judaism . Reform Jews say moral teachings are important to their faith .
 Many feel that Judaism's ritual practices have no significance for them . Many Jews feel that their ritual practices are meaningless .
 Reform Jews increasingly returning to traditional practices . Reform Jews are returning to the traditional Jewish faith . Reform Jewish leaders say they are committed to traditional Judaism .
 Conservative Jews consider the Talmud as much an authority as the Bible . Conservative Jews believe Talmud is as much authority as Bible .
 They believe that Jewish practice may be changed to fit the times . However, they believe that it may be possible to adapt to the times.
 Jews believe that Judaism can remain relevant to each generation . They believe that this way, Judaism can stay relevant for each generation.
 The Conservative movement requires observance of most traditional Jewish laws and customs . Conservative Jews are required to observe traditional Jewish observances .
 Reconstructionist movement, a smaller group that developed from the Conservative movement, stresses the cultural and community aspects of Judaism . Reconstructionist is a smaller movement that emphasizes cultural aspects of Jewish culture .
 The structure of Judaism Judaism has no one person as its head and no international body with authority over religious practices . Judaism is not a single person in charge of religious matters .
 Each local congregation chooses its own rabbi and manages its own affairs . Each congregation chooses their own rabbi .
 The synagogue is the Jewish house of worship and the center of Jewish education and community activities . It is a Jewish home of worship, the synagogue is also a center for Jewish education .
 It may also include a school where children study Judaism, the Hebrew language, and Jewish history . The school may also be a school for children studying Judaism .
 Most synagogues are constructed so that the worshipers face toward the holy city of Jerusalem during the service . The service is held in front of Jerusalem .
 At the front of the sanctuary stands the ark, a chest in which the scrolls of the Torah are kept . The ark is the chest where the Torah scrolls are kept and is kept .
 In front of the ark hangs the eternal light, an oil lamp whose constant flame symbolizes God's eternal presence . The oil lamp symbolizes the presence of God, a constant flame .
 The rabbi serves as spiritual leader, teacher, and interpreter of Jewish law . The rabbi is a spiritual leader and teacher .
 Today, rabbis deliver sermons during worship services in the synagogue . They also give advice to people with problems, and perform other functions .
 A person who wants to become a rabbi must spend years studying Hebrew sacred writings and Jewish history, philosophy, and law . People who want to be a rabbi need to study the sacred writings .
 Most rabbinical students also study a wide range of nonreligious subjects . Rabbinical students often study nonreligious topics .
 The cantor is often a professional who has a trained voice and special knowledge of Hebrew and the traditions of chanting . Cantors are often professional who have a special knowledge .
 Important parts of home worship include daily prayers, the lighting of the Sabbath candles, and the blessing of the wine and bread at the Sabbath meal . Important part of the home worship is daily prayers .
 Worship practices in the synagogue differ among the branches of Judaism and even within these groups .
 Orthodox and Conservative synagogues conduct services daily, but Reforms have services only on the Sabbath and holidays . Reforms hold weekly services only once a week .
 In Orthodox and Conservative synagogues, at least 10 men must be present for a service to take place . In all Orthodox and some Conservative synogues, the service must be held at least ten men .
 In most Conservative and Reform congregations, women may lead the service and be part of the minyan . Women may also be able to participate in minyan activities .
 Synagogue worship consists mainly of readings from the Torah and the chanting of prayers from a prayer book called the s/ddur .
 A different portion of the Torah is read each week, so the entire Torah is completed in a year . The Torah is finished in one year .
 In Orthodox synagogues, men and women sit separately and chant almost all the prayers in Hebrew . Men sit separately in Orthodox synogues, women sit separate and chant Hebrew .
 In Conservative and Reform congregations, men and women sit together, and much of the service is in the language of the country . Men and women are allowed to sit together and sit together .
 The Sabbath in Judaism is the seventh day of the week, Saturday, which is a holy day of rest . Saturday is the Sabbath in the Jewish faith .
 The Sabbath begins at sundown on Friday and ends at nightfall Saturday . It is calculated that three stars can be seen in the evening sky . The Sabbath ends at sunset on Saturday .
 On the Sabbath, Jews attend worship services in the synagogue and have special meals at home . Jews also eat special meals on the Sabbath .
 The High Holidays, called Rosh Ha-Shanah and Yom Kippur, are the most sacred days of the Jewish year . The High Hidays are called the Rosh Shanah, the holy day of the year, and are known as the High Hol
 Jewish holidays occur on different dates each year because they are based on the Hebrew calendar . Like all Jewish holidays, they occur on a different date each year .
 The High Holidays come during 7ishri, the first month of the Hebrew calendar, which usually falls in September or October . The High Hidays are celebrated during the Hebrew holiday season .
 Rosh Ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, begins on the first day of Tishri and lasts two days . The Jewish new year is celebrated in the holy month of the year of the month .
 According to Jewish tradition, people are judged on Rosh HaShanah for their deeds of the past year . Jewish tradition: People are judged for what they have done in the past .
 Chief symbol is the shofar, a ram's horn that is sounded during the holiday worship . The chief symbol of the holiday is the horn that sounds like the ram's .
 Rosh Ha-Shanah begins the Ten Days of Penitence, which end on Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement .
 Jews fast on Yom Kippur to express regret for bad deeds during the past year . Jews fast and express their regret for past year and their hope to perform good deeds .
 In ancient times, Jews were expected to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem during three major festivals . Passover, Shavuot, and Sukkot are three major Jewish festivals .
 During the week of Passover, Jews eat an unleavened bread called matzah . Matzah is a bread that is made of unheavened wheat and eaten during the Passover .
 Shavuot, or Pentecost, comes 50 days after the beginning of Passover . It commemorates the giving of the Torah to the Jewish people on Mount Sinai .
 Reform congregations celebrate Shavuot by holding confirmation ceremonies as well . Reform congregants also celebrate the holiday with confirmation ceremonies . Reformers hold confirmation ceremonies in their congregations .
 Jews build small huts for Sukkot as a reminder of the huts the Israelites lived in during their wandering in the wilderness . Jews build huts to remember the Israelite huts they used to live in .
 Jews celebrate the completion of the yearly reading of the Torah . Simhat Torah is the last day of this festival, called Simat Torah . Jews celebrate this year's completion of a yearly Torah reading .
 Other Jewish holidays commemorate major events in the history of the Jewish people .
 The Jews won their first struggle for religious freedom by defeating the Syrians, who wanted them to give up Judaism . That year, the Jews defeated the Syrians who wanted to give them up Judaism.
 Hanukkah usually comes in December and is celebrated by the lighting of candles in a special menorah . The menorah is a branched candlestick called a menorah and is a light-lit candle .
 Purim is a festive holiday in February or March . It commemorates the rescue of the Jews of Persia from a plot to kill them . Purim was a Jewish holiday in 18th century .
 The Bible commands that Jews follow certain dietary rules . The Bible, chiefly in the books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy, commands that . Jews follow strict dietary rules.
 Jews who observe these rules do not eat pork or shellfish, such as shrimp or oysters . Jews who eat pork and shellfish are not allowed to eat shrimp, oysters or oyster .
 They store meat and milk products separately and do not serve them at the same meal . They also store meat, milk and meat products separately .
 The dietary laws allow only meat that comes from a healthy animal killed by ritual slaughter called shehitah . Shehitah is a ritual slaughter of healthy animals killed in ritual slaughter .
 This method of slaughter is designed to kill animals quickly and with as little pain as possible . The method of killing animals in the U.S. has been described as 'humane' and 'painless'
 The ritual must be performed by a specially trained slaughterer, who says a special blessing before killing the animal . A special blessing must be said before killing an animal .
 Orthodox Jews consider these laws divine commandments and observe them strictly . Orthodox Jews observe these laws strictly .
 Many other Jews observe the rules as a sign of their faith or simply as a means of maintaining their Jewish identity .
 This event is celebrated in the synagogue with a ceremony Called a bar mitzvah . Called a Bar Mitzmitzmah, the ceremony is a ceremony called a bar .
 Some Reform and Conservative synagogues have a similar ceremony for girls called a bat mitzvah or bas mitzmitzmah . The ceremony is called a "bat mitzchah"
 The young person reads from the Torah during the ceremony, which is followed by a social celebration . The ceremony was followed by the celebration .
 A traditional Jewish marriage ceremony takes place under a /uppa, a canopy that symbolizes the union of the bride and groom . if a marriage breaks up, the hus182 Judas Iscariot band must give the wife a writ of divorce . Jews observe special rituals in connection
 Burial takes place as soon as possible, in most cases within a day after a death . Burial is usually held in the early hours of the death .
 After the funeral, the family enters a seven-day period of deep mourning called SA/va . The family of the deceased enter a period of mourning known as SA/VA .
 Mourners recite the Kaddish, a prayer that praises God but does not mention death . The mourners recite a prayer for the dead .
 On each anniversary of the death, relatives observe a memorial called a yahrzeit, reciting the Kaddish and lighting a candle in memory of the person . The relatives observe the memorial on each anniversary .
 For Biblical figures, see the list of Re/ated articles at the end of the Bible article . Biographies for Biblical figures include Biblical figures .
 Judas Iscariot, /OO duhs ihs KAR ee uht, was the apostle who betrayed Jesus Christ . Judas is the son of the apostles who betrayed Christ .
 The Gospel of Matthew reports Judas received 30 pieces of silver for betraying Jesus . Judas is said to have betrayed Jesus to get the silver for his betrayal .
 Scholars have speculated about what information Judas gave to authorities when he betrayed Jesus . Judas betrayed Jesus to the Roman Catholic Church in the early days of his life .
 Most assume that it was information telling where Jesus could be arrested . Most assume it was about where Jesus was arrested .
 The Gospel of Matthew reports that he returned the betrayal money and then hanged himself . He then returned the money and hanged himself after returning it to his family .
 The Acts of the Apostles tells that Judas bought a field with the money and then fell in the middle of it and died . Judas died of his injuries in the fall .
 Later tradition says Judas hanged himself on the Judas tree, giving the tree its name . Judas' death is believed to have caused the tree to bear the name Judas .
 Some traditions attempt to present Judas favorably by stating that he acted according to God's plan, or that he believed he could make Jesus prove He was the Messiah . Some traditions state that Judas acted out according to the plan of God . Judas was Judas' betrayer,
 Jude, jood, Epistle of, is a short letter that forms the 26th book of the New Testament . The letter forms the letter of the Epistle .
 It is one of eight books called General Epistles because they are letters addressed to Christians in general . The letters are letters to Christians, addressed to the general public .
 The author attacks false teachers who have arisen in the church . He warns that God's judgment against them is certain .
 Charlesworth Jude, jood, Saint, was one of the 12 apostles of Jesus Christ . He was a member of the Twelve Apostles .
 Jude was listed in the Gospel of Luke as the son of James, or as the brother of James in some versions of the Bible . Jude was one of the apostles who was listed as the younger son of the apostle .
 The lists in the Gospels of Matthew and Mark mention Thaddeus or Libbeus in place of Jude . However, the lists in Matthew or Mark mention the names of the two Gospels .
 Biblical scholars believe that Jude, Thaddeus, and Libbeus are all the same person . Biblical scholars say they are the same name as Jude .
 He should not be confused with Judas Iscariot, the betrayer of Jesus, or with Jude , the brother of Jesus . However, Judas is not the same name as Judas .
 Some scholars believe that he is Judas mentioned in the Gospel of John . He is believed to be Judas, Judas or Judas .
 Many Biblical scholars believe that he is not the Jude who wrote the Epistle of Jude . The Epistle is the 26th book of the New Testament, and is 26th New Testament .
 In the Roman Catholic Church, Jude shares a feast day with Simon the Zealot on October 28 . Jude and Simon share feast day together .
 Judea, joo DEE uh, was the name of a country in southern Palestine in ancient times .
 The area was originally named for the tribe of Judah that had set| tled there . The area is now known as the birthplace of Jesus Christ .
 Judea was mostly desert, but its people were able to produce olives, grapes, figs, citrus, and grain . Judea is now known as one of the world's most famous deserts .
 After King Solomon died, the nation was divided into — two kingdoms . Israel in the north, and Judah in the | south .
 In 70, the Romans recaptured Jerusalem and destroyed the Temple, putting an end to Jewish rule in 73 . The Romans captured Jerusalem in 70, but the Temple was destroyed in 73, ending Jewish rule .
 Jewish rule over the region did not resume until the founding of the modern state of Israel in 1948 . Jewish rule of the region was not resumed until 1948 .
 The judges of high courts are called justices in the United States and the United Kingdom . The judges are judges in the U.S. and UK .
 The judge decides all questions of law, including the rules that govern what evidence may be admitted . The judge is responsible for the law, and the rules are the rules .
 The judge charges the jury, telling it what rules of law apply to the case . When all the evidence has been heard, lawyers for both sides have addressed the jury .
 Or perhaps the parties do not want a jury to decide the case, as in technical questions of science or industry . Or perhaps perhaps they want a judge to decide whether or not a jury .
 An appellate judge hears appeals that question the accuracy of the trial judge's decisions on points of jaw . The appeals are heard by an appellate judge in the courts .
 Judges in Australia and in the federal courts of the United States are appointed for life . Judges in the U.S. and Australia and the Australian courts are appointed to life . The judges in both countries are appointed by life .
 Such appointments are intended to give judges independence from political considerations . The appointments were intended to encourage them to be fair and objective .
 Federal judges may be removed only by impeachment for serious misconduct . Federal judges can be removed from the federal court if they commit misconduct . Judges may also be removed if they are found guilty of misconduct .
 Some state judges are appointed under a similar system, but many are elected for long terms . Others are elected under a different system, appointed under similar system .
 Judge advocate general is the officer in charge of legal matters in the U.S. Army, Navy, or Air Force . The judge advocate general has the title of the Judge Advocate General in the United States .
 This officer holds the rank of major general in the Air Force or Army . The rank of rear admiral in the Navy is the highest in the U.S. Navy and Air Force .
 Each judge advocate general serves as legal adviser to the chief of staff of the individual service and, in some Cases, to the secretary of the Department of Defense .
 Their offices provide legal services of all types to the military community . Their offices are located in the U.S. military community.
 These services include prosecuting, defending, and reviewing courts-martial and offering legal assistance . The services include defending, defending and reviewing military courts martial cases .
 Other services include working with officials of the local civilian community on matters of common legal interest .
 These leaders were not necessarily judges in the sense of people who make legal decisions . They were leaders, not judges, they said, but leaders who made decisions .
 Judges were people whom God called to lead the Israelites at critical times . Judges are people who were called by God to lead Israelites during critical times, the Bible says . Judges were chosen by God for their service to the Israelite .
 Several judges were military leaders who saved the Israelites from their enemies . Several judges saved Israelite from enemies . Judges were judges who saved Israelites .
 The first part describes Israel's conquest of Canaan, the area later known as Palestine, and gives a general description and interpretation of judges .
 The second section tells the stories of the judges, including such famous Biblical figures as Deborah, Gideon, and Samson . The judges are included in the second section of the Bible .
 The Danites and the Benjamites are two ancient tribes of Israel . The Danite and Benjamite tribes were two of the most ancient tribes in Israel .
 A judgment by default is given by a court when the case is not defended by the defendant . A judgment is given when a defendant is not defending the case .
 When the defendant admits the claim or charge, the court hands down a confessed judgment . The court hands out a confession judgment when it comes to a confession .
 A judgment becomes, for the time, governing the law governing the particular case before the court . A judgment is a judgment of a judge, not a verdict of a court judge .
 In some states and provinces, a judgment of money due becomes a /fen upon the debtor's real estate . In some provinces, the judgment becomes a . /fen on a debtor's . estate .
 It studies the procedures of the federal courts and recommends policy changes . The federal courts are the subject of federal court cases .
 The 27-member Judicial Conference also examines the workload of each federal judicial circuit and district . The Conference may recommend the transfer of judges to circuits or districts that have the heaviest workloads .
 The group also handles complaints about federal judges who engage in misconduct or who are unable to perform their duties properly .
 Once a year, the White House gives Congress its recommendations for changes in federal rules . The White House makes recommendations to Congress every year .
 If the changes are approved by the Supreme Court, they take effect after 90 days unless Congress rejects them during that period . If approved, the changes will take effect within 90 days .
 The chief justice of the United States is chairman of the Judicial Conference . Chief Justice of the U.S. is a former Supreme Court chief justice . The Judicial Conference chairman is also a former judge .
 Other members are the chief judge of each of the 13 federal judicial circuits and a district court judge from 12 of the circuits .
 The chief judge of the United States Court of International Trade also serves . He is a former judge at the U.S. Supreme Court and a former diplomat .
 Judicial review in the broadest sense refers to the power of a court to strike down any legislative or executive action that it finds in violation of a nation’s constitution or other law . Judicial review is a federal court's power to review any legislation or actions that the court finds in
 Judicial review refers to a court's power to declare laws unconstitutional . In its narrowest sense, it refers to the power of a court to declare a law unconstitutional .
 A court would find that the law violates freedom of speech set forth in the First Amendment of the Constitution . For example, if the United States Congress were to pass a law forbidding criticism of public officials, the law would violate First Amendment rights .
 By invalidating the law, the court would be exercising the power of judicial review . The law would be invalidated by the court, the judge says . The case would be the first time the law has been invalidated .
 Constitutional democracies worldwide accept the judicial review process . Constitutional democracies around the world accept the process of judicial review .
 Most constitutions written since World War II specifically provide for some form of judicial review . The Supreme Court is expected to address the issue in the next year .
 The case marked the first time the Supreme Court declared an act of Congress unconstitutional . The case was declared unconstitutional by the justices .
 Chief Justice John Marshall reasoned that the judicial branch must have the authority to issue authoritative interpretations of the Constitution . Marshall: The judicial branch can decide whether an act of the legislative branch violates the Constitution; and to declare any such act unconstitutional . Chief Justice Marshall: "The judicial branch has the
 Many cases of judicial review resemble the Marbury case itself, in that courts specifically determine a law's consistency with a nation’s constitution . Courts specifically determine the consistency with the constitution .
 In other cases, courts determine the validity of rules and regulations made by executive agencies . Courts also decide whether to enforce rules and rules made by the government .
 In complex areas such as tax law and environmental protection, legislators lack time or technical expertise to legislate every detail of the necessary rules . In such complex areas, legislators may lack the time or the technical expertise for such complex laws .
 Governments often call upon expert agencies, such as the Internal Revenue Service, to develop and enforce detailed rules and regulations .
 Judicial review ensures agencies stay within the boundaries set by the relevant legislation . Judicial review in this context ensures that agencies stay in line with legislation .
 Judicial review ensures that a nation’s constitution and other laws are honored not just in theory but also in practice . When used properly, judicial review can be used to protect the constitution, not only in theory .
 If courts exercise this power too aggressively, they may interfere with lawmaking processes reserved for elected legislators, or with regulatory functions assigned to expert executive agencies . But if courts exercise it too aggressively courts may interfere inappropriately, it could interfere inappropriately .
 Assyrian general Holofernes attacked the Jews and laid siege to the town of Bethulia . He laid siege on Bethulia, a city in the Assyrian state of the same name .
 On their third night together, she cut off his head while he was asleep . She cut it off during the night he was sleeping .
 Judo is a sport in which a person uses balance, leverage, and timing to pin or throw an opponent . Gary G Porton Judo was founded in 1964 .
 Judo developed from an ancient Japanese method of unarmed combat called jujutsu, also spelled /ujitsu . Judo was developed from ancient Japanese methods of unarmed fighting . Jujutsu is a form of Japanese martial art known as jujitsu .
 Judo is taught at colleges, high schools, military bases, private clubs, YMCA’s, and YWCA‘s . Judo has been taught in schools across the country .
 Many judo techniques depend on a contestant's yielding to an opponent's attack until the right moment to strike back . Judo techniques require a contestant to yield to an attack until he is ready to strike .
 The shover leans forward and goes off balance at least a little and so can easily be thrown down . It is not the first time a shover has been thrown down in a row .
 With such “gentle’s methods, a skilled person can often defeat a heavier, stronger opponent . With such "gentle" methods, the skilled person often defeats a heavier or stronger opponent.
 Allspor Judo is a sport in which an individual tries to throw or pin an opponent . However, many Judo fans are not fans of the sport . Judo has been banned in Turkey and Turkey .
 Judo techniques require considerable strength . These men competing in the Summer Olympic Games are executing the judo throwing technique called nagewaza . judo techniques are executed by judo men .
 Practice and good instruction are more important than a person's age, size, strength, or weight . Practice and instruction is important for a person to be able to do well .
 Judo contestants wear a pajamalike costume called a judogi . The judogi consists of a white cotton jacket and pants and a colored belt . Judo is held in Japan .
 Many beginning courses consist of 36 hours of instruction during a 12-week period . Many of these courses involve 36 hours per week of instruction .
 Judoka learn to fall in all directions and from all positions without injuring themselves . Judoka practice other techniques to avoid injuring themselves, such as falling from all directions .
 Most beginners learn a foot sweep, hip throw, rear throw, shoulder throw, and some hand techniques . Most beginner throwers learn foot sweeps, hip throws and rear throws .
 Judoka learn the Japanese names for these movements and other judo terms . Judoka also learn the names of these movements in judo .
 Judo etiquette, including ceremonial bows and proper ways of sitting on the mats, is part of judo etiquette . Judo is a form of form known as judo in Japan .
 The United States Judo Federation officially recognizes three belt ranks: white, brown, and black . The U.S. Judo federation recognizes three belts, one white, one brown, one black, and one black .
 Beginners wear white, intermediate competitors wear brown, and experts wear black . Beginner wear white . Beginners and intermediate competitors dress white .
 Each color rank consists of various degrees of achievement . In addition, each color rank is based on achievement levels .
 Many clubs award other colors, such as green or yellow, for the degrees within the white-belt rank . White belts are awarded by a white belt .
 Nagewaza includes dozens of basic throws classified by the part of the body used . The throws are classified by part of a body used to perform each throw .
 They include hand throws, hip throws, leg sweeps, and side and back throws . Hand and hip throws include hip and hip sweeps, hip sweeps and leg sweeps .
 Katamewaza includes on-the-mat methods of choking, holding, and pinning . Katamwaza is a form of wrestling that involves choking, pinning, pining and choking .
 Atemiwaza includes techniques of kicking or striking various parts of the body to cause injury, paralysis, or even death . The techniques are used to cause injuries, paralysis or death, and can be fatal .
 There are two kinds of judo competition, kata and randori . In kata, contestants perform judo techniques in a specific order . In randori, the contestants perform techniques in an order .
 In randori, or free competition, contestants use any technique they wish . Contestants use their own technique in randori .
 A referee and two judges watch most judo matches to make sure contestants follow the rules . A referee, two judges and a referee are present in judo competitions . Judo is a form of martial art known as "judo"
 At the referee's command, the players grasp each other's jacket lapel and sleeve in a certain manner . Then, at the referee’s command, they shake their hands in a manner similar to each other .
 Referee starts and stops the match, which lasts from 3 to 7 minutes . Match lasts between 3 and 7 minutes, with the referee starting and stopping the match .
 Referee enforces rules and awards points for the correct performance of techniques . Referee awards points to players who score in the correct technique .
 A contestant can score a point by throwing an opponent or pinning an opponent for 30 seconds . For example, a contestant can throw an opponent, or pin an opponent to the ground .
 A contestant can also win by using an elbow lock or choking method to force an opponent to give up . A choking method can also be used to force a contestant to give an opponent up .
 Judo developed from jujutsu, an ancient form of self-defense practiced by the Japanese warrior class called samurai . Judo is a form of martial martial art known as jujitsu, practiced by samurai .
 Jujutsu included such techniques as choking, kicking, and twisting an opponent's arm . Jujitsu is a Japanese form of martial arts .
 In 1882, Jigoro Kano, a Japanese educator, began to select techniques from many jujutsu schools . Kano selected techniques from various jujitsu schools .
 He adopted jujutsu’s safest techniques and eliminated the rough, dangerous ones . The technique is known to be the most effective in jujitsu .
 He looked upon judo as an art, a mental discipline, and a sport which could be used as a means of education . Judo is an art and mental discipline which can be used in education .
 Judo grew in popularity and, in the early 1900's, became a required subject in Japanese schools . Judo is now a popular form of martial art in Japan and is taught in Japan .
 President Theodore Roosevelt was one of the first judoka in the United States . Roosevelt was a judoka at the time . Roosevelt became the first president of the U.S.
 Judo began its greatest period of growth in the U.S. after World War Ii ended in 1945 . Judo is now a major sport in the United States .
 Judo gained international recognition in 1964 when men’s competition became part of the Olympic Games . Judo became an Olympic event for men in 1964, with the men's competition becoming part of it .
 Judson, Adoniram, 40 of NY ruhm, was a Baptist clergyman . He was largely responsible for the founding of the first American Congregationalist and Baptist foreign missionary societies . Judson was also responsible for founding the first Baptist missionary societies in America .
 His interest in missionary work in the Far East resulted in the organization of a Congregationalist missionary society . The society was formed in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Judson soon left the Congregationalist church, deciding he disagreed with its practice of infant baptism . Judson was a member of the congregation, but later left the church .
 He offered to serve the American Baptists, who then organized a foreign missionary society . The society was organized by the American Baptist missionaries .
 He had written a Burmese grammar and baptized his first convert by 1819 . His first convert was baptized in 1819.
 He completed the Burmese Bible in 1834 and finished an English-Burmese dictionary in 1849 . He also completed a dictionary of English-burmese terms in 1847 .
 Henry Warner Bowden Juggernaut, /UHG uhr nawt, is a famous wooden image of the Hindu god Krishna . The Juggernaut is the image of a Hindu god .
 The image is housed in a decorative temple in Puri on the northeast coast of India .
 The large image is named /agannath, a Sanskrit word that means Lord of the World . The image was named by the name of the goddess of God .
 The juggernaut is an image of the Hindu god Krishna mounted on a huge cart . The elaborate forms of worship and the festivals celebrated at the Jagannath temple are celebrated in India .
 Images of Krishna's brother and sister are known throughout India . It is displayed during festivals in Puri, India, flanked by carts bearing images of Krishna’s brothers and sisters .
 In English, juggernaut refers to a huge or powerful object or task, or threatening force . In English it means a huge, powerful object, or a threat to a person or task .
 The word comes from an annual festival in which the image of Krishna is placed on a huge, brightly decorated cart 45 feet (14 meters) high . The image of the image is placed in a huge cart on a giant image of God on a large, brightly-decorated cart
 Hundreds of worshipers pull it through the city by means of long, thick ropes . The city is filled with worshipers and visitors from all faiths .
 According to legend, some worshipers have thrown themselves before the wheels to be crushed to death . Some worshipers are said to have been crushed by the wheels of the car .
 During this parade, Jagannath is accompanied by images of Krishna’s brother Balabhadra and his sister Subhadra, riding in separate carts . During the parade, the images show Krishna's brother and sister riding separate carts together .
 Anantavarman Choda Ganga, an Indian king, commissioned the temple in the 1100's . The temple was built in the 11th century and is located in India .
 Juggling is throwing and catching more than one object in one hand, or three or more objects in two hands . Juggling involves throwing, catching, catching and catching objects in one or two hands. Juggling has been a popular form of juggling .
 Jugglers most often use balls, hoops, or clubs shaped like bowling pins . Juggglers use balls or hoops shaped like pins to play .
 The world's best jugglers can briefly throw and catch as many as 10 balls, 12 hoops, or 7 clubs . They can then catch up to 10 balls or 12 hoops in a row .
 Jugglers can keep a pattern going for a longer time, but only with fewer items . Jugglers can keep the pattern going longer if they have fewer items to spare .
 To do so, jugglers throw one object into the air as they are about to catch another . To do this, they throw objects in the air to catch each other .
 They keep their eyes on the top of the arc of each throw to establish the necessary timing . They keep an eye on the arc . They also keep the eye on each throw from the top .
 Another is balancing an object, such as a stick or a ball, on a part of the body . Another is balanced an object such as the stick or ball on a body part .
 American and European vaudeville performers of the early 1900's also used juggling in their acts . American vaudieville performers used juggling to perform in their early 1900s .
 Juggling is also taught as a physical education skill to develop hand-eye coordination . Juggling has been a popular physical education subject in the U.S.
 International Jugglers Association jugoslavia.org . Critically reviewed by the international . Jugoslavia .org.com .
 Jugular vein, /UHG yuh yuh /uhr, is the name of each of four large veins that return blood to the heart from the head and neck . The name of the vein is each of the four large large veins .
 The veins get their name from the Latin word jugulus, which means collarbone . The veins are called jugulus and jugulus in Latin .
 There are two jugular veins on each side of the neck, known as the external and internal jugulars . The internal and external jugular's are known as internal or external .
 The external jugulars lie close to the surface and carry blood from the outside parts of the head and neck to the heart . The external jointulars carry blood from  the outside of the head and neck to the heart.
 The internal jugulars lie deeper and carry blood from the deeper tissues of the neck and from the interior of the skull . The internal blood vessels lie deeper in the internal neck and the internal skull .
 The internal jugular veins are much larger than the external jugular vein . Internal veins are the ones commonly referred to as internal . The internal veins are larger than external ones .
 Opening an internal jugular vein usually proves fatal, because of the rapid loss of blood . Opening an open internal vein often proves fatal because of rapid blood loss .
 Dominick Sabatino Juilliard, /OOL ih ahrd, Augustus Augustus was an American merchant, financier, and philanthropist . He was an outstanding patron of music .
 It was established in 1920 under the terms of the will of Augustus Juilliard, a wealthy textile merchant . It was set up under terms of his will in 1920 .
 The Juilliard Graduate School was formerly known as the Institute of Musical Art . It is the oldest school in the world .
 The Juilliard School is a member of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts . The school is based in New York City .
 The jugular veins are two on each side of the head and neck . They return blood to the heart . Julian is the son of Julian, who was born Julian .
 He received a Christian education but secretly rejected Christian beliefs . He received an education but later rejected his beliefs .
 Julian the caesar and defender of Gaul was made by Emperor Constantius Il in 355 . In 355, he was made the son of Constantius I, a Roman general who ruled Gaul . Julian was made a caesar in the Roman Roman empire of Gaul .
 Julian distinguished himself, and his troops proclaimed him emperor in 361 . Julian was the first emperor of the Roman Roman Empire .
 Julian tried to halt the growth of Christianity by strengthening the Roman religion and prohibiting Christians from teaching in the schools . Julian was emperor of Roman Empire .
 He also tried to end corruption in government and restore prosperity during his 18-month reign . He was also trying to end .
 Julian's death ended serious opposition to Christianity in the Roman Empire . Julian died at the time of his death in Rome . Julian was one of the most prominent Roman Christians in the world .
 He developed synthetic drugs that are duplicates of substances produced in the human body . Synthetic drugs can be duplicated of substances that are produced by the body .
 Julian discovered a way to make synthetic physostigmine, a compound found in the Calabar bean, a poisonous seed of an African plant . Julian discovered the compound in 1935 . It is found in a variety of African plants .
 He used one of them in a synthetic progesterone that he developed as commercial product in 1940 .
 Progesterone, which is produced in the human body, regulates reproductive functions . It is produced by the body in a form of form of hormone hormone .
 Julian developed the first commercially successful synthetic cortisone, another substance produced in the human body, in 1948 . In 1948, Julian developed a form of the drug that is now widely available in the world .
 Three years later, he left to found a manufacturing company and a research institute . Three years after he left, he went on to found manufacturing company .
 Julian was born on April 11, 1899, in Montgomery, Alabama . Julian was the grandson of slaves . He was born in 1899, and his family was slaves .
 Julian calendar was devised in 46 B.C. by the order of Julius Caesar . Julian calendar, /OOL yuhn, was devised by Julius Caesar in 46 BC. Julian calendar is now used to mark the end of the year .
 Roman religious officials distorted the calendar so that it differed from the solar year by three months . Before then, the Roman religious calendar was distorted by religious officials .
 Julian calendar divided the year into 12 months alternating from 30 to 31 days, except February which had 29 days . Julian calendar was divided by 12 months, with the exception of 29 days between January and February .
 To readjust the calendar, three months were added to the year 46 B.C, making it 15 months long . The year 46 BC.C was added to 46 BC .
 Pope Gregory XIII corrected the calendar with the newly developed Gregorian calendar in 1582 . Two years later, Pope Gregory XV corrected calendar with Gregorian Calendar .
 Juliana, joo /ee AN uh, was the queen of the Netherlands from 1948 to 1980 . Juliana was the Dutch queen from 1948 until 1980 .
 From early childhood, she was trained to succeed her mother, Queen Wilhelmina . She was trained from early childhood to become Queen of Wales . She is now the queen of England .
 As a young girl, Princess Juliana attended classes daily at the palace . She was a member of the royal family .
 Juliana was made a member of the Council of State when she came of age on her 18th birthday . Juliana made the council of state at the age of 18 .
 Juliana and her daughters lived in Canada from 1940 to 1945 during World War II . Juliana lived in the Netherlands with her daughters during the war .
 Juliana became queen after ruling as regent for several months . Queen Wilhelmina abdicated because of ill health in September 1948 . Juliana ruled as queen after abdicating due to ill-health .
 She succeeded to the Dutch monarchy in a ceremony known as investiture inthe Netherlands . She succeeded in the Netherlands as a British monarch .
 Jan de Vries Julius HE was the most vigorous and forceful of all the Renaissance popes . He was also the most forceful and forceful popes of the Renaissance .
 He was elected pope in 1503 and immediately became a strong defender of papal temporal power . He undertook vast projects to beautify Rome and beautify the city of Rome .
 As a cardinal, he was influential in papal politics . He opposed Alexander VI, the pope from the powerful Borgia family . Alexander VI was a member of the Borgia dynasty .
 Julius led armies in the conquest of Perugia and Bologna . In 1509 he joined the League of Cambrai against Venice . Julius was born in Rome, Italy .
 Julius’s artistic projects were the most enduring aspect of his papacy . Julius's artistic work was the most lasting aspect of the papacy, he said .
 He commissioned Michelangelo to carve his tomb and decorate the Sistine Chapel with frescoes . Michelangelo carved the tomb and decorated the Chapel with murals . The tomb was carved by Michelangelo and his tomb was found in the Vatican .
 He also employed the artist Raphael to work in the Vatican apartments . Raphael painted such masterpieces as the School of Athens .
 See also Michelangelo; Pope (Renaissance and Reformation); Raphael; Raphael . Michelangelo .
 Later, the Romans moved the beginning of the year to January 1 but did not change the names of the months . The Romans did not name the months after the January 1 .
 Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776 . The Declaration was adopted by the Continental Congress in 1776.
 This festival originated when the growing of sugar cane was a large part of life in that country . This festival was started in the 1930s when sugar cane farming was a major part of the life .
 Rastafarians honor the birth of Haile Selassie | on the 23rd of the month . Haile's birth is celebrated on the anniversary of his birth .
 Amendment 26 to the U.S. Constitution sets the voting age at 18, proclaimed in 1971 . Cecil Rhodes, British statesman and diamond king, born 1853 . American circus owner, American circuarium owner, born in 1810 .
 Whistler, American painter, born 1834 . Wyoming became the 44th U.S. state in 1890 . Battle of Britain in World War I began, 1940 .
 Josiah Wedgwood, British porcelain maker, born 1730. — Henry David Thoreau, American author, born 1817. — Andrew Wyeth, American painter, born 1917. — Panama Canal opened, 1920.
 Carole S Angell Quotations: "Then came hot July, boiling like fire, That all his garments he had cast away" Carole Angell: "All his garments were cast away. Then came hot . July."
 Edmund Spenser if the first of July be rainy weather, It will rain, more or less, for four weeks together . Edmund Spenten: "It will rain more or more than less" Edmund Spenner: "If the first day of July is rainy, it will
 Francis Thompson: Hot July brings cooling showers, Apricots and gillyflowers . Francis Thompson says he hopes to see more sunshine this summer .
 Rembrandt, Dutch painter and etcher, was born in 1606 . Manitoba became a province of Canada, 1870 . Second Battle of the Marne in World War | began, 1918 .
 July 14 — Pioneer Day; Mormons settled Salt Lake City, Utah, 1847 . July 16—first atomic bomb explosion — Alexandre Dumas the Elder, French author, born 1802 . Amelia Earhart, the first woman to fly over the Atlantic, was born 1897 .
 July Revolution of 1830 took place in Paris when the French people revolted against King Charles X and brought Louis Philippe to the throne . The July Revolution was the first French revolution since the French Revolution in 1830 .
 Charles had tried to move France toward the absolute monarchy it had been before the French Revolution began in 1789 . Charles tried to try to move the country toward an absolute monarchy . Charles died at the age of 92 in 1881 .
 In 1830, the liberals had won a large majority in the Chamber of Deputies, France's legislature . In the elections of 1830, they won a majority in France's parliament .
 King Charles, who opposed the liberals, then issued the July Ordinance . King Charles then issued a series of ordinances .
 They dissolved the newly elected Chamber of Deputies before it had met, set a date for new elections, and reduced the number of voters . They called for strict censorship of the press, and called for a new election date .
 Journalists and other middle-class professionals called for demonstrations . Demonstrators are expected to demonstrate against the government .
 Workers set up barricades in the streets of Paris and controlled the city center for three days . The barricades were set up in the French capital's capital .
 Marquis de Lafayette threw his great influence behind a limited monarchy under Louis Philippe, the Duke of Orléans, who then became king . He threw his influence behind the limited monarchy in France .
 Louis Philippe was seen as a bourgeois king rather than an aristocratic king such as Charles X had been . Charles X was the first French king to be seen as an aristocrat .
 A wave of revolutions swept through Europe following the July Revolution in France . The revolution in France was the first of its kind in France in 1877 .
 Louis Philippe became steadily more conservative during his reign, known as the July Monarchy . Louis Philippe was known as a conservative monarch .
 Jumping bean, the seed of a Mexican shrub, is famous for its quick, jumping movements . Jumping beans are a seed of Mexican shrubs known for their quick and jumping movements.
 The movements of a jumping bean are actually caused by a caterpillar that lives inside the seed . The movements are caused by the caterpillar inside the bean seed .
 Moths of the species Laspeyresia saltitans deposit their eggs in the shrub’s flowers . Moths deposit eggs in shrub's flowers in a shrub .
 After the eggs hatch, caterpillars burrow into the young seeds of the shrub . The eggs hatch and the caterpillar burrows into the seeds of a shrub.
 The seeds later develop a hard outer wall that conceals any indication of how the caterpillar entered . Seeds later develop hard outer walls that conceal any indication that the caterpillars were inside .
 The caterpillar eats away the inside of the seed, but it leaves the seed wall undamaged . The seed wall is left unharmed by the caterpillar .
 Scientists believe the jumping helps scare away animals that might try to eat the seeds . Scientists believe it helps scare animals away from eating them .
 The caterpillar makes a circular lid by cutting through the seed wall . Then the caterpillar cuts through a seed wall to make a circle of circles .
 The adult moth pushes through the lid and leaves the seed . When the change is completed, the adult moth will push into the lid .
 Jumping beans, /eft are actually the seeds of a Mexican shrub . William C Burger illustration by Oxford Illustrators Limited
 A caterpillar lives in each jumping bean . By grasping the silken wall of the bean with its legs and vigorously snapping its body, the caterpillar makes the bean move suddenly .
 A jumping mouse is about 4 inches long, excluding its 5-inch (13centimeter) tail . A jump mouse is 4 inches (4 inches) long . Jumping mice is a jumping mouse with a tail .
 Most species have a line along the sides of their bodies where the dark and the lighter-colored fur meet . The line is the line between dark and light fur meets .
 Most North American species live in meadows and thickets along the edges of woods in northern U.S. and Canada . Most species live along the edge of meadows or thickets in the northern United States .
 The female jumping mouse gives birth to a litter of about five young twice a year . The jumping mice give birth to about five children each year .
 North American jumping mice are in either of two genera, Zapus or Napaeozapus . The jumping mice belong to either of these genera or Zapus .
 There are five subspecies of dark-eyed junco in the U.S. There are gray-haired junco, Guadalupe junco and Oregon junco .
 The woodland jumping mouse normally lives in meadows and thickets along the edge of woods in the northern sections of the U.S. and Canada .
 The dark-eyed junco is a small bird that lives throughout much of North America . The small bird lives in the United States and Canada .
 The Oregon junco is one of four subspecies that live in the United States . The junco, shown here, is a junco one of the U.S. species .
 June was the fourth month in the early Roman calendar, and it once had 29 days . June is the month of June, the fourth in the Roman calendar .
 The Romans later moved the beginning of the year to January 1, making June the sixth month . The Romans moved the start of the new year to June, making it sixth month of the calendar .
 Julius Caesar reformed the calendar in 46 B.C. He gave June 30 days to mark the end of the year . Julius Caesar gave the date to June 30 .
 Some authorities believe the Romans named the month for Juno, the patron goddess of marriage . Juno is believed to have been the patron of marriage goddess Juno .
 June was believed to be the best time for marriages, and it remains a popular month for weddings . June is the best month for wedding ceremonies, according to experts .
 The Junius family was powerful and important throughout the early history of ancient Rome . It is believed that the family of the Junius were influential in Rome's history .
 June 1 marks Gawai Dayak , the most important holiday celebrated in the state of Sarawak in Malaysia . Gawai dayak is a Malaysian national holiday celebrated .
 Flag Day is celebrated on June 14, the anniversary of the adoption of the United States flag by the Continental Congress in 1777 . The Continental Congress adopted the U.S. flag by 1777.
 The third Sunday of the month is Father's Day in Canada and the U.S. Father's Sunday is the third Sunday in the month . Father's day is celebrated in Canada, the United States .
 Some Americans observe Juneteenth, though it is not a national holiday . Juneteenth is an African-American emancipation .
 The name Juneteenth is a shortening of June 19th, the date on which many of the slaves in Texas first learned of their emancipation . The name is a shortened version of the date of emancipation in Texas .
 John the Baptists Day, is celebrated in many countries, and customs surrounding the holiday vary from place to place .
 Also known as Midsummer's Day, this holiday often combines a celebration of the summer solstice (which occurs between the 20th and 21st) with the celebration of summer's solstice . French explorer Jacques Marquette, French explorer, born 1637 .
 Carl Nielsen, Danish composer, was born in 1865 . Cole Porter, American composer, born 1893. Carl Nielsen was Danish composer .
 Winfield Scott, American general, was born in 1786 . Yukon Territory organized, 1898 . Carlos Chavez, Mexican composer, born 1899. -- ""Red"" Grange, football hero, born 1903 .
 June 6— 22nd of June) with the commemoration of the anniversary of the birth of Saint John the Baptist . June 6-22nd June is the date of the first anniversary of John's birth .
 Gems associated with the month are the pearl, alexandrite, and moonstone . The month of January is February .
 Heaven tries earth if it be in tune, And over it softly her warm ear lays . Whether we look, or whether we listen, We hear life murmur, or see it glisten . Then, if ever, come perfect days; Then Heaven tries Earth if it's in
 No price is set on the lavish summer; June may be had by the poorest comer . Douglas Mallock: June may not be the best summer in the world .
 Eli Whitney applied for a patent on the cotton gin in 1793 . The cotton gin was the first cotton gin patent in the U.S.
 It lies in the southeastern part of the state, the area known as the Alaska Panhandle . It is located in Alaska's southeastern part, known as Alaska's Alaskan Panhandle, Alaska .
 The Inside Passage is a scenic water transportation route that extends from Washington to southeastern Alaska . It lies on the Inside Passage, a scenic route that includes Washington and Alaska .
 A state-operated ferry system on the Inside Passage connects Juneau to other communities in southeastern Alaska and to the lower 48 states . Juneau is home to the Juneau Peninsula .
 The passengers enjoy such activities as a tour of historic downtown Juneau and a helicopter tour of the Juneau Icefield . The passengers also enjoy a ride up nearby Mount Roberts .
 The local, state, and federal government provide about 45 percent of Juneau's jobs . Juneau, Alaska, is home to the state's largest city .
 Juneau was founded in 1880 on the site of Alaska’s first major gold discovery . Juneau, Alaska, was founded by the city of Juneau in 1881 .
 The city was first called Harrisburgh for Richard T Harris, one of the two prospectors who first discovered gold there . Harrisburgh was the name of a prospector who discovered gold in the area .
 In 1882, the city was renamed Juneau, after the other prospector, Joseph Juneau . The city was named Juneau after Juneau in 1882 . In 1881, Juneau was renamed after the prospector .
 Last of the gold mines closed in 1944 when operating costs exceeded income . The last of the mines was closed in 1945 due to operating costs .
 In 1970, Juneau and Douglas merged with the Greater Juneau Borough to form the City and Borough of Juneau . Juneau is one of the largest cities in the state .
 In 1976, Alaskans voted to move the State capital from Juneau to south-central Alaska, nearer the state’s population center . The move was approved by voters in 1976 .
 Juneau, the capital of Alaska, lies at the foot of steep mountains . Juneau's residents voted in 1982 to become the state's capital .
 Junebug, also called /une beetle or May beetle, is a name for several large brown beetles often seen in the United States during May and June .
 The beetles are related to the ancient scarab beetles of Egypt, which were considered sacred . They are related .
 They burrow into the soil in autumn and stay there two years or more, feeding on roots of corn, grains, grasses, and vegetables . The burrowers burrow in autumn in autumn, burrowing into the ground in autumn .
 Junebugs are in the order Coleoptera and the scarab family, Scarabaeidae . Junebugs in the family are known as Junebugs . They are also in the Scarabidae .
 Jung, yoong, Carl Gustav , was a Swiss psychiatrist and psychologist . He developed the field of analytical psychology . Jung was the founder of the Jung Jung Society .
 His teachings extended beyond psychology and influenced other fields, including anthropology, philosophy, and theology . His teachings included anthropology and philosophy .
 Jung challenged many of the theories proposed by the famous Austrian physician Sigmund Freud, who had developed the method of therapy called psychoanalysis . Jung challenged Freud's theories in his work .
 Jung and Freud stressed the effects of unconscious ideas on human behavior . However, both Freud and Jung stressed the effect unconscious ideas had on human behaviour .
 World Book illustration by Shirley Hooper, Oxford Illustrators Limited Junebug . Junebug's life. Junebug His life .
 Jung, a ministers son, was born on July 26, 1875, in Kesswil, Switzerland . Jung was born in 1875 and was a minister's son .
 As a boy, he developed a lifelong interest in superstition, mythology, and the occult . As a child, he became fascinated with superstition and mythology .
 Jung participated in the psychoanalytic movement . Jung and Jung were close friends and became close friends .
 Freud believed Freud placed too much importance on sexual instincts in human behavior . Jung believed Freud had put too much emphasis on sexual instinct in his work . Freud's work was published in 1900s The Life and The Life of Love .
 Jung's de-emphasis of sexuality led to a break with Freud, and their friendship ended in 1913 . Jung's relationship with Freud ended after a close friendship with him .
 Extroverts seek the company of other individuals for personal fulfillmentment . Extrovert seeks the companionship of others for personal fulfillment . Extromoteness is a self-confessed introvert .
 Jung taught that therapists should help patients balance the two character types in themselves . Jung taught patients to balance their character types with themselves .
 He believed personalities of parents are major influences on a child . He believed the personalities of a child were major influences .
 Jung taught that sexuality does not become important until just before young people reach puberty . Unlike Freud, Jung taught sexuality does become important only before puberty . Jung: Sexuality is important only for young people to reach puberty, not just before puberty.
 Jung believed that the unconscious part of the mind contains personal drives and experiences of which an individual is not aware . Jung, like Freud, believed that an individual's personal drives were not aware of . Jung said that unconscious drives and personal experiences are personal drives .
 Jung also thought that members of every race share a deeper level of unconsciousness, which he called the co/lective unconscious . Jung thought that the members of all races share a deep level of consciousness .
 Jung says the collective unconscious includes thought patterns called archetypes, which have developed through the centuries . Jung says archetypes are thought patterns that have developed throughout the world . Jung: Archetypes are a pattern pattern that has developed through centuries .
 Jung thought archetypes enable people to react to situations in ways similar to their ancestors . Jung said archetypes enabled people to respond to situations similar to those of the ancestors .
 Jung believed that the collective unconscious contains wisdom that guides all humanity . For this reason, he believed that humanity can be guided by its collective unconscious .
 He thought therapy should bring people in contact with the collective unconscious . He said therapy should be able to bring people into contact with their unconsciouss .
 Jung's studies of mythology convinced him that archetypes of gods and supernatural powers are deeply rooted in the collective unconscious . Jung: Archetypes are deeply-rooted in our collective unconscious and deeply-deeply-rearable .
 He believed religion enables people to express an unconscious need for religious experience . He said religion enables them to express their unconscious need to be religious .
 Jung, Carl G The Essential Jung. Pantheon Electra Mythology (Mythology and Extrovert the individual) Freud, Sigmund Psychoanalysis Introvert . Freud, Carl J. Jung. Jung . Jung. Carl G. Jung: "The Essential Jung"
 It is located about 12 miles south of Interlaken, a famous resort town in the Bernese Alps . The town is a popular tourist destination in the Alps .
 The Jungfrau is part of a circular ridge enclosing several glaciers that unite to form the Aletsch Glacier . The Aletch Glacier is one of the largest glaciers in the world .
 A tropical rain forest is a plant and animal community with huge trees, long vines, and such animals as parrots and monkeys . People commonly use the word 'jungle' to refer to what ecologists call a tropical jungle .
 Some ecologists consider jungles to be one stage in a rain forest's development . Some say jungles are one stage of the rain forests' development . The rain forest is one of the fastest-growing areas in the rain forest .
 They regard jungles as thick tangles of plants growing where sunlight reaches the floor of the rain forest . The rain forest is a thick, thick layer of plants that can be seen by sunlight .
 Such jungles grow in the rain forest along riverbanks and in clearings, where no trees block the sunlight . The jungles are found in rain forests along river banks and clearings where sunlight is abundant .
 Farmers and lumber companies often cut down sections of tropical rain forests . The cleared areas of Jater may become choked with jungle growth .
 Jungles may be so thick that people can only move through them by hacking paths with long knives called machetes . Jungles are so thick people only use long knives to hack paths through them . People can only hack through them using long knives known as machelets .
 Thomas E Lovejoy Junglefowl is the name of a group of birds that live in southern Asia and the East Indies .
 The hen’s cackle sounds much like that of our domesticated fowls, but the cock crows like a bantam rooster . The rooster sounds much more like a hen's cackle than a rooster's .
 The wild red junglefowl lives mostly in mountain forests near small villages . It is thought to be the biggest bird species in the wild .
 Red flesh forms a comb on top of the head and hangs as watt/es from the throat . Red flesh is formed from red flesh which forms from the head .
 Junior Achievement is an organization that educates young people about business and economics . Junior Achievement teaches students about business, economics and business .
 The organization operates in cities, suburbs, and rural areas across the United States . Business and industrial firms sponsor the organization, which operates across the country .
 Junior Achievement conducts activities that begin in kindergarten and continue through high school . Activities include classroom programs, after-school programs, and Internet exercises .
 Junior Achievement programs are taught by classroom volunteers from the business community . Junior Achievement is a Junior Achievement program taught by students from the community .
 In the Junior Achievement Company Program, high school students form, manage, and operate their own companies during the school year . The program is an atter-school program that teaches students how to form and manage their own businesses .
 They keep records, pay themselves small wages, and run their businesses . They also run their own small businesses .
 At the end of the school year, the students dissolve their corporations and divide their capital and any profit among shareholders . Students divide capital and profits among shareholders at end of school year . Students dissolve corporations and split their profits .
 Junior Achievement began the National Business Leadership Conference and National Business Hall of Fame in 1975 . Junior Achievement is the oldest organization in the world to have been formed .
 The conference is an annual forum in which business and education leaders discuss economic issues . The conference will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Hall of Fame honors people who have made outstanding contributions to American business . The hall of fame is based in New York City .
 Junior Achievement was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1919 by Theodore N Vail, president of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Horace A Moses, a paper manufacturer, and Senator Winthrop Murray Crane .
 Junior high school is a school designed mainly for students in the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades . The school is designed for seventh and eighth grade students .
 Some junior high schools consist of only grades seven and eight . However, some schools have only grades 7 and 8 instead of grades 7-8 .
 The purpose of a junior high school is to help boys and girls from 12 to 15 years of age prepare for high school . Boys and girls 12-15 years old will attend the school . The school's purpose is to prepare them for the transition to high school.
 During these years, most young people begin to undergo the physical, mental, social, and emotional changes associated with adolescence . During this period, most people undergo physical and mental changes . This is when they begin to experience the physical and social, social and emotional effects of adolescence .
 Junior high school programs help students adjust to the differences between elementary school and high school . The programs are designed to help students prepare for the transition from elementary to high school.
 Junior high schools are organized around subjects taught by specialists . Unlike elementary schools, junior high schools have specialised subjects .
 Students move from one classroom to another to take courses offered by teachers trained in the specific subject they teach . Students move to another classroom to take part in the classroom .
 In this way, the junior high school is more like a high school than an elementary school . "In this way," the school's principal says . "I'm not going to let it be a school that's not a school," he says .
 Junior high school students continue studying many of the subjects they had in elementary school . English, social studies, science, and mathematics are among the subjects students learn about .
 At the same time, they begin studying subjects that were once only taught only in high school .
 These subjects include foreign languages, home economics, and industrial arts . The subjects include home economics and home economics .
 Certain required subjects, especially English and social studies, may be combined into one course . Students may also be required to take part in a social studies course .
 Courses combined in this way may be called b/ock-time classes, unified studies, or core programs . Courses combining classes and classes may be known as core programs, or b-ock time classes .
 In junior high school, part of each student's program consists of e/ective courses . The e-ective courses are offered in junior high schools across the country .
 These are courses chosen from a variety of nonrequired subjects, such as business education or music . The courses chosen are chosen from non-required subjects .
 Students also encouraged to take part in clubs, sports, and social activities . Students are encouraged to participate in clubs and sports .
 The first junior high schools were established in U.S. parts of the United States about 1910 .
 Since the 1960's, an increasing number of school districts have been replacing junior highs with middle schools . Since the 1970s, middle schools have been replaced with junior highs .
 These schools consist of grades six through eight or five through eight . These schools are either grades six to eight or grades five to eight . The schools are divided into grades six and eight .
 Many educators believe middle schools focus better on the needs and interests of students than junior highs . Middle schools focus more on students' interests than junior high schools, educators say .
 Stephen M Fain is a middle school librarian . Stephen Fain was a member of the school's library staff . The school's libraries are located in the middle school .
 Junior Leagues are community service organizations for women from age 18 through 45 . Junior leagues are non-profit organizations that serve women ages 18 to 45 .
 The leagues encourage and train their members to participate in community affairs as volunteer leaders and workers . The leagues are based in New York City .
 Each league sponsors projects in such fields as the arts, criminal justice, education, health, and urban renewal .
 Programs address needs of specific groups, such as children, older adults, women, and the disabled . Programs also address the needs of children and older adults .
 Each league is self-governing, but all are affiliated with the Association of Junior Leagues, Inc. All leagues are self-governed and self-affiliated .
 The association advises the local leagues and coordinates programs . The association was founded in 1921 .
 Its activities include programs to train youth leaders and promote volunteer activities during retirement . It also promotes volunteer activities in retirement .
 Juniper, /OO nuh puhr, is the name of a group of evergreen shrubs and small trees of the cypress family . Juniper is the common name of an evergreen group of small trees and shrubs .
 The Chinese juniper comes in many cultivated varieties . However, they are not the same as Richard Shiell, the author of Earth Scenes .
 Leaves of the tree may be needlelike and prickly, or they may be scalelike and lie tightly against twigs . Leaves may be prickly and needlelike or needlelike . Leaves of a tree may lie tightly on twigs or lie tightly with twigs of twigs
 It ranks as one of the most widely distributed woody plants in the world . The plant is a widely distributed species of woody plant in the United States .
 It grows throughout the Northern Hemisphere in countries with a cold climate . It grows in countries such as Norway, Iceland and Argentina .
 The fruit of the common juniper contains an oil used in medicines and to flavor gin . The fruit is also used to make gin and make it popular in gin .
 The Chinese juniper, another well-known species, is native to eastern Asia . The juniper is another well known species of the juniper . It is also native to east Asia .
 The eastern redcedar is the only juniper of commercial importance in the United States . It is the most important juniper in the U.S.
 Oils from the leaves and wood of some species are used in perfumes and medicines . Some species species use their leaves or wood to make perfumes .
 The common juniper is £ communis communis, the Chinese juniper, and the eastern redcedar is / virginiana . It is common in China and Japan .
 Junk is a wooden sailing vessel used in China and other countries of the Far East . It is used as a wooden vessel used to sail around the world .
 First Junkers were descendants of knights who settled in Prussia in the Middle Ages . The first Junkers came from the Knights of Prussia . The Junkers are descendants of those who settled there in the middle Ages .
 Junkers gained a monopoly of civilian and military offices during the reign of Frederick the Great in the 1700's . The Junkers were given a monopoly on civilian offices in 17th century .
 Prussia, led by the Junkers under the statesman Otto von Bismarck, unified Germany in 1871 . The Junkers led the Prussian army in the early 1900s .
 After World War 1, liberals of the Weimar Republic tried to reduce the powers of the Junkers . The Junkers were considered the most powerful in Germany after World War I .
 Paul von Hindenburg, a Junker elected president in 1925, prevented the reduction of the size of the Junker .
 Junkers who opposed Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler were executed after they plotted to assassinate him . Later, Junkers were executed for plotting to kill Hitler .
 Juno, /OO noh, was the sister and wife of Jupiter, king of the gods of Roman mythology . Juno was born Juno, the sister of Jupiter and the wife of the god of Jupiter . Juno is one of the most powerful women in the world .
 As Jupiter's wife, she was queen of the gods and the most powerful goddess . She was also known as the goddess of Jupiter, Jupiter's first wife .
 She played the same role in Roman mythology as the goddess Hera did in Greek mythology . The goddess played a role in the Roman goddess Hera in the creation of the goddess .
 By the Latin name /uno Lucina , she was the goddess of childbirth and perhaps originally of the moon . She was also a goddess of marriage and childbirth .
 The Romans originally coined their money near this temple, and the words money and mintcome from moneta .
 Juno was one of the three deities enshrined in temples on the Capitoline Hill . Juno, along with Jupiter and Minerva, was among the three gods enshrined there . Juno and Jupiter were one of three deities in the Roman Catholic temple of Rome .
 Juno was jealous of Jupiter's love affairs with other goddesses and with mortal women, and she persecuted his mistresses . Juno's jealousy of Jupiter led her to be jealous of his love affairs .
 Juno was the enemy of Aeneas in the Aeneid, an epic poem by the Roman author Virgil . Juno was Juno's enemy in the epic poem . Juno is the daughter of the Trojan hero Aeneaas .
 After Greek armies destroyed Troy, Aeneas wandered for many years until he established a nation in Italy . He established a country in Italy after the Greek invasion of Troy .
 At the end of the Aeneid, Jupiter won Juno's support for Aeneas by promising Rome would rule a great empire in which Juno would be especially honored . Jupiter won Jupiter's support by promising to rule Rome in which Jupiter would honor Juno .
 Junta, HUN tuh or JUHN tuh, is a small group that takes over a government and rules by decree . A small group of small groups takes control of a government . Junta is a group that rules by decrement .
 A junta may seize power in order to restore order in a country or make reforms . A government junta can seize power to make reforms or restore order .
 The junta either serves as the government itself or sets up a government that follows its policies . It is either the government of the junta itself or the people who follow its policies.
 Junta rule occurs most often in countries that have unstable governments . It is often followed by military rule .
 Term junta was once associated primarily with Latin-American nations . The term junta once associated with Latin American nations .
 One example of a junta taking over a country occurred in Egypt in 1952 . One example was in 1952 when Egypt was overthrown .
 One member of the junta became prime minister, but the real power lay with junta members . The real power in the country was the power of the military, not the government .
 A struggle for power developed between the prime minister and a member of the junta, Gamal Abdel Nasser . Gamal Nasser was prime minister of Egypt's first government in the early 1950s .
 Its diameter is 88,846 miles , more than 11 times that of Earth, and about one-tenth that of the sun . It is one of the largest solar systems known to exist .
 It would take more than 1,000 Earths to fill up the volume of the planet . It would be more than a million Earths .
 Its mean (average (average) distance from the sun is about 483,600,000 miles . It is more than five times Earth's distance . The solar system is five times larger than Earth .
 Astronomers have studied Jupiter with telescopes based on Earth and aboard artificial satellites in orbit around Earth . They have studied the planet with telescopes and satellites based in Earth's orbit .
 Astronomers witnessed a spectacular event in 1994, when 21 fragments of a comet crashed into Jupiter's atmosphere . The comet named ShoemakerLevy 9 crashed into the atmosphere .
 The impacts caused tremendous explosions, some scattering debris over areas larger than the diameter of Earth . The impacts were caused by tremendous explosions . Some of the impacts were so large that Earth's diameter was larger than Earth .
 Jupiter is a giant ball of gas and liquid with little, if any, solid surface . Jupiter is also known as the largest planet in the solar system system .
 The planet's surface is composed of dense red, brown, yellow, and white clouds . It is not the surface of the planet, but the surface is covered in clouds .
 The clouds are arranged in light-colored areas called zones and darker regions called be/ts . They circle the planet parallel to the equator . The clouds cover the planet's equator and circle the globe .
 The planet completes one orbit in 4,333 Earth-days, or almost 12 Earthyears . It is the first planet to orbit the Earth in 12 Earth years .
 As Jupiter orbits the sun, the planet rotates on its avis, an imaginary line through its center . The line is a line through the center of the planet's center .
 Scientists measure tilt relative to a line at a right angle to the orbital plane . An imaginary surface touching all points of the orbit touches all points in the orbit of the Earth .
 It takes 9 hours 55 minutes to spin around once on the axis, compared to 24 hours for Earth . Earth spins around once every day, the fastest in the world's history .
 Scientists cannot measure the rotation of the interior of the giant planet directly, so they have calculated the speed from indirect measurements .
 The speed was calculated using an average of the speeds of the clouds that move with interior currents, except for a more rapid zone near the equator .
 Jupiter sends out radio waves strong enough to be picked up by radio telescopes on Earth . Jupiter's radio waves can be detected by telescopes in Earth's telescopes .
 Scientists now measure these waves to calculate Jupiter's rotational speed . The waves will be used to calculate the planet's rotation speed .
 The strength of the waves varies under the influence of Jupiter's magnetic field in a pattern that repeats every 9 hours 55 minutes . The waves are waves that vary under the magnetic field .
 Jupiter's magnetic field Originates in Jupiter's core . This variation shows how fast the plants interior spins .
 Jupiter's rapid rotation makes it bulge at the equator and flatten at the poles . It bulges at its poles, flattens at the polar poles . Jupiter is one of the largest solar systems in the solar system .
 The planet's diameter is about 6 percent larger at the equator than at the poles . The diameter of the planet is also 6 percent bigger at the polar poles .
 Its density averages 1.33 grams per cubic centimeter, slightly more than the density of water . The density of the water is slightly higher than water .
 The density of Jupiter is about 1 that of Jet Propulsion Laboratory . The layers of dense clouds around Jupiter appear in a photograph of the planet taken by Voyager 1 space probe .
 Jupiter's low density means it consists of hydrogen and helium, the lightest elements . Astronomers believe that the planet is primarily made up of hydrogen, helium .
 Jupiter's mix of chemical elements resembles that of the sun, rather than that of Earth . Jupiter is one of the most powerful solar systems in the solar system system .
 The core may be of about the same chemical composition as Earth, but 20 or 30 times more massive . Core may be 20 to 30 times larger than Earth, according to scientists . Core is of the same composition as the Earth .
 The force of gravity at the surface of Jupiter is up to 2.5 times stronger than on Earth . Jupiter's gravity is 2.2 times stronger on the surface than on the Earth .
 The atmosphere of Jupiter is composed of 86 percent hydrogen, 14 percent helium, and tiny amounts of methane, ammonia, phosphine, water, acetylene, ethane, germanium, and carbon monoxide .
 The percentage of hydrogen is based on the number of hydrogen molecules in the atmosphere, rather than on their total mass . It's based on a percentage of the hydrogen molecules that are in the Earth's atmosphere, not their mass .
 Scientists have calculated these amounts from measurements taken with telescopes and other instruments on Earth and aboard spacecraft . Scientists calculate these amounts using measurements taken from telescopes, other instruments and spacecraft .
 These chemicals have formed colorful layers of clouds at different heights . The clouds were formed by chemicals used to create clouds .
 The highest white clouds in the zones are made of crystals of frozen ammonia . The clouds are made by crystals of ice crystals .
 Astronomers had expected to detect water clouds about 44 miles below the ammonia clouds . Water clouds were expected to be 44 miles deep below the clouds .
 Jupiter's most outstanding surface feature is the Great Red Spot, a swirling mass of gas resembling a hurricane . Jupiter's Great Redspot is the largest surface feature of the solar system .
 Its color may be due to small amounts of sulfur and phosphorus in the ammonia crystals .
 Jupiter is the fifth closest planet to the sun . It is the largest planet in the solar system . Jupiter is one of the most powerful planets in solar system system .
 Hydrogen, helium, methane, methane and ammonia, ammonia, carbon monoxide, ethane, acetylene, acetene, phosphine, water vapor . Methane, helium and helium are among the gases found in the atmosphere .
 The spot remains at the same distance from the equator but drifts slowly east and west . The spot is now at the center of the world's largest solar eclipse .
 The zones, belts, and the Great Red Spot are much more stable than similar circulation systems on Earth . The zones and belts are much less stable than other similar systems .
 Astronomers began using telescopes to observe these features in the late 1600's . Since then, the features have changed size and brightness but have kept the same patterns .
 Measurements made by ground instruments and spacecraft show that Jupiter's temperature increases with depth below the clouds . Measurements from ground instruments show that the temperature of Jupiter's surface rises with depth .
 The temperature reaches 70 °F —""room temperature —at a level where the atmospheric pressure is about 10 times as great as it is on Earth . The temperature reached 70 °f —""Room temperature — at a level  10 times the pressure on Earth. The temperature is 70 °
 Scientists speculate that if Jupiter has any form of life, the life form would reside at this level . Scientists speculate if Jupiter's level of life is this level, it would reside in this region .
 Such life would need to be airborne, because there is no solid surface at this location on Jupiter . Such life is unlikely to be detected on Jupiter's surface .
 The core temperature may be about 43,000 °F —hotter than the surface of the sun . The core of the solar system is thought to be hotter than any other solar system .
 Most astronomers believe that the sun, the planets, and all the other bodies in the solar system formed from a spinning cloud of gas and dust . Most astronomers say the sun and planets formed from spinning clouds .
 The gravitation of the gas and dust particles packed them together into dense clouds and solid chunks of material . The gravity of the clouds packed the particles together .
 By about 4. billion years ago, the material had squeezed together to form the various bodies in the solar system . The material squeezed together into the different solar systems .
 So much heat was produced when Jupiter formed that the planet still radiates about twice as much heat into space as it receives from sunlight . Jupiter still receives about twice the same amount of heat from sunlight as it does from light .
 The force of its magnetism extends far into space in a region surrounding the planet called its magnetic field . This region is called the magnetic field and is called a region around the planet .
 Jupiter's magnetic field is about 14 times as strong as Earth's, according to measurements made by spacecraft . Jupiter has a magnetic field that is 14 times stronger than Earth's .
 Jupiter's magnetic field is the strongest in the solar system, except for fields associated with sunspots and other small regions on the sun's surface . Jupiter has the strongest magnetic field in solar system .
 Scientists do not fully understand how planets produce magnetic fields . Scientists say magnetic fields are key to understanding how planets make magnetic waves .
 The scientists suspect that electrically charged particles in the interior of planets generate the fields . They suspect that the movement of electrically . charged particles may also generate the field .
 Jupiter's field would be so much stronger than Earth's because of its greater size and faster rotation . Jupiter's greater size means it has a stronger field than the Earth's due to its size .
 Jupiter's magnetic field traps electrons, protons, and other electrically charged particles in radiation belts around the planet . Jupiter has a magnetic field that traps electrons and protons around the world .
 The particles can damage instruments aboard spacecraft operating near the planet . The particles are so powerful that they can damage spacecraft instruments aboard .
 Within a region of space called the magnetosphere, Jupiter's magnetic field acts as a shield . Jupiter's magnetosphere is a part of the planet's magnetic zone .
 The field protects the planet from the so/ar wind, a continuous flow of charged particles from the sun . The field is also known as a shield protecting Earth from the solar wind .
 Jupiter acts like a giant magnet . The trapped particles enter the magnetosphere near the ‘ Magnetic axis’
 Curved lines indicate the direction of the magnetic field, the region in which magnetism operates . Curved curved lines indicate direction of magnetic field in the region of magnetism .
 Radio waves given off by Jupiter reach radio telescopes on Earth in two forms—bursts of radio energy and continuous radiation . The waves come from the planet's solar system, known as Jupiter .
 Lo, the closest of Jupiter's four large moons, passes through certain regions in the planets magnetic field . Strong bursts occur when lo passes through magnetic regions in Jupiter's magnetic field. Lo is one of the four largest moons in the world .
 Continuous radiation comes from Jupiter's surface as well as from high-energy particles in the radiation belts . The radiation belts are thought to be the source of continuous radiation .
 Europa, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto are the four largest planets in the solar system . The four largest, in order of their distance from Jupiter, are lo, Europa and Ganyminge .
 The Italian astronomer Galileo discovered them in 1610 with a telescope . Lo has many active volcanoes, which produce gases containing sulfur .
 The yellow-orange surface of lo probably consists largely of solid sulfur that was deposited by the eruptions . The surface of the lo is thought to have been formed by eruptions of sulfur .
 Callisto, with a diameter of 2,986 miles, is slightly smaller than Mercury . It is the second largest planet in the solar system, after Mercury .
 Jupiter's remaining 35 satellites are much smaller than the Galilean moons . The remaining 35 moons are smaller than Jupiter's smaller moons .
 Except for Metis and Adrastea, the small satellites were discovered by astronomers using large telescopes on Earth . The small satellites are discovered using telescopes in Earth .
 Scientists discovered Metis and Adrastea in 1979 by studying pictures taken by Voyager spacecraft . Metis was discovered by studying images taken by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979 .
 In March 1993, astronomers Eugene Shoemaker, Carolyn Shoemaker and David H Levy discovered a comet near Jupiter . The impact of Comet ShoemakerLevy 9 was the first comet to be discovered by astronomers .
 Shoemaker-Levy 9 was pulled by Jupiter's gravity into an orbit around the planet . The comet probably once orbited the sun independently but had been pulled by the planet's gravity .
 Calculations based on the comet's location and velocity showed that the fragments would crash into Jupiter's atmosphere in July 1994 .
 Scientists hoped to see much about the effects of a collision between a planet and a comet . Scientists hope to see how the Earth and the comet collided .
 Astronomers at all the major telescopes on Earth turned their instruments toward Jupiter at the predicted collision times . The collision times were predicted by astronomers at all major telescopes .
 Scientists also observed Jupiter with the Hubble Space Telescope, which is in orbit around Earth; and the remotely controlled space probe Galileo, which was on its way to Jupiter .
 The fragments fell on the back side of Jupiter as viewed from Earth and the Hubble Space Telescope . The fragments were captured by the Hubble telescope on Jupiter's back side .
 The rotation of Jupiter carried the sites around to the visible side after less than half an hour . But the rotation of the planet's rotation carried the impact sites around . The impact sites were not visible for more than an hour, according to Nasa .
 Scars from the crash of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 appear on Jupiter's surface as a series of maroon blotches in this photo .
 The comet broke into 21 pieces before it hit Jupiter in 1994 . It broke into pieces before hitting the planet's largest planet . The comet was a comet that was more than 100 miles in diameter .
 Damage to certain of the probe's instruments limited its ability to record and send data . However, damage to some of the probes' instruments limited their ability to send data back .
 The impacts caused large explosions, probably due to the compression, heating, and rapid expansion of atmospheric gases . The impact of the impacts are thought to have been caused by large explosions . The impacts were probably caused by the compression and heating of the gases .
 The explosions scattered comet debris over large areas, some with diameters larger than that of Earth . Some of the debris was so large it was larger than the Earth .
 The debris gradually spread into a dark haze of fine material that remained suspended in Jupiter's upper atmosphere . It remained suspended for several months in the upper atmosphere of the planet .
 If a similar comet ever collided with Earth, it might produce a haze that would cool the atmosphere and darken the planet by absorbing sunlight . A similar comet could also darken Earth's atmosphere by absorbing light .
 If the haze lasted long enough, much of Earth's plant life could die, along with the people and animals that depend on plants . The haze could also kill the people, animals and people who depend on the plants .
 Pioneer 10, Pioneer-Saturn, Voyager 1, Voyager 2, Ulysses, and Galileo. Voyager 1 . Voyager 2 . Voyager 1. Voyager 2. Voyager 3. Voyager 4. Voyager 5. Voyager 6. Voyager 7. Voyager 8. Voyager 9. Voyager 10.
 Pioneer 10 was launched in 1972 and flew within 81,000 miles of Jupiter on Dec., 1973 . Pioneer 10 launched in 1973 and flew to Jupiter in December, 1973 . It was the first time Pioneer 10 had flown to Jupiter .
 The probe revealed the severe effects of Jupiter's radiation belt on spacecraft . Probe revealed the effects of the radiation belt in the solar system .
 Pioneer 10 also reported the amount of hydrogen and helium in the atmosphere of the planet's atmosphere . Pioneer 10 was launched from Pioneer 10 in 1968 . It was the first mission to explore the Earth's atmosphere and atmosphere .
 The probe discovered that Jupiter has an enormous magnetosphere . In addition to the probe, it also discovered that the planet has a huge magnetic field .
 Pioneer-Saturn flew within 27,000 miles (43,000 kilometers) of Jupiter in December 1974 . The probe was the first of its kind to fly within a direct orbit of Jupiter .
 The craft provided close-up photographs of Jupiter's polar regions and data on the Great Red Spot, the magnetic field, and atmospheric temperatures . The craft also provided data on Jupiter's magnetic field and atmospheric temperature .
 Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 flew past Jupiter in March and July 1979 . Voyager 2 and Voyager 1 flew past the planet in July 1979, respectively, respectively .
 These craft carried more sensitive instruments than did the Pioneers, and transmitted more information . These craft were more powerful and more reliable than their predecessors did .
 Astronomers used photos taken by the Voyagers to make the first detailed maps of the Galilean satellites . Astronomers also used photos of the satellites to map the Earth's satellites .
 Voyagers also revealed sulfur volcanoes on lo, discovered lightning in Jupiter's clouds, and mapped flow patterns in the cloud bands .
 Ulysses was launched in October 1990 and passed by Jupiter in February 1992 . It was the first spacecraft to pass by Jupiter .
 The European Space Agency had built the probe mainly to study the sun’s polar regions . The European space agency is an organization of Western European nations .
 Scientists used the tremendous gravitational force of Jupiter to put Ulysses into an orbit that would take it over the suns polar regions . The spacecraft will orbit the sun over the polar regions of the planet .
 The solar wind has a much greater effect on Jupiter's magnetosphere than earlier measurements had suggested . Ulysses passed by Jupiter, it gathered data indicating that the solar wind had a greater effect .
 Galileo’s mission was to measure the amount of water and other chemicals in Jupiter's atmosphere . One of Galileo's missions was to find water and chemicals in the atmosphere of the planet .
 Its first task was to record on tape the data transmitted by the probe, then relay the data to Earth . The probe's first task is to record the data .
 It then monitored Jupiter's atmosphere, and it observed the planet's major satellites . It also monitored the atmosphere of Jupiter, and observed the world's largest satellites .
 Galileo then continued its observations under an extension known as the Galileo Millennium Mission . Galileo's Millennium Mission continued under the extension of the mission .
 Cassini, Giovanni Domenico Planet Callisto Satellite (pictures) Galileo Solar system Ganymede Voyager lo Additional resources Beebe, Reta.
 Jupiter was king of the gods and ruler of the universe in Roman mythology . Jupiter ruled the Roman gods and ruled the world of the world .
 Jupiter was originally the god of the sky and of such atmospheric phenomena as thunder and lightning . He was originally Jupiter, god of thunder, lightning and thunderstorms . Jupiter has been Jupiter since Jupiter became god of sky .
 He used a thunderbolt as a weapon, and he had the power to send the earth clear weather, rain, or destructive storms . He used the power of the thunderbolt to send clear weather and rain .
 Jupiter made sure that mortals lived out their lives according to fate . Jupiter made certain that mortals live out of their lives .
 Jupiter was a son of Saturn— the son of the earth and sky and ruler of the universe . Jupiter was born Jupiter in Jupiter, Saturn, and Jupiter was the most powerful planet in the solar system . Jupiter is now the world's most powerful god .
 Jupiter and Saturn's other children overthrew him, and Jupiter took Saturn's place . Jupiter took the throne of Saturn, taking over from him .
 Jupiter married Juno, who became queen of the gods . His sisters were the goddesses Ceres, Juno, Juno and Vesta .
 Jupiter's other children included the gods Apollo, Bacchus, and Mercury; the goddess Diana; and the hero Hercules . Jupiter also had a child with the goddess of Jupiter, the god of Apollo .
 Jupiter also was the father of the nine Muses, who inspired art, poetry, and learning . Jupiter also inspired art and poetry by the Muses . Jupiter was Jupiter's father .
 According to some myths, the goddess Minerva sprang full grown from Jupiter's head . Some myths say she sprang from the head of the planet .
 The religious center of Rome was Jupiter's temple on the Capitoline Hill . Rome was the birthplace of the Roman Roman Empire .
 These three deities (gods or goddesses) became known as the Capitoline triad . The Capitoline Triad is the name of the goddesses and goddesses .
 Jura, /OO ruh, is a mountain range that lies between the Rhine and Rhone rivers . It lies in the middle of the Rhone and Rhine .
 The highest peaks in the world are less than 6,000 feet (1,800 meters) above sea level . The highest peak is less than 1,800 feet (6,000 meters) away .
 Land on the middle and lower slopes of the range serves as pasture for the important dairy industry . Land in the lower slopes is pasture for dairy farmers in the region .
 Economic centers of the Jura include Pontarlier, France; and La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland . The towns are noted for making clocks and watches . The Jura region is home to the world's largest watchmaking industry .
 Jury is a group of citizens who hear the testimony in legal disputes and determine what they believe is the truth . Jury hears testimony in a legal dispute and determines the truth of the truth in each case . Jury is the group that hears the testimony and decides what they think is truth .
 A petit, or petty, jury is a trial jury and the most common form of jury . Petit is a petty jury, a petit or petty jury . A petty jury is the smallest form of a jury in the world .
 In a civil lawsuit, a petit jury decides who is at fault and how much money must be paid in damages . A pet jury decides damages in a civil suit . In the case, the jury must decide who's at fault .
 In a criminal trial, a jury decides whether the defendant is or not guilty . In the trial, the jury decide whether to convict the defendant . In this case, a judge must decide whether or not she is guilty .
 The jury hears testimony by witnesses, then the lawyer for each side summarizes the case . The trial is expected to last three weeks .
 If jurors are not convinced “beyond a reasonable doubt’ that a defendant is guilty, they must acquit him or her . That is, that is, return a verdict of not guilty . If the jury is not acquit a defendant, it means a verdict must be
 Until about 1970, juries consisted of 12 members and 1 or 2 alternate jurors . Juries were made up of 12 jurors and 1 jurors .
 A Aung jury is one in which the required number of jurors cannot agree on a verdict . The Aung Jury is one of the lowest juries in the world to reach a verdict in Myanmar .
 The court selects the names of possible jurors from such sources as tax rolls, voting lists, and telephone directories . The names of potential jurors can be found in tax rolls and voting lists .
 From the selected names, people are then chosen by lot and summoned for possible service on a jury . People are chosen from a lot to be selected for possible jury service . They are then summoned by lot to serve as jurors .
 Before becoming a jury member, a person is questioned by the trial judge, the opposing lawyers, or both . A person is asked by the judge, opposing lawyers or both to make a decision .
 The person may be related to someone involved in the case . For example, the person may have been related to the victim . The case is being investigated .
 Lawyers are also allowed a limited number of rejections called peremptory challenges . The lawyers are allowed to reject the rejections .
 A new trial may be ordered if a judge decides that the lawyers have made their challenges solely on account of race . The case could lead to a new trial if the lawyers' challenges are made solely on race .
 The United States Constitution provides that jurors in a criminal trial must be neutral regarding the case . Jurors in the trial must also be neutral in order to be impartial .
 In most situations, the jurors are selected from the community where the supposed crime occurred . In most cases, the jury is selected from a community where a supposed crime is alleged . The jury is chosen from a jury in most cases .
 There are two kinds of grand juries in the United States, charging and investigatory . Grand juries are both charging and investigating, but not necessarily charging .
 A grand jury decides whether there is enough evidence to try a person suspected of a crime . A charging grand jury decided whether there was enough evidence for a suspect to be tried .
 If a jury finds sufficient evidence, it makes a formal accusation, called an indictment, against the person . If the jury finds enough evidence, the accusation is made an indictment .
 An investigatory grand jury investigates suspected dishonesty of public officials and possible crime, especially organized crime . An investigation into alleged dishonesty by public officials will take place in the U.S.
 Coroner's jury conducts a /nquest into the cause of death in cases that involve doubt . A coroner's jury has to decide whether or not the death was caused by the death of someone involved in the death .
 During the A.D. 800’s, people in many European communities testified to a representative of the king about such matters as taxes and land boundaries .
 Ernest Everett received the first Spingarn Medal, awarded annually to a black who has had outstanding achievement in his or her field . Just, Ernest Everett .
 When he won the award in 1915, he was studying fertilization in marine invertebrates . He was studying the role of the cell surface in the development of such organisms .
 Just’s research led him to declare that all parts of a cell influence the cell's activities . Just's research led to him declaring that all . parts of the cell influence each other's activities.
 This idea differed from the traditional belief that only the nucleus of the cell controlled cell activity . This idea was different from the belief that a nucleus of a cell can control cell activity.
 From 1909 through 1930, Just spent almost every summer conducting research at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts . Just spent most of his summers at the lab .
 He spent most of the last 10 years of his life working in Europe to escape racial discrimination in American laboratories . He worked in Europe for 10 years to avoid racial discrimination .
 The Biology of the Cell Surface and Basic Methods for Experiments on Eggs of Marine Animals is published in the book "Biology of the Cells Surface" and "Biological Methods"
 See Judge; Justice of the peace; Law; Supreme Court of the United States. See Judge . See Judge and Justice . of the Peace .
 Justice, Department of Justice, is an executive department of the U.S. government . Justice is the highest-ranking department in the United States .
 It enforces federal laws and provides legal advice for the president and heads of the governments other executive departments . It also enforces laws and advises on the president .
 The attorney general is a member of the presidents Cabinet . He heads the department and ranks as the governments chief legal officer .
 The president appoints the attorney general with the United States Senate approval . The attorney general is appointed by the president with the Senate approval of the president .
 In 2002, President George W Bush proposed a reorganization of the federal government with an emphasis on protection against terrorism .
 Under Bush's plan, some of the agencies of the Department of Justice would be transferred to a newly created Department of Homeland Security . Some of the Justice agencies would be moved to a new Homeland Security agency .
 The Department of Justice investigates and prosecutes violations of federal laws . The department is investigating and prosecuting violations of those laws .
 These laws include antitrust, criminal, environmental, and civil rights laws . These laws are based on the laws of the U.S. Constitution and the Constitution .
 The federal government represents the federal government in the United States Supreme Court and in other federal courts .
 A Justice Department official known as the solicitor general supervises this representation in Supreme Court cases . The solicitor general is responsible for representation on the Supreme Court .
 Justice Department agencies include the Federal Bureau of Prisons, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Immigration and Naturalization Service . The Justice Department also includes the DEA, the FBI, the DEA and the National Guard .
 The Bureau of Prisons oversees federal prisons and supervises the custody of all federal prisoners . It supervises all federal prisons .
 The Drug Enforcement Administration enforces federal laws and regulations that apply to narcotics and other dangerous drugs . The agency is known for its enforcement of federal laws, regulations and regulations .
 The FBI investigates federal crimes and collects evidence in lawsuits that invalve the federal government . The FBI is involved in investigations into crimes and lawsuits against the government .
 It gathers information about individuals and groups that it believes are dangerous to national security . It also gathers information on individuals that it thinks are dangerous .
 Immigration and Naturalization Service administers and enforces U.S. immigration laws . The immigration and naturalization service administers the immigration laws in the United States .
 The seal of the Department of Justice Justice includes the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National Institute of The National Institute . Justice. Justice.
 These agencies support police programs that are designed to prevent and control crime in the U.S. These agencies are supporting police programs designed to stop crime .
 The agencies provide this support mainly by researching and analyzing various aspects of crime and the U.S. criminal justice system .
 The attorney general served in the Cabinet but did not head an executive department . He was the attorney general of the Cabinet, but not an executive officer .
 Attorney General advised the president and represented the federal government in cases before the Supreme Court . The attorney general advises the president, represented the government in court cases .
 Almost every federal department had part in enforcing national laws . Almost every department had some part of enforcing national law .
 In 1870, Congress set up a new Department of Justice under the attorney general . The Department was set up in 1870 .
 The new department took over most law-enforcement duties from the other departments . It took over from most of the departments .
 Justice of the peace is an officer of a township, county, or other small unit of government in some states . Justice of a peace is a justice of peace for a township or county .
 Justices of the peace may be appointed by the governor or elected by the people . Justices in the peace can be appointed or chosen by the public . They can also be elected by a governor or by the voters .
 Justices of the peace may have the power to punish people for breaking minor criminal laws . Traffic laws, such as traffic laws, are among the minor crimes that break the law .
 A grand jury will decide whether an accused person should be held for a grand jury . Grand jury will then decide whether the person should stand trial . The jury will also decide whether a person should have been held for trial .
 The trend has been to abolish this office and transfer its functions to other courts .
 In large cities, police magistrates perform the same functions as justices of the peace . Police magistrates in large cities have the same powers of magistrates .
 Justin the Martyr, Saint Justin, was the first prominent defender of the Christian faith against nonChristians . Jack M Kress Kress was the founder of the Saint of Christ . Justin was a leader in the early Christian community .
 Justin is known as an apo/ogist because he defended Christian beliefs and practices against suspicions and false accusations made by non-Christians . Justin was known as a Christian apo-ogist for his defense of Christian beliefs .
 Justin's surviving writings use Greek philosophical ideas to explain Christian theological doctrines . Justin used these ideas to help explain Christian doctrines .
 His writings also provide descriptions and explanations of Christian life and worship .
 In two theological essays called Apologies, Justin defended Christians against charges of atheism, sexual immorality, and disobedience to civil authority . Justin's Apologies was published in 2000 .
 Justin attempted to show that Christianity was superior to other religions and that Christians led pious lives . Justin's attempt was to show Christians were better than other religions .
 Justin was born in what is now Nablus, in the West Bank region of southwest Asia . He was born into a Greek family in what now is known as Nablu .
 He tried various Greek and Roman philosophies before converting to Christianity . He converted to Christianity in about 130 .
 This code, also called the Justinian Code, is the basis of the legal systems in many nations today . It is also the basis for the legal system in many countries .
 Justin died a few months later, and Justinian became sole emperor of the Byzantine Empire . Justinian's death was the death of Justinian, who died shortly after .
 In 529, he closed the schools of philosophy in Athens, Greece, because he felt the schools taught paganism . The schools were closed because of paganism, he felt it taught .
 In 532, people in Constantinople revolted against Justintan and burned down the central part of the city . People in Constantinople burned out of Constantinople in 532 . The city was burned down in the aftermath of the revolt against the king .
 Justinian rebuilt the city, including a new church, the famous Hagia Sophia . Justinian built the city in his first year of his reign .
 He also built aqueducts, fortresses, harbors, churches, monasteries, and public buildings all over the empire . The Roman Empire was also known for its buildings .
 In 533, Justinian began a series of wars against the Vandals, Ostrogoths, and Visigoths . The Vandals had conquered most of the West Roman Empire in the 400's . Justinian's first war was against the Visigoth, who had conquered the
 Justinian Code, ju/hs TIHN ee uhn, was a collection of early Roman laws and legal principles . It was published in the Justinian Codex of the Roman Roman Empire .
 The code clarified Roman laws and legal principles and illustrated them by cases . The code was written in Roman law and illustrated Roman cases .
 It is recognized as one of the greatest Roman contributions to civilization . It is also recognized as a Roman contribution to civilization.
 The Digest contained interpretations of many trials and decisions by lawyers of the A.D. 100's and 200's . The Digest was published in 1941 .
 The Novels were collections of legislation enacted after the publication of the Codex . The novels were collected by the Codex, which was published in 1903 .
 Jute, joot, is along, soft, shiny fiber that can be spun into coarse, strong threads . Soft, shiny fibers are spun into fine threads . Jute is soft and shiny fiber .
 Natural fibers is second only to cotton in amount produced and variety of uses . It is one of the cheapest natural fibers in the world, and is second to cotton .
 Jute fibers are composed primarily of the plant materials cellulose, lignin, and pectin . The fibers are made from cellulose and lignins, which are used in fibers .
 Both the fiber and the plant from which it comes are commonly called jute . Jute is commonly known as jute, and the fiber is made of both fiber and plant .
 Jute is used chiefly to make cloth for wrapping bales of raw cotton, and to make gunny sacks and gunny cloth . Jute also used in gunny bags, gunners and gunners cloth .
 The fibers are woven into curtains, chair coverings, carpets, and burlap . The fibers also weave into curtains and chair covers .
 The fibers are used alone or blended with other types of fibers to make twine and rope . They can be used in twine or in rope .
 Jute butts, the coarse ends of the plants, are used to make inexpensive cloth . Jute Butts are used in inexpensive cloths .
 China, India, and Bangladesh rank as the world’s main producers of jute . Jute is a popular form of cloth used to make clothing and shoes .
 The fibers are off-white to brown and 3 to 15 feet (0. to 4. meters) long . They are pressed into bales for shipment to manufacturers . Jute fibers are 3-15 feet long and 3-5 feet long .
 These three tribes were Germanic or Teutonic . They were thought to have come from what is now Denmark and northern Germany . The tribes are thought to be from Denmark and Germany .
 The Jutes settled in parts of southeastern Britain that are now known as Kent, southern Hampshire, and the Isle of Wight . They settled in areas of southern Hampshire and southern Hampshire .
 Much of the information about the Jutes in England comes from the Ecclesiastical History of the English People . Much of this information comes from a book by Saint Bede .
 Archaeological findings have shown that the Jutes had much in common with both the Saxons in Britain and the ancient Franks, a people of what are now Belgium, France, western Germany, and the Netherlands .
 Historians say the Jutes came from the area of Denmark known today as Jutland . Some historians say they may have been from Denmark known as Juteland .
 Battle of Jutland was the only major fight between German and British fleets during World War I . The British fleet, commanded by Admiral John Jellicoe, met off the coast of Denmark in a two-day battle .
 Although the Germans destroyed more British ships than the Germans, they lost a greater percentage of their smaller navy . The loss of a larger percentage of British ships was due to the loss of smaller ships .
 Both sides claimed victory, but the battle left Britain in control of the seas . The battle left both sides claiming victory but Britain was in control .
 These pieces ridi_ cule the extravagance, corruption, and immorality he saw in Rome . They ridi . cule of extravagance and corruption he saw . in Rome.
 Juvenal thought society should be run by men, like himself, of the old upper class who were of Italian birth . Juvenal wanted society to be ruled by men like himself who were Italian .
 Juvenal's 3rd and 10th satires are his best known and have often been imitated . Juvenal is best known for his satires . His satires, Juvenal, are often imitated by Juvenal .
 The 3rd satire attacks Rome because it is noisy, uncomfortable, dangerous, and full of criminals and foreigners . Rome is noisy and uncomfortable because it's full of crime and foreigners, says the 3rd .
 His mildest satire, the 10th, shows the dreadful consequences of seeking beauty, power, or material success . The 10th satire is the most biting satire of the book, and the most serious satire is his 10th .
 It urges the reader to desire only “a sound mind in a sound body’—that is, a healthy and simple life . The book urges only ‘a healthy, simple life.’
 His full name in Latin, the language of ancient Rome, was Decimus Junius Juvenalis . Decimus was Decius Junius Julius Juvenalis, a Roman citizen of Rome .
 Juvenile court is a special court that handles cases involving children who have committed crimes or who need the care and protection of society . Elaine Fantham Juvenile Court is the special court for children who commit crimes .
 Most delinquency cases involve children who have broken the law or who are difficult to control . Most of the cases involve child who has broken law or is hard to control, police say .
 Neglect cases involve children whose parents do not or can not care for them properly . Neglect is a case of child abuse and child neglect .
 Both the United States and Canada have extensive juvenile court systems . Both the U.S. and Canada has extensive juvenile courts systems .
 In the United States, most states include the juvenile court as a division of the main state court or of the county court . In the U.S. most states have a juvenile court . The juvenile court is an administrative division of either the main court or county court.
 Most juvenile courts handle the cases of youths who are under 18 years of age . Juvenile courts handle cases involving youths under 18 .
 Some serious cases involving children as young as 11 may be transferred to an adult court for trial . Serious cases involving such cases may be moved to a higher level of trial .
 Juveniles charged with delinquency may be held in temporary confinement until their cases are heard in court . Juveniles are charged in juvenile detention facilities in the U.S. Juvenile detention centers .
 Juvenile courts generally cannot issue sentences that would confine youths beyond the age of 21 . Youth cannot be confined to a maximum of 21 years old .
 Before the establishment of juvenile courts, judges tried children for lawbreaking in the same way that they tried adults, and they sentenced many to prison . Now, judges are trying to prevent children from being sent to prison for breaking laws .
 Juvenile courts were the result of a change in attitudes toward child offenders during the late 1800's . Juvenile court system was formed in response to a change of attitudes to child offenders in late 1800s .
 The juvenile courts were to be places to help, not punish, children . According to these new attitudes, the juvenile courts should be places where children can be helped .
 Children were not supposed to experience the harsh atmosphere and treatment often found in adult courts . Children were supposed to be protected from the harsh environment and treatment of adults in the courts .
 Social workers were to give the judge information on the child's background . The judge would freely discuss problems with the child, usually in private hearing .
 The judge then was supposed to reach a decision based on the child’s best interests . The judge is supposed to decide based on a child's best interests, the judge said .
 This decision could result in a warning, a fine, probation, or referral or transfer to another agency . This decision may result in the possibility of a warning or a fine .
 Massachusetts became the first state to provide separate court sessions for children in 1872 . In 1872, the state was the first to provide children's court sessions .
 In 1967, the Supreme Court of the United States issued a landmark decision regarding juvenile courts . The decision was made in a landmark case in 1967 .
 Gau/t decision: Juvenile courts deprived children of certain rights guaranteed by the Constitution . In the decision, the court ruled that the private and informal procedures used by juvenile courts deprived many children of some rights .
 It ruled that children must be granted these rights, including the right to have a lawyer in any case which may result in confinement . Children must be given adequate notice of the specific charge, the court ruled .
 In 1967, a special presidential commission reported that juvenile courts had failed in their efforts to decrease juvenile delinquency . Also in 1967, the commission said juvenile courts were failing to decrease youth delinquency.
 Since then, juvenile courts have used an approach much like that used in adult criminal courts . Juvenile courts have been used in juvenile courts since the 1970s .
 There is more emphasis on rehabilitation in the juvenile courts than in the adult correctional system . The juvenile system is more likely to focus on rehabilitation than in adult prisons .
 In Canada, a separate, nationwide court system for juvenile offenders was established by the Juvenile Delinquent Acts of 1908 . Canada has a separate juvenile court system .
 Today, individual provinces have special juvenile courts that operate under the federal Young Offenders Act of 1984 . Individual provinces have separate juvenile courts under the act .
 Under this act, youths up to age 18 are treated as juveniles, while children under 12 are freed from any criminal responsibility . Under this law, youths under 12 years old can be freed from responsibility for crimes .
 Judges may not impose sentences longer than three years . The combined duration of consecutive sentences may not exceed three years. Judges may also impose sentences between three and five years .
 Judges also have authority to transfer to the adult courts those accused of more serious crimes . Judges can also transfer those youths accused of serious crimes to adult courts . Judges have authority over transferring youths to adult court .
 Juveniles guilty of shoplifting or vandalism may avoid court process altogether by participating in community work, counseling, or repayment of victims . Juvenile guilty of less serious offenses, such as shoplifting, may avoid the court process .
 Juvenile delinquency usually refers to the violation of a law by a juvenile . Jack M Kress is the son of Jack Kress .
 It includes those acts that would be crimes if committed by adults, such as automobile theft and burglary . It also includes acts that are illegal only for boys or girls . Those acts include staying out after a curfew or drinking alcoholic beverages .
 Many people use the term juvenile delinquency to include anything youngsters do that goes against the standards of society, regardless of whether this action is legal or illegal . The term is often used to refer to anything against society's standards .
 Legal age at which a person is considered to be a juvenile varies from place to place . The legal age of a person considered a child varies from where to where it is legal .
 Most states in the United States define anyone under 18 years of age as a juvenile . Most states define anyone younger than 18 years old as a 'juvenile'
 Most states allow youngsters who are young enough for juvenile-court handling to be tried by regular criminal courts under certain circumstances . In some states, juvenile cases are handled by regular courts .
 Juvenile delinquency is regarded as a serious social problem in the United States and many other countries . It is considered a serious problem in many countries .
 It has caused increasing public concern, but it is by no means a new problem, it is not a new thing . It is not the first time it has been reported to be a problem .
 Young people formed violent street gangs in American cities during the 1800's . Delinquency rates were reported rising during the early 1900's .
 Juvenile delinquency is widespread in highly industrialized nations that have large cities . Delinquency is found in all nations and is particially found in the United States and Canada .
 The legal term juvenile delinquent was established so that young lawbreakers could avoid the disgrace of being classified in legal records as criminals . It was established to protect young people from being classified as criminals.
 Juvenile delinquency laws were designed to provide treatment, rather than punishment, for juvenile offenders . The laws are designed to help rehabilitate juvenile offenders rather than punish them .
 Young delinquents usually are sent to juvenile courts, where the main aim is to rehabilitate offenders, rather than to punish them . The main aim of juvenile courts is to punish offenders rather than punish them, not to send them to jail .
 A youngster can be labeled a delinquent for breaking any one of a number of laws, ranging from robbery to running away from home . A youngster is labeled a juvenile if he is caught breaking any of the laws .
 An action for which a youth may be declared a delinquent in one community may not be against the law in another community . But an action that may be deemed a delinquent is not illegal in another area .
 In some communities, the police ignore many children who are accused of minor delinquencies or refer them directly to their parents . Police often refer children to parents or refer children directly to them .
 Police may refer such children to juvenile court, where they may officially be declared delinquents . But in other communities, the police may refer them to a juvenile court . In some communities, such children may be declared delinquent .
 Crime statistics, though incomplete, do give an indication of the extent of the delinquency problem . Extent of delinquency is often incomplete and may be misleading, say crime statistics .
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation reports that in the early 1990's, nearly half of all United States arrests for motor vehicle theft and arson (the causing of fires) were of people under age 18 .
 In any year, about 4 percent of all children between the ages of 10 and 18 appear in a juvenile court . About 4 percent appear in juvenile court in any year . In the U.S., about 4 per cent of children appear in court .
 The percentage of this age group who are sent to court at least once is much higher than the younger age group .
 A third of those boys living in slum areas of large cities may appear in court at least once . A third or more of those living in large cities are likely to face court .
 About 1 of every 5 youngsters appearing in juvenile court is a girl . Today, about 1 in 5 youngsters appear in juvenile courts is a female .
 In the early 1900s, this ratio was about 1 girl to every 50 or 60 boys . The ratio of girls to boys is about 1 to 1 in every 50 boys .
 Sociologists have conducted a number of studies to determine how much delinquency is not reported to the police . Sociologists say delinquency rates are higher in the United States .
 Most youngsters report taking part in one or more delinquent acts . Most offenses are minor, though a majority of them are minor .
 Experts have concluded that youthful misbehavior is much more common than is indicated by arrest records and juvenile court statistics . Experts concluded that young people are more likely to be misbehaved than they are arrested .
 Many studies have been made in an effort to determine the causes of delinquency . Many studies were made to determine why delinquency is a problem .
 Most of these have focused on family relationships or on neighborhood or community conditions . Most of the issues have been related to family relationships .
 The results of these investigations have shown that it is doubtful that any child becomes a delinquent for any single reason . It is doubtful any child will ever be a child who is delinquent for a single reason.
 Family relationships, especially those between parents and individual children, have been the focus of several delinquency studies . Family relationships are the subject of several studies into delinquency .
 An early study comparing delinquent and nondelinquent brothers showed that over 90 percent of the delinquents had unhappy home lives and felt discontented with life circumstances .
 Whatever the nature of the delinquents’ unhappiness, delinquency | appeared to them to be a solution . The delinquency was a solution to their unhappiness .
 It brought attention to youths neglected by their parents, or approval by delinquent friends . It also solved problems of an unhappy home life in other ways .
 More recent studies have revealed that many delinquents had parents with whom they did not get along or who were inconsistent in their patterns of discipline and punishment . Many delinquents have parents who did not like each other or who are inconsistent with discipline and punishments .
 Many inquiries concentrate on differing rates of delinquency, rather than on the way individuals become delinquents . Many of these inquiries focus on how delinquency affects individuals rather than how individuals become delinquent .
 A series of studies have shown that delinquency rates are above average in the poorest sections of cities . A study has shown that delinquent rates are higher than average in poorer areas of city .
 They also have poor schools, high unemployment, few recreational facilities, and high crime rates . They are also poor schools and high unemployment .
 Many young people see delinquency as their only escape from boredom, poverty, and other problems, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Social scientists have also studied the influence of other youngsters on those who commit delinquencies . Social scientists also have studied the impact of others on delinquency .
 Most youngsters who engage in delinquent behavior do so with other juveniles and often in organized gangs . For example, they point out that most youngsters engage in delinquency with other juvenile delinquents .
 Studies indicate that the causes of delinquency also extend to a whole society . Studies show that delinquency can be traced back to a society .
 For example, delinquency rates tend to be high among the low-income groups in societies where most people are well-to-do . Delinquency rates are also high among people in societies with most people being well to-do, say experts .
 The pain of being poor and living in slum conditions is felt more strongly in a rich society than in a poor one . The pain is more strongly felt in rich societies than in poor ones, says CNN.com .
 Many efforts have been made to develop programs of — delinquency prevention . Many programs have been developed to prevent delinquency .
 There is little evidence, however, that any of these programs is truly effective, says CNN.com .
 Some programs provide counseling services to youths who appear to be on the verge of becoming delinquents . Some programs also provide services to those who appear on verge of delinquency .
 Other programs draw youngsters into clubs and recreational centers to keep them away from situations in which delinquency is likely to occur .
 In recent years, many efforts have been aimed at improving the educational and work skills of youngsters .
 For those juveniles who have already become delinquents, there are programs designed to prevent them from committing future delinquent acts . For those who are already delinquent, there is also a program to prevent future delinquents .
 Probation services are offered through juvenile courts in an effort to provide guidance for delinquent children . Juvenile courts are also offering juvenile probation services to help delinquency cases .
 The more progressive institutions for juveniles attempt to provide treatment programs for offenders . Work experiences, counseling, education, and group therapy are some of the programs .
 Many other institutions provide little more than protective custody for juvenile delinquents . However, many other institutions are more like protective custody .
 Semite was also a letter in the alphabet used by the Semites, who once lived in Syria and Palestine . It was also used in the letters used by Semites .
 They probably adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic of an open hand to represent the letter . It is believed to have been adapted to represent an Egyptian letter .
 The ancient Greeks took the letter into their alphabet and called it Kappa Kappa . Kappa is Kappa, the letter of the Greek alphabet .
 K or k is about the 22nd most frequently used letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material in English . K is the 22th most commonly used word in printed material .
 K is used as an abbreviation for knight or knights, as in KC for Knights of Columbus and K.G. for Knights the Order of the Garter . K is also used in the name of the Knights of the Order, Knights of Knights of The Order of The Garter
 The ancient Egyptians, about 3000 B.C. used a symbol that represented a slightly cupped hand . In chess, K is used to represent the letter of the letter K .
 Roman letters have small from person to person . Common forms of the letter K Kk XA Kk Kk . Handwritten letters vary in Roman letters .
 finishing strokes called serifs script letters, /eft that extend from the main have simple curves and strokes . Manu_ finishing strokes are called . Serifs are finished strokes called . . . finishing strokes .
 K is used as an abbreviation for the Ke/vin scale of absolute temperatures . K is also used in the Ke-Vin scale of temperature .
 In some countries, k represents a unit of money . In Germany, Denmark, and Norway, krona in Sweden; and kopeck in Russia .
 In English, a person pronounces & in such words as king with the tongue back and with its sides touching the velum, or soft palate . In English it is said to be king with tongue back & with sides touching velum . In French, the tongue is back and sides
 The & is silent when it appears before n at the beginning of a word, as in such words as knee, knock, and know . It is silent before n when it is used in words such as knee and knock .
 The small letter k first appeared during the A.D. 800s as a rounded letter . It first appeared in the middle of the alphabet in the 800s .
 The peak, which reaches 28,250 feet (8,611 meters), is snow-covered and usually hidden in clouds . The peak is usually covered in snow, usually hidden under clouds .
 The mountain originally was named for Henry Haversham Godwin Austen who surveyed it in the late 1850's . The mountain was named after an Englishman who surveyed the area .
 An Italian expedition reached the top of the mountain for the first time in July 1954 . The summit was reached by an Italian expedition .
 James A Hafner Kaaba, KAH buh, also spelled Caaba, is the most sacred shrine of Islam . Kaaba is a most sacred Islamic shrine in Islam .
 Cube-shaped building is near the center of the Great Mosque in Mecca . It is a cube-shaped structure with a flat roof with a small roof .
 The famous Black Stone, enclosed in a silver ring, rests in the eastern corner of the Kaaba . The Black Stone is enclosed in an enclosed ring .
 Pilgrims run and walk around the Quran seven times, praying and reciting verses from the Quran . Pilgrads run around it seven times .
 Kabbalah, kab uh LAH, is the traditional name for the teachings of Jewish mysticism . Richard C Martin is the son of Richard Martin .
 The term, also spelled Cabala, Kabala, or kabbala, means what is handed down or received in Hebrew . The term also means "handful of knowledge"
 The early writings describe the wondrous journeys of sages who ascend through heavenly palaces filled with angels to behold the Divine Presence on His throne .
 Other early works explore the secrets of creation as well as magical formulas and practices .
 The greatest period of Kabbalah came in the Middle Ages, reaching its peak in the 1200's in Spain . The greatest time was during the 12th century in Spain, reaching a peak in 1200's .
 Most modern scholars believe de Leon was the author of the Zohar . Although de Leon and his followers claimed the book was written by an ancient sage named Simeon bar Yohai, most modern scholars .
 These aspects consist of qualities such as Beauty, Glory, Judgment, and Mercy that are called Seffrot . These aspects include qualities such a beauty, glory, Judgment and Mercy .
 A second important center of Kabbalah arose in Palestine in the early 1500's . A second center of the religion arose in the 1500's.
 Luria instructed his followers that strict observance of Jewish law, understood mystically, could release sparks of imprisoned divine light and hasten the coming of the Messiah . Luria's followers were instructed to obey strict Jewish law .
 The last major flowering of Kabbalah came in Hasidism, a mystical movement that began in the 1700's in Poland and spread throughout Jewish eastern Europe . Hasidicism is a mystical religious movement that spread throughout the Jewish community .
 Hasidism emphasizes prayer and song and other religious experiences as a way of communing with God . Hasidic Jews believe that prayer is a way to commune with God, rather than pray .
 Some people associate Kabbalah with fantastic interpretations of the hidden meanings of numbers and letters in the Bible and with miraculous acts . Others associate it with miracles, miraculous acts and miraculous miracles .
 These elements play a smaller role in Kabbalah than popularly supposed . However, these elements are said to have a very small role in the Jewish faith .
 The city lies 5,890 feet (1,795 meters) above sea level in the Hindu Kush mountains . The city is located in an area known as the "Hindu Kush" mountains .
 Various tribes of Afghanistan and other parts of Asia controlled the Kabul area until the A.D. 1700's . Various tribes were involved in the area . The area was controlled by various tribes until the early 1700's when it was ruled out of Kabul .
 During a civil war in the 1990's, Kabul was shelled repeatedly by the various factions . Kabul was repeatedly shelled during the civil war .
 Thousands of people in Kabul were killed, and many buildings were destroyed or damaged . Thousands of buildings were damaged or destroyed in the capital .
 The city came under attack again in 2001 when Afghan rebels, aided by U.S. air strikes, forced Afghanistan's Taliban rulers from power . The city was attacked by the Taliban in 2001, when they were overthrown .
 It exported many goods produced in Afghanistan, including carpets, skins of Karakul sheep, and fresh and dried fruits and nuts .
 Kabul's industries made drugs, furniture, machine tools, textiles, and wine . Kabul’s industries include furniture, furniture and machine tools . Kabul's industry also made drugs and furniture, including wine, furniture .
 Kachina, kah CHEE nut, is the name of a religious ceremony of the Hopi Indians and of carved wooden dolls used in it .
 Each winter, the Hopi dedicate services to the spirits of the dead to bring a good harvest . Hopi devote services to spirits to bring good harvest to the people of the deceased .
 Kadar gained power in 1956, after Soviet troops crushed a revolt by the Hungarian people . Kadar became prime minister of Hungary in 1956 .
 Kadar was born Janos Czermanik on May 26, 1912, probably in what is now western Croatia . He was born in 1912 .
 Kadar joined the Hungarian underground and fought the Germans during World War I . During World War II, Kadar fought for Hungary against the Germans .
 When Communists gained control of Hungary in 1948, Kadar became minister of the interior and chief of the secret police . Kadar was also chief of Hungary's secret police when Communists took over Hungary .
 He was imprisoned from 1951 to 1953 for sympathizing with the Yugoslav Communists, who had split with the Soviet Union . He was released from prison in 1953 after his release from prison .
 Kafirs thrive in the plains region of North America where rainfall is light . Kafir thrives in plains region, where rain is light.
 Kafka, KAHF kah, Franz, frahnts , was a Czech writer who gained worldwide fame only after World War I. He gained worldwide acclaim only after the war .
 Kafka wanted his unpublished manuscripts to be burned after his death, but his friend Max Brod edited and published them anyhow . Kafka wanted to burn them after he died, but Brod published them anyway .
 Kafka's highly imaginative works have been associated with such intellectual movements as expressionism, surrealism, and existentialism . Kafka's work is often associated with expressionism and surrealism . His works include works such as surrealism and expressionism .
 He could not identify himself with any particular creed, class, or ethnic group . His writings do not belong to any particular literary school, he said .
 Kafka’s writings uniquely combine a realistic, sometimes grotesquely exact description of details with an overall atmosphere of fantasies, dreams, and nightmares . Kafka's writings combine realism, realism with an atmosphere of fantasy, dreams .
 "He portrays objects and events with precision, but they appear to have no purpose or meaning," he says . He portrays objects with precision and precision but not meaning .
 Kafka presents a world in which people are deprived of spiritual security, and tortured by anxiety and loneliness . Kafka presents people in a world where people suffer from spiritual security and anxiety . Kafka's "Kafafka" is published in New York and London .
 Kafka’s characters repeatedly are frustrated in attempts to gain their goals, such as knowledge, social acceptance, or salvation . Kafka's characters repeatedly attempt to gain knowledge or salvation, but are frustrated .
 Their lives are marked by patterns of hope and despair, attempt and failure . The lives of these people have been marked in patterns of failure and hope .
 This alienation is rooted in personal guilt and at the same time appears as an inescapable destiny . This alienation appears to be rooted in guilt and appears as a destiny, the author says .
 In his novel The Tria/ a man is arrested, convicted, and executed by a mysterious court . In his book, a man was arrested and convicted of murder by mysterious court in Tria/.
 His attempts to learn the nature of his guilt and of the secret court fail, and he dies in ignorance . "His attempts to find out the truth of the court fail," he writes .
 Amerika is a comic novel about the adventures of an adolescent European immigrant in America . Amerika was written by a European European immigrant .
 Werner Hoffmeister Alfred Knopf Franz Kafka . Additional resources Karl, Frederick R Franz Kafka.91. Karl .
 Frida Kahlo was an important Mexican painter known for her harsh, revealing self-portraits . Kahlo, Frida, was known for harsh self portraits .
 At the age of 15, 15, she was severely injured in a bus accident in Mexico City . She was seriously injured in the accident at age of 16 .
 Kahlo lived in constant pain and was crippled for the rest of her life . Kahlo was crippled by the pain of her injuries .
 She underwent about 35 operations, including the amputation of one leg, including about 35 surgeries . She underwent one leg amputation, including one leg .
 Unable to pursue her dream of becoming a doctor, Kahlo taught herself to paint . Kahlo was inspired by her desire to be a painter and artist .
 Their stormy relationship involved separations, divorce, and remarriage . The couple's marriage ended in a divorce and divorce .
 Kahlo’s paintings are mostly self-portraits that reflect her physical and emotional suffering . Kahlo's paintings reflect her personal and personal suffering .
 Many of her pictures include startling symbolic images and elements from Mexican history . Many of the pictures are startlingly symbolic images .
 She often portrayed herself wearing colorful Mexican Indian costumes and ornaments .
 Louis Kahn's works include the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences in La Jolla, California . Kahn developed a theESTO theestO .
 This research center, built of concrete and wood, was completed in 1965 . The research center was built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The "servant" spaces are functional areas, such as stairwells and air ducts . The “servant’s” spaces are the functional areas of the building . The 'servant' spaces include stairwell and ducts, and the ‘serv
 Kahn considered the “servant’s areas essential to a building's beauty and creatively incorporated them into his designs . Kahn considered them essential to the ‘servant areas’ of his buildings .
 As a teacher, he influenced many architects of the middle and late 1900's . His influence continued to grow after his death . He was a teacher of many architects .
 His ability to blend historical sources with modern materials is highly influential . He is known for blending historical sources and modern materials with modern material .
 German emperors of the Holy Roman Empire sometimes used this title in its German form . The title was often used by the German Emperor .
 Wilhelm | of Prussia took the title of the kaiser in 1871, when he became emperor of a united Germany . Wilhelm was born in 1881 .
 Robert M Berdahl Kaiser, KY zuhr, Georg, gay OHRKH , was a German expressionist playwright . He was born Robert M. Kaiser, who was also known as Georg, in 1945 .
 His dramas are marked by visions of the renewal and regeneration of humanity . His dramas include visions of regeneration and renewal of humanity.
 The Burghers of Calais shows how society can be saved through individual sacrifice . The Burgher of Calais was filmed in Calais, France, during the siege .
 Kaiser mixed brief, staccatolike Janguage and impassioned, flowery speeches . Kaiser's speech was delivered with a flowery, brief J.S. speech .
 His characters tend to be types and abstractions rather than individuals . His characters are abstracts rather than individual individuals .
 Gas trilogy attacks capitalism . Characters representing specific attitudes appear in Gas trilogy, which attacks capitalism.
 Henry John Kaiser attracted national attention during World War II by the speed with which he built ships . Peter Gontrum Kaiser, KY zuhr, Henry John, was an American industrialist who built ships during the war .
 He ignored usual methods of building from the keel up, and used assembly line methods . He ignored the usual methods to build the aircraft from the ground up .
 Kaiser and Joseph W Frazer founded the Kaiser-Frazer Corporation in 1946 . Kaiser and Frazer built automobiles for the company . The company was founded by Joseph Frazer and Kaiser Kaiser .
 In 1953, this corporation bought Willys-Overland Motors, Inc., Inc., and later stopped making pleasure cars in the United States . The company later stopped producing pleasure cars .
 Kaiser Jeep Corporation was sold to American Motors Corporation in 1969 . Kaiser Jeep was sold by American Motors to Kaiser Jeep in 1968 .
 Kaiser also had interests in aluminum, aviation, cement, health care, housing, land development, and land development . Kaiser also owned interests in aviation, steel, aluminum, cement and housing .
 Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation, Kaiser CeNicholas Adams ment and Gypsum Corporation, and Kaiser Steel Corporation . Today, the major Kaiser companies are Kaiser Aluminum, Chemical and Steel Corporation. Kaiser Steel is one of the world's largest steel companies .
 William H Becker Kala-azar, KAH lah ah ZAHR, is a disease that affects humans and animals . It is the name of William Becker, the founder of Becker Becker, who died of the disease . Kalaazar is a type of disease that can be
 It is caused by a parasite that belongs to Leishmania, a group of one-celled organisms . The parasite is a parasitic form of a one-cell organism .
 The disease occurs throughout the warmer parts of Asia, the Mediterranean region, and various parts of Africa and South America .
 In humans it causes fever, anemia, and enlargement of the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes . It causes fever and anemia in humans and can also cause anemia .
 Kala-azar in Hindi means black fever, which refers to the darkening of the skin that may occur . It is also known as black fever in India .
 It also is known as dumdum fever, named after a town in India that has suffered from kala-azar epidemics . It is also known as kalaazar fever .
 Kala-azar is transmitted by various species of sand flies and commonly affects dogs and rodents . It is also transmitted by sand flies .
 Kalahari Desert is a large, dry sandy basin that covers about 190,000 square miles in southern Africa . Desert is the largest dry sandy desert in the world .
 It spreads across much of Botswana, and parts of Namibia and South Africa . It also spreads across parts of South Africa and Namibia .
 Kalahari has vast areas of waterless ground surface covered by red sands and hundreds of sand dunes . Like a typical desert, the desert is covered in red sands, red sand and red sand . It is also covered in hundreds of dunes and red sands .
 A true desert receives less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rainfall annually . Some definitions of a true desert are based on 10 inches of rainfall per year .
 Many parts of the Kalahari sometimes receive more than that amount of rain . But many parts of it receive more rain than the average amount .
 Animals that live in the region include brown hyenas, lions, meerkats, several species of antelope, and many types of birds and reptiles .
 Vegetation in the Kalahari consists of dry grassland and scrubby acacias . Vegetation is mainly grassland, grassland in the region .
 African people known as the San were the first known human inhabitants of the Kalahari . The San were first known humans to live in the region of the region .
 Kalahari Desert, in southern Africa, is one of the continents last wildlife paradises . It is a one of Africa's last remaining wildlife havens .
 Antelope, shown here, are one of the many types of animals that live in the region . wilderness have become legendary .
 Today, only a small number of the San follow their traditional way of life in the Kalahari .
 Modern civilization is threatening the natural resources of the Kalahari . Modern civilization threatens the resources of many of the world's most ancient tribes .
 Mineral companies have discovered large coal, copper, and nickel deposits in the region . The region is home to large coal and copper deposits .
 In addition, one of the largest diamond mines in the world is at Orapa in the Makgadikgadi, a depression of the northeastern Kalahari .
 Kalb was born on June 29, 1721, in what is now Bavaria, in southern Germany . Kalb died in 1721 .
 In 1777, Kalb traveled to the American Colonies with a group of French soldiers led by the Marquis de Lafayette . Kalb died in 1777 .
 The group hoped to help the colonies defeat Britain, France’s most important enemy . The group was part of the group that helped them defeat Britain .
 That year, he briefly commanded the American army in the south . Major General Horatio Gates took over from him .
 Under Gates, the army suffered a terrible defeat at Camden, South Carolina . Gates' defeat was the worst of the war .
 Kalb fought brilliantly and bravely, but he was wounded 11 times . Kalb died three days later, on Aug., 1780, three days after his death .
 Charles W Ingrao Kale, kay/. is a vegetable somewhat like cabbage but with loose, curly leaves instead of a head . Kale is similar to cabbage but has loose-curled leaves .
 Leaves are boiled or steamed and eaten alone or mixed with potatoes . These leaves are boiled, steamed or eaten separately or together .
 Kale has additional value because it is a green vegetable available during winter . Kale is available in winter in order to be available during the season .
 Brassica oleracea, variety acephala. i Se. of ogee $ © Michael Fogden, Bruce Coleman Inc. Inc.
 Most kaleidoscopes are from 2 to 3 inches in diameter and about 10 inches long . Most kaleidsoscopes have a diameter of about 3 inches and are from about 3 to 10 inches .
 Both ends are closed, but one end has a small peephole through which you can look into the kaleidoscope . Both ends of the kaleidsoscope are closed but can be accessed by the small window .
 At the far end of the kaleidoscope are two disks, the one closer to the eyehole made of clear glass and the other of ground glass . The two disks are made of glass and ground glass, respectively .
 Ground glass throws reflections in many directions, and patterns are formed . The ground glass throws the reflections into many directions .
 A kaleidoscope is a tube containing two mirrors and two small plates that hold beads and pieces of colored glass . When the beads and glass shift, the patterns shift, and the patterns are created .
 The mirrors reflect the beads and glass as colorful symmetrical patterns, right . These patterns change continuously as the tube is turned .
 Designers have used the kaleidoscope to find new patterns for rugs, wallpaper, and fabrics .
 Kaliningrad, ku/h LEE nihn Gran , is the westernmost port city of Russia . Kalinedrad is located in Russia . It is also known as the most populous city in the world .
 Kaliningrad serves as an important seaport because its deep harbor remains free of ice the year around . Kalinezrad is located in Russia's most populous city . The city's deep harbor is known for its year-round ice-free harbor .
 The city's industries include shipbuilding, ship repair, machine building, and fishing . The city is known for its shipbuilding and fishing industries .
 The oblast is separated from the rest of Russia by Lithuania and Belarus . It is located in the country's borders with Lithuania, Belarus .
 The city became the cultural and political center of the German state of East Prussia in the 1600's . The city was the cultural center of its state, East Prussian in the 16th century .
 The city and surrounding territory became part of the Russian republic of the Soviet Union in 1945 . The city was part of Russia during the Second World War .
 When the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991, Kaliningrad remained part of Russia . Kalinedrad was part of the USSR when it was dissolved in 1992 .
 Kamakura period, in Japanese history, lasted from 1185 to 1333 . Kamakura is the name of the Kamakura era . It is also known as "H muh KOO ruh" in Japanese .
 The samurai (warrior class) dominated the imperial government from military headquarters in Kamakura, near Yokohama, Japan .
 Kamchatka Peninsula, kam CHAT kuh, extends southward from eastern Siberia, in Russia, between the Bering Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk . The peninsula is located in eastern Siberia .
 The others belong to Siberian tribes and include the Koryak, Even, Chukchi, Itelmen, Aleut, and Aleut . The others are Koryaks, Even and Chukchukchi .
 Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, on the eastern coast, is the capital and chief port . The city is located on the east coast of Russia . It is also known as the most populous city in Russia .
 Theodore Shabad Kamehameha I, kah may hah MAY hah , founded the Kingdom of Hawaii . Theodore Shabab KameHameha was born in Hawaii .
 Kamehameha conquered the island of Hawaii in 1782 . After Kalaniopu'u, the chief of Hawaii, died, the island's chief died .
 He later won additional victories, climaxing in 1795 by the bloody Battle of Nuuanu Pali on the island of Oahu .
 Kamehameha used cannons to drive Oahu's defenders over a cliff near Honolulu . The battle took place on Oahu in the early 1800s .
 He kept alive the customs and religion of his people but, after his death, missionaries spread Christianity throughout the islands . He kept his people's customs alive and kept them alive .
 The kamikazes dived airplanes loaded with explosives into certain targets, usually American warships . The planes dived planes loaded with bombs into specific targets, such as American warships.
 Its military leaders viewed the kamikazes as the last hope of stopping the Allied advance . The kamakazes were seen as last hope to stop the powerful Allied advance.
 Fliers volunteered for kamikaze missions because they considered it a privilege to die for their emperor . Fliers volunteer for missions because of their desire to protect the emperor .
 First kamikaze attacks occurred in October 1944, when the Allies invaded the Japanese-held Philippines . The first kamakaze attacks were in the Philippines during World War II .
 More than a thousand kamikazes took part in the defense of Okinawa in 1945 . More than 1,000 of them were involved in the battle .
 The kamikazes failed to sink any large aircraft carriers . But in time proved to be a costly failure, the kamakazes were costly failures .
 They became more important for the kind of resistance they symbolized than for the damage they caused . They symbolized the resistance they had to take to the streets, not the damage caused .
 It originally referred to a typhoon that destroyed a fleet sent by the Mongol conqueror Kublai Khan to attack Japan in 1281 . The storm was originally known as a storm that destroyed the Khan's fleet .
 The name Kam/oops comes from an Indian word that probably means meeting of the waters . The name comes from the Indian word "Kam/oops", which means 'oops'
 The city is the financial, educational, and transportation center of a farming, logging, and mining region . It is also a financial and educational hub of a mining and logging region .
 The North West Company and the Pacific Fur Company built trading posts in the Kamloops area in 1812 . The Pacific Fur and North West Trading Post built in the area in the early 1800s .
 The completion of the Canadian Pacific Railroad in 1885 stimulated Kamloops growth . The gold rush of the 1850s and the completion of a Canadian Pacific railroad in the 1880s stimulated growth .
 Kampala is the capital and largest city of Uganda . Kampala, kahm PAH Iuh, is the largest city in Uganda .
 Kampala replaced Entebbe as capital when Uganda became independent in 1962 . Kampala became capital of Uganda when it became independent from Uganda in 1963 .
 Kanawha River, kuh NAW wuh, is one of the chief waterways of West Virginia . Kanawra River is the largest river in the state and is located in West Virginia.
 The land along the river contains deposits of coal, natural gas, and salt . The land is also rich in coal and natural gas .
 Kandahar, KAN duh hahr, also spelled Qandahar (pop. 191,345), is the second largest city of Afghanistan . Kandahar is Afghanistan's second-largest city and second-most populous city .
 Kandahar's old section includes many ancient buildings and bazaars . The old section of Kandahar includes ancient buildings . Kandahar is famous for its ancient architecture and culture .
 Kandahar serves as the center of an important trade route between India, Iran, Pakistan, and Kabul . Kandahar is located in Afghanistan's most populous province .
 Ahmad Shah Durrani, the empire's founder, built the modern city of Kandahar in 1761 . The city was the birthplace of the Afghan Empire, which ruled Afghanistan .
 Kandahar became the headquarters of a conservative, militant Islamic group known as the Taliban in the 1990s . Kandahar was the Taliban headquarters of the Taliban, which is now known as a Taliban .
 Riffat Sardar Kandinsky was a Russian artist . Kandinsky's works include Wassily, Wassily and Kandinsky paintings .
 He is generally considered to have discovered abstract painting, which has no recognizable subject . He is considered to be the first person to discover abstract painting .
 Kandinsky believed that painting, like music, is primarily a form of personal expression, rather than a way to tell a story or express an idea . Kandinsky: "Painting is like music"
 Kandinsky painted with bright, pure colors in a free, spontaneous style . During this period, Kandinsky was known for his bright, free and spontaneous colors .
 His ideas on expressive qualities of color and form appear in his book Concerning the Spiritual in Art .
 One of Kandinsky’s works, Black Lines, is reproduced in the Painting article . Kandinsky's work is reproduced here .
 During World War I, Kandinsky returned to Russia and was a teacher in Moscow . Kandinsky was also a teacher during World War II .
 From 1922 to 1933 he taught the theory of form at the Bauhaus school of design in Germany .
 Paul Kane, Paul Kane was the first artist to paint an extensive record of Indian life in western Canada . Kane was an artist who painted extensive records of western Canadian Indian life .
 Kane was inspired by pictures of Indians painted by the American artist George Catlin . Kane visited Catlin while in England, inspired by his work .
 Kane traveled across Canada sketching and painting Indians and Indian life . With financial support from the Hudson's Bay Company, Kane painted Indians and Indians .
 It originated as a small kingdom in the area north of Lake Chad in the 700s . The kingdom is now a kingdom in northern Chad .
 The early kingdom engaged in trans-Saharan trade with Muslim North Africa . The kingdom was established in the early days of the kingdom .
 The profits from this trade helped Kanem expand and conquer other kingdoms and territories . Kanem's trade helped him expand his kingdom .
 Kanem’s markets for ivory, leather goods, and slaves . Cloth, copper, glass, and horses from North Africa and the Mediterranean region were traded in Kanem .
 At its height, Kanem included parts of what is now Cameroon, Chad, Libya, Niger, Nigeria, and Sudan . Kanem is now known as Kanem, which includes parts of Nigeria, Chad and Libya .
 Bornu, on the southwest side of Lake Chad, became a province of Kanem, the empire was often called Kanem-Bornu . Bornu became the province of the Kanem empire and was often known as Kanem .
 Mai Idris Alooma, who ruled from 1580 to 1617, reconquered the lost territory and extended the empire to its greatest size . Mai Idrri's reign extended to the end of the Ottoman Empire .
 Starting in the 1600's, Kanem began to decline because trade centers shifted from inland routes to the coast . Kanem is now a UNESCO World Heritage Museum .
 Kangaroo is a type of furry mammal that hops on its hind legs . Kangaroo hopes on hind legs and hops on their hind legs. Kangaroo hopping is a form of bipartartart .
 Kangaroos are marsupials that give birth to extremely undeveloped offspring . Kangaroo's birth is the first of its kind in the wild .
 The young of kangaroos complete their development in a pocketlike pouch on the belly of the mother . The pouch is the pouch where the young of a kangaroo develop .
 Other macropods include bettongs, potoroos, rat-kangaroos, wallabies, and wallabies . Macropods are macropod species of animals .
 The word macropod means /arge foot . Most macropods have tong hind legs and feet and small front legs . The word "macropod" means "arge foot"
 There are about 55 species of macropods, and all of them are native to Australia, New Guinea or nearby islands .
 The two main types of kangaroos are the red and gray kangaroo . The gray and red are the most common types of animals in the world .
 The red kangaroo inhabits the deserts and dry grasslands of central Australia . Red kangaroises live in central Australia's dry grasses .
 Gray kangaroos are found in the forests and grasslands of southern and eastern Australia . They are often found in Australia's eastern and southern regions .
 There are two species, the eastern gray kangaroo and the western gray . The eastern gray and western gray are the two species of kangaroas .
 Shortly after a joey leaves the pouch, most female kangaroos give birth to a new joey . Shortly after the joey is born, most kangaroo give birth in a pouch . The joey was born in the pouch of a female koala .
 A kangaroo can hop on its powerful hind legs at speeds up to 30 miles per hour . The animal is capable of hopping on its hind legs and can reach speeds of up to 40mph . It can also be seen hopping up to 20mph .
 The animal uses its long muscular tail for balance when hopping . or gray fur . It uses its muscular tail to keep its balance .
 When kangaroos hop, they use only their hind legs, which they move together . This is when they hop together . When they hop, the kangaroo uses only its hind legs .
 Large kangaroos can hop as fast as 30 miles per hour for short distances . Large animals can hop up to 30 mph per hour in a short distance . Kangaroos are known to be dangerous to humans .
 A kangaroo uses its tail for balance when hopping and also for support when standing upright or when walking on four legs . The tail is used for balance between standing upright and standing upright when standing or walking .
 Kangaroos rest in the shade during the day and search for food at night . In general, kangaroos are found resting in shade and looking for food in the dark .
 Kangaroos usually spend their time in small groups that often consist of a mother and her offspring . Otherwise, kangaroos tend to spend most of their lives in groups of small groups .
 Female gray kangaroos generally breed in the late spring or early summer . They breed in late spring and early summer in Australia .
 About one month after mating, the female usually gives birth to one offspring, called a joey . The joey is a baby born after a month of mating . The female gives birth in one month .
 The joey spends six to eight months in the mother’s pouch, attached to one of her feats and nourished by her milk . It is the first joey to be born in the pouch of a mother and fed by milk .
 The female has four teats, and older offspring often attempt to suck milk from them long after leaving the pouch . Older offspring often try and drink milk from the female's teats long after they leave the pouch.
 Kangaroos generally live from six to eight years, but many younger individuals may die in times of drought . Kangaroo's life spans between six and eight years . Many younger individuals die in drought times .
 Red kangaroos have a special system of reproduction that helps their populations quickly return to normal size after a drought . The kangaroo's reproduction system helps their population quickly recover after a droughts . The animals are known to have a unique reproductive system .
 The embryo (unborn young) formed from this mating does not develop into a joey until after the first joey leaves the pouch or unless the first  joey dies in the pouch . The embryo does not grow into the joey .
 After the second joey is born, the mother usually mates again, and the cycle continues . Other macropods vary widely in size and live in a variety of habitats . ee
 It inhabits open forests and grasslands along the northern coast of Australia . The species is found in Australia's northern coast .
 The smallest macropod is the musky rat-kangaroo, which grows to about the size of a rat . It is also known as musky rats, which can grow to about a rat size .
 Musky rat-kangaroo lives in rain forests of northeastern Australia . The musky rat kangaroo has been spotted in Australia's northern rain forests .
 Hare-wallabies and potoroos live in grasslands, bettongs live in dry woodlands, and tree kangaroos are found in rain forests .
 Kangaroos have few enemies besides human beings and wild dogs called dingoes . Kangaroo's only enemies are humans and dingoes, which are also known as dingoes.
 Kangaroos are protected throughout Australia by laws that prohibit killing them . They are protected in Australia by law that prohibits killing them.
 In some areas, hunters are licensed to kill large kangaroos to protect crops or to provide meat, fur, and leather when the kangarooos are abundant . In other areas, however, hunting is prohibited in some areas .
 Some small macropods, including certain rat-kangaroos and wallabies, are in danger of extinction . Farmers and ranchers have destroyed much of their habitat . Wallabies and rats are threatened by farmers .
 The eastern gray kangaroo is M giganteus, and the western gray is M fuliginosis . The western gray and eastern gray are the same species of kangaroas .
 Kangaroo court is a slang term for an unauthorized gathering of people who take the law into their own hands by acting as a court . Kangaroo courts are a term for unauthorized gatherings of people taking the law against them .
 Such groups disregard the principles of law and justice, and impose unfair or excessive punishments . Such groups usually disregard the principle of law, justice, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Pioneer judges traveled from place to place handling trials quickly . They were paid with the fines from convicted prisoners .
 Critics of a lawfully appointed court often use the term when they feel such a court's judgments completely disregard legal rights or procedures . Critics of lawfully appointed courts often use it to refer to the court's disregard of legal rights .
 Their silky fur is yellow or brown on the upper parts of their upper parts and white on the underparts . They are often found in the wild in their native habitat .
 Kangaroo rats live in the deserts of the southwestern U.S. and Mexico . They live in deserts in the southwestern United States and Mexico.
 They nest in burrows (tunnels) and come out at night to gather plant food . They come out of their burrows to gather food .
 Kangaroo rats use their small front feet to stuff food into furlined pouches on the outside of their cheeks . Kangaroo rat's front feet are used to make food into a pouch on the inside of its cheeks .
 Kangaroo rats, like their relatives the pocket mice, do not need to drink water . The animals do not drink water, but do not eat water .
 They use the water that is produced when food inside them combines with oxygen that they breathe . The water is produced by the water produced when the food inside the animals combines with the oxygen .
 At night, kangaroo rats come out from their burrows to search for food . At night they come out of their burrow looking for food in search of a meal .
 He expanded the empire’s power over what is now Pakistan, Afghanistan, and northwest India . He expanded his empire's power over the region, including Pakistan and Afghanistan .
 Kanishka adopted Buddhism as the empire’s official religion . He called together a council of Buddhist monks and philosophers . The empire was ruled by the king .
 At his capital, near Peshawar, he built a famous towering monument to house relics of Buddha . He built a giant Buddha statue near his capital near the city of Peshawar .
 Kanishka supported the Gandharan school of sculpture, one of the first schools to produce stone images of Buddha . He also supported Gandhharan art school, which produced images of the Buddha .
 Earlier, sculptors had created things only associated with Buddha, such as his footprints . Now sculptors have created sculptures of Buddha's footprints .
 Kanishka probably adopted the Saka Fra, a calendar system still used by the Indian government . The calendar system is still used in India .
 Kanpur is the largest city in Uttar Pradesh, a state in northern India . Kanpur, KAHN poor (pop.,532,138; met. area pop. 2,690,486), is the city's largest city .
 Kanpur factories produce cotton, leather goods, military equipment, silk, and wool . Kanpur's factories also produce silk, leather, and silk, among other items .
 The city’s oldest section, in the west, has narrow, winding streets lined by buildings that are crowded together . The oldest section of the city is lined by narrow streets lined with buildings crowded together.
 Kanpur, then called Cawnpore, was ceded to the British East India Company in 1801 . An Indian leader ceded Kanpur to the company in 1802 .
 Cawnpore grew rapidly from a small village into a thriving commercial city . The city is now a thriving tourist destination .
 Karan Kansa Indians, KAN saw, or Kaw Indians, were a Plains tribe who lived along the Kansas River in eastern Kansas . The Kaw Indians were the first to live in the area .
 They lived in earth lodges made of wooden posts and woven mats banked with soil . They were made of earth lodgeges made from wooden posts, woven mats and banked soil .
 The tribe sold their Kansas lands to the government in 1873 and moved to a reservation in Oklahoma . The tribe moved to an Oklahoma reservation after the government sold their land .
 Diseases, such as smallpox, took a heavy toll, and few Kansa remain today . Few Kansanans remain today, and many Kansans have died of smallpox .
 Kansas wheat fields are so productive that the state has earned the nicknames Wheat State and Breadbasket of America . The state's wheat fields have earned the nickname "Wheat State," "Breadbasket"
 Kansas leads all the states of the United States in wheat production . The Sunflower State leads the nation's wheat production. Kansas leads the U.S.
 In early summer, the vast wheat fields on the state's prairies look like golden seas of grain . The vast fields are seen in early summer on the prairies in the state .
 Busy mills throughout Kansas grind wheat into flour, to be shipped to the world’s bakers . The world's bakers use wheat to make their own flour .
 Thousands of oil and gas wells dot the prairies, and Kansas leads the states in the production of civilian airplanes . Thousands of well-known wells dot Kansas prairies .
 Manufacturing and trade are the state’s most important economic activities . Manufacturing is a key part of the state's economy . The state's manufacturing and trade is the most important industry .
 Kansas was named for the Kansa, or Kaw, Indians who once lived in the region . The area was named after the Kaw, or Kansi, Indians .
 Before Alaska and Hawaii joined the Union, the geographic center of the United States was near Smith Center, in north-central Kansas . Smith Center is located in Smith Center .
 This point serves as the reference point, or point of origin, for all U.S. government maps of North America . This point is used as a reference point for all maps of the United States .
 The governments of Canada and Mexico also use this point in producing their maps .
 Kansas received two nicknames because of its stormy history of the mid-1800's . Kansas was known for its storms during the 1800s .
 The conflict over slavery led to such violence that newspapers of the 1850's called the area Bleeding Kansas . The area was known for its violence over slavery as a result .
 Raiders crossed from Kansas territory into Missouri to attack and sometimes kill slaveholders . Raiders crossed to attack slaveholders, sometimes killing slaveholders in Missouri .
 Prohibition first became part of a state constitution in 1880, when Kansas passed an amendment prohibiting the manufacture, distribution, and sale of liquor . This activity came to be called javhawking, and the raiders were known as jayhawkers .
 A newspaper called the Siwinowe Kesibwi (Shawnee Sun) was established in Kansas in 1835 . A newspaper was established by the same name in 1836 .
 The monthly publication was the first newspaper published in Kansas and the first in North America to be printed entirely in an Indian language . It was printed in the first month of the year .
 The newspaper was published in the Algonquian language for members of the Shawnee tribe by the missionary Jotham Meeker .
 The state's history of the 1860's through the 1880's has become well known through books, motion pictures, and TV programs about cattle trails, cattle towns, and lawmen of that time .
 Dodge City, Kansas, is known as the "Cowboy Capital of the World" Dodge City is known for its reputation as cattle country . Dodge City's nickname of Dodge City: Cowboy Capital of Kansas .
 Dodge City got its nickname when it was a major regional shipping point for cattle . Dodge City is now a major cattle shipping point in the United States .
 Cowboys herded Texas longhorns great distances over cattle trails to reach the railroads in Dodge City, Abilene, and other cattle centers . Cowboys sheded Texas cattle to reach railroads .
 Wyatt Earp, Wild Bill Hickok, and Bat Masterson tried to keep the peace among cowboys and outlaws . The cattle towns were known as brawling, lawless places .
 Dodge City is still a cattle center, but some of its cowboys no longer ride horses . Dodge City, Texas, has a reputation for being a cattle town of cattle town .
 Mounted on motorcycles or on all-terrain vehicles the cowboys herd cattle in Dodge City's feed lots . The cowboys are often seen riding motorcycles or riding all over the country .
 Kansas ranks among the leading states in production of beef cattle . Today, Kansas is one of the world's leading beef cattle states .
 Susanna Salter was elected mayor of Argonia, Argonia in 1887 . She was the first female mayor in the United States .
 The election also marked the first time women in Kansas were allowed to vote in city elections . Women in Kansas also voted in the first city elections in Kansas .
 The discovery of helium in natural gas led to the development of the commercial helium industry . Because helium can be removed from natural gas easily, the discovery led to development of helium industry.
 The collection includes works by such noted artists as Charles Marion Russell and Frederic Remington . The collection is based in New York City .
 Beef production remains a leading agricultural activity in Kansas . Cattle markets played a key role in the development of Kansas, Kansas .
 The state flag was adopted in 1927 and modified in 1963 . Kansas in brief Symbols of Kansas: State Flag .
 Above the state seal is the state crest—a twisted blue and gold bar with a sunflower, the state flower . The state seal features a twisted blue-and-gold bar with the state sunflower .
 On the state seal, adopted in 1861, the rising sun represents the East, from where most Kansas settlers came . The rising sun is the symbol of the state's most recent settlers .
 The farmer plowing and the settlers cabin symbolize the future prosperity State flag State seal of the state through agriculture . State seal symbolizes future prosperity in the state .
 Topeka has housed the State Capitol since 1861 . Ad Astra per Aspera (To the Stars Through Difficulties) is the name of the state Capitol in Topeka .
 Lowest—680 ft above sea level along the Verdigris River in Montgomery County, Maryland . Lowest-lowest-landed is 680 ft above the riverbed along a riverbed in the area .
 Fighting over the slavery issue gave the region the name Bleeding Kansas . Oil and gas fields began as part of the Louisiana Purchase state on January 29 .
 Services include community, business, and personal services; finance; government; trade; and transportation, communication, and utilities . /ndustustry includes construction, manufacturing, and mining . Services include finance, government, trade, trade and transportation .
 The Department of Commerce and Housing handles requests for information about the state's economy . The department also handles requests about the economy .
 The state's official Web site at www.state.ks.us also provides a gateway to much information on Kansas's economy, government, and history .
 An amendment increasing the terms for governor and other top state officials from two to four years became effective . An amendment to increase the terms of governors and other officials was effective .
 The 2000 United States census reported that Kansas had 2,688,418 people . The 2000 U.S. census reported the state of Kansas . The state had a population of 2.688,000 people .
 The population had increased 8 5 percent over the 1990 figure, 2,477,574 . The population has increased 8.5 percent over that figure .
 According to the 2000 census, Kansas ranks 32nd in population among the 50 states . Kansas is ranked 32nd among those in population .
 Lawrence, Topeka, and Wichita are located entirely in Kansas . Lawrence and Topeka are the largest metropolitan areas in the state of Kansas .
 Kansas City, Missouri, metropolitan area extends into eastern Kansas . Kansas City is home to the largest city in the country .
 For the populations of these metropolitan areas, see the /ndex to the political map of Kansas in this article . The population of these areas is shown .
 Overland Park, Kansas City, Topeka, Olathe, and Lawrence are the state's other large cities . Kansas City is the largest city in the state, followed by Kansas City .
 Mennonite women live on reservations in Kansas . About 5 percent of them live on reservation in the state . Kansas Dept. of Commerce and Hnusing Mennite women attend rummage sale .
 Mennonites, who believe in simple living and modest dress, settled in Kansas during the 1870's . Mennonite Mennites are simple-living Menniteers .
 People lowa, Sac and Fox, Kickapoo, and Potawatomi Indian reservations . Native Americans live in the Sac, Fox, and Kickapoatomi tribes .
 The first schools in Kansas were established for Indians by missionaries during the 1830's . Missionaries established the schools for Indians in Kansas .
 In 1855, the territorial legislature passed laws providing free education for white children . The laws were passed in 1855 . The state legislature passed the laws providing for free education .
 In 1859, the territorial legislature extended the laws for free education to all children in Kansas . The laws were extended in 1859 .
 It appoints a commissioner to administer elementary and secondary education . The education commissioner is appointed by the Education Commission .
 Since 1963, many small districts have been combined to make better use of school buildings and funds . Small districts have made better use use of buildings and money .
 Kansas Dept. of Commerce and Houstng Indians participate in a ceremony at an Indian center in Wichita, shown here . The ceremony was held at the Indian center .
 More than half of the people of Kansas live in metropolitan areas . Population density is based on population growth in the state .
 The western half is 25 to 50 my 10 to 20 heavily rural and relatively 10 to 25 4to 10 thinly populated . Western half of the country is heavily rural .
 Young Indians prepare there for careers in business and industry . Today, young Indians prepare to prepare for careers .
 State Library of Kansas provides materials for and about the state government . Today, the State Library in Topeka, Kansas, provides materials about state government.
 The Kansas Museum of History in Topeka, operated by the Kansas State Historical Society, is the largest historical museum in the state . The museum is located in Kansas City .
 Eisenhower Library contains documents and other items associated with Dwight D Eisenhower . Eisenhower was president of the United States from 1953 to 1961 . Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Texas, contains documents associated with Eisenhower .
 The library is part of a complex that includes a museum and Eisenhower’s burial place . Eisenhower's burial place is also part of the complex . Eisenhower was buried in 1953 .
 Wichita’s Century Wl. serves as a cultural and civic center . G 13 is located in the heart of the city's historic center .
 G 5 includes exhibit and convention halls, a theater, and a concert hall . G 5 is the largest convention and convention center in the world .
 Towns that were once wild cow towns feature museums depicting the exciting days of cattle drives . Towns have museums that show the excitement of the days when cattle drives were on the way .
 Visitors can see wheel ruts left by wagons on the Santa Fe Trail and other westward trails . Visitors can also see wheel marks left by wagon wheels left by the trail .
 Preserved forts that once provided travelers protection now offer living history events during the year . Preserve forts are located in the U.S.
 Boot Hill Museum, in Dodge City, is on the original site of the Boot Hill cemetery . Ye* y A Places to visit: Boot Hill museum, on the site of Boot Hill Cemetery, is in Kansas .
 The site consists of historic and reconstructed buildings . Front Street, the original business district of Old Dodge City, is one of the sites .
 Eisenhower Library and Museum, in Abilene, house mementos and papers of President Dwight D Eisenhower . Eisenhower's papers are housed in the museum . The museum also houses his memento and memorabilia .
 Eisenhower's boyhood home and the Place of Meditation, where he is buried, are also there . Eisenhower and his wife Mamie are also buried in his home .
 Exploration Place, in Wichita, features interactive exhibits and activities related to flight, health and human life, people, places, and the environment of Kansas . Exploration Place is located on the campus of the University of Wichita .
 Fort Larned was built in the 1860's to protect travelers on the Santa Fe Trail . The site is a national historic site in New Mexico . It is located near the town of Santa Fe .
 Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, was the first permanent white settlement in Kansas . It was located near the site of the first white settlement of the state . The town was founded in 1881 .
 Visitors guide out Kansas, a leader in wheat production, celebrate the state's farming heritage . The fort is the best place in Kansas to explore the state .
 Visitors to Kansas’s aviation museums can see displays of the many commercial and military aircraft built in the state .
 Flint Hills region is one of the largest remaining areas of tallgrass prairie in the world . The Flint Hills is also known as the Flint Hills area of tall grass prairie . The region is known for its tallgrass and prairie architecture .
 i a ee ae now houses the United States Army Gormmnmnaind and General Staff College, and Leavenworth Prison, a federal penitentiary . The Kansas State Fair in Hutchinson is now home to the U.S. Army's Gormnmnain
 Many buildings, including a cavalry museum, an early Kansas Capitol, and the home of General George A Custer, still stand on the grounds of the fort . General Custer's home is still located on the fort's grounds .
 Fort Scott National Historic Site, in Fort Scott, is a restored cavalry post of the 1840’s. The site is a national historic site . Fort Scott was established in the 18th century .
 Eleven historic buildings, including a hospital, barracks, and officers’ quarters, stand there . The 11 historic buildings include a hospital and barracks, .
 Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center is a wide-ranging museum that features a large space exploration exhibit . The museum is located in Hutchinson .
 Exhibits contain original spacecraft, space suits, lunar roving vehicle, and the Apollo 13 command module . Exhibit also includes original spacecraft and space suits .
 Kansas’s system of state recreation areas — includes 23 state parks, about 40 state lakes, and many small roadside parks .
 The Southeastern Plains cover the area south of the increases in elevation from east to west . Most of Kansas is a rolling plain that the area is covered by rolling plains . The area is also known as The Plains .
 The Dissected Till Plains cover the northeastern coreast and the Flint Hills in the west . They are divided into the Osage Cuestas in the area . The Flint Hills are located in the east and west .
 Cuestas is the Spanish ner, lying generally east of the Big Blue River and north word for upraised ridges of the Kansas River . Cuesta is the name of a town in the area north of the Colorado River .
 The Osage Cuestas were formed by the erosion of glacier that once covered the region retreated . The area’s rich soil was left as the rich soil . The region was formed by erosion of glaciers .
 The area's natural resources incut into the soil, creating high bluffs, and winds deposit clude limestone, natural gas, and petroleum . The area is known for its natural resources .
 Bluestem grasses that grow abundantly there make the area a lush pastureland . The area is also known for its green grasses .
 This region slopes upward from about 1,500 feet (457 meters) above sea level in the east to about 4,000 feet at the Colorado border . The Colorado border slopes upward . This region is about 1.500 feet above sea levels in east .
 This is the flattest part of the state, though it is also the highest in elevation in elevation . This part of Colorado is also flattest in elevation, with the highest elevation .
 The Red Hills are along the southern border and the Smoky Hills in the north . The Smokies are also known as the Red Hills along the northern border . The Hills are located in the southern part of the state .
 This area also contains lowlands that fill with water and provide wetland habitats . The area is home to a great variety of birds and other animals .
 Smoky Hill R GREAT ia PLAINS “oN Ark Sas , ie SOUTHEASTERN PLAINS Land regions of Kansas Rivers and lakes . “Smoky Hill’s”
 The Kansas, or Kaw, River system drains the northern part of the state . The Kansas River system is known as the Kaw River system .
 The Missouri River, along the state's northeast border, is the only major waterway for barges . It's along the Missouri River along the northeast border .
 Other important rivers of Kansas include the Big Blue, Cimarron, Neosho, Republican, Saline, Solomon, Smoky Hill, and Verdigris rivers .
 Small streams may flow for a short distance and then disappear as the water soaks into the dry soil of the streambed . In some parts of western Kansas, small streams flow into dry soil .
 Milford Lake, a reservoir on the Republican River covers about 16,000 acres and is the largest lake in the state . Milford . Lake is located on Republican River and is located in Republican River .
 Other large lakes include Cedar Bluff, Cheney, Fall River, John Redmond, Kanopolis, Kirwin, McKinney, Pomona, Toronto, and Tuttle Creek .
 The state's largest natural lake is Lake Inman, which is about half a mile across . The state is home to the largest lake in the state, Lake InMan .
 Trees include the ash, black walnut, elm, hackberry, hickory, locust, maple, oak, pecan, redcedar, sycamore, and willow trees .
 Cottonwood trees grow along streams and rivers throughout the state, especially in the moist river valleys of the east . Cottonwood can be found along streams, rivers, streams and lakes .
 Shorter types of grass, such as blue grama and buffalo grass, are found in the west . The grass is found in western Europe .
 Other wild flowers include asters, clover, columbines, daisies, goldenrod, thistles, verbena, and morning-glories .
 Today, bison have been reintroduced in small herds, but smaller animals are most plentiful . Bison were reintroduced to the U.S. in the 1970s, when they were still alive .
 These include coyotes, muskrats, muskats, opossums, prairie dogs, rabbits, and raccoons .
 Birds found in Kansas include blue jays, cardinals, crows, meadowlarks, robins, sparrows, woodpeckers, and several kinds of hawks . Blue jays are the most common birds found in the state .
 Game birds, such as ducks, geese, pheasants, prairie chickens, and quail, live in Kansas . Kansas has cold winters .
 Cold air from the north moves across the flat plains, moderating as it travels southward . Cold air moderated as it moves southward to cool temperatures .
 The northwest generally has the mildest summer temperatures throughout the state . The northwest has the most warm summer temperatures .
 Fishes in the state’s lakes, rivers, and streams include bass, bluegills, catfish, and crappies . The state's lakes and rivers are filled with fish .
 There are many kinds of reptiles, including two kinds of poisonous snakes . Copperheads and rattlesnakes are among the most poisonous snakes in the world .
 Cold air from the north moves easily across the flat plains in winter . Hot winds sweep up from the south in summer in summer . Cold air moves easily in winter, and hot winds sweep across the plains .
 Northern Kansas usually has cooler weather than southern Kansas, but the difference is often slight . Northern Kansas is usually cooler than southern .
 The record high temperature of 121°F occurred in 1936 on July 18 in Fredonia and on July 24 near Alton . The record-high temperature was recorded in July 1936 in Alton, near Fredonia .
 Service industries account for the largest portion of Kansas’s gross state product . Service industries, taken together, account for a large portion of the state's gross product .
 Such activities as finance, government, and trade have replaced agriculture as the mainstay of the state’s economy . Agriculture has been replaced as a mainstay by finance, trade and government .
 Kansas remains a leading farm state, however, and farming contributes to the larger sectors of the economy . Kansas is a leading agricultural state, but agriculture contributes to larger parts of the state's economy .
 Getting agricultural products from farms to processors provides economic opportunities for people employed in the areas of wholesale trade and transportation . For example, getting agricultural products to processors is economic opportunity for people .
 Wichita is the nation's leading producer of commercial and private aircraft . Wichita is famous as the nation’s leading plane manufacturer .
 Construction and mining are relatively small parts of the state's economy . Construction and . mining is a relatively small part of the . economy .
 Mining industry in Kansas consists mainly of extracting petroleum and natural gas from fields in western Kansas . The mining industry is mainly extracting natural gas and petroleum .
 The most important natural resources of Kansas are fertile soil and rich mineral deposits . The state is home to the largest population in the country .
 Most of Kansas has a loamy, fertile soil suitable for growing many kinds of crops . The soil is fertile and fertile enough to grow all kinds of plants .
 Central and northwestern Kansas have fertile soil, but these rich areas get less rain than eastern Kansas . Central and northwest Kansas have less rain, but fertile soil is rich .
 The soil of southwestern Kansas is often sandy, and there are some sand dunes along the Arkansas River .
 Severe droughts in the 1930's and 1950's taught Kansas the importance of conserving soil and water . Kansas is one of the most drought-stricken states in the world .
 The state and federal governments built many dams to create reservoirs and ponds to hold water and to keep it from washing away the soil . Many dams were built to create reservoir and ponds and keep water from flooding .
 Farmers use contour plowing, limited tillage, and terracing to conserve soil and water . Farmers use special methods of farming to conserve water and soil and soil .
 Other valuable mined products found in Kansas include clays, gypsum, helium, natural gas liquids, salt, sand and gravel .
 Service industries account for the largest part of the gross state product of Kansas . Service industries make up the majority of the state's economy .
 Wholesale and retail trade ranks first among the service industries of Kansas in terms of the gross state product . Retail and wholesale trade is one of the fastest growing industries in Kansas .
 The leading types of retail establishments are automobile dealerships and grocery stores . The leading type of retail is automobile dealer's and grocery store .
 Department stores, restaurants, and service stations are also important in the market .
 Leading wholesale trade activities include distributing farm products, groceries, machinery, and motor vehicles . Wholesale trade is based in the United States and Canada .
 Kansas City and Wichita areas are the leading centers of wholesale and retail trade in Kansas . The Kansas City area is home to the largest wholesale trade centers in the state .
 Community, business, and personal services rank second among Kansas’s service industries . Kansas‘s service industry ranks second among the state's service industry .
 This industry group consists of a variety of establishments, including private health care, law firms, data processing companies, hotels, and repair shops . The industry group also consists of private health .
 Government services rank third among Kansas’s service industries in terms of the gross state product . Government services ranked third among the state's service industries . Kansas is the most populous state of the nation .
 These services include the operation of public schools and hospitals, and military activities . Schools and hospitals are also used in the country's military .
 The federal government operates Fort Leavenworth, Fort Riley, and McConnell Air Force Base . Fort Riley and Fort Riley are located in Kansas .
 The federal penitentiary and a nearby state state prison employ many people in the Leavenworth area . The area is home to the federal and state prisons .
 Local school districts and public universities are major employers in Kansas . Local schools and universities are big employers in the state .
 Top Kansas service industries are finance, insurance, real estate, finance, and real estate . The state's economy ranks second in the nation's service industries .
 Overland Park, Kansas City, is home to dozens of insurance companies and several major banks . The area is the home of dozens of major banks and insurance companies .
 Light-airplane manufacturers in Wichita build about twothirds of the civilian aircraft produced in the United States . Insurance companies are also concentratients in Wichita, Kansas .
 The Wichita area is an important financial base for people of the central Kansas region . Wichita is home to many of the state's wealthiest residents .
 Transportation, communication, and utilities are a more important part of the economy in Kansas than in most other states . Transportation and communication is a key part of Kansas's economy .
 Kansas’s central location makes it an important link in the United States transportation system . Kansas is an important part of the U.S. transportation system.
 The state's farmers rely on trucks and trains to transport crops and livestock to processing centers . The state’s farmers rely heavily on trucks, trains to get their crops to the processing centers. The state has been hit hard by the drought .
 Pipelines transport natural gas and petroleum to Wichita, Kansas City, and major cities outside the state . Pipelines are used to transport gas and oil .
 Television and telephone companies make up the most economically important parts of the communications industry . Television and phone companies are the most important part of the industry .
 Goods produced in Kansas have a value added by manufacture of about $20 billion annually . Goods made in Kansas are valued at more than $30 billion a year . Kansas is the only state to manufacture goods in the state .
 Value added by manufacture is the increase in value of raw materials after they become finished products . Value added is the value of the raw materials that are added to the finished product . Manufacturers use raw materials to increase the value added by manufacturing .
 Kansas City and Wichita are the leading manufacturing centers in the U.S. The Kansas City-Wichita area is home to the largest manufacturing centers .
 Wichita area produces about two-thirds of the nation’s general aviation aircraft . The light-airplane industry of the U.S. is centered in the Wichita area .
 Military airplanes, missiles, and aircraft parts are also manufactured in the Wichita area .
 Railroad freight cars, locomotive parts, and passenger cars are manufactured in Atchison, Kansas City, Lawrence, Topeka, and Wichita, Kansas .
 Other transportation equipment produced in Kansas includes truck parts, snowplows, and trailers . Truck parts and trailers are also produced in the state .
 Food processing ranks second among Kansas’s manufacturing activities in terms of value added by manufacture . Food processing is the state's second-largest food processing industry .
 The largest flour mills in Kansas are located in Hutchinson, Topeka, and Wichita, Kansas .
 Factories in Lenexa, McPherson, Wichita, and Winfield make plastics products . Factories make a variety of plastics products in the area .
 Motor vehicle tires are the most important rubber product made in the state . Motor vehicle tire is the state's most important tire product .
 The production of printed materials is also a leading manufacturing activity in Kansas . Kansas is a major manufacturing hub in the state .
 Kansas City has the state's largest business printing and newspaper operations . Kansas City is home to the largest newspaper and printing operations in the state .
 A plant in Topeka is one of the largest producers of school yearbooks in the U.S. The plant is located in Kansas .
 Other products manufactured in Kansas include chemicals, electrical equipment, paper products, petroleum products, and stone, glass, and clay products .
 Kansas ranks among the country’s leading states in the value of farm products . Kansas is one of the nation's leading states for farm products.
 Beef cattle and wheat generate more income for Kansas farmers than any other products . Wheat and cattle are the most important source of income for farmers .
 Together, these two products account for nearly three-fourths of Kansass farm income . Together, they account for about three-fifths of farm income in the state .
 Beef cattle bring in about 60 percent, and wheat earns about 13 percent . Beef cattle earn 60 percent . Wheat earns 13 percent in the United States .
 Kansas ranks among the nation’s leaders in wheat production and beef cattle . Kansas also has a large number of beef cattle in the state .
 Leading farm products include corn, soybeans, grain sorghum, hay, and hogs . The other leading farm products are corn and soybeans .
 Kansas is among the leading states in the production of hay and grain sorghum, both of which are used for livestock feed . Kansas is also among the top states in production of livestock feed.
 In some dry parts of western Kansas, farmers plant crops on only half or two-thirds of their land each year . Farmers plant crops in some dry areas of the state each year.
 Summer fallowing allows moisture to collect in unused portion of the land . This procedure, called summer fallowing, allows the land to be filled with moisture .
 Ogallala aquifer, a vast underground reservoir, is a major source of water for irrigation in the western quarter of the state . It is the largest reservoir in the state and is a source of irrigation in western areas .
 Kansas farmers served by this aquifer grow corn, hay, sorghum, sugar beets, and wheat . The aquifer is a natural resource for farmers .
 Farmers increasingly use conservation measures to protect the aquifers supply of irrigation water . Farmers are increasingly using conservation measures in order to protect water supply .
 Petroleum and natural gas are the state’s most valuable mined products . Natural gas and oil are the most valuable minerals in the state .
 Barton, Ellis, Rooks, and Russell counties combine to produce nearly a fourth of the state's oil . Barton and Ellis counties produce nearly one-in-a-half of all oil in Texas .
 Most of the natural gas produced in Kansas comes from the southwestern part of the state . Most of Kansas's natural gas production comes from its southwestern part .
 Hugoton gas field stretches across eight Kansas counties . It is one of the largest natural gas reserves in the United States . The Hugoton field stretches over eight counties .
 Limestone, used mainly for crushed stone in roadbeds, comes mostly from eastern Kansas . Limestone is used mainly to crush stone for crushed stones .
 Salt comes from brine wells and rock salt mines near Hutchinson, Kanapolis, and Lyons . Salt is used in salt mines in the town of Lyons and Hutchinson .
 About two-thirds of the electric power in Kansas is produced by plants that burn coal . About 2.3 percent of the power in the state is from coal .
 The rest of the state’s electric power comes from plants that burn natural gas or petroleum . The state's electric power is mostly from natural gas and petroleum .
 The central location of Kansas makes the state an important link in the United States transportation system . Kansas is an important part of the U.S. transportation system, with the state's central location important .
 Pioneer wagon trains followed trails through the region during the 1800's . Early railroads chose routes across the flat plains of Kansas . Pioneer wagon train tracks followed trails .
 The first railroad in the state was a 5-mile line that was built in 1860 . The first rail line was built by the state's first railroad .
 Kansas has 133,000 miles (214,000 kilometers) of roads and highways . Today, Kansas has more than 100 million miles of road and highway miles .
 It ranks among the leading states in total distance covered by highways . The state is one of the most populous in the country .
 The extensive road system is needed to connect the state's many farm communities with market centers . It is needed for the state to connect farmers with the market center of the state .
 Interstate 70 crosses the entire state, stretching from the Colorado border on the west to the Missouri border . Interstate 70 is one of the most important interstate highways in the state .
 Kansas City International Airport is located in Kansas City, Missouri . It serves the Kansas City metropolitan area . It is one of the world's largest airports .
 The state's first newspaper was the monthly Shawnee Sun, published by Jotham Meeker, a missionary, in 1835 . The state was the first newspaper published by a missionary in the state .
 Meeker printed the paper in the Shawnee Indian language for members of that tribe . Meeker's paper was printed in Shawnee Indians .
 The first English-language paper, the Kansas Weekly Herald, appeared in Leavenworth, Kansas in 1854 .
 Today, the state's leading newspapers are 7he Topeka Capital-Journal and The Wichita Eagle . Today's state-leading newspapers are The Topeka, Topeka and Wichita Eagle.
 KFH, Kansas’s first radio station, began broadcasting from Wichita in 1922 . KFH was the state's first radio network, broadcasting from 1922 .
 The first commercial television station in Kansas, KTVH, began operating in Hutchinson in 1953 . The station is now located in Hutchinson, Kansas .
 Kansas is governed under its original Constitution, which was drawn up in 1859 . The state is governed by the original Constitution .
 Amendments must be approved by two-thirds of the members in each house of the Legislature, and by a majority of the voters . Amendments to the state's constitution must also be approved in advance of a majority vote .
 Such a convention may be called only with the approval of two-thirds of the legislators and a majority of the people who vote on the issue in a statewide election . The convention may only be called if the majority of those who vote for it call it .
 The Legislature must call an election to approve the convention's actions . The convention must also be called upon by the state legislature .
 They may be elected to an unlimited number of terms, but not more than two in a row . They can be re-elected to a maximum of three terms . They may not be elected as many as two terms, not as many times as three .
 Other top elected state officials include the secretary of state, attorney general, treasurer, and insurance commissioner of insurance .
 Each is elected to a four-year term, and may serve an unlimited number of terms . Each term is four years old, and each can serve a maximum of four years .
 Senators serve four-year terms, and representatives serve two-year term terms . Senators serve for four years, while representatives for two .
 The Legislature meets each year, beginning on the second Monday in January . The Legislature met each year on January 2, 2015 .
 Special sessions may be called by the governor or by a petition of two-thirds of the members of the Legislature . Special sessions are called by governors or by petitioning the Legislature to hold special sessions .
 Kansas became the first U.S. state to form a legislative council in 1933 . Kansas was the first state in the United States to form its own legislative council .
 This council, now known as a legislative coordinating council, consists of leaders of the state Senate and House of Representatives . This council is now called the Legislative Coordinating Council .
 The law requires the Kansas Supreme Court to approve each reapportionment plan . Law requires each plan to be approved by the state's highest court .
 Kansass state's highest state court is the Supreme Court, made up of seven justices . The highest court in the state is the state Supreme Court .
 New justices of the state's Supreme Court are appointed by the governor from a list of candidates made up by a Supreme Court nominating commission . The governor appoints the justices from a selection of candidates .
 After a new justice has held office for a year, the voters decide in an election whether the justice can continue for a regular term . The voters decide whether a justice can be continued in office after a year .
 The justice with the longest service on the Supreme Court serves as the courts chief justice . The chief justice is the longest-serving justice in the country .
 The chief justice of the Supreme Court appoints the chief judge of the Court of Appeals from among the judges . The chief judge will be chosen from among judges .
 William H Avery was Republican 1961-1965 . Robert Docking was Republican . John W Carlin was a Democrat . Bill Graves was a Republican .
 Board of county commissioners administers each county . Board of commissioners consists of three or five members . County commissioners in each county administers county .
 Commissioners are elected from separate districts and serve four-year terms . Commissioners serve four years in each district . They are elected to separate districts .
 County officials include the county attorney, county clerk, register of deeds, sheriff, and treasurer . Other county officials are the sheriff, attorney, clerk, and sheriff .
 Each of the four counties with the largest populations has an election commissioner . Each county has a commissioner . The election commissioner is elected by county commissioners .
 Most of the smaller cities have a mayor-council form of government . Most of them, especially smaller cities, are smaller cities with a mayor .
 In 1961, an amendment to the state constitution gave the cities of Kansas home rule power . The amendment was passed in 1961, giving Kansas cities home rule powers .
 This power gave the cities control over their own affairs in such matters of licensing and taxation . It gave them control over such matters such as licensing .
 In 1974, the Legislature granted the counties of Kansas home rule power similar to that of the cities . The Legislature granted counties home rule powers similar to the cities of Kansas .
 Kansas gets more than half of its general revenue from state taxes . The government of Kansas gets over half of the state's general tax revenue .
 Personal and corporate income taxes and a general retail sales tax provide most of the money . The state is raising $1.5 billion in revenue .
 The state levies taxes on motor vehicle licenses and motor fuels to pay for highway construction and maintenance . Motor fuels and motor vehicle license fees are among the state's highest taxes .
 Kansas has traditionally voted strongly Republican in both national and local elections . The state has a history of electing Republicans .
 Kansas voters usually elected Republican governors during the late 1800s and early 1900s . Republican governors were elected in Kansas during those same period of time .
 Since 1956, Democrats have won more gubernatorial elections than Republicans . Democrats won more governorships than Republicans in the past decade . Republicans have had more gubernatorial victories than Democrats since 1956 .
 Four Indian tribes probably lived in what is now eastern Kansas . Before Europeans came, four Indian tribes lived there .
 The Arapaho, Cheyenne, Comanche, and other tribes came to the central plains after obtaining horses during the early 1600's . The Aribaho, Cheyenne and Comanche were among the tribes who came to get horses .
 In 1541, Francisco Vasquez de Coronado led the first Europeans into the Kansas region . He led the Spanish explorer to the region .
 Spaniards found no treasure, and they left without establishing settlements . Spaniards left no treasure and left without setting settlements .
 In the late 1600's, French explorers claimed large areas of North America for France . In the 17th century, the French claimed large parts of the continent .
 The French settled only in the northeastern corner of the Kansas region . The French only settled in northeastern Kansas .
 Spain still claimed a small portion in the southwestern part of what is now Kansas . The area is still part of Kansas .
 The government of the Kansas region changed several times during the early years of U.S. control .
 At various times the region was part of the District of Louisiana, the Louisiana Territory, and the Missouri Territory . The region was also known as Louisiana, Louisiana, and Missouri .
 In 1825, the federal government decided to take land from Indians in the East and give them Kansas land in return . The federal government took the land from the east and returned it to the west .
 Between 1825 and 1842, about 30 tribes were forced off their eastern lands . They settled on reservations in the Kansas region .
 These tribes included the Chippewa, Delaware, Fox, lowa, Kickapoo, Ottawa, Potawatomi, Sauk, Shawnee, and Wyandot .
 Other reservations were set aside for the Indians who already lived in the region . Reservation was set aside to protect Native Americans .
 Fur trappers, merchants, and settlers used the Santa Fe and Oregon trails through the region . Fur traders, traders and settlers were among those who used the trails .
 In 1827, Colonel Henry Leavenworth established the first U.S. outpost, Fort Leavenworth . The first United States outpost was established in 1827 by Colonel Henry Levenworth .
 Pressure to open Kansas to white settlement and railroad construction increased about 1850s . Pressure was put on Kansas to open white settlement .
 The United States negotiated with the Indian tribes and took back most of the land . The U.S. government negotiated with Indian tribes to take back the land. The land was taken back by the government .
 In the west, the Plains Indians fought the settlers who poured across the prairie . In the western part of the 1800s, the plains Indians fought against the settlers .
 Major groups in the 1800's included immigrants from England, Ireland, Germany, Sweden, and Russia .
 Other settlers included Austrians, Bohemians, Czechs, Italians, and Germans from Russia . Other settlers were Austrians and Bohemians .
 Kansas became the symbol of a nationwide struggle over slavery in the 1850's . Kansas was symbol of the struggle to end slavery .
 During the first half of the 1800's, the slavery issue divided the people of the United States . The slavery issue was a major issue in the U.S. during the 1800s .
 In Congress, Northerners and Southerners clashed on whether new states and territories would permit slavery . Northernerners and Southernoutherners argued over whether slavery should be allowed in new states .
 In 1854, Congress found a way to create new territories and avoid the issue of slavery . Congress created new territories in order to avoid slavery .
 The answer was popular sovereignty, also known as squatter sovereignty . Squatter sovereignty is popular sovereignty .
 The settlers, sometimes called squatters, in each territory would decide for themselves whether to allow slavery . The settlers would then decide whether or not to let slavery be allowed .
 Andrew H Reeder was appointed as territorial governor by President Franklin Pierce . He was appointed by President Pierce in 1877 . Reeder died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 Settlers from both North and South were streaming into Kansas, aided by groups who wanted to influence the decision on slavery .
 Kansans who opposed slavery formed a political group called the Free State party . Kansanans opposed slavery were part of a political party . The Free State Party was formed in 1881 .
 In 1855, many citizens of the slave state of Missouri crossed the border and voted illegally in Kansas . In the 1855 elections, citizens of Kansas crossed into Missouri to vote illegally in the state .
 Proslavery candidates won control of the territorial legislature and passed many pro-proslavery laws . Pro-prolesavery candidates were elected to the state legislature .
 Violence broke out, particularly in the area close to the Missouri border . Violence was reported in the region, especially in the Missouri-area .
 In 1856, supporters of slavery burned part of the Free State town of Lawrence in Lawrence . The town was burned by supporters of the slave trade in 1856 .
 Violence in Kansas over slavery issue attracted attention throughout the U.S. The violence in Kansas attracted attention across the United States .
 Pro-slavery group wrote a constitution favoring slavery, but Kansas voters rejected it . Kansas voters reject it .
 The Free Staters gained control of the legislature and repealed the proslavery laws . The laws were repealed by the end of slavery .
 A treaty with the Osage Indians gave travelers through Kansas safe passage on the Santa Fe Trail . A treaty gave travelers safe passage through Kansas . The treaty was signed in 18th Century .
 John Brown led a raid on proslavery sympathizers in a small Kansas settlement on the Pottawatomie Creek in 1856 . Brown was an opponent of slavery, and a supporter of pro-slavery .
 Nancy Kassebaum of Topeka was elected to the United States Senate from Kansas in 1978 . She was elected in 1978 to the U.S. Senate of Kansas .
 Kansas cattle towns shipped longhorn cattle to other parts of the country by railroads during the 1860's and 1870's . The country's first helium was found near Dexter .
 She raised the first Turkey Red wheat in Kansas. for statehood. was the first woman elected to the office of statehood of Kansas .
 Southern Democrats in Congress would not vote to admit a new Republican state . Southern Democrats will not vote for a Republican state in the state .
 Kansas became the 34th state on Jan., 1861, after several Southern states had left the Union . Kansas was the first state to join the U.S. in the Civil War .
 The American Civil War started within a few weeks, and Kansas became involved in new violence . Kansas was the first state to enter the Civil War .
 Antislavery leader Jim Lane led “jayhawking’s raids into Missouri, attacking slaveholders and bringing back freed slaves . Lane was the leader of the ‘jayhawkers’ who attacked slaveholders in Missouri .
 During the war, Kansas sent more men to the Union army, in proportion to its population, than any other state . The state sent more soldiers to the U.S. during the war than other states .
 Union veterans and newly freed slaves moved into Kansas to claim land . After the war ended in 1865, thousands of Union veterans moved into the state . Thousands of new slaves were freed from slavery in Kansas .
 In 1877, blacks established the all-black town of Nicodemus, which still exists . The town was established by blacks in 1877 .
 During the late 1860's and the 1870's, railroads built lines into Kansas . The railroads were built into Kansas in the late 60's and 1870's .
 The railroads brought settlers in and carried farm products to the East . They brought in settlers and brought in farm products .
 Cattle owners began to drive herds of longhorn cattle from Texas to Kansas railroad towns . The cattle were driven to Kansas by cattle ranchers .
 The trails, the towns, and the people of this era have provided material for books, motion pictures, and television . The trails and the towns have been the subject of numerous books, movies and television shows .
 Famous cattle trails included the Chisholm Trail and the Western Trail . Famous cattle trailers include the Chishesolm trail and Western Trail in Scotland .
 For 10 years after 1875, the city was a major regional shipping point for cattle . The city became a hub for cattle trade in 1875 .
 The cowboys liked to “whoop it up’ after hard weeks of herding cattle, and the cattle towns became wild and disorderly . The cattle towns were known as ‘wild and disorderly’ by the cowboys .
 Wyatt Earp, Wild Bill Hickok, Bat Masterson, and other Jawmen won fame for taming the wild towns . Earp and Hickok were known for their role in taming up the towns .
 Kansas ranches continued to operate, and the state had developed a meat-packing industry . Kansas had developed an industry in meatpacking .
 Many early Kansas farmers grew corn and wheat, but drought and insects often ruined their crops . Early Kansas farmers often grew corn, wheat and wheat .
 In the 1870's, a religious group called the Mennonites arrived from Russia . The group arrived in the 1870s . The Mennites are a religious religious group .
 It was harvested early in the summer, and thereby escaped summer heat and many insects . The harvest was early enough to escape heat and insects .
 Farmers suffered during a period of dry weather in the late 1880's and 1890's . The farmers suffered from dry weather during the period .
 Farmers Alliance won control of the Kansas Legislature in 1890 . Farmers formed a group called the Farmers Alliance to solve problems . Farmers Alliance was formed to solve Kansas's problems .
 Populist candidate won the state's electoral votes for president in 1892 and 1896 . Populists were elected governors of the state in both of those years . The state was elected to the capital in 1896 .
 A spirit of reform swept Kansas, and the ideas of the reform group grew to include a broad program of social change . The Kansas City, Kansas, reform group was formed in 1950s .
 A limit was placed on interest rates, and new regulations limited the power of banks, railroads, and other large companies . New regulations were also placed in place in the 1930s .
 Many saloons were selling alcoholic drinks in violation of Kansas’s prohibition law . A woman named Carry A Nation began smashing saloons with a hatchet .
 They passed Jaws outlawing child labor, setting up juvenile courts, and reducing railroad rates on grain shipments . They also set up a juvenile court and reduced railroad rates .
 Other laws gave women the vote and set up primary elections to choose candidates for office . Other laws set up primaries and elections to allow women to vote for candidates .
 A Confederate raid in Kansas during the Civil War resulted in the destruction of most of Lawrence . In 1911, the Legislature passed the nation’s first b/ue-sky Jawto proKansas State Historical Society .
 Much of the reform program was passed with the support of a group of newspapermen . The reform was passed in the wake of the Second World War II .
 This group included Henry J Allen, Joseph L Bristow, Arthur Capper, William Allen White, and others . This group was formed by Henry Allen and Joseph Bristow .
 Many factories were built in Kansas in 1917 to produce war supplies . After the United States entered World War | in 1917, many factories in Kansas were built .
 Farm production, particularly of wheat, was increased to meet wartime food needs . Farm production was increased in response to wartime food shortages .
 Farmers, however, did not share in the prosperity of the 1920's because farm prices were low . Farm prices were also low in the 1920s .
 People often could not eat or drink without feeling gritty dust between their teeth . The dust was often gritty between teeth .
 Many farmers left their damaged land, but others fought back with help from the federal and state governments . Many farmers have left their land but others have fought back .
 Farmers tried new methods of farming, and planted trees to break the sweep of the wind . They tried new ways of farming and planting trees to stop wind sweeping .
 In 1936, the Republican party nominated Landon for United States president . Landon was nominated for president in 1936 .
 World War II created a great demand for Kansas farm and mineral products . Kansas farm products were used in the war's supply chain .
 It also stimulated growth of the aviation industry, especially in Wichita, Kansas .
 Some aspects of the economy continued to grow during the 1950's and 1960's . The economy continues to grow in the '50's and '60's .
 The state's main industries, energy and agriculture, suffered major problems . But the state's biggest industries, agriculture and energy, suffered big problems .
 The state suffered a rapid loss of farms and had only a small increase in population . Overall, with the poor condition of the agricultural economy, the state suffered only small increases in population, the report says .
 A drought almost as severe as that of the 1930's struck in the 1950's, but with less disastrous effect . The 1950's drought was similar to that in the 1930s, but was less disastrous .
 Production of crops had also increased because of advances in technology, says the government .
 Irrigation with ground water allowed farmers to raise corn and grain sorghum in areas of little rainfall . Ground water was a major development that began during the 1960's .
 Even without irrigation, improved winter wheat varieties increased wheat production in Kansas . Kansas remained the leading wheat-growing state in the country .
 Agriculture remained important economically, but the population became largely urban . Agriculture was important economically . The population was largely urbanized in the 1930s .
 Wichita and Kansas City became the fastest-growing population centers in the state . Wichita is the city of Kansas City, Kansas City . Kansas City is one of the fastest growing cities in state .
 Republican Dwight D Eisenhower grew up in Abilene, Texas . Eisenhower served as U.S. president from 1953 to 1961 . He was born into a family of four .
 Cattle drives were common in Kansas during the late 1860's and the 1870's . The cattle drive was a popular way to get around the state .
 Newly opened railroad lines in the state attracted cattle owners from Texas and other areas who used them to ship their livestock to eastern markets .
 Dodge City, Abilene, and Wichita became cattle centers in Republican Kansas . Dodge City and Wichita were cattle centers for Republican Kansas. Wichita was a cattle hub for Republican Republicans .
 Democrats George Docking and Robert Docking, father and son who both served as governor, showed that Kansas had become a competitive two-party state . Democrats George and Robert were both governors .
 Voters approved the legalization of selling liquor by the drink and betting on horse and dog races in 1986 . In 1986, the voters approved the legalized sale of liquor by drink and horse races .
 Low prices plagued the oil industry, and financial difficulties caused the failure of many farms . Many farms failed due to financial difficulties .
 Kansas, Inc. is the state's economic planning agency . It was established by the government and business people to try to improve the economy .
 Its efforts contributed to improvement of the state's economy in the 1990's . Its efforts and other developments contributed to improved of the 1990s .
 Joan Finney, a Democrat, served as governor of Kansas from 1991 to 1995 . Finney was a Democrat from Kansas . She was governor of the state from 1991 until 1995 .
 A Land and climate A Land regions B Rivers and lakes . Economy A Natural resources B Service industries B Manufacturing D Agriculture B Annual events C Plant and animal life D Climate E Mining F Electric power G Transportation H Communication V Government A Constitution E Local government B Executive F Revenue C Legislature G Politics
 Dust clouds caused by winds whipping across the plains overwhelmed entire towns . Great dust clouds caused to cover entire towns in dust storms .
 Lawrence State University has a college of liberal arts and sciences . It has schools of architecture and urban design, business, education, engineering, fine arts, journalism, law, pharmacy, and social welfare .
 The university's medical center in Kansas City has schools of allied health, medicine, and nursing . The medical center also has allied health and medicine schools .
 The school of medicine also offers clinical programs on its Wichita campus .
 Museums of anthropology, art, classics, entomology, geology, and natural history are also on the Lawrence campus . The Lawrence campus is home to the Lawrence Institute of Technology .
 The city lies on the Kansas-Missouri border, along both banks of the Kansas River, just west of Kansas City, Missouri . The city is located on the Missouri-Kansas border .
 Kansas City forms part of the important industrial center known as Greater Kansas City . Kansas City is home to many of the world's largest cities, including Kansas City, Missouri .
 It is part of the Kansas City, Missouri, metropolitan area, which has a population of 1,776,062 . It is the largest city in the world, with 1.4 million residents .
 Kansas City's downtown area includes the Kansas City Municipal Building, courthouses, and a regional headquarters for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency .
 Huron Indian Cemetery, an Indian burial ground dating from 1843, has been abandoned . Huron was a burial ground in 1843 . The Municipal Building in Kansas City houses local government offices .
 Only Wichita and Overland Park have more people served in downtown area than downtown area . Only Wichita has more people in the area than Kansas City, Kansas .
 The National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame lies just west of the city . The city is home to the largest agricultural center in the world .
 Kansas City is also an agricultural center of the plains region of the United States . It is also known as a center of agriculture in Kansas City .
 The Kansas City International Airport and the Downtown Airport in Kansas City, Missouri, serve the metropolitan area . The Downtown Airport is located in the city's downtown area .
 Kansas City and Wyandotte County are governed by the Unified Government of Kansas City/Kansas City, Kansas . The Unified Government is based in Kansas City . Kansas City is the largest city in the state .
 Before whites arrived, the Kansa Indians lived in the area that is now Kansas City, Kansas City .
 In 1804, the expedition led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark camped there . The site was also used by the Lewis and Clark expedition .
 In 1818, the United States government made the surrounding area a reservation for the Delaware Indians . The surrounding area was made a reservation in 1818 .
 Wyandot Indians, a tribe from Ohio, purchased the land from the Delaware in 1843 . The land was purchased by the Wyandots, a Native American tribe, from Ohio . It was the first time the land had been purchased by a tribe .
 They built the first free school in Kansas, a church, a community store, and a council house . They also built a free school and a church in Kansas .
 In 1859, a convention in Wyandotte wrote the Constitution under which Kansas gained statehood . The convention in 1859 wrote the constitution under which statehood was created .
 Wyandotte citizens played an important part in the anti-slavery movement . The citizens played a key role in the antislavery movement .
 Many European immigrants came to Wyandotte as the meat-packing industry thrived . Many of the city's immigrants came from Europe as it grew up .
 Armourdale and Kansas City combined with Wyandotte under the name of Kansas City in 1886 . In 1886, Armourdale combined with Kansas City . Armourdale, Kansas City and Wyandott combined under Kansas City's name, Kansas .
 Two more towns, Argentine and Rosedale, later became part of Kansas City . Two more of the towns later became Kansas City.
 The city pioneered in the development of industrial parks by locating industrial plants in open areas away from residential sections . The industrial parks were developed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Jack Reardon Civic Center is named after a three-term mayor . Reardon was mayor of the city from 1986 to 1994 .
 In 1987, General Motors completed a $1-billion automobile assembly plant to replace an existing plant . The plant was completed in 1987 . General Motors says the plant will be the largest in the world for decades .
 Kansas City, Missouri, is the state's largest city and a Midwestern center of commerce, industry, and transportation . Kansas City is a city of commerce and industry .
 It lies on the western border of Missouri, where the Kansas and Missouri rivers meet . It lies near the Kansas-Missouri rivers .
 In 1821, American Fur Company employees establi i, lished a trading post at the site of what is now Kansas City .
 The oldest and most densely populated part of the city lies south of the river . The city's oldest part of its population is south of river, and the oldest part lies south .
 Kansas City's central business district, called the downtown /oop, is bounded on all sides by interstate highways . The downtown area is called the "downtown /oop"
 Buildings in the freeway loop include City Hall, the 10th District Federal Reserve Bank, the Jackson County Courthouse, the Municipal Auditorium, a convention center and state and federal office buildings .
 Cass, Clay, Clinton, Jackson, Lafayette, Platte, and Ray counties in Missouri; and johnson, Leavenworth, Miami, and Wyandotte counties in Kansas . Kansas .
 96 percent of Kansas City’s people were born in the United States . About 96 percent were born into the U.S. The city is home to about 1,800 people .
 Kansas City is often called the Heart of America because it lies almost in the center of the United States . Kansas City lies in the heart of the U.S.
 Kansas City is a distribution, telecommunications, transportation, and warehouse center . This location has helped make Kansas City a distribution and telecommunications center .
 Metropolitan Kansas City is the largest winter-wheat market in the United States . The market is located in the city of Kansas City, Kansas .
 It ranks highly among American cities in the capacity of its grain elevators . The city has a grain elevator capacity of more than 1,000 grain stores .
 The Scout, an American Indian memorial in Penn Valley Park, overlooks the city’s downtown area . The Scout is a memorial to the American American Indians .
 The American sculptor Cyrus E Dallin designed the memorial, which was dedicated in 1922 . The memorial was dedicated to the U.S. state of Columbia .
 Federal, state, and local governments and the wholesale and retail trade employ many workers . The wholesale, retail trade employs many people in the U.S.
 The city is headquarters for several engineering and architecture firms . The city has a history of engineering and design engineering .
 Automobile assembly, food processing, and printing and publishing rank as the largest manufacturing industries in the world . Food processing, manufacturing and printing are the three largest industries .
 Other important industrial activities include the production of chemicals, clothing, electric equipment, fiber-optic communication systems, metal goods, and soap .
 Kansas City School District and 16 other public school systems serve Kansas City . Kansas City is home to the largest school system in the country .
 Thousands of students attend private and churchsupported schools . In addition to thousands of students, thousands of others attend private schools .
 Count Basie and Charlie Parker began their careers in jazz at Avila College . Oth1930's for its many jazz clubs, where such musicians as er institutions of higher learning .
 The museum shares its space with the Negro William Jewell College is in nearby Liberty, and Park League Baseball Museum is nearby .
 The Arabia Steamboat MuKansas City conducts scientific research . Seum features items salvaged from a sunken steamboat .
 The Kansas City Public Library and its branches serve The science museum Science City is located on the the the city .
 Linda Hall Library is one of the country’s. largest privately financed libraries of scientific and tech . The Lyric Opera of Kansas City presents an annual nical research materials .
 Lyric Theatre performs in the . nearby Independence houses documents and memenLyric Theatre . It performs in nearby Independence .
 The city-owned Starlight Theater, an out| tos of Truman's presidency, offers a summer program of musiCultural life . The city's Starlight Theatre is a summer concert venue .
 The Missouri Repertory Theater is known for its fine collection of Asian art . Missouri's St. Louis-based troupe is a professional theater .
 The Kansas City Symphony and the State of Missouri Ballet also perform in the city . The Henry Moore Sculpture Garden is the largest collection outside the United King .
 Swope Park is one of the nation’s largest city parks . It occupies 1,769 acres (716 trict) and is known for its Spanish architecture and hectares .
 Kansas City Zoo, Starlight Theater, golf courses, and a swimming pool . It infountains. cludes the city .
 Kansas City is called the City of Fountains for its many public and private fountains . Kansas City has more than 1,000 public and 2,000 private faucets .
 Kansas City is home to the Kansas City Chiefs of the NFL and the Royals of the Royals . The city is also home to a major league baseball team and a football team .
 This event is held in the old stockyards and meatpacking district along the Kansas River . It is one of the nation’s largest horse and livestock shows .
 The council appoints a city manager as the chief administrative official . Council appoints the city manager to be the city's chief administrator .
 The Kansa Indians lived at the meeting place of the Kansas and Missouri rivers before the arrival of white settlers . The meeting place was the meeting point of the rivers .
 By the 1820's, the Kansa and another local tribe, the Osage, had left the area as the result of treaties . The Osage also left the region as a result of treaty treaties .
 During the 1830’s, Indian tribes who had been forced from their lands in the East, such as the Shawnee -and the Wyandot, settled just across the border . The Shawnee and Wyandots were among the tribes forced to leave their homeland .
 The first began in 1821, when Francois Chouteau and several other employees of the American Fur Company established a trading post .
 By the late 1820's, Chouteau had set up his headquarters at a site that became known as Chouteau's Landing . The site is now known as the site of his headquarters . The French Revolution was founded in 1820 .
 In 1838, a group of investors purchased Chouteau’s Landing and named it the Town of Kansas . The town of Kansas was named after the town in 1838 .
 Steamboat traffic on the Missouri River increased during the 1840's . Town of Kansas began to grow during the 18th century . The town of Kansas was named after the town of Missouri .
 The second settlement, called Westport, was located 4 miles south of the Town of Kansas . Westport was located in 18th Century Kansas .
 Westport was founded in the early 1830's and served as a trading center for New Mexico . Westport is located in Westport, New Mexico, and is located on the Santa Cruz River .
 Overland traffic moved along the Santa Fe Trail, which cut through the town . The trail is a popular tourist attraction in New Mexico .
 Later, settlers using the Oregon Trail and gold seekers headed to California traveled through Westport . Westport was a popular destination for the early settlers .
 Westport Landing served as the river port for Westport, Westport . It served as a river port, and many people even called it Westport landing .
 Many people moved away from the area after it became the site of bitter fighting between Confederate and Union supporters . Many of the area's residents moved away after the fighting .
 The most vio_ lent clash, the Battle of Westport, took place in 1864, when about 30,000 soldiers fought just south of the city . The most famous clash took place just outside Westport in Westport .
 By the end of the war, the profitable river and overland trade had died . The profitable river, overland and river trade died .
 Business leaders realized that the future of the City of Kansas depended on railroads . The future of Kansas City, Kansas, was dependent on the railroads.
 In 1869, the city opened the first railroad bridge over the Missouri River . The bridge was built in 1869 . It was the first of its kind .
 The bridge helped make the city a link in the nation’s transcontinental railroad system . The bridge was built to connect the city to the nation's transcontinental rail system .
 During the 1870's and 1880's, the city developed as a market for the grain of the surrounding farmland . The city was developed as an agricultural market for grain .
 It also became a stockyard center as the railroads brought cattle from the West . The town became a town center for stockyards and stockyard centers .
 In 1889, a new charter officially changed the city’s name to Kansas City . Kansas City was officially renamed Kansas City in 1883 .
 The Pendergast machine supported many civic improvements, but corruption became common among Kansas City politicians . The machine was used to help Kansas City's economy .
 Harry S Truman, a Pendergast-supported U.S. senator from nearby Independence, became vice president in 1945 .
 He assumed the presidency a few months later when President Franklin D Roosevelt died . President Roosevelt assumed his post in 1945 .
 Since the 1950's, much urban redevelopment has taken place in Kansas City, Kansas City . The city has been undergoing urban redevelopment since the 1950s .
 In the mid-1970's, a convention center was built in a previously run-down section of the downtown loop . The convention center is now located in a run down section of downtown .
 Crown Center, another major project, includes apartment buildings, hotels, office buildings, restaurants, and shops south of the loop . Crown Center will include apartments, hotels and restaurants .
 In the mid1980's, developments in the downtown loop included new construction and the restoration of the old Quality Hill neighborhood .
 The 1914 building at the edge of the downtown area became a theater and restaurant complex . It became the home of a science museum and a theater .
 Freight House District has become a popular site of art galleries and restaurants . The area north of the depot, known as the Fregh House District, is known for its art galleries .
 A major flood control and beautification project improved Brush Creek, which flows through the Country Club Plaza . Brush Creek is the source of a flood control project .
 Two new territories, Kansas and Nebraska, were to be made from the Indian land that lay west of the bend of the Missouri River and north of 37 degrees north latitude .
 Midwesterners had tried to get a new territory organized in Nebraska for four years . The new territory was organized by a group of midwesterners in Nebraska .
 Douglas was influenced by the Midwesterners, especially Missourians, and may also have been influenced by his desire to build a railroad from Chicago to the Pacific Coast . Douglas may also be influenced by a desire for a railroad to the west .
 Douglas included in his bill a provision for “popular sovereignty in Kansas and Nebraska’s ‘popular sovereignty’ in the state of popular sovereignty . Douglas included the provision in the bill . The bill also includes a provision that would allow the state to expand its sovereignty .
 This provision stated that all questions of slavery in the new territories were to be decided by the settlers rather than by Congress . This provision was part of the 18th Amendment to the Constitution .
 The provision was designed to win the support of the Southern congressmen . It was directly contrary to the Missouri Compromise of 1820 . The provision is designed to support the Southern Congressmen .
 The Missouri Compromise had declared that all land in the Louisiana Purchase north of 36° 30’, except for the state of Missouri, was to be free . The land in Louisiana Purchase was free to all except for Missouri .
 The Kansas-Nebraska Act made slavery legally possible in a vast new area . It was the first act to allow slavery in the vast new territory of the state .
 The act revived the bitter quarrel over the expansion of slavery, which had died down after the Compromise of 1850, and hastened the start of the Civil War . It revived the old quarrel over slavery expansion, which hadn't died down since 1850 .
 His work is influential because he established the main lines for philosophical developments since his day . His work was influential because of his work established the most lines of philosophical developments .
 Kant discussed the nature and limits of human knowledge in his chief work, Critique of Pure Reason . Kant's work is the work he wrote about the nature of knowledge .
 This question became important to him because of Scottish philosopher David Hume’s theories . This question was important because of David Hume's theories, he says .
 Before Hume, most philosophers assumed that our past experience could provide knowledge about matters that go beyond our experience . Hume assumed that past experience would provide knowledge beyond our own experience .
 Hume argued that we cannot be certain of anything beyond our experience . Hume said that we can't be certain that anything is beyond our own experience .
 The law of universal gravitation states that a force of attraction acts between all objects . For example, the law states that all objects in the universe are subject to a force that acts between them .
 Our experience is restricted to only a few objects that we have observed. But our experience has been limited to a handful of objects that have been observed. We are only able to observe a few of these objects.
 Kant believed we cannot justify claims beyond our actual experience as long as we continue to think of the mind and its objects as separate things . Kant believed that we cannot justified claims beyond the actual experience of our mind .
 He held instead that the mind is actively involved in the objects it experiences . The mind is active in the experiences it experiences, rather than passive observers .
 Experience organizes experience into categories, or forms of understanding . That is, it organizes experiences into categories of understanding, rather than categories .
 All things capable of being experienced are also arranged in these categories . The categories include things that can be experienced and can be easily experienced .
 Kant believed that we can have knowledge of what we have not yet experienced as well as what we've already experienced . Kant believed we can know what we already have and what we haven't experienced .
 Kant’ conclusions meant having to abandon any claim to know things as they are in themselves, things in which the mind is not involved, he said . Kant's conclusions were meant to abandon claims to be made by the mind as they were in themselves .
 He didn't deny the existence of things in themselves, which he called noumena . But he did not deny the fact that things are in themselves .
 Some philosophers regarded this refusal to claim absolute knowledge as too serious a limitation on a system of philosophy . Some philosophers thought it was a serious limitation on philosophy .
 Other philosophers argued that we have an intuitive, nonrational knowledge of things . Other philosophers have argued that people have intuitive knowledge of everything .
 He argued that the existence of God cannot be proved or disproved by the use of reason . He said that God's existence cannot be proven by using reason .
 Kant says reason is restricted to ideas of possible experience . The idea of God transcends all possible experience, Kant says . Kant says God transcates all possible experiences in the world .
 Kant held that faith could be rational because we cannot think of the world as orderly or justify our morality without supposing the existence of God . Kant said we cannot justify morality or justify morality without thinking about God without faith .
 In ethics, Kant tried to show that doing one’s duty consisted in following only those principles that one would accept as applying equally to all . Even assuming that scientists can predict what we are going to do, the predictions do not conflict with our use of free will .
 The predictions of scientists have no bearing on our duty to live morally . Therefore, the predictions of science are not relevant to our moral duty to be morally concerned .
 Kaolin, KAY uh uh /ihn, is a pure white clay made of feldspar that has decomposed . Kaolin is made of a white clay that is white and decomposed from a decomposing bone . The clay is made from a mixture of wood and
 Kaolin is also called china clay and porcelain clay . The United States, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany are the countries where it is made from .
 Kaolin-producing states include Georgia, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Florida, North Carolina, and North Carolina . Kaolin is produced in the United States .
 Kaolin is either mined dry with a shovel, or dislodged with jets of water and sucked into a pump system . Kaolin can be mined dry by shovels, or by water jets to dislodge the material .
 It is washed, washed and put through separation processes to remove sand, mica, and iron-oxide impurities . Then it is washed .
 Excess water is then removed, and the clay is formed into cakes that are dried and shipped to potteries . Excesses of water are then removed from the clay, and then removed .
 Kaolin is also used in textiles, as a coating for paper, and as a filler for rubber tires . Kaolin also used as a filler for tires and in coating for textiles .
 Kapok, KAY pahk or KAP uhk, is a light, soft, lustrous, cottonlike fiber . Kapok is light and lustrous cotton like cotton .
 Kapok trees grow in Indonesia, the Philippines, India, Sri Lanka, tropical America, and Africa . Kapok Trees grow in tropical America and tropical America .
 After the ripe fruit of the kapok tree is picked, the seeds and fibers are taken out and dried in the sun . After the fruit is ripe, it is taken out of the tree and dried to dry in sun .
 Workers separate seeds and fibers and pack the fibers into bales . Workers then separate the seeds from fibers and then pack them into a bale .
 It is useful as a filling for mattresses and furniture, and also as a substitute for cork in life jackets .
 In many of these uses, kapok is being replaced by synthetic fibers, which cost less and are more durable . Synthetic fibers are being replaced with cheaper, more durable fibers . In many cases, the fibers cost less, and are used in many of the world's most popular
 The kapok, or silk-cotton, tree belongs to the bombax family, Bombacaceae . Kapok is a silk-covered silk-cloth tree .
 Kara Sea, KAHR uh, an arm of the Arctic Ocean, lies off the northern coast of Siberia, between the Kara Strait — and the Severnaya Zemlya Islands .
 Ice blocks the sea most of the year, but shipping to the Yenisey and Ob rivers occurs for about two months in summer . Ice blocks sea most year .
 Karachi is Pakistan's largest city and chief port of Pakistan . Karachi is the largest city in Pakistan .
 Pakistan is the country’s commercial and industrial center and the capital of Sind Province . It is also the country's commercial and . industrial center .
 The Layari River flows through Karachi and forms an excellent harbor where it empties into the Arabian Sea . Karachi is the best harbor in the world for harboring .
 The center of Karachi, which is next to the harbor, is the most heavily populated section of the city . Karachi is home to the largest city in Pakistan .
 Karachi includes the main bazaar, or market, called the Sadr, and most of Karachi's important buildings . The city is home to Karachi's most important buildings, including most of the city's main bazaums .
 Attractions in or near this area include the Mausoleum of Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the National Museum, and the Zoological Gardens .
 Residential areas are scattered around the city, and the chief industrial districts are in the suburbs . The chief industrial district is in the city's suburbs .
 Karachi is an important educational center and has several universities and many other schools . Karachi is a major educational center in Karachi . Karachi has several colleges and universities .
 Factories manufacture textiles, printed materials, steel, food products, chemicals, chemicals and other products . Factories also make textiles and printed materials .
 The city has a shipyard, and its port serves as the gateway for Pakistan's foreign trade . The port is Pakistan's gateway to its foreign trade, and is a key economic hub in Pakistan .
 Karachi's international airport, one of the largest in Asia, is 9 miles from the city’s center . Karachi's airport is one of Asia's largest and most popular airports in the world .
 In 1729, a trading village developed near the present site of Karachi’ harbor . The trading village is located near the current site of the harbor . Karachi harbor is now located in Karachi .
 By the mid-1800's, about 14,000 people lived in Karachi and its suburbs . Karachi and the suburbs of Karachi were once the largest city in Pakistan . Karachi was once the center of the world's largest city .
 Karachi became an important port and commercial center after the British gained control of the region in 1843 . Karachi is now a major city in Pakistan .
 Karachi served as the new nation’s capital from 1947 to 1959, when Islamabad was named the capital . Karachi was the capital of the Pakistanis from 1947 until 1959 .
 Karachi’s population has grown from about 400,000 to over 5 million since 1945 . Karachi has a population of about 5 million . Karachi is the largest city in Pakistan and has a history of terrorism .
 The kapok flower usually blossoms every other year . Hodge from Peter Arnold usually blossows once a year . The Hodge Hodge flower is usually found in the wild .
 The kapok tree has a short, thick trunk and many long branches . It has a long trunk and thick trunk, with many branches .
 The city faces other problems, including air pollution, overcrowding, slums, and violence, including slums .
 The violence results from conflicts between rival ethnic, political, and religious groups . The violence is often linked to conflicts between political, religious and ethnic groups .
 Riffat Sardar Karajan, KAH rah yahn, Herbert von , was one of the leading symphony orchestra and opera conductors of the 1900's .
 Karajan was known for his interpretations of the symphonies of Gustav Mahler and the music of Viennese composers of the 1900's . He was also known for interpretations of Mahler's symphony symphony .
 Karajan was born in Salzburg, Austria, and received musical training there and in Vienna . He received his musical training in Austria and Vienna .
 He served as music director, conducting opera and orchestral music in Aachen, Germany, from 1934 to 1941 . He was music director and conductor of opera and orchestra at the time of his death .
 In the late 1940's, he became a conductor of the Vienna Philharmonic and Vienna Symphony orchestras . He was also a conductor for the Vienna Symphony Orchestra . He is known for his work as a conductor .
 He served as artistic director of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra from 1955 until 1989 . He resigned in 1989 .
 He was artistic director of the Salzburg Festival from 1956 to 1960 . He rejoined the festival in 1964 . He has since returned to the festival .
 Karajan was director of the Vienna State Opera from 1956 to 1964 . He returned to the company in 1977 . He was director for the company from 1956 until 1964 .
 Karakul, KAR uh kuhl, is a fat-tailed sheep from which we get pelts called broadtail, Persian lamb, and caracul . Charles H Webb Webb was Charles Webb Webb .
 They store up fat in their tails and back legs to live on when food is scarce . They can store up enough fat in the tails and backs legs to survive .
 The rams have widespreading, spiral horns, but the ewes usually have none . The ewests have no spiral horns . The ram's horns are the most widespread in the species .
 The coarse fleece of the adult is white, yellowish, gray, brown, or black . Adult fleece is white or yellowish or brown .
 The fleece has a high luster, and is often curled until the fifth day after the lamb’s birth . It is curled until five days after it was born .
 It has a silky, rippled appearance, and usually comes from lambs that were born too soon . It is usually born from a late-born lamb that is born in a premature position .
 Persian lamb, formerly called astrakhan, is the tightly curled pelt of lambs from 3 to 10 days old . Persian lamb is a tightly curled, tightly curled lamb with a tight pelt .
 Most skins are produced in central and southwestern Asia, India, southeyeded . Most skins produced in India, central and southwest Asia, are made in India .
 Karakuls are raised chiefly in central and southwestern Asia . Brown, ARDEA Karakul are raised in central, southwestern Asia.
 Karakum is a large desert that occupies most of Turkmenistan . The desert is known for its large population . It is also known as a large, uninhabited desert .
 Most of the desert was formed by sandy deposits from a river called the Amu Darya . Desert was formed from sandy deposits formed by a river known as the Amuv Darya in the region . Desert is now a UNESCO World Heritage status status .
 Karakum’s terrain includes flat clay plains, salt basins, and sand mounds . The region is known for its salt bashes, sand mound mounds and clay plains .
 Wildlife includes antelopes, wolves, wildcats, snakes, lizards, tarantulas, scorpions, and various rodents . Wildlife also includes antelope, wolves and wildcats .
 Most of the desert is used throughout the year as pasture for sheep, goats, and camels . The desert is also known as a pasture for goats, sheep and goats . The area is known as the largest desert in the world .
 Karakum’s mineral resources include natural gas, petroleum, and sulfur . The country is also known for its natural gas and petroleum resources .
 Donna Karan, KAR uAn, Donna , is a leading American fashion designer . She creates clothes primarily for executive businesswomen . Karan is also known as Donna, Donna .
 Her designs brought a softer femininity to the business wardrobe and a new shaping to traditional tailoring . Her designs bring a softer . femininity .
 Karan tries to achieve a total look for her customers, emphasizing accessories such as belts and jewelry . Karan: "I want to make sure I have the most of my wardrobe available to me"
 The designer also designs separates, which are outer garments such as blouses, skirts, and sweaters .
 Her company also produces perfume, and she licenses a number of products over her name, including eyewear, hosiery and lingerie .
 She collaborated with Louis Dell‘Olio in creating the casual but sophisticated separates that gained her acclaim in fashion world .
 Karan started her own company, called the Donna Karan Company, in 1984 . She showed her first collection in 1985 . Karan's first collection was shown in 1985 in New York .
 Karate, kuh RAH tee, is a form of unarmed combat in which a person kicks or strikes with the hands, elbows, knees, or feet . Karate is an unarmed combat form that uses a person kicking or striking .
 Karate is one of several Asian forms of unarmed combat called martia/ arts . Karate forms are known as "martia arts"
 Most blows aimed at body parts that are easily injured, such as the stomach and throat . Most blows are aimed at those areas where the body parts are easily hurt .
 There are four major types of karate, including Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Okinawan .
 All use the same basic techniques, but each stresses certain skills and has its own characteristic style of movement .
 Chinese karate, called kung fu, also spelled gongfu, uses a flowing, circular motion that differs from hard, powerful movements of the other types .
 American karate has a combination of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Okinawan features . It has a mixture of Chinese and Japanese influences .
 This style developed because many Americans learn more than one type of karate . This style was developed because of many Americans who learn multiple karate styles . The style is known for its simplicity and simplicity .
 In the 1970's and 1980's, many motion pictures and television shows featured karate fights that have stimulated interest in this type of combat . In the 1980s and 1990s, many of these fights were featured in karate films .
 Growing numbers of men and women are learning karate as a means of self-defense . In addition, growing numbers of women and men are learning to use karate in defense .
 Hundreds of colleges, karate clubs, military and police training schools, and feminist groups teach karate .
 Karate training usually takes place in a gymnasium or hall called a dojo . Karate is a form of martial art known as karate or karate school .
 Students and teachers wear a uniform called a g/ that consists of a loose cotton jacket tied with a colored belt, and pants with a drawstring or elastic waist . A g/ is a uniform worn by students and teachers .
 The students begin by doing exercises to strengthen and stretch their muscles . The students use exercises to stretch and strengthen muscles .
 Students practice punching bags, imaginary opponents, and each other . Students practice with punching bags and imaginary opponents .
 When working with each other, they either stop short of hitting or touch their opponent only lightly . The pair touch their opponents lightly or lightly .
 Karate students may advance through various ranks of achievement, each of which is designated by a belt of a different color . Each of the ranks of a Karate student can be distinguished by the color of a belt .
 Schools award different colors, including brown, green, and purple, for intermediate ranks . Different colors can be used in grades, grades and grades .
 Students earn promotions by demonstrating to a licensed examiner or a group of licensed examiners the techniques required for the next rank . Students can be promoted to a higher rank by demonstrating their skills to the next level .
 Basic techniques include stances and methods of blocking, kicking, punching, and striking . Basic techniques are blocked, kicked, punching and striking techniques .
 Stances include the back stance, cat stance, forward stance, horse stance, and horse stance . Stances are back, cat, forward and horse stances .
 Kicking techniques include the front kick, hook kick, roundhouse kick, and side kick . Kicking technique is known as front kick and hook kick .
 Students often practice these techniques in prearranged patterns called katas . Sound plays a key part in the technique, and students often practice it .
 An attacker often gives a yell called a kiai (KEE aye/to put maximum force into the blow) The yell is meant to give maximum force in the blow .
 This yell is produced by expelling air from the lungs and tightening the stomach muscles . This yell produces an expelling of air from lungs and tightness of stomach muscles.
 Many exhibitions show ways of breaking various exhibitions . Sarts Hustrated Time is on display in New York City, NY .
 When karate students work out, they stop short of hitting each other, or they touch their opponent only lightly objects with the hands and feet . When working out, students touch their opponents lightly .
 Most karate schools do not require students to practice these techniques . However, most karate school students must practice the techniques . The techniques are not required by students at most schools .
 There are two kinds of karate contests, form competition and free fighting . In form competition, each contestant demonstrates various forms to a panel of five judges . Free fighting is also a form competition .
 Each judge awards the contestant 1to 10 points, and the contestant with the highest total wins . Contestants are awarded 1 to 10 points by each judge .
 In free fighting, contestants fight without prearranged techniques . Free fighting is known as "free fighting" in the United States .
 A contestant scores when he delivers a blow that a majority of the judges consider effective . A majority of judges consider the blow effective .
 A blow must start with full force but stop a split second before it hits . A blow should start full force and stop a second second before hitting a person in the air .
 Rules forbid hitting certain areas of the body and using many dangerous karate blows . Rules also prohibit hitting certain parts of the _ body .
 Buddhist monks in India used a form of karate to defend themselves against wild animals . As early as the 400's B.C. C.C., Buddhist monks used to use karate as a way to protect themselves from animals .
 During the A.D. 500's, a group called the _ Hwarang practiced karate in the country of Silla, which later became Korea . The group was a group of karate enthusiasts .
 A Japanese clan had conquered the island and passed strict laws against owning weapons . The island was ruled by a Japanese clan who had conquered it .
 Okinawans developed many of the unarmed tech niques of modern karate . As a result, the Okinawan have developed the most modern weapons in the world .
 Karate spread to Japan after Okinawa became a Japanese province in 1879 . Karate was first introduced to Japan in Japan in the 1880s .
 After World War II ended in 1945, many U.S. servicemen brought the skill from the Far East to the United States .
 Sweden controlled part of the region from the 1200's to the late 1400's and from the 1600's to early 1700's . Sweden controlled the region between 1200's and 1600's .
 Finland controlled part of Karelia from 1918 to 1920 and from 1941 to 1944 . Finland held part of the region from 1918-1940 .
 Karloff, Boris, was a British actor known for his chilling performances in American horror films . Karloff was known for playing a chilling performance in horror films such as The Death of Boris Karloff .
 Karloff toured Canada and the United States with small theatrical companies for several years before making his film debut . Karloff starred in several films in the early years of his career .
 Karlovy Vary, KAHR law vih VAH rih, also called Karlsbad, is a famous health resort in the Czech Republic . Roger Ebert is the founder of the first Czech hospital in the city .
 Its mineral springs contain bicarbonate soda, sulfate of soda, and common salt . The mineral springs are found in the town's mineral springs .
 Vojtech Mastny Karma, KAHR muh, is an important concept in several Eastern religions, especially Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism .
 Followers of these religions believe that existence is a continuing cycle of death and rebirth . Followers believe that there is a cycle of rebirth and death .
 They teach that the conditions of a person’s life result from his or her karma in previous lives . They say that they teach people that karma in their previous lives can affect their life .
 People's present actions determine their future destinies in this world, in heaven, or in hell . People's actions determine destiny of their life, whether they live in heaven or hell .
 Good deeds lead to rebirth in a higher state, perhaps as a wealthy person, perhaps even as a rich person . Good deeds can be good deeds, good deeds can lead to a better life .
 beliefs about karma both encourage ethical behavior and explain what appear to be unfair conditions in society . Beliefs about karma are both positive and negative .
 Buddhists, Hindus, and Jains agree that the highest religious goal is to end all attachments to worldly things and so free oneself from the effects of karma . Buddhists and Hindus, Buddhists agree that ending attachments to the worldly things is the ultimate goal of religion .
 The person then achieves a higher level of experience, called moksha by Hindus and nirvana by Buddhists . Moksha is a higher experience, known as mokshsha by Hinduism . Buddhists call it moksa or nrvana .
 Karsh, kahrsh, Yousuf, YOO suf, was a Canadian photographer . He became famous for portraits of leading international figures in politics, literature, and the arts .
 Karsh had a solemn photographic style in which light and shadow are placed in strong contrast for dramatic effect . Karsh's photography style is similar to that of his colleagues .
 He used props and the natural expressions and gestures of his subjects to help reveal their personality . The photographer used props to reveal his subjects' personality .
 Karsh's photographs have been widely published and are included in the collections of many museums . Karsh’s photographs are included .
 His best-known portraits include those of British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and U.S. President Kennedy .
 Karsh later worked in Boston for a time as an apprentice to John H Garo, a photographer noted for his portraiture .
 Charles Hagen Kart racing is a sport involving small, open racing cars that seat one person . It is also known as 'Charles Hagen' Kart racing .
 Sprint events are raced on short road courses 5 mile or less in length . Sprint events race on short courses 5 miles or less of a road course .
 Road races are one hour long and held on automobile racing tracks . Most road races are held in cars and are held at automobile racetracks . Road racing is a one-hour long race .
 Some local kart races feature 8-year-old children competing against one another . Some local children compete against each other .
 Most national events require contestants to be at least 16 years old . However, most events require the contestant to be a 16-year-old at all .
 KASH mihr, also spelled Cashmere, is a large area on the border between India and Pakistan . The area is also known as Cashmere in Kashmir .
 It has been the center of a dispute between India and Pakistan since 1947 . The border has been a major source of tension between the two countries . Pakistan and India are at odds over the border .
 The capitals of Kashmir, by traditional use, are Srinagar in the summer and Jammu in the winter . Kashmir is a state of Kashmir in the north and south .
 Several ranges of the Karakoram and Himalayan mountain systems cut across Kashmir . Kashmir is one of the world's most famous mountain ranges .
 Two of the world’s highest peaks, K2 and Nanga Parbat, are in northern Kashmir . The peaks are located in the northern part of the region .
 A tributary of the Indus, the Jhelum, flows through the famous Vale of Kashmir . The river is a major source of water in Kashmir and flows through Kashmir valley .
 Most are Muslims, but about a fourth belong to other religions, including Hinduism . About a fourth of Muslims belong to Hinduism or Islam .
 The Muslims and Hindus belong to the same group, with the same language and customs . Culturally, the Muslims and the Hindus are Hindus and Muslims . They are Hindus .
 Others work in small industries, making shawls and rugs from cashmere wool . Others make cashmere-wooled clothing .
 Only about 6 percent of the land in Kashmir can't be used for growing food . Some farms are perched on the sides of hills, some are perched in the hills .
 Corn and rice are the major crops, and there are many orchards and vineyards . There are many vineyards and many of the largest orchard in the world .
 Prior to British withdrawal from the subcontinent of India in 1947, an absolute monarch ruled Kashmir .
 The maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, a Hindu, tried to avoid joining either country . He was the Hindu ruler of the state .
 Pakistani Muslims invade Kashmir in an attempt to unite Kashmir with Pakistan . Pakistani Muslims invaded Kashmir in a bid to unify Kashmir with the country .
 War raged until 1949, when the United Nations arranged a cease-fire and set up a truce line . U.N. set up the truce line after the war began in 1949 .
 The line left the northwestern third of Kashmir under Pakistani control . The line has been left in the northwestern part of Kashmir . Pakistan says the line is now under control in Kashmir .
 Free Kashmir Movement, made up of Muslims, refused to recognize the changes . Muslim groups say they will not accept the changes in Kashmir .
 Pakistan objected to any move that seemed to link Kashmir more closely to India . Pakistan objected vigorously to any link between Kashmir and India .
 Heavy fighting broke out again between India and Pakistan in August 1965 . In August 1965, heavy fighting again broke out between Pakistan and India .
 India and Pakistan resolved to try to settle their dispute peacefully in 1966 . In 1966, the two countries agreed to try and settle their differences peacefully .
 In 1971, civil war broke out in Pakistan, and Indian forces again fought Pakistanis in Kashmir . Civil war between Pakistanis and India ended in 1971, but civil war continued .
 In 1972, after the war ended, a new truce line was established between the Indian and Pakistani sections of Kashmir . A new truce was established in 1972 after the conflict .
 Since then, fighting has broken out along the truce line from time to time . Fighting has also broken out between the two sides of the border .
 Muslims in the Indian section of Kashmir staged protests against Indian rule . In the late 1980's, Muslims in Kashmir staged . protests against India rule .
 Some demanded independence for Kashmir, and some wanted Kashmir to unite with Pakistan . Some wanted independence from Kashmir, others from Pakistan .
 Kasparov, kuh SPAHR awf, Garry , a Russian chess player, became the youngest world champion in chess history at the age of 22 . Garry became the world champion aged 22 at the time of his victory .
 Kasparov had long been critical of the Fédération Internationale des Echecs organization . The organization that governs chess internationally has been criticized for its poor record . Kasparova had long criticized the organization .
 In 1993 Kasparov and British challenger Nigel Short broke with FIDE in a dispute over arrangements for the next championship match . In 1993, the pair agreed to play each other for the first time in a row .
 He retained PCA championship by defeating Viswanathan Anand of India in 1995 . He retained his PCA title by defeating Anand in 1995.
 In 1997, he lost to a more powerful IBM computer, called Deep Blue, in a six-game match . He also lost to IBM's Deep Blue in 1997, when he lost six-match match .
 In 2000, Kasparov lost to Vladimir Kramnik of Russia in a world championship match sponsored by the Brain Games Network . Kasarov lost in the match to Russia's Kramnnik in the world championship in 2000 .
 Garry Kimovich Kasparov was born in Baku, Azerbaijan, when it was part of the Soviet Union . He was also born in the country's capital, Baku . He is a chess grand slam champion .
 Nancy Landon served in the United States Senate from 1979 to 1997 . She was a Kansas Republican . Landon was a member of the Kansas Republican Party .
 Kassebaum was the first woman elected to a full term in the Senate who did not succeed her husband in either the Senate or the House of Representatives . She was elected to the Senate without succeeding her husband . Kasseba was elected in 1964 .
 Several women had previously been appointed to the Senate to Larry Evans . Larry Evans —L a LA LL A LO — was a Republican senator .
 In the Senate, she was considered a modercomplete their husbands’ terms . She was a moderate in the Senate .
 Kassebaum never held a federal or state office before she became a Republican . Kasseba never held office before becoming a Democrat .
 In 1996, she and Sen. Edward M Kennedy successfully promoted the KennedyKassebaum bill . The bill includes a provision that workers can change jobs without losing their medical insurance coverage .
 She is the daughter of Alfred M Landon, a former Kansas governor and Republican presidential candidate . Landon is a daughter of a former governor and former presidential candidate.
 In 1956, she married John Philip Kassebaum, an attorney and businessman . She is survived by her husband of more than 60 years .
 Kathmandu, also spelled Katmandt, is the capital and largest city of Nepal . It is also known as the capital of Nepal, the country's largest city .
 Mandu’s main industry is tourism . Kath Kath Kath office of Nancy Landon Kassebaum .
 Light industry in the — city includes brick, carpet, and concrete manufacturing; woodworking; and metalworking .
 In 1768, the nearby kingdom of Gorkha conquered Kathmandu and united the region that became the modern kingdom of Nepal . Gorkha was the first kingdom to conquer the city of Nepal and united it in 1768 . Nepal is now the most populous country in Nepal .
 James F Fisher Katmai National Park, KAT my, is in southwestern Alaska . KATMy is in southwest Alaska . It is also known as the Katnai River National Park .
 One of the volcanoes, Mount Katmai, produced one of the largest eruptions ever recorded in 1912 . In 1912, the eruption of Mount Katmai was the largest eruption ever recorded .
 Mount Katmais explosion created an ash-filled valley that became known as The Valley of the Ten Thousand Smokes . The explosion created a valley known as the Valley of The Ten Thousand Smoke .
 Katmai has a great variety of wildlife, including Alaskan brown bears, bald eagles, moose, sea otters, — and sockeye salmon .
 Katmai was established as a national monument in 1918 and became a national park in 1980 . It is the largest mountain in the world and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
 Its name comes from the love call of the male of a certain species in the eastern U.S. It is called a love call by a certain male in the Eastern United States .
 Katydids rub the bases of their front wings together to make their sounds . Katydidids rub their front wing bases together to create the sounds .
 Many katydids are shaped like leaves, and the veins in their wings look like leaves . The veins in these leaves look like the veins of leaves on the wings .
 Katydids lay flat, oval, slategray eggs from early fall until frost appears . Katydid eggs lay in early fall and early spring .
 Many of the eggs lay in double, overlapping rows on the edges of leaves and on twigs . Many of them lay their eggs in double- overlapping rows of leaves .
 The killings occurred in 1940 at Katyn, a village near the city of Smolensk in what was then the Soviet Union . The killings were the first of its kind in Soviet Russia .
 For nearly 50 years, the Soviet government denied responsibility for the massacre . The massacre took place in the Soviet Union in June 1968 .
 Both sides imprisoned tens of thousands of Polish soldiers and executed many of them . Both sides executed many Polish soldiers .
 In 1943, the Germans discovered a mass grave at Katyn filled with the bodies of Polish soldiers . The mass grave was discovered by the Germans in Katyn in 1943 .
 Investigators identified the soldiers as those who were in Soviet prison camp before the German invasion . Investigators identified them as those in a prison camp in the USSR .
 Soviets said the Germans had killed the soldiers after invading the area in 1941 . But the Soviets said it was the Germans who had killed them in the area .
 After the war, Communists took power in Poland, and the Soviet Union gained a strong influence over the Polish government .
 Polish and Soviet authorities forbade any mention of the Katyn incident . Poland and the Soviet Union banned all mention of Katyn in Soviet Union .
 In 1989, the postCommunist Polish government officially blamed the Soviets for the massacre . The post-Communist government blamed the massacre on the Soviets in 1989 .
 In 1990, the Soviet government publicly admitted its responsibility for the Katyn murders, as well as for the killing of thousands of other Polish prisoners of war prisoners . Thousands of others were killed by Soviet troops in the Soviet-occupied Katyn .
 She specialized in portraits and in scenes from Greek and Roman mythology and history . Her work includes portraits of portraits and scenes from mythology .
 As a young woman she worked in Italy, where she gained a reputation as a portrait painter . She is now retired from painting .
 In 1766, Lady Wentworth persuaded Kauffmann to return with her to England . The artist was a client of the English ambassador and one of the artist's clients .
 Kauffmann became a close friend of the artist Sir Joshua Reynolds in the 1930s . Kauffman became a friend with Reynolds and became a great friend of Reynolds .
 She joined him in his efforts to promote neoclassical painting, which emphasized themes from Greek and Roman culture . She was married to a wealthy businessman who died in 1953 .
 Kauffmann became a founding member of the Royal Academy of Arts in London in 1768 . Kauffman was also a founder of the Academy of Art in London . He died in 1881 at the age of 92 .
 She worked with architect Robert Adam in decorating house interiors . House interiors used Greek and Roman themes and artistic styles .
 Ann Friedman Kaufman, KAWF muhn, George S&S. Kaufman, was an American playwright . Kaufman was a Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright and author . Kaufman died at the age of 92 .
 He wrote more than 40 plays and musical comedies, nearly all of which were collaborations with other authors . He wrote over 40 plays, many collaborations with others .
 Kaufman's best-known works are lively, satirical comedies that often poke fun at big business and government . Kaufman is best known for his satirical works of satire and satire .
 Most of their plays concern ambitious young men who succeed with the help of a young woman . Most of the plays are set in the role of young women in their roles .
 Their plays are full of wisecracks and amusing characters who usually work in show business . Their plays include characters from show business who often work in the theatre .
 Perhaps their bestknown play is You Cant Take It with You . It is a comedy about an eccentric but loving family . The play is about a family of eccentric and loving characters .
 Kaunas, KOW nahs, is the second largest city of Lithuania . Kauna is the name of a Lithuanian city .
 Factories in Kaunas produce about a fourth of Lithuania’s manufactured goods . Factories produce about one in four of Lithuania's manufactured products .
 Kaunas has schools of agriculture, engineering, medicine, medicine and veterinary medicine . The Lithuanian capital has a range of universities .
 Kaunas served as the capital of the independent nation of Lithuania from 1919 to 1939 . The Lithuanian capital of Lithuania was the capital from 1919 until 1939 .
 In 1940, the Soviet government forcibly made Lithuania part of the Soviet Union . Lithuania was made part of Lithuania in 1940 . Lithuania is now a member of the Lithuanian Republic .
 Lithuania broke away from the Soviet Union and became an independent nation again in 1991 . Lithuania is now a member of the U.S. state of Lithuania .
 V Stanley Vardys Kaunda, kah OON dah, Kenneth David (1924ib) served as president of Zambia from 1964 to 1991 . V Stanley Kaunde was president of the Zambia between 1964 and 1991 .
 In 1964, he led the movement that resulted in Zambia's independence from Britain . He was elected president of Zambia in 1964 .
 Kaunda was reelected in one-party elections in 1973, 1978, 1983, and 1988 . He was re-elected in 1978, 1978 and 1983 .
 In 1991 and 1996, Kaunda and other UNIP candidates were defeated in multiparty elections . In both cases, the UNIP candidate was defeated by the opposition .
 He supported construction of a railroad from Zambia through Tanzania to the Indian Ocean . He also supported the construction of an international railroad .
 The peoples of the South Pacific use the juice to make a fermented drink called kava, ava, or kavakava . The drink is made from fermented kava juice .
 The scientific names for the two kinds are Piper methysticum and P excelsum . Piper methsysticum is Piper excelsum and Piper methyssticum . The scientific name for the kind of kind of type of kind is Piper methylsticum, which means Piper meth
 Symptoms of Kawasaki disease include prolonged high fever, redness of the eyes, sore throat and sore throat . Symptoms include swollen lymph nodes in the neck, swelling lymph nodes and a red rash over the body .
 After the rash clears, the skin peels, especially on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet . The rash is caused by a rash that causes skin to break out .
 About 10 percent of all patients suffer heart damage, but only a very small number of these patients die . Only a small percentage of those patients die, but a small number die from heart damage .
 Early in the illness, inflammation of the heart muscle can cause the heart to fail . Inflammatory heart muscle inflammation can lead to heart failure .
 Inflammatory inflammation of the arteries that supply blood to the heart can weaken and scar the artery walls . Later, inflammation can weaken the walls and weaken the arteries' strength .
 Physicians give aspirin and disease-fighting proteins called gamma globulins to reduce the symptoms and the risk of heart damage .
 Arnold W Strauss Kayak, KY ak, is a light, narrow boat that has an enclosed deck . Kayak is an enclosed boat with enclosed deck.
 The deck has from one to four cockpits— openings in which kayakers sit . The deck can be used to sit in one or four of the kayakers' cockpit holes .
 A kayaker wears a plastic covering called a left Foott, called a 'left Foott' by Bruce Coleman Ltd. The Foott is a kayaker's left foot .
 The kayaker sits in an opening, called a cockpit, and uses a paddle that has a blade at each end . The paddle is used in a kayaker's cockpit, called the cockpit .
 The sprayskirt attaches to the sides of the cockpit and keeps water out of it . A blade at each end of a kayak paddle has a blade on each end .
 The two most common types of kayaks are whitewater kayaks and touring kayaks . Whitewater kayak kayak is the most popular type of kayak .
 Whitewater kayaks are 11 to 13 feet long and are built for quick maneuvering on river rapids . Whitewater whitewater kayak kayaks can reach speeds of up to 11 feet long . The kayak is a kayak designed to be comfortable and comfortable on the river rap
 Touring kayaks are used to paddle along the coasts of oceans and large lakes . They are also known as sea kayaks .
 They are 13 to 20 feet (4 to 6 meters) long and are built to handle ocean waves . They're 13-to-20 feet long and can handle waves of up to six meters (4 meters)
 Most are made of a type of plastic called polyethylene, or of fiberglass, or fiberglass . Most of the world's plastic is made of plastic, and most are made out of plastic plastic .
 Others, called fo/ding kayaks, are made of a rubberized fabric that covers a collapsible frame . Others, made of rubber, kayaks are made from the same material as the kayak .
 Inuit Inuit built the first kayaks thousands of years ago and used them for fishing and hunting . Inuit kayaks were used for hunting and fishing in the Inuit .
 Today, most kayaks are used for recreation or for racing, including events in the Summer Olympic Games . Today's most kayak races are held in the United States and Canada .
 Barton Parrott Kaye, Danny became noted for his lively pantomimes and his command of ingenious songs .
 She became known for her interpretations of highly dramatic roles in such modern works as The Cage, Dark Elegies, Fall River Legend, Lilac Garden, and Pillar of Fire .
 Kaye also won praise for her dancing in classics of the 1800's, including Giselle and Swan Lake .
 For many years, she assisted her husband, Herbert Ross, a choreographer and director of musical comedies and motion pictures . She was married to Herbert Ross .
 In 1980, Kaye became associate director of the American Ballet Theatre . Kaye is credited with leading ballet company's success .
 Kazakhstan, kah zahk STAHN, is a country that lies mostly in west-central Asia . Kazakhstan is a relatively small country in the region .
 A small part of Kazakhstan lies west of the Ural River on the European continent . Kazakhstan is one of the smallest countries in Europe .
 Kazakh people were herders who raised their livestock on the regionss plains . For hundreds of years, the Kazakh people have been herders on the plains . Kazakh people are still herders .
 They relied on their herds of sheep, camels, cattle, and horses for food, clothing, and transportation . They relied heavily on livestock for food and clothing .
 This lifestyle began to change in the 1800's, when the Russian Empire conquered the Kazakh region . This lifestyle was changed when the Russians conquered the region .
 Kazakhstan became part of the Soviet Union in 1922 . It was formed under Russia's leadership .
 During most of the 1900's, while Kazakhstan was under Soviet rule, industry grew steadily . Industry grew steadily during the Soviet era .
 Most Kazakh people ended their nomadic ways and settled in rural villages or cities . Meanwhile, most of the Kazakh people have settled in cities or rural villages . The Kazakh people now live in cities and villages .
 The president serves as head of state and is the most powerful government official . The president is the president of the United States .
 The president appoints a prime minister to head the government and a cabinet . The prime minister is chosen by the president to lead the government .
 The parliament consists of an upper house called the Senate and a lower house called Mazhilis . The parliament is made up of two chambers: the Senate, the Mazhilsis and the lower house . The Senate is the most powerful chamber in the country's parliament .
 Kazakhstan is divided into 17 ob/asts for purposes of local government . Kazakhstan is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Kazakhs make up about 42 percent of the population, and Russians account for about 37 percent . Kazakhs are Kazakhs, Russians are Kazakh citizens .
 Other ethnic groups in Kazakhstan include Belarusians, Tatars, Uygurs, and Uzbeks . Kazakhstan is also home to Belarusians and Tatars .
 A majority of Kazakhstan's people, including the Kazakhs, Tatars, Uygurs, and Uzbeks, are Muslims . The majority of Kazakhs and Tatars are Muslims, including Kazakhs .
 The flag is blue, with a yellow sun and eagle in the center and a yellow stripe of national ornamentation at the left . It is blue with the national emblem and national flag .
 Most of the urban people of Kazakhstan live in modern apartments or houses . One hundred tiyn equal one tenge. 250b is 250b .
 Some Kazakh shepherds still live in traditional tentlike dwellings from their nomadic past . Some Kazakh people still live tent-like dwellings in traditional tents like those of nomadic times .
 Called yurts, these portable homes are made of a circular wooden frame covered with felt . They are made from a circular wood frame made of felt felt .
 Kazakh men and their children generally remain a part of their parents’ households . Kazakh men generally remain part of the parents' households . Kazakhstan is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Many women work outside the home as teachers, doctors, and agricultural workers . Many women also work as doctors, teachers, and farmers .
 Most Kazakh men wear Western-style clothing, and some wear traditional felt hats . Kazakh men often wear Western clothing, but some wear felt hats and Western clothing .
 Common Kazakh foods include meat dishes and milk products, such as cheese and curds . Common Kazakh food includes meat dishes, milk products and cheese .
 Besh barmak, thinly sliced meat and noodles boiled in broth, is a popular dish . The dish is a thinned meat-and-nearly-sliced noodles and thinly sliced noodles .
 Kazakh people enjoy folk songs and legends, and they recite them many occasions . The Kazakh people recite them in their folk songs .
 Kazakhs participate in a singing competition called an aitys. At some events, Kazakhs take part in singing competitions . Kazakhs sing in a Kazakh national singing competition .
 Performances of Russian ballet, theater, and music take place in all the major cities . Russian ballet and theater performances take place all over Russia .
 Popular sports in Kazakhstan include volleyball, skating, and wrestling . Popular sports include wrestling, volleyball and ice hockey .
 Kokpar is a traditional Kazakh game in which dozens of skilled horsemen try to carry the carcass of a goat or sheep across a goal .
 Under the 1995 Constitution, Russian is used on an equal basis with Kazakh in government documents . Under the constitution, Russian and Kazakh are used on equal basis . Russian is also used in the constitution .
 The government requires children to attend school from the ages of 6 to 17 . It requires children from the age of six to 17 to be in school .
 The schools use either Kazakh or Russian as the language of instruction . Kazakh and Russian is used in the Kazakh language .
 Kazakh Academy of Sciences includes over 30 separate research institutes . Kazakhstan's Academy of Science is home to over 30 different research institues . Kazakh Academy is the largest in the world's scientific community .
 In the west, the dry plains of the Caspian lowland border the Cascian Sea . In the east, the lowlands of the region are the Caskian lowlands . The dry plains are the most fertile areas in the region .
 Dry lowlands extend over much of the western part of the country and around the Aral Sea on the southwest border . Dry lowland areas are dry lowlands in the west and south of the border .
 High, grassy plains called steppes cover large areas of northern Kazakhstan . High grasses known as steppas cover large parts of the steppans .
 Northeastern Kazakhstan consists of flat, highly elevated lands that are suitable for farming . The region is known for its high-altitude farming .
 A series of mountain ranges, including the Tian Shan and the Altai Mountains, forms Kazakhstan’s eastern and southeastern borders . Kazakhstan is one of the world's largest countries .
 Republic Square in Astana, Kazakhstan's capital, is the site of the House of Government, /eft, and the parliament building . Several ul Wm. ss ss HNMR Ny Ne ul ae i 1 Tree Wii f | bi .
 Astana became the nation’s capital in 1997 . Mountain rivers in the east feed into Lake Balkhash, the largest lake entirely within Kazakhstan .
 January temperatures average about 0 °F in the north and about 23 °F  in the south . January temperatures in the northern part of the country average about 23°F .
 July temperatures average about 68 °F in the north and about 81 °F  in the south . July temperatures in the northern part of the country average about 80 °F .
 Mountainous regions are colder, and receive more rainfall, than the rest of the country . Mountainous areas receive more rain and snowfall than other regions .
 Agriculture accounts for about two-fifths of the value of Kazakhstan's economic production . Agriculture is a major source of economic growth in Kazakhstan .
 In the last half of the 1900's, Kazakhstan’s crop production increased sharply due to expansion of agricultural lands and the irrigation of dry lands . Kazakhstan's crop production has increased sharply since the first century .
 Industry accounts for about one-third of the value of the country’s economic production . Industry is estimated to account for about a third of the national's economic output .
 Kazakhstan’s industries include food processing, mining, and the manufacture of chemicals, textiles, and heavy machinery . Kazakhstan is one of the largest economies in the Middle East .
 Almaty, Pavlodar, Qaraghandy, and Shymkent rank among the chief industrial centers in the country . The city is home to the largest city in the world, Almatya .
 Baykonur Cosmodrome is the former Soviet Union’s main space-launch facility . It is near the city of Leninsk, Russia, and is located in eastern Russia .
 The mines of Kazakhstan region yield many valuable minerals, including bauxite, borax, chromium, gold, iron, lead, nickel, phosphate, silver, tin, tungsten, uranium, and zine .
 Airlines link cities within Kazakhstan, and several airports handle international flights . Kazakhstan is one of the world's largest economies .
 Newspapers are published in several languages, including Kazakh and Russian . Newspapers in Kazakh, Russian and Kazakh newspapers are published worldwide .
 The national television station broadcasts from both Almaty and Astana . The national TV station broadcasts in both the capital and city of Almatya .
 Nomadic people lived in what is now the country of Kazakhstan before the birth of Jesus Christ . Jesus Christ is believed to have lived in the region of Kazakhstan .
 During the 1200's, Mongols from the east invaded the area and defeated the Turkish people . Mongols defeated the people of the region and defeated them .
 Many of the country’s people are descended from the Turkish and Mongol tribes . The country is descended from many of its people, including many of the Turks and Mongols .
 Russians began migrating to the Kazakh region in the early 1700s . Russians began arriving in the region from Russia in the 1700's .
 In 1731, after suffering attacks from neighboring peoples, the Kazakhs accepted Russian rule for protection . The Kazakhs were attacked by neighboring peoples in 1731 .
 By the mid-1800's, the Russians had set up forts throughout the Kazakh region . The Russians had established forts in the region .
 The Russian government took control of vast areas of land and encouraged Russian and Ukrainian peasants to settle in the northern parts of the region .
 A nationalist movement seeking independence from Russia emerged in Kazakhstan following the Russian Revolution of 1917 . The movement was formed following the 1917 Russian Revolution in Russia .
 Kazakh nationalists set up a central government and sent troops to fight against the Bolsheviks . The Bolsheviks had seized power in Russia during the Russian Revolution . Kazakh nationalists fought against the Communists in Russia .
 Kazakh nationalists had sided with the Bolsheviks . By late 1919, however, they had sided against the Bolshevik Party .
 Livestock farming is a major economic activity in Kazakhstan . The Kazakhs Kyrgyz are called Kazakhs Kyrgyz, or Kazakhs . The republic was once known as the Kazakhs Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic .
 Kazakh republic was renamed the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in 1925 . Present-day Kyrgyz were referred to as the Kara Kara Karkyz . Kazakh autonomous Soviet Soviet Socialist Republic was renamed in 1925 . The present-day K
 The Soviet Union established a powerful Communist central government in Moscow . It took control of all industry and land in Kazakhstan and the other republics . The country was ruled by the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Soviet law forbade certain traditional cultural practices, such as religious instruction . Law forbade religious instruction in Soviet Russia .
 During World War I, the Soviet government forced many people from the western part of the Soviet Union to move to Kazakhstan . Many people were forced to leave the USSR during the Second World War .
 During the 1950's, the Soviet government launched a program to expand the use of Kazakhstan's vast steppes for agriculture . The program was launched in the 1950s, during the Soviet-era Soviet government .
 The Virgin Lands project brought thousands of people from other parts of the Soviet Union to Kazakhstan . This program, called the Virgin Lands, brought people from all over the world to the country . Thousands of people were brought to Kazakhstan by the program .
 During the 1980's, the Soviet government, under Mikhail S Gorbachev, made reforms toward giving people more freedom . The Soviet government made reforms to give more freedom in the 1980s .
 Kazakhstan declared that its laws took precedence over those of the Soviet Union in 1990 . In 1990, Kazakhstan declared its laws take precedence over Soviet Union's laws .
 Nursultan Nazarbayev became the first democratically elected president in Kazakh history in December 1991 . Nursultan was the first elected president of the Kazakh Republic in December 1992 .
 On December 16, Kazakhstan declared its independence, just nine days before the Soviet Union broke apart . Kazakhstan declared independence on December 16 . The country became independent in December .
 Kazakhstan joined other Soviet republics in a loose association called the Commonwealth of Independent States . Kazakhstan is now one of the world's most populous countries .
 Kazakhstan replaced its Communist government system with a system based on democratic principles . As an independent country, Kazakhstan replaced the Communist government with a democratic system .
 In 1997, Kazakhstan moved its capital from Almaty to the city of Akmola, now called Astana . Astana is Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan .
 Nazarbayev called an election that he called earlier than expected in 1999 . Voters reelected him as president in 1999, in an election he called an earlier version .
 Almaty is the capital of Russia’s republic of Tatarstan . It is located in the heart of the Caspian Sea, the Caucasus region .
 Kazan is a center of culture for the Tatars, who founded Kazan in the 1400's . Kazan was founded in the 14th century . It is also a center for culture for Tatars .
 Zvi Gitelman Kazan, kuh ZAN, Elia, EEL yuh . Kazan became one of America’s best-known stage and screen directors .
 He is regarded as Broadway's leading director of the late 1940's and the 1950's . He is credited with directing Broadway's most famous musicals .
 Kazan was born Sept., 1909, in Constantinople (now Istanbul, Turkey, to parents of Greek descent . Kazan is one of the world's most famous artists .
 Gerald Bordman Kazantzakis was a Greek author . He was also known as the author of "Nikos, Nikos, NEE kows" He died in 2005 .
 He began his literary career writing tragedies, after which he turned to poetry . He began writing tragedies before turning to poetry in later years .
 In 1938, he finished what he believed was his masterpiece, The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel . The poem is an epic poem of 33,333 lines .
 Later in his career, Kazantzakis turned to prose fiction and wrote several novels . He also turned to the literary world for the first time .
 The three for which he is best known are Zorba the Greek , The Greek Passion , and 7he Last Temptation of Christ .
 His autobiography, Report to Greco, was published in 1961, after his death . His autobiography was published shortly after he died .
 He traveled widely from about 1920 to 1940 and wrote several travel books . He wrote travel books and traveled widely .
 Kazantzakis was influenced by the French philosopher Henri Bergson and the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche . He translated many of his works, including works by Friedrich Nietzsche, and translated them .
 Kostas Myrsiades Kea, KAY uhor KEE uh, is a parrot that lives in New Zealand . The parrot is a New Zealand parrot .
 It is also called the mountain nestor . It is dull olive-green with red under the wings . The nestor is a dull olive green .
 The kea spends its summers in the mountains and its winters in the Jowlands . It spends its winters on the islands of the island nation .
 Around human settlements, it may eat almost anything and become quite bold and tame in its search for food . It may become quite tame around settlements .
 Edmund Kean, Edmund was considered the greatest and most influential English actor of his time . The kea of New Zealand has a powerful, hooked bill .
 He was the first important performer to reject the polite, restrained style of acting popular in the early 1800's . He rejected the polite and restrained style popular in early 1800s .
 He introduced a more romantic and exuberant style that became the ideal for most of the 1800's . The style of the late 1800s was romantic and romantic .
 Kean first gained fame for his emotional acting style as Shylock in William Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice in 1814 . Kean is best known for his role in The Merchant's Venice .
 Samuel Taylor Coleridge wrote that watching Kean act was like reading Shakespeare by “flashes of lightning” Kean’s performance was like “reading Shakespeare by flashes of lightning.”
 At the outbreak of the war, he became a brigadier general of New Jersey volunteers . At the end of the World War II, he was a major force in New Jersey .
 He served in the Eastern theater and rose to major general and division commander . He rose from major general to division commander in the war .
 He was killed on Sept., 1862, during the Battle of Chantilly, in Virginia .
 He lost an arm at Churubusco and won promotion to the rank of major for his bravery . He was promoted to rank of Major for bravery .
 He joined the French Army in 1859 and fought in the war against Austria . He won the cross of the Legion of Honor for his bravery .
 Kearny was a nephew of Stephen Kearny, who commanded the western armies of the United States in the Mexican War . Kearny's nephew was the son of the U.S. commander of the Western armies in Mexico .
 He attended Columbia College for one year but left to join the army in the War of 1812 . He left to fight in the war of the year .
 In 1825, he joined an expedition to the Yellowstone Riv_ er, and after 1828 commanded several frontier posts . In 1828, he commanded several Frontier posts, including Yellowstone .
 Kearny led the armies that conquered New Mexico and California during the Mexican War . Kearny was a hero in New Mexico, California and New Mexico .
 Kearny and U.S. Navy Commodore Stockton received conflicting orders concerning their authority in California . In 1847, Kearny was given conflicting orders regarding his authority in the state of California .
 Later orders from Washington gave Kearny control of the civil government . Kearny later took control of government .
 Fremont was court-martialed for insubordination . Kearny and Frémont were involved in a dispute over orders from Fremont .
 He served as governor of Veracruz and Mexico City for a few months before his death on Oct. 1848 .
 He ranked among the most popular silent film comedians, along with Charlie Chaplin and Harold Lloyd . He was one of the three most popular comedians in silent films .
 Keaton created a character, sometimes called ‘The Great Stone Face,” who rarely smiled but overcame obstacles through a naive determination and mechanical ingenuity . Keaton's character is sometimes called 'The Great Face'
 He reappeared in motion pictures, as well as television, shortly before his death .
 He became part of his parents’ vaudeville act before he was 4 years old . He was a member of the family’s touring touring touring troupe .
 Robert Sklar Keats, keets, John , was a poet of the Romantic period . Keats was a member of the Keats family . He was born in 18th century .
 Keats's poetry is concerned, in various ways, with joy in the beauty of this world, sorrow over its inevitable passing . Keats attempts to find bridges between the perishable world we know and the eternal world we imagine .
 His verse employs unusually rich and vivid images to express his intense feelings . His verse uses unusually rich, vivid images of intense emotions .
 Keats was born in London on Oct. 1795 . He was the son of a livery stable keeper . Keats is one of the world's greatest poets .
 He attended the Clarke school in Enfield, outside London, and his interest in literature was first aroused there . He attended Clarke school, where he was inspired by literature .
 Keats later studied medicine and passed his medical examinations, but he never practiced because he had decided to become a poet . Keats never practiced in medicine because he wanted to be a poet.
 Hunt was a journalist, essayist, and poet who held liberal political views . Hunt was an advocate for the liberal movement in the United States . Hunt died in 2003 .
 In 1818, Keats finished his second volume of poetry, Endymion, a long mythological story in verse . Keats' work was published in 1818 in the New Year's Poemem .
 The reviewers for the powerful Tory journals, always eager to attack Hunt or his friends, ridiculed Endymion . The reviewers for the . powerful Tory . journals, such as the powerful Conservative journals, are always eager for attack Hunt .
 Keats's brother died from tuberculosis in 1818 . Keats had a premonition that he himself would suffer the same fate . He was disappointed by his brother's death .
 He began to develop a growing feeling that poverty and disease would prevent his marrying Fanny Brawne, whom he deeply loved, he said . He said he was worried that poverty would prevent him marrying his beloved .
 His final and best volume was published in 1820 . He experienced an intense burst of creativity from 1818 through the fall of 1819 .
 He traveled to Italy, hoping a warmer climate might improve his health . He hopes to spend more time in the country .
 It showed the influence of Edmund Spenser and William Shake . But it lacked consistency these poets displayed . Keck Observatory speare, but lacked consistency .
 In Endymion, Keats retold the classic story of the shepherd who loved and won the goddess of the moon . Keats tells the story of a shepherd who loves and wins the moon from the goddess .
 Some people think that Keats simply let his imagination run wild, without a clear plan, in this 4,000-line poem . Keats' poem is a masterpiece of poetry, but Keats had no clear plan .
 Others see the poem a symbolic story concerned, like much of Keats's early poetry, with showing how appreciation of the beauty of nature can lead to the understanding of eternal truth .
 In the poetry of his final volume, Keats achieved the rich beauty and superb control of image, story, and language that has earned him lasting fame . Keats' final volume is published in New York .
 Agnes' uses brilliant contrasts to tell a Romeo and Julietlike tale of dangerous young love . Agnes’s use of brilliant contrasts in the book to tell the tale .
 The poem explores Keats's favorite theme of the relationship between dreams and the everyday world . Keats' favorite theme is the subject of the poem, which he wrote about dreams and dreams .
 The unfinished ‘Hyperion’ shows the influence of the English poet John Milton . The unfinished "Hyperion" was written in 18th century .
 “The Fall of Hyperion” was also somewhat influenced by that of the Italian poet Dante . The style of the fragment was also influenced by Dante's work .
 Together, they deal on a grand scale with the wars of the ancient gods and the principle of power in the universe .
 The great odes "Ona Grecian Urn,’ “To a Nightingale,” "On Melancholy," and "To Autumn" present various aspects of the soul's eternal longing in a world .
 "They explore many possibilities but do not insist upon any one answer to the enduring problems of life," says the author of the book .
 The intense experience of life, not its perfect understanding, was Keats' main poetic concern . Keats's poetry was his main concern, not perfect understanding .
 Keck Observatory is an astronomical observatory on Mauna Kea, a mountain on the island of Hawaii . The observatory is located on the mountain of the same name .
 The observatory consists of two identical telescopes, Keck | and Keck Il, which are the largest optical telescopes in the world . The Keck telescopes are the world's largest and largest .
 Keck | and II collect and focus visible light waves and intrared waves from objects in space . Keck: The Keck and II capture and focus light waves on objects from objects from space .
 One use of the telescopes is to analyze radiation coming to Earth from the farthest known galaxies . The telescopes are used to study radiation coming from the furthest known galaxy .
 Astronomers can use the information gathered to determine a galaxy’s distance, size, age, and other characteristics . Astronomers use the data to determine the galaxy's distance and size .
 Keck | and Il are reflecting telescopes . They use a large mirror to collect and focus light . Keck and Il use mirrors to collect light and focus .
 The lightgathering mirror is a segmented mirror that consists of 36 smaller mirrors mounted together . It is the same mirror that is used to collect information from the Internet .
 If a segment gets out of position, sensors on its edges activate pistons in the support structure that move the segment . Sensors on the edge of the segment move the segments in order to keep it in the same position . The segment can be moved by pistons on the edges of
 Keeshond, KAYS hahnd, is a Dutch dog of Arctic descent . The dog is related to the Samoyed, chow chow, and Pomeranian .
 Estes, a United States congressman from Tennessee, won fame in 1950 as head of a Senate committee investigating organized crime . Estes was a member of the Tennessee Senate committee that investigated organized crime.
 He and presidential candidate Adlai E Stevenson lost to President Dwight D Eisenhower and Vice President Richard M Nixon . Stevenson was a candidate for President Eisenhower .
 He won a seat in the United States House of Representatives in 1939 . He practiced law, and won a U.S. House seat in 1939.
 Keillor, KEE /uhr, Garrison, Garrison , is a popular American radio host, humorist, and writer . He is also a popular radio host .
 He first gained fame as the host and head writer for the popular weekly radio show “A Prairie Home Companion,’ which began in 1974 . The show is now on PBS .
 This highly praised program presents comedy as well as music that ranges from yodeling to opera . The program has been praised for its comedy and music .
 The highlight of each show is Keillor’s humorous monologue about a fictitious town called Lake Wobegon, Minnesota . The best-known monologue is a monologue from the show .
 Keillor was born in Anoka, Minnesota, in August 1942 . His real name was Gary Edward Keilor, born in 1942 .
 Wilma J Kahn Keller, Gottfried, CAW freed , was the most famous Swiss author who wrote in German before the 1900's .
 He is noted for his humor and a concern for the ethics of good citizenship . He is known for his concern for good citizenship and his humor .
 The comic “Clothes Make the Man’ and the tragic “Romeo and Juliet in the Village.’ are the comic ‘Clothes make the man’ The pair are also a tragic tale of Romeo and Juliet's tragic relationship .
 The Epijames I Lengle gram is a collection of ironic love stories . Other important series include Seven Legends and Zurich Novellas .
 He failed as a student of painting in Munich and lived in poverty and isolation in Germany for several years . He lived in isolation and lived as a child in Munich .
 He refused to be paid for his poetry, much of which he regarded as a service to Switzerland . Much of his poetry was considered a service for Switzerland, so he refused to pay .
 Jeffrey L Sammons Keller, Helen Adams is an outstanding example of a person who conquered physical disabilities . Helen Adams was born with a physical disability but overcame it .
 A serious illness, which her doctor called “acute congestion of the stomach and brain,” destroyed her sight and hearing at the age of about 1 5 . Her doctor called the illness “a serious illness” at the time .
 As a result, she could not speak and was totally shut off from the world . She was unable to speak and could not even speak . She had to be 'shut off from her world'
 She rose above her disabilities to gain international fame and help disabled people live fuller lives . But she rose above disability to become international fame .
 Anne Sullivan arrived from Boston from Boston to teach her daughter . Shortly before the child was 7, Anne Sullivan taught her the basics .
 Sullivan had been nearly blind during childhood, but surgery in 1881 and 1887 partially restored her sight . Sullivan was nearly blind when she was born .
 She later married John A Macy, but she remained with Helen Keller until her death . She later wed John Macy .
 Mary Agnes ‘Polly’ Thomson, who had been Keller's secretary, took Sullivan's place . She was replaced by Polly "Polly" Thomson .
 Sullivan was able to make contact with the girl's mind through the sense of touch . Sullivan made contact with her through the use of the senses of touch.
 Helen used a manual alphabet by which she spelled out words on Helen's hand . Helen used the manual alphabet to spell out words in her hand .
 Within three years, she knew the alphabet and could read and write in braille . She learned the alphabet within three years of learning braille and could write in the alphabet .
 Until she was 10 years old, Keller Keller could talk only with the sign language of the deafmute . Keller was born deaf at birth . Keller is now an adult with a family of four children .
 She decided she would Jearn to speak and took lessons from a teacher of the deaf . She decided to learn to speak .
 By the time she was 16, she could communicate well enough to go to prep_aratory school and to college . By the age of 16 she was able to communicate enough for college .
 Sullivan stayed with her through these years, interpreting lectures and class discussions for her . Sullivan stayed in touch with her throughout the years .
 After college, Keller became concerned with the conditions of the blind and the deafblind . Keller was concerned about conditions of blind and deafblind after college .
 She became active on the staffs of the American Foundation for the Blind and the American . Foundation for Overseas Blind . She also served on staffs for the American. Foundation for Blind .
 She appeared before legislatures, gave lectures, and wrote many books and articles . She appeared in legislatures and gave lectures .
 During World War II, Keller worked with sol_diers who had been blinded in the war . Keller lectured in over 25 nations throughout the world .
 With Anne Sullivan, she demonstrated the method for the American actor Joseph Jefferson, and decorations from many governments .
 The motion picture Helen Keller in Her Story tells the story of Keller's life . Helen Keller was a pioneer in the United States and a pioneer of American life .
 The Miracle Worker and its movie adaptation described how Sullivan made contact with Keller through the sense of touch . The play and the movie adaptation were both made into a play .
 She promoted better working conditions, particularly for women, and child welfare . She promoted women's rights, especially in the workplace .
 Her work led to a state law that limited women’s work hours and banned child labor . Her work helped lead to a law that allowed child labor and limited women's hours .
 From 1893 to 1897, she enforced the act as the state’s chief factory inspector . She was in charge of factories across the state from 1893-97 .
 Kelley served as general secretary of the National Consumers League from 1899 to 1932 . Kelley was a member of the Consumers League . Kelley died in 1932 at the age of 92 .
 This organization identified manufacturers and stores that provided fair working conditions . It also urged people to buy their products .
 During the early 1900's, her speeches and writings helped bring about minimum wage laws in several states . During the 1900s, she helped raise the issue of minimum wage .
 Congress established the Children’s Bureau in 1912 . The agency was proposed by Kelley and Lillian Wald, who was a pioneer in public health nursing .
 She was a lifelong socialist and a leader in the movement to gain women the right to vote . She was also a leader of the movement for women's rights .
 Frank Billings was an American lawyer, diplomat, and statesman . He was also a lawyer and diplomat . He died in 1945 .
 He won the 1929 Nobel Peace Prize for his work in framing the KelloggBriand Pact of 1928 . He was awarded the Nobel Prize for peace in 1929 .
 Kellogg was appointed a judge of the Permanent Court of International Justice in 1930 . Kellogg served as a judge at the Permanent International Court of Justice . He was also a member of the World War II Court of Peace .
 He had little formal education but read law and was admitted to the bar in 1877 . In 1877, he was admitted into the bar .
 He prosecuted business trusts, chiefly the oil, railroad, and paper monopolies . He prosecuted oil, railroads, paper and oil monopolies in the 1930s .
 Kellogg served as a Republican United States senator from Minnesota from 1917 to 1923 . Kellogg also served as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom in 1924 and 1925 .
 See also International Court of Justice; KelloggBriand Pact . James S Olson . James Olson. James Olson . Olson .
 He worked for many years for his brother, who ran a sanitarium in Battle Creek, Michigan . His brother died in 2008 .
 Kellogg experimented with a new breakfast food called “corn flakes” and recognized its sales potential . Kellogg: "Corn flakes’s sales potential. Kellogg recognized its potential"
 William R Childs Kellogg-Briand Pact, also called the Pact of Paris, condemned the use of war to solve international problems and called for peaceful settlement of disputes . The Pact was signed by Childs Childs, the son of William Childs .
 French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand originally proposed the pact in 1927 as a treaty between France and the U.S. The pact was originally proposed by the French foreign minister . It was originally intended to be a treaty with the United States .
 Frank B Kellogg, the United States secretary of state, enlarged the plan in 1928 to include all nations . The plan was enlarged to include nations in 1928 .
 The signers included all the nations in the world except Argentina, Bolivia, E] Salvador, Uruguay, and Uruguay . Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco, and San Marino also signed .
 Japan claimed this right in the 1930's, when it fought against China without formally declaring war . Japan claimed the right to claim the right in 1930's .
 The pact provided no way to enforce its provisions . It could not prevent attacks, such as the one Italy launched against Ethiopia in 1935 .
 Although the pact has been violated many times, it has never officially been canceled . The pact has never been officially canceled .
 After World War I! , the Allies used the pact against individuals, rather than against nations . The pact was used to protect individuals, not nations, during the war .
 The pact became part of the legal basis for the Nuremberg and Tokyo war crimes trials . The pact was part of a legal basis of the Nuresmberg and the Tokyo trials . It was used as a basis for both the trials of the two World War II leaders .
 Kellogg Foundation is a philanthropic organization that administers funds for educational and charitable purposes . Kellogg foundation administers educational and charitable meals for educational purposes .
 It provides start-up money to organizations and institutions for specific projects, mainly in the U.S., Latin America, and southern Africa .
 The foundation's funding priorities include youth, higher education, leadership, health services, food systems, rural development, philanthropy and volunteerism, and ground-water resources .
 In Michigan, it also helps programs contributing to economic development . In Michigan it helps programs contribute to economic growth .
 The foundation does not make loans and does not support research projects or make grants to individuals . The foundation is based on donations from the foundation .
 Since that time, the foundation's total expenditures have exceeded $1.1 billion .
 The Kellogg Foundation headquarters are in Battle Creek, Michigan . Kellogg is the world's largest food company .
 Gene Kelly became a popular American dancer, choreographer, actor, and director . He was also a popular actor and dancer . Kelly was a member of the Kellogg Foundation .
 He ranked as one of the finest and most creative dancers in musical motion pictures . He was ranked as a dancer in musical films .
 His imaginative choreography combined tap dancing with elements of ballet and acrobatics . The show is a tap-dance version of a ballet and a ballet version .
 Eugene Curran Kelly was born on Aug., 1912, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . He was born in 1912 . Kelly was also known for his role in World War II .
 He made his Broadway debut in 1938 in Leave /t to Me . He gained his first recognition in the title role of the musical Pa/ Joey in 1940 .
 Kelly made his film debut in For Me and My Gal . Kelly has appeared in over 30 musicals and dramatic films . Kelly appeared in more than 30 musical and dramatic plays .
 Kelly directed or codirected several dramatic and musical films . Kelly sang in many of his movies and directed or directed them . Kelly starred in many films, including several musical and dramatic films .
 Gerald Bordman Kelly, George Edward became known for realistic, carefully constructed social comedies . The playwrights were known for realism and social comedy .
 His first success was The Torchbearers , a broad yet biting satire on pompous amateur theater groups . He was a satirist who satirized the pompous amateurs .
 The Show-Off satirizes the eternal bragging sentimentalist, in the character of Aubrey Piper . The show is set to be released in September 2015 .
 Kelly had created Piper in his long-running vaude— ville skit Poor Aubrey . Kelly's character Piper was created in the 1980s and '90s .
 Kelly received the Pulitzer Prize for Craig’s Wife . The Pulitzer Prize-winning author is a character study of a cold-hearted woman .
 He was a vaudeville performer in the early 1900s and wrote dozens of widely performed sketches . He was known for his sketches and sketches .
 He turned to film writing in the 1930's after continued cool critical reception of his plays .
 In 1954, she won the Academy Award as best actress for her performance in 7he Country Girl . She was nominated for her role in the film .
 Rachel Gallagher Kelly, Ned, was the most famous of Australia's bushrangers . The most famous bushranger in Australia was Ned Kelly, who was a member of the National Socialist Party .
 Bushrangers were bandits who operated in rural Australia from about 1790 to 1900 . They operated from 1790 until about 1900 .
 Through the years, some people have considered Kelly Kelly to be a vicious criminal . Kelly was convicted of murder in 2007 of stabbing a woman to death .
 Others have admired him as a symbol of revolt against authority and injustice . Others have said he was a sign of rebellion against authority, injustice .
 Edward Kelly was born Edward Kelly in Beveridge, near Melbourne, in what is now the Australian state of Victoria . Kelly was the first person to be recorded as a Victorian politician . He was also the first woman to be born in Australia .
 In 1877, three years after his second prison term ended, he became involved in horse and cattle theft . He was sentenced to two years in prison in 1877 .
 In 1878, a police officer who went to the Kelly house | to arrest Ned’s brother Dan for horse theft was wounded . Ned Kelly's brother Dan was wounded in 1878 when he was arrested for horse stealing .
 Ned and Dan Kelly escaped into the thickly forested Wombat Ranges, where two friends, Steve Hart and Joe Byrne, joined them . The Kelly brothers escaped to the thickest forested Ranges in NSW .
 Ned and his companions surprised one of the patrols and killed three police officers in a shootout . Ned's companions killed three officers in the shootout with police officers .
 Two months later, they raided Jerilderie, a small town in southern New South Wales . The raid was the first time they had raided a town they raided in southern NSW .
 The two local police officers were locked up in a bank robbery . They then robbed another bank and locked up two police officers . The robbers then robbed a second bank and robbed another .
 Ned Kelly tries unsuccessfully to find the editor of the local newspaper . Ned Kelly tried unsuccessfully to get the editor to explain why he was upset .
 He wanted the editor to print a document, now known as the Jerilderie Letter, in which he explained his actions and complained of injustice . He wanted to print the letter, which has since become known as "Jerilderie Letters"
 In June 1880, the gang took over the township of Glenrowan and held townsfolk captive in an inn . The gang held people captive in the inn in the town's township .
 During a12-hour siege by police, Dan Kelly, Hart, and Byrne EE ee won the election by promwere killed . During the siege, police killed three of them .
 Police capture Ned Kelly, dressed in homemade armor, as he tries to rescue his companions . Ned Kelly was captured by the police after he tried to protect his friends . Kelly was wearing homemade armor when he was captured .
 Sharon Pratt was the first black woman mayor of a major U.S. city . On November 11, he was hanged . Kelly was hanged in November .
 She changed her last name to Kelly in December 1991, when she married James R Kelly Ill, an American businessman .
 Sharon Pratt Kelly replaced Washington Mayor Marion S Barry Jr. Barry, Jr., who near the end of his 12 years in office had been convicted of possessing cocaine . A Democrat, she replaced Barry, who was convicted of cocaine possession .
 Kelly ising voters that she would “clean house,” a reference to Barry's scandalous final term as mayor . Kelly says she would "clean house" after Barry's final term . Kelly: "Clean house" reference to scandal-plagued mayor .
 Kelly represented Washington, D.C., on the Democratic National Committee from 1977 to 1990 . Kelly served as committee treasurer from 1985 to 1989 . Kelly was also a member of the National Democratic Party .
 Lee Thornton Keloid is a mass of scar tissue that occurs at the site of a cut . Keloid occurs in the shape of a scar tissue . It is also known as the "Lee Thornton Keloids" or "Keloids"
 They usually are raised above the surface of the skin and extend beyond the original skin injury . The scars are usually raised above surface of skin and extended beyond original injury .
 They often occur after the skin has been injured by a laceration or by surgery . They may appear spontaneously, but may also appear spontaneously .
 Keloids can be surgically removed, but they frequently reappear weeks or months later . Keloids often reappear in the weeks or after surgery .
 Kelp is any of a variety of large, brown to brownishgreen seaweeds that grow underwater and on rocky shores . Kelp can be found in the UK and Australia .
 One type of kelp may have hundreds of branches, each of which has hundreds of leaves . Giant kelp, called giant kelp , may have branches of which each have hundreds leaves .
 In areas where many giant kelps live together, they form underwater forests . In areas of underwater forests, they often live together together .
 Some species consist of a single branch and grow less than 3 feet long . Some species of tree branches consist of just one branch . Others consist of only one branch of a tree .
 Kelps have a complex type of life cycle known as a/ternation of generations . Kelps live in a complex life cycle called a complex form of life .
 Other animals, including lobsters and many fish, use kelps for shelter . Many animals, such as lobsters, use them for shelter.
 People in China and Japan grow kelp for food on special farms in the ocean . The kelp is grown in special farms on the ocean floor in Japan .
 In the United States and many other countries, kelps are collected from the places where they grow naturally . In the U.S. and many others countries, they collect them from the place they grow .
 Harvested kelps yield a/gin, a substance used in the manufacture of ice cream, salad dressing, beer, paper, cosmetics, and other products .
 Queen Victoria knighted Kelvin for his work as the electrical engineer in charge of laying the first successful transatlantic cable in 1866 . She was knighted for her work in the wake of the Great War .
 Kelvin invented the mirror galvanometer used in cable signaling . He invented the siphon recorder, still used to receive the signals . The siphon was still used in receiving signals .
 He invented the first ship's compass that reduced the magnetic influence of iron on the ship . The compass was invented by the inventor of the compass in 1903 .
 The discovery of radioactivity showed that his basic assumptions were incorrect . However, the discovery of radioactive material showed that he had been wrong .
 Kemble Kemble, Fanny , was a British author and actress who lived in the U.S. for many years . Kemble was known for her strong antislavery beliefs in the United States .
 In her book Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation, she recorded observations she had made of Southern plantation life . She sharply criticized slavery .
 The book helped increase opposition to the Southern cause in both the U.S. and the UK .
 She made her stage debut in 1829 in Romeo and Juliet . In 1832, she came to the United States, where she won praise for her performances .
 The marriage, which ended in divorce, brought her in contact with slavery . The marriage brought her into slavery .
 Kemble wrote poetry, plays, essays on Shakespeare, and a novel . Kemble also wrote essays and plays on Shakespeare and essays on the Bard .
 Gabor S Boritt Kemp, Jack French became an important American political leader after a career as a professional football player . Jack French was also a professional footballer . Jack British was an important figure in American politics . He was a member of the Republican Party .
 He was the Republican candidate for vice president of the United States in 1996 . He was also a Republican presidential candidate for president of 1996 .
 Kemp and his presidential running mate, Robert Dole, were defeated by their Democratic opponents, President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore . Kemp and Dole were both defeated by Clinton and Gore .
 Occidental football player played on Occidental’s varsity football team for three years . A quarterback, he played for Occidental for three seasons .
 His best success came with the Buffalo Bills of the American Football League, from 1962 until 1969 .
 Kemp helped organize the league's players association, and he served as its president from 1965 to 1970 . Kemp was also the president of the players' union, which he helped organize .
 Kemp was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1970 . Kemp was reelected eight times . Kemp served as a member of the U.S. House of Representative .
 Kemp attracted national attention for coauthoring the Kemp-Roth bill with Senator William V Roth, Jr., of Delaware . Kemp was also a coauthorator of the Kemp bill in the House .
 The bill formed the basis of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 . It cut individual income tax rates 25 percent over three years . The bill was the basis for the 1981 Economic Recovery Act .
 Supplyside supporters believe tax-rate reductions encourage savings and investments . Supplyside theory says tax rates should be reduced to encourage investment and savings .
 Kemp was an unsuccessful candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1988 . Kemp was a Republican presidential candidate in the 1980s . Kemp is a former presidential candidate .
 As secretary, he promoted enterprise zones to try to improve economic conditions in poor urban areas . As secretary he promoted enterprises zones .
 Businesses in enterprise zones receive tax cuts and freedom from such regulations as zoning laws . Businesses are allowed to operate in the enterprise zones .
 Kemp cofounded Empower America, a center for research and study dedicated to conservative principles and ideas . Kemp was a Cabinet member in the late 1980s and early 1990s .
 The park is named for fords (long, narrow inlets of the sea) that cut into its coastline on the Gulf of Alaska . The park was named for its fords, which cut into the coastline .
 The fiords area features forests, deep valleys, rugged cliffs, and many sea animals . It is also home to a variety of wildlife .
 Kendall, Henry Way and Jerome Friedman worked with Jerome Friedman of the United States and Richard Taylor of Canada in experiments that proved the existence of subatomic particles called quarks .
 Three scientists fired particles into protons and neutrons, the objects that make up atomic nuclei . In the early 1970's, the three scientists used the technique to create atomic nuclear particles .
 The three scientists shared the 1990 Nobel Prize for physics . For these discoveries, the three scientists were awarded the Nobel Prize .
 The quark theory was first proposed in 1964 by two American physicists . Murray Gell-Mann and George Zweig proposed the theory in 1964 .
 In 1971, Kendall and his colleagues provided the first direct evidence of the existence of quarks . Kendall's experiments provided the evidence that quarks existed in 1971 .
 They showed that protons and neutrons are made up of quarks, which have electric charges that are fractions of the charge of the electron and proton . They also showed that quarks have electric charge that is fractions of that of the electrons and proptons .
 Until then scientists had believed that protons and neutrons were indivisible . Until then, scientists had thought that proton and neutron were indevisible .
 In 1969, Kendall helped to found the Union of Concerned Scientists . The group is pressing the U.S. government to control harmful technologies such as nuclear power . Kendall helped found the group .
 Two scientists traced structure of hemoglobin and myoglobin using X-ray crystallography . The two scientists traced the structure of the two hemoglobin molecules .
 These are two proteins found in the blood and muscles of human beings and animals . They are found in blood and in the muscles of humans and animals.
 He directed the molecular biology lab at Cambridge from 1946 to 1975 . He directed molecular biology laboratory at Cambridge between 1946 and 1975 .
 The novel, titled Schindler's Listin the United States, is based on the true story of a German businessman who saved the lives of more than a thousand Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland . More than 1,000 Jews were killed in the Holocaust in Poland .
 His other notable books include Bring Larks and Heroes and 7he Chant of Jimmy Blacksmith . 7hree Cheers for the Paraclete is a novel dealing with conflict within the Roman Catholic Church .
 He served as a Democrat from West Virginia in the United States House of Representatives from 1877 to 1883 . He also served in the U.S. Senate from 1883 until his death .
 Kenna called for government funding to improve river navigation in West Virginia . Kenna also called for more funding for navigation in the state .
 George Frost is credited with developing the United States policy to prevent Soviet expansion after World War II . Edward A Lukes-Lukaszewski Kennan, George Frost was a diplomat for the U.S. Kennan .
 As ambassador to the Soviet Union in 1952, Kennan protested being restricted to Moscow . Kennan was ambassador to Moscow in 1952 .
 He served on the U.S. Department of State policy-planning staff in 1947 . He was a member of the State Department's staff .
 Kennan became a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1956 . Kennan was a member of the Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton .
 Anthony McLeod became an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States in 1988 . Paul B Frederic Kennedy was an associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court .
 President Ronald Reagan named Kennedy to fill the vacancy created by Justice Lewis Powell's retirement . Kennedy was appointed to the Supreme Court by Ronald Reagan in 1981 .
 Reagan nominated Kennedy after the United States Senate rejected his first nominee, Robert H Bork, and after his second nominee, Douglas H Ginsburg, withdrew . Kennedy was nominated after Bork and Ginsburg withdrew from consideration .
 He practiced law in San Francisco from 1961 to 1963 . He practiced in Sacramento from 1963 to 1975 .
 President Gerald Ford appointed Kennedy to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in 1973 . Kennedy was appointed to the 9th Circuit in the same year .
 He is generally considered a conservative, as is an advocate of judicial restraint . He is reluctant to interfere with legislative policy unless that policy is clearly unconstitutional .
 Edward Moore has served in the U.S. Senate since 1962 . He has been a member of the Massachusetts state Senate since 1961 .
 He was Democratic whip (assistant leader) of the Senate from 1969 to 1971 . He served as Democratic whip from 1969-1971 . He was also Democratic whip .
 From 1979 to 1981, he served as chairman of the Senate’s Judiciary Committee . He served as a senator from Washington, D.C., from 1978 to 1981 .
 He was chairman of the Labor and Human Resources Committee from 1987 to 1995 . He was chair of the committee from 1987 until 1995 .
 Kennedy is known as a national spokesman and defender of liberal causes . Kennedy is also known for his work in Washington, D.C., as a spokesman for the liberal movement .
 He has supported greater government spending on programs to help the poor, the working class, minorities, and other disadvantaged groups .
 In the Senate, he supported arms control, stronger antitrust laws, and tax reform . In the U.S. he supported strong antitrust laws and strong tax reforms .
 Kennedy was an unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1980 . Kennedy was a candidate for President Reagan in the 1980s .
 His brothers President John F Kennedy and Senator Robert F Kennedy were assassinated . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He was only 30 years old, the minimum age for a senator, but he won easily . He won easily, winning easily .
 In 1969, Kennedy's car plunged from a bridge on Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts, and his passenger, Mary Jo Kopechne, was drowned .
 He was shot to death on Nov., 1963, after 2 years and 10 months as chief executive .
 The world mourned Kennedy's death, and presidents, premiers and members of royalty walked behind the casket at his funeral .
 Kennedy, a Democrat, won the presidency with his “New Frontier’ program, after a series of television debates with his Republican opponent, Vice President Richard M Nixon .
 President Kennedy was the first president of the Roman Catholic faith . He was 46 when he was elected president . Kennedy was a Catholic .
 In his inaugural address, President Kennedy declared that “a new generation of Americans had taken over leadership of the country’s . Inaugural address, he declared that a ‘new generation’ had taken control .
 He greatly increased U.S. prestige in 1962 when he turned aside the threat of an atomic war with the Soviet Union . In 1962, he carried out negotiations that resulted in the Soviets withdrawing missiles from Cuba .
 Lyndon B Johnson was Vice President of the U.S. from 1961-1963 . He served as a vice president of the United States from 1961 to 1963 . He was in office at the time of the Cold War .
 On the home front, the United States enjoyed its greatest prosperity in history . The U.S. enjoyed the most prosperous period of its history . In the 1930s, the economy was at its peak .
 African Americans’ demands for civil rights caused serious domestic problems . African Americans made greater progress in their quest for equal rights than at any time since the Civil War .
 During Kennedy's administration, the U.S. made its first piloted space flights and prepared to send astronauts to the moon . The United States was preparing for the moon when Kennedy made his first space flights .
 The president's ancestors were Irish farmers of Wexford County in southeastern Ireland .
 His great-grandfather, Patrick Kennedy, left Ireland during the great potato famine of the 1840's and settled in Boston . Patrick Kennedy left Ireland in 1840's during the Great Potato Famine .
 The president's grandfather, Patrick J Kennedy, became a state senator and the political ‘boss’ of a ward in Boston . The president’s grandfather was a state .
 Fitzgerald served in the state senate and the United States House of Representatives . Fitzgerald was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1964 . Fitzgerald served as a state senator and a member of the United United States House .
 During the administration of President Franklin D Roosevelt, he served as the first chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission . He also served as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom . He served as first chairman and ambassador to United States .
 Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Massachusetts, a Boston suburb . He was born in 1917 . Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family .
 The other eight Kennedy children were Joseph, Jr. , who died in 1968 . Historic events of Kennedy's presidency included construction of the Berlin Wall and the first American manned space flights .
 The Berlin Wall divided East and West Berlin, closing the route used by millions of Germans to flee Communist rule . Millions of Germans fled the area to escape Communist rule in the wake of the Wall .
 Astronaut John H Glenn, Jr., orbited the earth in the space capsule Friendship 7 . Glenn's Friendship 7 was the first time he orbited earth in space . Glenn was a member of the Friendship 7 crew .
 Jack, Jack, as his family called him, and Joe, his older brother, were especially strong rivals . Jack and Joe were strong rivals, and Jack was a strong rival .
 Jack was quiet and often shy, but he held his own in fights with Joe . "Jack" was quiet, often shy but held his hand in Joe's fight .
 In 1930, when he was 13 years old, his father sent him to the Canterbury School in New Milford, Conn. He was sent to the school by his father .
 Kennedy was graduated from Choate in 1935 at the age of 37 . Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family .
 The District of Columbia gave residents the right to vote in presidential elections . It gave residents of the D.C. the right of the nation to vote for president . It was the first time residents could vote in a presidential election .
 In 1962, astronaut John H Glenn, Jr., became the first American to orbit the earth . Glenn was the first man in space to orbit Earth .
 Adolf Eichmann, a top Nazi war criminal, was hanged in Israel in 1962 for his part in the massacre of European Jews during World War II . Eichman was hanged for his role in the Holocaust massacre .
 Aigeria won independence from France in 1962 after more than seven years of bloody fighting . The country's independence was declared in 1962 .
 The communications sateilite Te/star J was launched by the United States in 1962 . Te/Star J was the first communications satellite communications satellite launched in the 1960s .
 It was the first satellite to relay television programs between America and Europe . It was also the first to relay programs between U.S. and Europe.
 Silent Spring, Rachel Carson's book on the wasteful and destructive use of pesticides, helped Jaunch the U.S. environmental protection movement in 1962 . Silent Spring was published in 1962 and helped launch the environmental movement in the United States .
 The Supreme Court ruled in 1962-1963 that official prayers and Bible reading in public schools were unconstitutional .
 South Vietnamese generals overthrew and killed President Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963 . South Vietnamese general overthrew Diem's government in 1963, killing him .
 Traveling from country to country, he interviewed politicians and statesmen . Traveled around the world .
 Kennedy's birthplace was this three-story frame house in Brookline, Mass., a suburb of Boston . Kennedy sent his father detailed reports on their views of the crisis that soon led to World John F Kennedy National Historic Site .
 Kennedy tried to explain in his senior thesis why the U.K. had not been ready for war . Back at Harvard, Kennedy tried in his thesis to explain why the UK was not ready to war .
 His thesis, published as Why England Slept, became a best-selling book . His book, Why England Sleeps, was published in 2004 .
 Kennedy enlisted as a seaman in the United States Navy . Kennedy enlisted in the U.S. Navy after a trip through South America .
 He applied for sea duty following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on Dec. 1941 . He applied to sea duty after the attack .
 After learning to command one of the small craft, he was commissioned as an ensign . He learned to command a small craft and was commissioned to be an ensman .
 Kennedy's PT boat was assigned to patrol duty off the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific . Kennedy was assigned with patrol duty .
 A Japanese destroyer cut his boat in two . Shortly after midnight on Aug., 1943, 1943, the boat was cut off by a Japanese destroyer .
 Kennedy and the other 10 men clung all night to the wreckage of their boat . Kennedy and 10 others clung to the boat's wreckage all night . Kennedy was killed in the crash .
 Despite an injured back, he spent five hours towing one of the disabled crewmen to shore . He spent the rest of the day towing the stricken ship to shore, despite his injured back .
 Kennedy spent most of the next four days in the water, searching for help . Kennedy spent the rest of the time in the ocean looking for help in the wake of the storm .
 On the fifth day, he persuaded friendly islanders on Cross Island to go for help . The islanders in Cross Island were able to reach out to the islanders .
 For his heroism, Kennedy received the Navy and Marine Corps Medal . Kennedy was awarded the Medal of Honor for his heroism .
 In December 1943, Lieutenant Kennedy was returned to the United States .
 He was suffering from malaria and his injured back gave him great pain . He said: "I'm not going to be able to go out of pain. I'm going to go to work"
 After recovering, Kennedy spent the rest of his naval service as an instructor and in various military hospitals . After recovering from his injuries, he spent the next few years in the Navy .
 Kennedys had thought Jack would become a writer or a teacher . Jack was a member of Congress and has served in Congress .
 He opposed nine other candidates for nomination in the solidly Democratic 11th Congressional District of Massachusetts .
 He won the nomination and went on to easily defeat his Republican opponent . He won't be a candidate for president in 2016 .
 The 1946 campaign set a pattern that played a major part in Kennedy's success . The 1946 election was the first time Kennedy had been elected president .
 His isolationism before World War II, his conservatism, and his wealth made him a controversial figure . His isolationistism before WWII, his wealth and his isolationism also made him controversial .
 Later that year, he became seriously ill, and doctors discovered that he was suffering from a malfunction of the adrenal glands .
 To control the ailment, he had to take medicine daily for the rest of his life . To control it, he was forced to take daily medication .
 Kennedy won the Navy and Marine Corps Medal as the skipper of a PT boat during World War I . He kept that medal, but he kept it in his pocket .
 Kennedy led his crew to safety after a Japanese destroyer cut the boat in two from public view . Kennedy led the crew of his ship to safety from the Japanese destroyer .
 In Congress, Kennedy voted for most of the social welfare programs of President Harry S Truman . Kennedy voted against most of President Truman's social welfare policies .
 Lodge, a popular and experienced legislator, seemed certain to win reelection . Lodge, an experienced lawmaker, was re-elected in November .
 Kennedy's mother and his brothers and sisters and their spouses joined him in the campaign . Kennedy's family and his siblings and spouses were in support of his campaign .
 Dwight D Eisenhower, the Republican presidential candidate, carried Massachusetts in the 1952 election . Eisenhower carried Massachusetts .
 Jacqueline "Jackie" Lee Bouvier was the daughter of a wealthy Wall Street broker, John V Bouvier Ill. She was born Jacqueline “Jackie’s” daughter, Jacquie, Lee .
 Later, she worked as an inquiring photographer for the Washington Times-Herald .
 Senator Kennedy focused at first on helping industries in Massachusetts and New England . Kennedy focused first on economic issues in Massachusetts .
 He sponsored bills to help such industries as fishing, textile manufacturing, and watchmaking .
 Kennedy served on the Senate Labor Committee, and the Government Operations Committee, chaired by Senator Joseph R McCarthy . Kennedy was a member of both the Labor and Government Operations Committees .
 Robert Kennedy, his brother, served on the Government Operations Committee staff as an assistant counsel . Robert Kennedy served as a member of the Senate's staff .
 At the time, McCarthy was the most controversial figure in American politics . McCarthy was known for his anti-immigration policies .
 Many people praised his attacks on Communist influence in government . Many praised him for attacking the Chinese government .
 Others criticized McCarthy because they felt he had violated the civil liberties of people investigated by his committee . Others felt McCarthy had violated people's civil liberties .
 Kennedy felt McCarthy often abused his power and was endangering the honor of the Senate . Kennedy felt that McCarthy often abuse his power . McCarthy was accused of abusing the Senate honor .
 If he had been present, he would have voted for the condemnation, he said . But he said later that if he'd been present he would've voted for it . He said he would not have been present at the vote .
 In October 1954, and in February 1955, he underwent corrective surgery . He had corrective surgery in October 1954 .
 While recovering, he wrote a book about some of the brave deeds of U.S. senators .
 Kennedy was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1957 . For the book Profiles in Courage, Profiles In Courage, he was awarded a Pulitzer Prize . Kennedy won the award in 1957 for his work .
 In 1957, Kennedy was appointed to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a key assignment in Congress . Kennedy was a key member of the Foreign Relations committee . He was appointed in 1957 to the committee .
 He criticized the foreign policy of the Republican administration . He supported increased aid to underdeveloped countries .
 Kennedy also worked for moderate legislation to end alleged corruption in labor unions . Kennedy also campaigned against alleged corruption of labor unions in the 1980s .
 He was a member of a Senate committee investigating racketeering in labormanagement relations . He was also a Senate member of an investigation into racketeering .
 The Kennedys and other committee members engaged in dramatic arguments with controversial Jabor leaders, including James R “Jimmy Hoffa, of the Teamsters Union.”
 In June 1956, a movement to nominate Kennedy for vice president had gained strength among Democratic leaders . Kennedy was nominated as vice president in 1956 .
 At the partys national convention in Chicago, Kennedy made the presidential nominating speech for former Governor Adlai E Stevenson of Illinois . At the national convention, Kennedy gave the presidential nomination speech for Stevenson .
 Stevenson chose Stevenson to oppose Eisenhower for the second time . Stevenson was elected to the presidency in 1953 . Stevenson opposed Eisenhower in the Senate .
 Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee lost his seat in a close battle . He was defeated by a narrow margin of votes in the Senate .
 Kennedy began working for the 1960 presidential nomination right after the 1956 convention . Kennedy worked for the nomination after the convention in 1956 .
 In 1958, Kennedy won reelection to the Senate by a majority of 874,608 votes . Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1958 . Kennedy is a Republican .
 Many Democratic leaders thought Kennedy had several disadvantages as a presidential candidate . Kennedy was considered to be a candidate for the White House in 1968 .
 Alfred E Smith, the only Roman Catholic ever nominated for president by a major political party, had been badly defeated in 1928 . Smith was the first Roman Catholic to win a major party's nomination for president .
 Kennedy's youth, family wealth, and relative inexperience in international affairs are possible factors . Other possible shortcomings include his youth, wealth and inexperience . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Some Democrats opposed Kennedy because they thought he was too conservative and because he never actively opposed Senator McCarthy . Kennedy was not actively opposed to McCarthy .
 Kennedy decided that the key to the presidential nomination would be to win as many state primary elections as he could . Kennedy decided to focus on winning as many states as possible . Kennedy: "The key to winning the nomination is to winning all primary elections"
 He believed that victories in the primaries would prove he could win the presidency . He said he believed that victory would prove his ability to win the presidential election .
 At the Democratic national convention, Kennedy's chief opponents for the presidential nomination were Senator Lyndon B Johnson of Texas, Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri, and Senator Stuart . Symington, and Stevenson. Stevenson.
 The delegates, at the request of Kennedy, nominated Johnson for vice president . The delegates nominated Johnson at Kennedy's request . Kennedy nominated Johnson as vice president in 1964 .
 Republicans chose Vice President Richard M Nixon to oppose Kennedy for the presidency . The Republicans chose vice President Richard Nixon instead of President Kennedy .
 Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., then U.S. delegate to the United Nations, was Nixon's running mate . Kennedy's old opponent was Kennedy's opponent . Lodge was Lodge's former U.N. delegate .
 He had the advantage of being vice president under Eisenhower, an unusually popular president . Eisenhower was unusually popular .
 His good looks, wealth, and attractive wife had made him a popular subject for articles in newspapers and magazines . His wealth, good looks and wife were among the reasons for his fame .
 Television helped Kennedy greatly during his four televised debates with Nixon . Television also helped Kennedy during the four televised presidential debates .
 His poise helped answer criticism that he lacked maturity needed for the presidency . He was criticized for lack of maturity needed to be president .
 The debates marked the first time that presidential candidates argued campaign issues face-to-face . The debates were held in New York City .
 The televised debates between Kennedy and Richard M Nixon marked the first time presidential candidates argued face-to-face . Kennedy and Nixon were the first presidential candidates to argue face to-face in public .
 He charged that, under the Republicans, the United States had lost ground to the Soviet Union in the Cold War . The president charged that under the GOP, the U.S. has lost ground .
 As he took office, he faced such national problems as increased racial tensions, unemployment, and a sluggish economy . President Obama took office in 2009 .
 In foreign affairs, he faced the continuing spread of Communist influence, and the threat of nuclear war . In foreign policy, he also faced the spread of communist influence and nuclear war, he said .
 The New Frontier, the name Kennedy gave to his program, got off to a slow start . Kennedy: "The New Frontier" is the name he gave to the program .
 The 87th Congress finally began passing measures sponsored by the administration . The new measures were passed by the president's administration .
 In April 1961, the legislators approved aid to economically depressed areas . The state legislature approved the aid in April 1961 .
 In May, Congress approved an increase in the minimum hourly wage from $1 to $1.25 . Congress approved the increase in May . Congress also raised the minimum wage in June .
 U.S. Peace Corps was one of the most successful of Kennedy's Peace Corps programs . The Peace Corps is the largest branch of the Peace Corps in the world .
 It was launched by executive order in March 1961, and authorized by Congress . It was later authorized by both Congress and the White House .
 The corps sent thousands of Americans abroad to help people in developing nations raise their standards of living . Thousands of Americans were sent overseas to help raise standards in developing countries .
 Congress rejected a cabinet-level Department of Urban Affairs and Kennedy's plan for medical care for the aged . Congress also rejected Kennedy's proposal to create a new health care system for the elderly .
 Kennedy reorganized the nation’s defense policies by increasing conventional weapons . Kennedy also increased the use of conventional weapons in the 1960s .
 He wanted to be prepared for nonnuclear wars and make every effort to avoid using nuclear weapons, he said . He said he wanted to avoid nuclear war .
 In March 1962, the major steel producers signed a contract with the steelworkers union that increased workers’ benefits, but not their wages . The contract was signed by steel producers that increased benefits but not wages .
 Kennedy praised the contract, which he said would help prevent inflation . Kennedy said the contract would help keep inflation in check .
 On April 10, the United States Steel Corporation led a move to raise steel prices $6 a ton . The U.S. Steel Corporation has raised steel prices by $6 per ton .
 Kennedy denounced the move as causing needless inflation, and the companies canceled it . Kennedy angrily denounced it as causing inflation . Kennedy: "It was a mistake. It was a waste of time"
 They felt the presidents action toward the steel companies reflected an antibusiness attitude . They said they felt the action .
 Kennedy aided business by increasing tax benefits for companies investing in new equipment . Kennedy increased tax benefits by increasing the tax rate to $1,000 per cent . Kennedy also increased the tax rates for companies that invested in new technology . Kennedy says the tax benefits will be increased to $2,
 In 1963, he proposed a $10-billion tax cut, which included lowering corporate taxes . He proposed a tax cut of $10 billion, including lowering corporate tax rates .
 He thought that the public would be able to spend more if taxes were cut . He said the public could spend more on taxes if the public were able to .
 The increased spending would generate new business, and the taxes received from an expanded economy would more than offset the revenue lost in the tax cut . The tax cut would be offset by increased spending and increased taxes .
 Demands for equal rights for African Americans became the major domestic issue during the Kennedy administration .
 In 1961, a group of nonviolent freedom riders entered Montgomery, Alabama, by bus to test local segregation . Kennedy's inauguration as president took place on Jan. 31, 1961 .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy sent United States marshals to the city to help restore order . White rioters attacked them .
 Two people were killed in the rioting that followed on the university campus at Oxford . Two people died in the riots that followed .
 The president ordered 3,000 federal troops to the area to restore order . President Obama has ordered the troops to help restore order in the area .
 In 1963, demands by African Americans for equal civil and economic rights increased . The civil rights movement for African Americans increased in the 1960s .
 Racial protests and demonstrations took place across the United States. Racial protests were held across the country .
 Kennedy federalized the Guard again in September to ensure the integration of public schools in three Alabama cities . Kennedy had the Guard in Alabama to ensure public schools integrated .
 On Aug. 1963, more than 200,000 people staged a Freedom March in Washington, D.C., to protest their demands for equal rights for blacks . The march was held in Washington to protest the lack of African-American representation in Congress .
 He also asked Congress to grant the at_ torney general authority to begin court suits to desegre| gate schools on behalf of private citizens unable to start legal action themselves .
 This was only the third time in the 1900's that the party in power increased its representation in Congress in a midterm election . This was the only third time since 1900s that a party was in control of Congress in that midterms .
 In his second year in office, Kennedy appointed two justices of the Supreme Court . Kennedy also appointed two Supreme Court justices .
 Caroline and John, Jr. were the youngest children of a president to live in the White House in more than 60 years . Caroline was the youngest daughter of President Barack Obama to have a White House residence . Caroline, Jr., was the daughter of a former president .
 Women in many countries copied Jacqueline Kennedy's stylish clothes and hairdo . Women copied her style of clothing and hairstyle .
 She gathered furnishings of past presidents and made the mansion a historic showplace and tourist attraction . The mansion is now a tourist attraction and a showplace .
 The president gave recognition to the creative arts by appointing a special adviser on the arts . See White House (Rebuilding and redecorating).
 On April 17, 1961, Cuban rebels invaded their homeland to overthrow Fidel Castro, the Communistsupported dictator . Fidel Castro was overthrown by the Cuban government in 1961 .
 Another Cuban crisis erupted in October 1962, when the United States learned that the Soviet Union had installed missiles in Cuba capable of striking U.S. cities . The United States also learned that missiles were installed in Cuba .
 Navy ships were ordered to turn back ships delivering Soviet missiles to Cuba . U.S. Navy ships turned back ships carrying Soviet missiles . Cuban missiles were among the missiles being delivered to the island .
 Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev ordered all Soviet offensive missiles removed from the Soviet Union . Then, Soviet Premier Khrushchevitch ordered the removal of all Soviet missiles .
 In 1961, the Soviet Union threatened to give Communist East Germany control over the Wests air . Kennedy's courage during the Cuban missile crisis was compared by a cartoon with the bravery described in Profiles in Courage .
 The threat was part of a Soviet effort to end the combined American, British, French, and Soviet control of Berlin . It was begun in 1945, when World War II ended .
 In June 1961, Kennedy discussed Berlin with Khrushchev at a two-day meeting in Vienna, Austria, Austria . Kennedy discussed the issue in June 1961 at a meeting in Austria .
 In August, the East Germans built a wall between East and West Berlin to prevent people from fleeing to the West . The wall was built in August to stop people fleeing from the East to flee to the west .
 Kennedy called up 145,000 members of the National Guard and reservists to strengthen U.S. military defense . Kennedy calls up about 145,00 members of National Guard, reservists .
 In 1961, the United States established the Alliance for Progress, a 10-year program of aid for Latin American countries that agreed to begin democratic reforms . U.S. established the program in 1961, a decade of aid to Latin American nations .
 Kennedy hoped this program would bring social and political reform as well as fight poverty . Kennedy hopes this program will bring social reform and help fight poverty in America . Kennedy: "It's not just about politics, but it's about social justice and social justice"
 In 1961, Kennedy was interviewed by Khrushchev's son-in-law, then editor of /zvestia, the Soviet government newspaper . The interview was printed in the newspaper, which printed the entire interview .
 Kennedy had trouble establishing a united NATO nuclear force . The western Atlantic alliance remained strong, but Kennedy struggled to establish a united force .
 President Charles de Gaulle refused to commit France to the NATO nuclear force . President Charles De Gaulle was president of France in the 1950s .
 Kennedy ordered U.S. military advisers to the area in 1961 and 1962 when the Communists threatened South Vietnam and Thailand . Kennedy ordered United States .
 The U.S. severely criticized the South Vietnamese government for its repressive policies against the country's Buddhists . In the summer and autumn of 1963, 1963, the United States severely criticized Ngo Dinh Diem's government .
 The government imprisoned many Buddhist leaders and students who were leading demonstrations against the Diem government . Many Buddhist leaders were imprisoned by the government during the government .
 Kennedy sent former Republican senator and vice presidential candidate Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., Jr., to South Vietnam as ambassador in 1963 . Kennedy sent him to Vietnam in 1963 as ambassador to Vietnam . Lodge was a Republican senator in the 1960s .
 The tests broke an unofficial test ban that had lasted nearly three years . The tests were the first to break the unofficial ban for three years.
 The United States began testing shortly after the Soviets resumed their tests, but the U.S. conducted its tests underground, which created no dangerous fallout .
 In April 1962, the United States resumed testing in the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean . The United States continued testing in 1962 .
 In July 1963, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States signed a treaty banning atomic testing in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water . The treaty was signed in July 1963 .
 John F Kennedy was shot to death by an assassin on Nov. 22, 1963, as he rode through the streets of Dallas . JFK was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Harrison who was elected in a year that ended in ‘0’ died while in office . Harrison was elected to office in 2008 . Harrison died while serving in office in 2009 .
 Harrison, who was elected in 1840; Lincoln, elected in 1860; James A Garfield, 1880; William McKinley, 1900; Warren G Harding, 1920; and Franklin D Roosevelt, 1940 . These presidents were Harrison, Lincoln, Garfield, McKinley and McKinley .
 Johnson was the first Southerner to become president since Andrew Johnson succeeded Lincoln when Lincoln was assassinated in 1865 .
 Kennedy came to Texas accompanied by his wife and Vice President and Mrs. Kennedy . Kennedy was accompanied by her husband and vice president .
 The Kennedy party left Washington, D.C., on Thursday, November 21, and flew to San Antonio, Houston, and Fort Worth, Texas .
 At 11:37m. the next day, the president's plane arrived in Dallas after a short trip from Fort Worth . At 11.37m, the plane left Fort Worth and landed in Dallas .
 Kennedy, Johnson, and others to travel in a motorcade through the streets of Dallas to the Dallas Trade Mart . Kennedy and Johnson were traveling in motorcade to Dallas .
 After leaving the plane, Kennedy entered an open limousine for the trip to the Trade Mart . Kennedy entered the open limo after leaving his plane .
 Texas Governor John B Connally sat in a ‘jump’ seat in front of the president, and Mrs. Kennedy sat in the 'jump' seat . Mrs. Connally was the first lady to sit in the president's 'jump seat'
 Behind the president's car was a limousine filled with Secret Service agents . The president was traveling with a large group of Secret Service officers in the car .
 Dallas had reputation as a center for people who strongly opposed Kennedy . Dallas had a reputation for opposing Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 At 12:30m., the cars approached an expressway for the last leg of the trip . At 12.30m, the cars left the country for the final leg of their journey .
 Three shots rang out and the president slumped down, hit in the neck and head . The president was hit by three shots in the head and neck .
 Kennedy held her stricken husband's head in her lap as the limousine raced to nearby Parkland Hospital . Kennedy was rushed to a nearby hospital where he was taken to critical condition .
 Doctors worked desperately to save the president, but he died at 1:00m. without regaining consciousness . The president was rushed to hospital but later died without consciousness .
 Kennedy had no chance to surveive when brought into the hospital . Doctors said that Kennedy had . no chance of surveiving . Kennedy was taken to the hospital in a coma .
 Television and radio flashed the news of the shooting to a shocked world . The shooting was the first of its kind to be reported in the U.S.
 Vice President Johnson raced to the hospital and remained until Kennedy died . Vice President Kennedy died at the age of 65 .
 At 2:39m., United States District Judge Sarah T Hughes administered the oath of office . Johnson became the 36th president of the United States .
 As Johnson took the oath in the airplane, he was flanked by his wife and by Mrs. Johnson .
 The plane carrying the new chief executive and his wife, the body of the dead president, and the late presidents widow returned to Washington . The new president's widow was also in the plane .
 The killer fired when Kennedy's car reached the spot marked by the cross . Kennedy was killed when his car was driven to the site marked by a cross .
 Kennedy sat next to him, and Governor John B Connally of Texas sat in front of him . Kennedy sat beside him, as did Connally .
 Police search for a building employee who had left the scene a few minutes after the shooting . Then they begin a search for another building employee, who has not been seen since .
 Oswald was finally arrested in a theater a short while later, and was charged with the murders of President Kennedy and Tippit . Oswald was charged in the deaths of both JFK and Kennedy with the deaths .
 Oswald had been given a hardship discharge from the United States Marines and had once tried to become a Soviet citizen . Oswald had tried to join the Soviet Union but was denied entry into the country .
 He also had been active in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, a group that supported Cuba's Communist dictator Fidel Castro .
 Dallas police claimed that the evidence against Oswald was overwhelming . Dallas police said the evidence was overwhelming against Oswald . Oswald was found guilty of the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Oswald was scheduled to be taken from the Dallas city jail to the county jail on November 24, two days after the assassination . Oswald was due to be transferred to the Dallas county jail two days later .
 Dallas nightclub owner, Jack Ruby, shot Oswald to death . Ruby stepped out of the crowd and shot Oswald in the head as he was being led to an armored car . Ruby was the owner of a Dallas nightclub .
 Jack Ruby was convicted of Oswald's murder in 1964, but the conviction was overturned in 1966 . Ruby was found guilty of the murder of Oswald in 1966, but was never convicted again .
 The sudden death of the young and vigorous American president shocked the world . President Obama's sudden death was the shock of the world.
 Kennedy's body was brought back to the White House and placed in the East Room for 24 hours . Kennedy's remains were placed in East Room of White House for the day .
 On the Sunday after the assassination, Kennedy's flag-draped coffin was Carried to the Capitol Rotunda to lie in state . On the day of the shooting, Kennedy was carried to the Rotunda .
 Throughout the day and night, hundreds of thousands of people filed past the guarded casket . The casket was guarded by police throughout the night .
 Representatives from over 90 countries attended the funeral on November 25 . Representatives from more than 90 countries also attended the service .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, the accused assassin, was shot by Jack Ruby, right, two days after Kennedy died . Jack Ruby shot Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 . Ruby was the first person to shoot Kennedy in Dallas to death .
 Millions of TV viewers saw Ruby kill Oswald, who was under police guard . Millions of television viewers saw the assassination of Oswald .
 President Johnson named National Aeronautics and Space Administration installation in Florida the John F Kennedy Space Center . President Johnson was one of his first acts to name the facility .
 The following quotations come from some of Kennedy's speeches and writings . Other Quotations from Kennedy include: "I am not afraid to be afraid to die"
 Aman does what he must, in spite of personal consequences, says Aman . "That is the basis of all human morality," he says . Aman says, "I do what I must, despite obstacles and dangers"
 Inaugural Address: "The torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans" Speech: "Unwilling to witness the slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been committed"
 There are no “white” or “colored” signs on the foxholes or graveyards of battle . No one has been barred on account of his race from fighting or dying .
 Speech from 1963: "When power leads man toward arrogance, poetry reminds him of his limitations"
 When power narrows the areas of man’s concern, poetry reminds him of the rich ness and diversity of his existence, poetry . Poems like poetry remind him of his own existence .
 Art establishes the basic human truth which must serve as the touchstone of our judgment . For art establishes a basic human . truth, art establishes human truth, which must . serve as a touchstone for judgment .
 Public buildings and geographical sites throughout the world were named for Kennetly . Amherst College was named for him .
 The United Kingdom made 1 acre of ground permanent United States territory as part of a Kennedy memorial at Runnymede .
 The Warren Commission, headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, investigated the assassination . Warren Commission was headed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court .
 Many believed Oswald was part of a group that had planned to murder Kennedy . Oswald was believed to be part of the group that planned to kill Kennedy .
 During the 1970's, a special committee of the United States House of Representatives reexamined the evidence surrounding the assassination . A special committee was formed in the 1970s to reexamine the case .
 Committee accepted testimony of acoustical experts who claimed shots were fired from two locations along the motorcade at almost the same time . The committee accepted testimony from acoustics experts who said shots were shot from two different locations along motorcade .
 In 1982, the National Research Council, a scientific research organization, disagreed with the House committee's finding . The National Research council also disagreed with its findings .
 Warren Report Outline I Early life A Family background C Education B Boyhood D War hero lil. Nixon, Richard M Cold War Onassis, Jacqueline Kennedy Cuba Oswald, Lee Harvey. JFK. Onassis . Kennedy. Kennedy. JFK . JFK. Kennedy . JFK’s
 In Congress, Illinois was a U.S. representative . In Congress he was a member of the House of Representatives . He was elected to the Senate in 1996 .
 The solemn procession traveled past the Lincoln Memorial, shown here, on its way to Arlington National Cemetery, where the president was buried . President Obama was buried there in Arlington .
 Kennedy was a self-made multimillionaire who earned most of his great wealth by investing in stocks, bonds, and real estate . Kennedy was an investor who invested in real estate, stocks and bonds .
 His sons included a United States president and two senators . He held several government positions, including a vice president .
 At the age of 25, he gained control of a small bank in East Boston . He became the country’s youngest bank president .
 He later managed a shipbuilding company and an investment banking firm . He was later managed by shipbuilding and investment banking firms .
 He also served as president and board chairman of several theater and motion-picture organizations . He was also president, board chairman and president of several theaters .
 In 1934, President Roosevelt named Kennedy to the newly created Securities and Exchange Commission . The agency regulates stock trading . Kennedy was named to the new agency in 1934 .
 He served as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom from 1937 to 1940 . He served in the UK from 1937 until 1940 .
 In 1914, Kennedy married Rose Fitzgerald, daughter of the mayor of Boston . Kennedy married the mayor's daughter in 1914 .
 The oldest child, Joseph, Jr., was killed in 1944, during World War II, on a mission as a U.S. Navy pilot . Joseph Jr. was killed by the Navy in 1944 .
 The other three Kennedy sons were John F Kennedy, who was president from 1961 until his death in 1963, Robert F Kennedy and Edward M Kennedy .
 The Kennedy daughters were Rosemary; Kathleen, Kathleen, the wife of the Marquess of Hartington; Eunice, the . wife of Sargent Shriver, first director of the Peace Corps . Patricia, Patricia, once married to actor Peter Lawford; and Jean,
 Eunice founded the Special Olympics, an athletic competition for mentally disabled children and adults . She founded the special Olympics .
 Robert Francis served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1987 to 1999 . He represented Massa270 Kennedy, Massachusetts . Robert's son Joseph P Kennedy is the son of Robert .
 Edward's son Patrick became a representative from Rhode Island in 1995 . Edward became a member of the Rhode Island delegation in 1995.
 Robert Townsend's daughter Kathleen Townsend took office as lieutenant governor of Maryland in 1995 . Kathleen Townsend is the daughter of Robert Townsend, who died in 1996 .
 John’s son, John, Jr., was cofounder and publisher of the political satire magazine George . John, Sr. was co-founder of the magazine George. John Jr. was also publisher of George.
 He was assassinated in Los Angeles in June 1968 while campaigning for the Democratic nomination for president .
 In 1969, Sirhan Bishara Sirhan, a Jordanian-born Arab, was convicted of the assassination . Sirhan was sentenced to death in 1969, but has since been released from prison .
 The sentence was changed to life imprisonment in 1972 after the California Supreme Court declared the state's death penalty unconstitutional . The death penalty was declared unconstitutional in California in 1972 .
 Robert Kennedy was appointed attorney general of the United States by his brother, President John F Kennedy, in 1961 . He was appointed by President Kennedy in 1961 after his brother was assassinated .
 Kennedy continued as attorney general under President Lyndon B Johnson . After the presidents assassination in 1963, Kennedy continued to serve under President Johnson .
 Kennedy resigned from the Cabinet position in 1964 to run for the Senate . Kennedy resigned in 1964 from his Cabinet post in order to be a senator .
 Kennedy had entered the government in 1951 as an attorney in the United States Department of Justice . Kennedy had been an attorney for more than 50 years . Kennedy was a member of the U.S. Supreme Court .
 From 1953 to 1955, he was a counsel for the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations . He was also counsel for a subcommittee on investigations .
 Kennedy gained public attention during the late 1950's when he was chief counsel for the Senate committee that investigated improper labor and management activities . Kennedy was the Senate's chief counsel during the 1950's .
 Kennedy managed his brother's campaigns for the U.S. Senate in 1952 and for the presidency in 1960 . Kennedy managed the campaigns for his brother in 1952, 1960 .
 Joseph Kennedy II of Massachusetts was a member of the United States House of Representatives from 1987 to 1999 . His son Joseph P Kennedy II was a U.S. House member from 1987-1999 . He was elected to the Massachusetts Senate of Representatives .
 The National Symphony Orchestra and Washington Opera are resident companies of the center . The Washington Opera is resident companies at the center.
 Concert Hall, which has 2,750 seats, features concert music and popular entertainers . The Concert Hall is located in the heart of the city .
 Opera House seats 2,200 spectators and presents opera, ballet, and musical comedies . The Opera House is located in New York City, New York .
 Eisenhower Theater, which seats 1,100 people, offers plays and smaller opera and dance productions . The Eisenhower Theater is located in the Eisenhower Park, Florida .
 It is the primary launch and recovery site of the reusable space vehicle called the space shuttle . It is also the launch site for the shuttle shuttle .
 The American architect Edward Durell Stone designed the center, which was erected as a national memorial to the late president . The center was built in honor of President George W. Bush .
 Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts opened in 1971 . The Kennedy Center is an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution .
 The president of the United States appoints 30 people from each house of Congress . 3 members of Congress also appoints members of the House of Representatives .
 Kennedy Space Center, on the east coast of Florida, is the launch facility for all United States space missions that carry crews . The Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts is critically reviewed by the John F Kennedy Center .
 The center is located on Merritt Island, across from a point of land called Cape Canaveral . It is located across from the point of Cape Canaveral, Florida .
 People often call the center Cape Canaveral because it was formerly located there . The center is now known as Cape Canaveral . It was once located in Cape Canaveral, Florida .
 NASA tests, repairs, and launches space shuttles at Kennedy Space Center . NASA tests and launches shuttlees from the Kennedy Center .
 Workers attach external fuel tank to the orbiter (the craft that carries the crew) and two booster rockets . To prepare a shuttle for launch, workers in the 52-story Vehicle Assembly Building attach a fuel tank . The shuttle is the first shuttle to be prepared for launch .
 A huge tractorlike machine called a craw/er then carries the shuttle to one of two launch pads . The craw/ers are used to carry the shuttle from a launch pad .
 Kennedy Space Center evolved from NASA’s Launch Operations Directorate on Cape Canaveral . Kennedy space center evolved from the Launch Operations Division at Cape Canaveral, Florida, to Kennedy's Kennedy Space Station .
 The directorate was a part of the George C Marshall Space Flight Center, whose headquarters were in Huntsville, Alabama . It was a directorate for the space program .
 In 1962, NASA made the directorate an independent unit and renamed it the Launch Operations Center . The directorate is now the launch operations directorate .
 The center received its present name in December 1963, the month after the assassination of President John F Kennedy .
 In 1964, NASA moved the center to Merritt Island because the Cape Canaveral facilities were not large enough to handle the assembly, service, and launching of huge rockets that were to be used for the flights to the moon .
 NASA continues to assemble and test satellites and space probes on Cape Canaveral . The agency continues to build satellites and test probes on the site .
 One day, an epidemic of poliomyelitis struck, and Kenny could not get medical help . Kenny's family was devastated by the disease, but he was able to save his life .
 She found that prompt application of hot woolen packs relieved muscle spasms and usually prevented the patient becoming crippled .
 She lectured and demonstrated the method in the U.S. in 1940 . She secured funds to set up the Elizabeth Kenny Institute in Minneapolis, Minnesota .
 Elizabeth Fee Kensington rune stone is a slab inscribed with early Germanic characters called runes . It is inscribed in Germanic characters called runes.
 Olaf Ohman claimed he found the stone on his farm near Kensington, Minnesota, in 1898 . Ohman, a Swedish-born American farmer, claimed to have discovered the stone .
 Swedish and Norwegian Vikings set out on an expedition from an area of eastern North America called Vinland . It tells of a group of Swedish and Norweigolds who set out from the area of east North America .
 The language has some features that are more modern than typical language of the 1300's . The language was written in the 1300s .
 Ohman owned a book about runes, and many experts believe he forged the stone . Many experts believe the stone was forged by Ohman .
 The message could only have been written by someone with great knowledge of the Norse language of the 1300's . They argue that it could only be written by a Norse language expert .
 His Commentaries on American Law had great influence on American legal practice . He was influential in American law practice .
 He found material for his books and many of his drawings on his travels to remote parts of the world .
 These books and Sa/amina and N by E established him as both a writer and an artist . These books established him both an artist and writer .
 Rockwell Kent's Drifter, shown here, is typical of the artist's black-and-white wood engravings . The Drifter is shown here . Kent's black and white wood engraving .
 Kent Kent's style features bold patterns, simplified settings, and dramatic characterizations . Kent is known for his simplified settings .
 Kents work showed consistently sure draftsmanship and a strong sense of design . Kents' work was consistent and consistent .
 His illustrated editions of books written by other authors include Moby-Dick, Beowulf and The Canterbury Tales .
 He studied with some noted artists, including William Merritt Chase and Robert Henri . He studied painting with some of the world's most famous artists .
 Charles P Green Kenton, Stan , was an American bandleader, pianist, and composer . He was also known as Stan Kenton . Kenton was a member of the Grateful Dead .
 Throughout his career, Kenton led bands that departed from the big-band sound of the swing era . Kenton was a pioneer in the jazz world .
 In 1950, he toured with his 40-piece Innovations in Modern Music Orchestra, which included strings .
 In 1961, Kenton formed an orchestra featuring a brass instrument called the mel/lophone . In 1965, he assembled a semisymphonic band of 27 pieces he called the Neophonic Orchestra .
 Kenton compositions such as “Artistry in Rhythm” and “Eager Beaver’ became famous . Kenton composed “Intermission Riff’ .
 Kenton helped establish the careers of Lee Konitz, Art Pepper and Maynard Ferguson . He helped establish careers of many famous jazz musicians .
 In 1941, he formed his first band, which received wide praise for its precise, brassy sound . In 1941 he formed a band, known as The Beatles . He is credited for his precise and brassy music .
 Its popularity increased after Pete Rugolo began arranging the band’s music in 1945 . The band's popularity increased when Rugolo started arranging the music .
 Many jazz critics disliked Kenton’s music during his lifetime, but his bands remained popular with listeners .
 Kentucky horse farms produce some of the world’s finest thoroughbred race horses . Kentucky horses are bred in the state of Kentucky and bred in Kentucky .
 Most such farms are found in the state’s Bluegrass Region, near Lexington . Most of these farms are located in the Bluegrass region .
 Kentucky is one of the border states that lie between the North and the South of the United States . The Bluegrass State is a border state that lies between North and South .
 The Ohio River is one of the traditional boundaries between the Northern States and the Southern States . Its long northern border is formed by the Ohio River, one of its traditional boundaries .
 Kentucky also forms a link between two of the great land features of the United States . Kentucky is one of the most important U.S. landmarks .
 Thoroughbred race horses still graze on the lush grass of the region around Lexington, in central Kentucky .
 The region is known for the bluish grass blossoms that give Kentucky the nickname the Bluegrass State . Kentucky is also known for its nickname for the bluegrass .
 Each May, huge crowds thrill to the excitement of the country's most famous horse race, the Kentucky Derby, held at Churchill Downs .
 It leads the states in the production of burley tobacco, and it ranks second only to North Carolina in total tobacco production . It also leads the state in total production of tobacco .
 Coal is mined in Kentucky's eastern Appalachian counties and in western Kentucky . Kentucky coal mines are mined in eastern and western Kentucky counties .
 Cumberland Falls, Mammoth Cave, Natural Bridge, and Land Between the Lakes are some of the world's most famous landmarks .
 Most of the nation’s gold reserves are stored in the depository at Fort Knox, which is south of Louisville, Kentucky .
 A group of colonists from Pennsylvania established the first permanent white settlement in what is now Kentucky in 1774 .
 Kentucky stayed in the Union during the American Civil War (18611865) Thousands of Kentuckians joined the Confederate armies during the war .
 In 1900, an assassin’s bullet killed the governor of Kentucky, William Goebel, and Kentucky nearly had a civil war of its own . The governor was killed by an assassin's bullet .
 From 1904 to 1909, Kentucky farmers fought a group of tobacco firms in the so-called Tobacco Wars . From 1904-1909, the Tobacco Wars was a series of battles between Kentucky farmers and tobacco firms .
 Kentucky got its name from a Cherokee Indian word whose possible meanings include Land of Tomorrow and Meadow/land . Kentucky was named from the word "Kentucky" Kentucky is Kentucky's largest state .
 Kentucky was named a commonwealth to honor Virginia, which owned the region before Kentucky became a state . The state was named after the region, which was owned by Virginia .
 Mammoth-Flint Ridge cave system, entirely within Kentucky, is the longest known cave system in the world . Kentucky is home to the world's longest cave system . Mammoth Ridge is a cave system entirely within the state .
 Mammoth Cave National Park is part of the national park . It includes the famous Mammoth Cave and is home to the famous Cave of Mammoth . It is also home to Mammoth National Park .
 Kentucky Derby is the oldest continuously run horse race in the U.S. The Kentucky Derby has been held since 1877 .
 The first Derby was run in 1875 as part of the program for the opening of Churchill Downs race track in Louisville . The first race was held at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky . The Derby is the longest horse race in the history of the Derby .
 Each May, thousands of trackside spectators and millions of television viewers watch the “run for the roses’—the blanket of roses presented to the winning horse and jockey . The gold depository at Fort Knox contains more than $6 billion in gold bullion .
 Bullion represents nearly all of the gold owned by the United States government . Bullion is placed in the vaults of the depository by the U.S Treasury Department .
 Before that, people generally recovered oil only when it seeped through the ground or accidentally gushed from salt wells . The discovery of oil was rare in the past .
 Louisville lies on the shore of the Ohio River, which forms Kentucky's long northern border . The Ohio River is Kentucky's longest northern border, and forms the state's northern edge .
 Whiskey manufacturing centers include Louisville, Bardstown, and Frankfort . Kentucky Whiskey factories are located in Kentucky .
 The state flag, first adopted in 1918, bears the state seal . Kentucky in brief Symbols of Kentucky: State Seal .
 The lower portion of the seal is surrounded by a wreath of goldenrod, the state flower . The state flower is the most popular flower in the country .
 The goldenrod, gold lettering, and blue field display the state's official colors . The state is known for its goldenrod and gold letter lettering .
 On the state seal, first adopted in 1792, a frontiersman and a statesman embrace . The state motto, United We Stand, Divided We Fall, appears below .
 Statehood: June 1, 1792, the 15th state . LAs my Nd 1 WW ei ie General information .
 The State Capitol is in Frankfort, Kentucky's capital since by Stephen Collins Foster . It is in the state capital since 1913 .
 Fe we along the Mississippi River in Fulton County, Fulton County . Lowest—257 ft above sea level, Fe we are at the lowest point in the world .
 Agriculture: tobacco, beef cattle, horses, soybeans, corn, milk . Services: Services 65% economy . Gross state product: GDP 65% . Agriculture is the most important industry .
 The state's official Web site at www.state.ky.us also provides a gateway to much information on Kentucky's economy, government and history .
 Amendment approved allowing reelection of state officers to second consecutive term . Amendment also approved allowing re-election of elected officers for second consecutive terms . Amendment approved to allow reelection of elected officials to second term .
 Kentucky Education Reform Act launched Amendment approved allowing reform of state’s public schools . yearly sessions of state legislature are held yearly sessions . Kentucky education reform Act launched in 2012 .
 This popular annual event takes place in the foothills of eastern Kentucky . This year's event was held in the eastern Kentucky foothills .
 The 2000 United States census reported that Kentucky had 4,041,769 people . The 2000 U.S. Census reported that the state of Kentucky was 4.041,700 people . Kentucky is home to 4.04 million people .
 The population had increased nearly 10 percent over the 1990 figure, 3,685,296 . The population was nearly 10 per cent higher than the population in the 1990s .
 According to the 2000 census, Kentucky ranks 25th in population among the 50 states . Kentucky is the most populous state in the United States .
 These areas are Cincinnati, Ohio; Clarksville -Hopkinsville; Evansville -Henderson; Huntington (West Virginia)-Ashland; Lexington, Lexington; Louisville; and Owensboro .
 For the populations of these areas, see the /ndexto the political map of Kentucky . The population of Kentucky is based on the population of those areas .
 Other major cities include Louisville, Owensboro, Bowling Green, Covington, Hopkinsville, and Frankfort, Kentucky .
 Between 1950 and 1970, thousands of Kentuckians moved from rural to urban areas . Thousands of Kentucksians moved between rural and urban areas in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Many of Kentucky's most densely populated regions lie along the Ohio River . The Ohio River forms the state's northern boundary . William Coomes, a pio, is a former governor of Kentucky .
 The Lexington area of eastern Kentucky is another heavily populated region . The area is also heavily populated in the Lexington area .
 World Book Map is based on United States Census Bureau data . More than 40 people in the U.S. are likely to live in the United States .
 Some of the horses are sold at auctions for more than $1 million . The horses are auctioned at auction for $1million each .
 Other early schools were established in McAfee’s Station in 1777, Boonesborough in 1779, and Lexington in 1783 .
 The first institution of higher learning west of the Allegheny Mountains was chartered in Kentucky in 1780 . Kentucky was the first institution to chart chartered west of Allegheny Mountain .
 Transylvania Seminary opened in 1785 in what is now Danville, Georgia . The school is now located in the city of Danville .
 In 1838, the legislature established the state's first public school system . The state legislature established a school system in 1838 .
 In 1989, the Kentucky Supreme Court declared the state's school system unconstitutional because of vast differences in spending among school districts . The state's schools were declared unconstitutional by the court .
 The Kentucky Education Reform Act of 1990 made sweeping changes in the way the state's schools are financed, managed, and held accountable for student learning .
 Kentucky's state Department of Education administers the state's public school system . Kentucky's public schools are home to students and teachers .
 The commissioner of education heads the department and oversees public education . The education commissioner heads the education department .
 For the number of students and teachers in Kentucky, see Education . gFrankfont e Lexington “Owensboro Richmond eBowling Green Hopkinsville — — — Libraries .
 Lexington Public Library was organized in 1795 as a subscription library . Lexington was founded in 1796 . Lexington Library is now a public library .
 Members of a library contributed money to buy books, which they could then use free . Members of this library contributed to buy free books and then use them for free .
 Lexington Public Library is the oldest circulating library west of the Allegheny Mountains . Lexington Library is located in Lexington, Pennsylvania, and is home to the Lexington library .
 The Trappist Library at the Abbey of Our Lady of Gethsemane near New Haven has one of the South's most complete collections of Roman Catholic literature .
 The Kentucky Historical Society Library in Frankfort is Kentucky's largest historical library . The library is home to the largest historical collection in the state .
 This table lists the universities and colleges in Kentucky that grant bachelor's or advanced degrees and are accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools . Universities and colleges are listed .
 The John James Audubon Memorial Museum in Henderson County exhibits prints by the famous painter of birds . The museum also exhibits portraits and stuffed birds . It was founded in 1881 .
 Waveland State Historic Site near Lexington has a museum with exhibits on daily life in Kentucky during the mid-1800's . Waveland is a state historic site .
 Speed Art Museum in Louisville; Patton Museum of Cavalry and Armor at Fort Knox . Patton Museum at Louisville's Speed Art Art Museum . The Patton Museum is also a museum at the Indiana State Museum .
 Audubon lived in Henderson County in the early 1800s and did many of his bird illustrations there . He lived there in the 1800s .
 Metropolitan areas Nicholas .........6,813. A 3 Frances. ...c@eses. eee f 4 Metropolitan areas . Nicholas ........6.813 .
 F 14 CaSCY vxccces sees 15,447 .. 10 ot) NR eee ee ee are } 13 Canitet fp sccccecet scans I 9 Eastview ..............26.26.000 .
 E 6 Mealy cv cocuncxsmasiceners H 15 Parkway Sardis. ccsaccececweues 149. cv. Cv. E 6 E 6 Cv cocunxsmaiceners . E 6 Sardis . Cv . cv
 Places without pepulation figures are unincorporated areas by the United States Census Bureau . County seat is county seat .
 Cumberland Falls, in southeastern Kentucky, is often called the Niagara of the South . The Falls is the largest waterfall in the country and is considered the Niagara Falls .
 Natural Bridge in Daniel Boone National Forest is also popular with tourists . Natural Bridge is popular with visitors to the area . The bridge is located in the national forest .
 Constitution Square, in Danville, is the site where Kentucky's first Constitution was adopted in 1792 . Constitution Square was the site of the Kentucky Constitution's first constitutional convention .
 Visitors may see replicas of the log courthouse, meeting house, and jail from pioneer days in Kentucky . Visitors may also see replica of a log courthouse and meeting house .
 Fort Knox is the home of the nation’s gold depository and the Patton Museum of Cavalry and Armor . Fort Knox also hosts the Patton museum and the nation's gold-depository .
 Kentucky Derby Museum, in Louisville, is on the grounds of Churchill Downs . Churchill Downs is the site of the Kentucky Derby .
 It also offers a special theater presentation, hands-on displays, and exhibits . The museum also offers special theater presentations, hands on displays .
 The park includes a museum and offers a tour and a daily parade of more than 40 different breeds of horses . The park also features a museum, a daily museum and a parade of horses.
 The park also includes the gravesite of Man o’ War, perhaps the most famous race horse in American history . Man o' War is perhaps the world's most famous horse .
 Land Between the Lakes is a 170,000acre (69,000-hectare) peninsula bordered by Lake Barkley and Kentucky Lake . The peninsula is a peninsula in western Kentucky .
 This national recreation area features a herd of bison, a planetarium, and observation areas . It also features a living history farm, a nature center, audio-visuals, and a Planetarium . The area is a national recreation site .
 Visitors guide lakes offer opportunities for fishing, boating, and other recreational activities . Visitors guide lake offers opportunities for boating and fishing .
 The Kentucky Derby is held at Churchill Downs in Louisville on the first Saturday of May . The most famous race is the Kentucky Derby, held in May .
 My Old Kentucky Home, in Bardstown, is the home that inspired Stephen Foster to write the famous song, “My Old Kentucky home,” now the state song . The Kentucky Derby winner at Churchill Downs, Louisville, Kentucky, is Kentucky's 5th annual Derby .
 It is furnished in the style of the early 1800's, and hostesses dress as women did during that period . Hostesses wear dresses as they would have done in the 1800's .
 Shaker Village of Pleasant Hill, near Harrodsburg, is a restored community founded by the Shaker religious group in the early 1800s . Pleasant Hill was founded by Shakers in 18th century .
 Visitors may see more than 30 original buildings and watch artisans create Shaker crafts . Visitors may also see artisans creating Shaker craft crafts .
 Mammoth Cave National Park includes the world’s longest known cave system . The park is about 90 miles south of Louisville, Kentucky . Mammoth National Park is home to the longest cave system in existence .
 Cumberland Gap National Historical Park lies in southeastern Kentucky and extends into Virginia and Tennessee . The park is a national park in the state of Kentucky and Virginia .
 Daniel Boone National Forest extends northeast from Kentucky's southern boundary . The national forest is one of the largest national parks in the world .
 This large, triangle-shaped region consists of mountain ridges, plateaus, valleys, rivers, and streams . It is also known as the U.S. Geological Survey .
 Cumberland and Pine mountains, Kentucky’s chief ranges, rise along the southeastern border of the state . The Cumberland, Pine and Cumberland mountains are Kentucky's chief ranges .
 Black Mountain, near Lynch on the southeastern border, rises 4,145 feet above sea level . Black Mountain is located near Lynch, on the southeast border .
 West of the Cumberland and Pine mountains, the Appalachian Plateau has been divided into a maze of sharp ridges and narrow valleys by eroding streams . The Appalachian Plateaus is divided into narrow valleys and ridges .
 Coal is the major product found in this region, which is sometimes called the Eastern Coal Field . Coal is a major product of the region .
 Kentucky's largest cities, most of its horse farms, and much of its manufacturing are in the Bluegrass Region . The Bluegrass region is home to the state's largest city and most of the horse farms .
 Along the eastern, southern, and western edges of the Bluegrass Region lies an arc of conelike sandstone knobs interlaced by stream flood plains . The Bluegrass region is known for its sandstone and sandstone formations .
 The Pennyroyal Region stretches along Kentucky's southern border from the Appalachian Plateau to Kentucky Lake . The Mississippi Plateau is also known as the Kentucky Plateau .
 The Pennyroyal Region is named for a small herb of the mint family that is common in the region . The region was named for the small herb that is commonly found in the area .
 The southern part of the region has flat and rolling farmland with limestone soils . It has flat farmland and limestone soils in the southern part .
 In the center of the region lies a treeless area, which early pioneers called The Barrens . Early pioneers called the area 'The Barrerens'
 Underground passages run beneath the limestone rock of the Pennyroyal Region . Many underground passages run under limestone rock beneath limestone rock .
 Rivers and valleys cut through the forested hills of the Appalachian Plateau region of eastern Kentucky . The most common rivers and valleys in the region are in eastern Kentucky and western Kentucky .
 The Western Coal Field is a region of sharply rolling land in northwestern Kentucky . The region is known for its sharply rolling terrain .
 The region is surrounded by the Ohio River on the north, and by the Pennyroyal Region on the east, south, and west . The area is also surrounded by a network of rivers and streams .
 The Jackson Purchase Region is part of the East Gulf Coastal Plain, which extends from Florida west to Mississippi and north to Illinois . The region is located in the Jackson Purchase region .
 The region is bordered by Kentucky Lake on the east, the Ohio River on the north, and the Mississippi River in the west . The region has a population of 4 million people .
 A double bend in the Mississippi River separates about 10 square miles of extreme southwestern Kentucky from the rest of the state . The area is part of a UNESCO World Heritage Institute .
 In 1811 and 1812, severe earthquakes in the zone caused the Mississippi River to flow backward and formed Reelfoot Lake near the KentuckyTennessee border . The Mississippi River was formed by the quakes .
 Kentucky's border extends across the Ohio River to the northern banks, not to the center of the river . The border is Kentucky's northern bank, not its center . Kentucky's Ohio River border extends to the north, not the center .
 Principal rivers within Kentucky are the Cumberland, Green, Kentucky, Licking, Salt, and Tennessee . The principal rivers in Kentucky are Cumberland and Green .
 All of these rivers are westward-flowing tributaries of the Ohio River . The Ohio River is one of the largest rivers in the world .
 Cumberland Falls, the state's largest waterfall in terms of volume of water, drops 68 feet on the Cumberland River near Corbin . The state is home to the largest waterfalls in the state, the Cumberlands Falls .
 Kentucky has moist, cool winters with much of the state averaging above freezing . The average January average is below freezing .
 The warmest temperatures are found along the length of the southern portion of the state . Temperatures are found in the southern part of the country .
 Other artificially created lakes in Kentucky include Barkley, Barren, Dewey, Herrington, Malone, Nolin, and Rough . Other artificially-created lakes include Barkley and Dewey .
 Temperatures get increasingly cooler toward the eastern part of the state . Temperatures are expected to get cooler in the east .
 Degrees Fahrenheit above 80 are 78 to 80 degrees Celsius . Degrees Celsius above 78 degrees Celsius is 26 degrees Celsius below . Celsius above 27 degrees is the lowest temperature in the world .
 The thickest forests are in the Appalachian Plateau and in the Knobs Region of the Bluegrass . Thickest forests in the region are in Appalachia and in Knobs region .
 The most common ones include the ash, beech, hickory, maple, red oak, yellow-poplar, walnut, and white oak . Most common oak tree species include beech and beech .
 The most common softwood trees are hemlock, redcedar, shortleaf pine, Virginia pine, and white pine . Softwood trees include redcedars, white pine and red pine .
 Some of the more common ones are blueberries, dogwoods, ferns, huckleberries, mountain laurels, mountain magnolias, redbuds, rhododendrons, serviceberries, wild azaleas, and wild plums .
 Smaller woodland plants in the Appalachian Plateau include the dogtooth violet, jack-in-the-pulpit, May apple, snakeroot, trillium, and wild iris . Smaller species in the Plateau are also known as the May apple and
 Such grasses as Bermuda grass, bluegrass, broom sedge, crab grass, and fescue flourish in most parts of the state . Bermuda grass is one of the most common grasses in the state, along with bluegrass and bluegrass .
 The Knobs Region and the forests of the Western Coal Field have anemones, buttercups, spring beauties, toothworts, and other wild flowers . The region has a wide variety of wild flowers, including anemone and buttercup .
 Bluegrass and Pennyroyal regions of Kentucky bloom with goldenrods, ironweeds, daisies, and violets . The Bluegrass region of Kentucky is known for its wild flowers .
 Pennyroyals flourish in the Pennyroyal Region, in the central part of the state . The region is known for its culture and culture . Pennyroys thrive in the region .
 Animal life in Kentucky's fields and forests includes chipmunks, foxes, minks, muskrats, muskats, opossums, rabbits, raccoons, squirrels, and woodchucks .
 They include bass, bluegill, buffalo fish, carp, catfish, crappies, gar, gizzard shad, muskellunge, rockfish, and walleye . The fish species are often found in the wild .
 Kentucky has a warm, rainy climate with generally warm summers and cool winters . Kentucky is known for its rainy winters and warm summers .
 January temperatures average 38 °F in western Kentucky, 34°F in the central portion of the state . January temperatures in the east of Kentucky average 39 °F .
 In July, temperatures in Kentucky average 79 °F in the west, 77 °F  in central Kentucky, and 76 °F in the east .
 The state's lowest temperature, —37 °F , was recorded at Shelbyville on Jan. 23, 1994 . The state has the lowest temperature ever recorded in the state .
 Kentucky averages from 48 to 52 inches of rain a year . Precipitation in southern Kentucky averages between 48 and 52 inches per year .
 Northern Kentucky has an average of 40 to 44 inches of precipitation a year . Northern Kentucky is home to more than 40 inches of rain a year, according to the National Weather Service .
 Snowfall averages from 6 to 10 inches a year in southwest to 15 to 20 inches (38 to 51 centimeters) in southeast . Snowfall in southwest averages 6-10 inches (10 inches) a year .
 Service industries account for the largest portion of Kentucky's gross state product . The state product is the value of all goods and services produced in a state in a year .
 Manufacturing is Kentucky's single most important economic activity . Kentucky's manufacturing industry is the state's largest in the state of origin .
 The chief centers of manufacturing in Kentucky are located in Louisville and Lexington . Kentucky is home to the largest manufacturing centers in the state .
 Huge coal deposits provide Kentucky with billions of dollars in income . Kentucky is home to the largest coal deposits in the state .
 Farming is important in the Bluegrass, Pennyroyal, and Purchase regions . Farming in these regions is important to the communities .
 Natural resources of Kentucky include rich soils and large coal deposits . Kentucky is home to rich soils, rich coal deposits and rich coal reserves .
 The area around Fayette, Jessamine, Scott, and Woodford counties has especially rich soil . The area of the Bluegrass is rich soil, especially rich in the soil .
 The Knobs Region has shallow, poorly drained soils that are not as suitable for farming . The region has shallow and poorly drained soil that are unsuitable for farming.
 It is found in two Jarge coal fields that cover about 40 percent of the state . The coal fields are found in about 40 per cent of state .
 Petroleum and natural gas are produced in the western, southcentral, and eastern portions of the state .
 Other mined products in the state include clays, lead, sand and gravel, and zinc .
 Service industries account for the largest part of Kentucky's gross state product . Service industries make up the majority of the state's economy .
 Most of the service industries are located in the state's metropolitan areas . The state is home to the largest service industry in the country's history .
 Kentucky's leading service industries are community, business, and personal services and wholesale and retail trade . Kentucky is home to the state's largest service industries .
 Both industry groups contribute an equal portion of the gross state product . Both industries contribute to the state economy .
 The wholesale trade of coal, food products, motor vehicles, petroleum products, and tobacco is important in Kentucky . Kentucky is a state of origin for the wholesale trade .
 Leading types of retail businesses include automobile dealerships, gas stations, grocery stores, and restaurants . Leading type of retail business include car dealerships and gas stations .
 Government ranks third among service industries in Kentucky in terms of the gross state product . Government is the state's largest service industry . Kentucky's government ranks third in the country's economy .
 Government services include the operation of public schools and hospitals, and military bases . The government is responsible for most of the country's operations .
 The largest centers of civilian government services are Frankfort, Lexington, and Louisville . Frankfort and Lexington are Kentucky's largest cities .
 Finance, insurance, and real estate is the fourth most important service industry in Kentucky . Real estate, finance, insurance and real-estate are the other four most important services industries .
 Many major banks and insurance companies have large branch offices in the area . Many of the country's largest banks and insurers have large branches in the region .
 Real estate is important in the state’s major cities because of the large sums of money involved in the buying and selling of homes and other property . Real estate has become increasingly important in California's major cities .
 Transportation, communication, and utilities rank fifth in importance among service industries in Kentucky . Kentucky's transportation, communication and utilities ranked fifth in the state's economy .
 Many shipping and trucking companies have large operations in Louisville, Kentucky . The city is home to a large number of shipping, trucking operations .
 Telephone companies are the most important part of the communications sector . Telephone companies make up the majority of the telephone industry .
 More information about transportation and communication appears later in this section of this article .
 Goods manufactured in Kentucky have a value added by manufacture of approximately $40 billion annually . Goods made in Kentucky are valued at $40billion annually .
 Value added by manufacture is the increase in value of raw materials after they become finished goods . Value added is the value of the raw materials that are added to the finished products . Manufacturers use raw materials to increase the value added by manufacturing .
 The production of transportation equipment is Kentucky’s leading manufacturing activity in terms of value added by manufacture . Transportation equipment is the state's leading production activity . Kentucky is also the leading state of manufacturing in the country .
 Motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts are the main kinds of transportation equipment made in the state . Motor vehicles are the state's main types of transport equipment .
 Many Kentucky cities have plants that produce motor vehicle parts . WORLD BOOK map map parts are produced in Kentucky .
 Other transportation equipment made in Kentucky includes aircraft parts, boat trailers, and railroad cars . Aircraft parts and boat trailers are also made .
 Chemicals produced in the state include cleaning and pharmaceutical products, paints, and industrial chemicals . The state is home to a range of industrial and cleaning products .
 Calvert City produces a variety of chemicals, including industrial gases . The city also produces industrial gases and other chemicals .
 Large chemical plants are also located in Brandenburg, Carrolton, Catlettsburg, and Paducah . Large chemical factories are located in several locations .
 Plants in Louisville produce elevators, air filtration equipment, and conveyors . Plants also make elevators and air fil-fil-fil equipment .
 Maysville and Glasgow factories make ball and roller bearings for machines . Ball bearings are ball bearings and ball bearings . The factories also make ball bearings, roller bearings .
 Factories in Lexington manufacture heating and air-conditioning equipment, typewriters and printers . Factories also manufacture heating, air-conning equipment .
 Other products manufactured in Kentucky include electrical equipment, fabricated metal products, primary metals, rubber and plastics products .
 The state’s fabricated metal products include sheet metal, hardware, springs, and wire . The state is known for its fabrication metal products .
 Steel and aluminum are the leading primary metals manufactured in Kentucky . Steel and aluminium are the most common primary metals made in the state .
 Polystyrene foam and rubber tires and hoses are among Kentucky's leading plastics and rubber products . Rubber tires and tires are among the state's leading plastic products . The Kentucky plastics industry is one of the fastest growing in the state .
 Coal is mined in two widely separated fields in Kentucky . The Western Coal Field and the Appalachian Plateau are also known as the Eastern Coal Field .
 Hopkins, Union, and Webster counties are the chief coal-producing counties in the Western Coal Field . Hopkins and Union counties are among the most prolific coal-mining counties in West Virginia .
 Harlan, Martin, and Pike counties produce the most coal in the Appalachian Plateau . The most coal is found in Harlan and Martin counties .
 Kentucky mined products include natural gas, petroleum, and limestone . Natural gas, natural gas and petroleum are mined in Kentucky .
 E-C N ea..:.aaeEEEEaEET SS ee O_O — vx ee ee comes from the Appalachian Plateau . E-Ee is the name of a species of mountain dwellers in North Carolina .
 Many parts of the state quarry limestone, which is used to make cement and roadbeds . The limestone is used in cement, roads and cement .
 Livestock and livestock products account for about half of Kentucky's farm income . Kentucky farm income is about half the state's income .
 The breeding and selling of thoroughbred horses is Kentucky's most valuable source of livestock income . Kentucky's horses are the most valuable livestock income in the state . The state is home to the largest livestock industry in the country .
 Most thoroughbred horses come from the bluegrass pastures that are located near Lexington, Kentucky . The horses are bred in the state of Kentucky .
 Cattle raised throughout the state except on the Appalachian Plateau . Cattle are raised in all parts of the state, except for the Appalachian Plains .
 Other important livestock products in Kentucky are milk, hogs, broilers, eggs, milk and eggs .
 Bourbon, Fayette, Graves, Scott, and Woodford counties are the most important livestock centers in the state . Bourbon and Fayette counties are Bourbon and Graves counties .
 Kentucky leads the states in growing burley tobacco, and it ranks second only to North Carolina in total tobacco production . Kentucky is the second largest tobacco producer in North Carolina .
 Dark tobacco is grown in the southern and southwestern parts of Kentucky . The area is sometimes called the Black Patch, sometimes called Kentucky's Black Patch .
 The leading apple-growing areas are near Bowling Green, Liberty, Somerset, and Walton .
 Important popcorn-producing areas include Calloway, Marshall, and McCracken counties . Calloway and Marshall counties are important popcorn-growing areas .
 Coal-burning plants produce about 95 percent of Kentucky's electric power . Kentucky's coal-burning power is produced by coal plants . Coal plants are used to make electricity .
 Sources of hydroelectric power in the state include Barkley Dam, Kentucky Dam, Ohio Falls Station, and Wolf Creek Dam .
 Plants that burn natural gas or petroleum generate only a small amount of state's electric power . Plants burning natural gas and petroleum generate a small fraction of the state's power .
 Most early transportation routes in Kentucky were waterways and small trails . Early transportation routes included waterways and trails .
 A Kentucky tobacco farmer harvests tobacco plants that have been cut and left to dry in a field . Kentucky tobacco farmers harvest tobacco plants in fields that are left for dry .
 In 1815, the steamboat Enterprise traveled from New Orleans to Louisville . The Enterprise was the first steamboat to travel to Louisville, Kentucky .
 It was the first steamboat to travel up the Mississippi and Ohio rivers . It was also the first to travel on the Ohio and Mississippi .
 Steamboats were regularly carrying passengers and cargo along both rivers . Soon, steamboats began carrying passengers along the rivers .
 Kentucky's first railroad, the Lexington and Ohio, began operating in 1832 . It was the first railroad in Kentucky to open a railroad .
 It later became a part of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, and it is now part of CSX Railroad . CSX is now the largest railroad in North America .
 In 1914, the legislature approved a system of free roads throughout the state . The state legislature approved the system in 1914 . Today, the state's roads are free .
 The Mississippi River, which forms Kentucky's western border, links the state with the Gulf of Mexico . Kentucky is one of the most populous states in the world .
 Many barges travel to and from the Mississippi River on the Ohio River, which forms Kentucky's northern border . The Ohio River is the source of many of Kentucky's rivers .
 The Tennessee River, which flows through western Kentucky, is linked to the Gulf of Mexico by the TennesseeTombigbee Waterway and the Tombigbee and Mobile rivers .
 The state's busiest airport is the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport . The Cincinnati airport is located in Boone County, near the Ohio border .
 The Kentucky Gazette, Kentucky's first newspaper, was established in 1787 by John Bradford . John Bradford established the Kentucky Gazette in Lexington, Kentucky .
 The first successful newspaper in the * state was the Advertiser of Louisville . Louisville was the city's first newspaper .
 WHAS began broadcasting in Louisville in 1922 . The state's first radio station, WHAS, was broadcasting in 1922. WHAS is Louisville's first broadcast station .
 WAVE-TV is the first Kentucky television station to broadcast in Louisville, Kentucky, in 1948 . WAVE was the first television station in the state to be broadcast in Kentucky .
 Leading papers include The Courier-Journal of Louisville, the Lexington HeraldLeader, The Kentucky Post of Covington, the Owensboro Messenger-Inquirer, and the Paducah Sun .
 A coal-fueled power plant operates in the Western Coal Field region of Kentucky . Cable television systems and Internet providers serve many of Kentucky's communities .
 Constitutional amendments may be proposed by the state legislature or by a constitutional convention . Constitutional amendments are proposed by state legislatures or by constitutional convention delegates .
 An amendment must be approved by threefifths of the members of each house . An amendment to the bill must be agreed by three-fifths in each chamber .
 The amendment must then be approved in a general election by a majority of the people voting on the issue . The amendment then needs to be approved by a larger majority of voters in the country .
 Before a constitutional convention can meet, it must be approved by a majority of each house of the legislature . A constitutional convention must be held in the U.S. before it meets .
 A constitutional convention must be approved by a majority of the people voting on the proposition . A majority of those voting on a convention must also approve of a constitutional convention . The convention would be held in New Mexico .
 The number of approving votes must equal at least a fourth of the number of voters who took part in the most recent general election . Approval votes must be equal to at least one in four of the voters who voted for the government .
 The governor appoints the adjutant general, the secretaries of the 13 units called program cabinets, and the heads of departments within those cabinets .
 Top elected officials include the attorney general, auditor of public accounts, commissioner of agriculture, secretary of state, and treasurer . Top elected official: Attorney general .
 These elected officials and program cabinet secretaries and department heads make up the governor's general cabinet . They include program secretaries and program secretaries, department heads .
 It consists of a 38-member Senate and a 100member House of Representatives . It is the largest state in the United States .
 Voters in each of each of the state’s 38 senatorial districts elect one senator . Voters vote in each district to elect a senator .
 In even-numbered years, legislative sessions begin in January and last 60 working days or until April 15, whichever comes first . Legislators are in session for 60 days or more than April 15 .
 The justices of each court select one judge to serve a four-year term as chief justice . Chief justice is a member of the highest court in the United States .
 The number of circuit court judges in a circuit depends on the circuit's population . A circuit's number of judges is based on the population of the circuit .
 The court system includes 59 district courts, which are also used as trial courts . The district courts are used as district courts and trial courts.
 Democratic Martha Layne Collins and Wallace G Wilkinson are both Democrats . They are the Democratic Party's nominees for the Democratic National Congress .
 The legislature determines the form of government Kentucky cities may have . Kentucky cities must have a city council . The legislature decides the state's state of government .
 Second through sixth-class cities may use the mayor-council, commission, or city-manager form . City-manager forms are used by second through sixth class cities .
 More than a fifth of the revenue comes from federal grants and U.S. government programs . The city's revenue comes in part from government grants and other federal programs .
 Personal income tax and general sales tax account for most of the tax revenue . Personal income taxes account for the majority of the revenue .
 Taxes on corporate income, coal production, and motor fuels are also important .
 Other sources of revenue include government services and the state lottery . State lottery revenue comes from government services .
 Kentucky voters began electing an increasing number of Republicans to Congress and to the state legislature during the mid-1900's . The state legislature has a Republican majority .
 Democrats carried Kentucky in every presidential election from 1932 through 1952 . Democrats carried every presidential candidate from 1932 to 1952 .
 Since then, Republicans have won the state's electoral votes twice as often as Democrats have . Democrats have won more electoral votes than Republicans have in the past .
 Kentucky's legislature consists of a House of Representatives and a Senate of Representatives . Kentucky is one of the most populous states in the country .
 As long as 12,000 years ago, Indians probably lived in the forests of what is now western Kentucky . Indians lived in what now is Kentucky .
 Early explorers found many different tribes in the Kentucky region . Early European explorers found different tribes .
 Several English and French explorers probably visited the Kentucky region during the late 1600's and early 1700's . Several explorers may have visited the region in the late 16th century .
 Among the French explorers were Father Jacques Marquette, Louis Jolliet, and Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle . Father Marquette was among the explorers .
 In 1750, Thomas Walker, a pioneer scout, entered Kentucky through the Cumberland Gap . Walker made the first thorough exploration of the eastern part of the region . Walker was the first explorer to explore the eastern Kentucky region .
 He came to Kentucky again in 1769 and then spent two years in the Bluegrass Region . He spent two more years in Kentucky before returning to Europe .
 In 1773, Boone led a group of settlers into Kentucky, but Indians forced them to turn back . Boone led the group to Kentucky but was forced to turn his back .
 James Harrod led a group of colonists into Kentucky from Pennsylvania from Pennsylvania in 1774 . In 1774, he led the group to Kentucky .
 Harrodsburg, Kentucky, was the state's first permanent white settlement . It was established by white settlers in 1877 .
 Boone led another group of settlers through the Cumberland Gap into Kentucky in 1775 . Boone led the first group through the gap into Kentucky . Boone was the first white man to enter Kentucky .
 Boone settled along the Kentucky River and called his site Boonesborough . Boone settled in the area and called the town his birthplace . Boone was the first to settle there .
 Mountains and forests stood between the settlers and the protection of the American colonies . The American colonies were protected by the mountains and forests .
 After the Revolutionary War began in 1775, Indians friendly to the British made repeated attacks on Kentuckians . After the war, the Kentuckian tribesmen were attacked by Indians .
 Boone, Kenton, and George Rogers Clark successfully defended Kentucky against attacks by Indians . Boone and Kenton fought against Indians in Kentucky . Boone was the first Kentucky Governor of Kentucky .
 Indians supplied with British weapons continued to attack the settlers . The settlers were attacked by Indians supplied by British weapons .
 In 1778, George Rogers Clark led a small band of men against three British-controlled settlements northwest of Kentucky . Clark led the men against the British in 1778 . Clark was the only man to fight the British .
 Clark captured settlements and cut off British supplies to the Indians . Clark captured the settlements and ended British supplies .
 In May 1792, Kentuckians adopted a constitution in preparation for statehood . The constitution was adopted in 1792 . The state was declared state of Kentucky in 1788 .
 In 1798, Congress passed a series of acts known as the Alien and Sedition Acts . Congress passed the acts in 1798 . The Sedition and Alien and Alien Alien Acts were passed by Congress .
 These acts gave the president special powers against people born in other countries and people who tried to create discontent with the government . The president also has special powers to act on people born outside of the country .
 Kentuckians opposed these acts, as did many other Americans including Vice President Thomas Jefferson and Virginia Representative James Madison . Jefferson and James Madison opposed the acts .
 Kentucky adopted strong resolutions, written by Jefferson, declaring the Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional . Jefferson declared the Sedition and Alien and Alien Act unconstitutional .
 Jefferson’s opposition to the acts helped him to be elected president of the United States . Jefferson was elected to office in 17th century .
 After Kentucky became a state, its population increased and more areas of farmland were opened to settlement . Kentucky's population grew and more land was opened up for settlement .
 The Army created its fecarcaiea icccenboroan Daniel Boone led a group of colonists in 1940 . Boone led the group to the colonies in 18th century .
 The post was originally from North Carolina through the Cumestablished as Camp Knox in berland Gap and into Kentucky in 1775 . Camp Knox was established in 1777 and moved to Kentucky in 1881 .
 The Tobacco Wars took place in western and central Kentucky from 1904 to 1909 . The Kentucky Dam, on the Tennessee River near Gil Gilmore, was built in Kentucky .
 Farmers unsuccessfully fought against low bertsville, was finished in prices, mounting debt, and the tobacco 1944 . Farmers unsuccessfully tried to keep tobacco prices up .
 1750 Thomas Walker made the first thorough exploration of the tobacco monopoly in the Tobacco Wars what is now Kentucky . Daniel Boone made his first journey to Kentucky roads . 1767 Daniel Boone traveled to Kentucky .
 The Confederates retreated into neighboring Tennessee, and Kentucky came under Union control . The Confederate forces retreated to neighboring Tennessee .
 The battlefield is now a state historic site in central Kentucky . The battlefield was once a battlefield in the state of Kentucky .
 Use of steamboats in the early 1800's helped the state’s farms to prosper . The use of steamboat in the state's early 1800s helped to prosper.
 Farmers shipped huge cargoes of crops and livestock products to markets along the Ohio and Mississippi rivers . Cargoes were shipped to markets in the area along the rivers .
 A market for whiskey in New Orleans, down the Mississippi River, aided the growth of Kentucky agriculture and manufacturing . New Orleans was a major market for bourbon whiskey in Kentucky .
 Kentucky farmers raised corn, rye, and other grains used in manufacturing alcoholic beverages . Kentucky farmers also raised corn and rye for manufacturing alcohol beverages .
 The use of slaves was central to Kentucky's agricultural economy . Slavery flourished in the Bluegrass Region, Kentucky .
 The state had social, economic, and political ties with both the North and the South . The state was home to both North and South .
 In September 1861, the state legislature created a military force to drive the Confederates out and preserve the state's neutrality . The state created the force to protect its neutrality .
 About 75,000 Kentuckians fought for the Union, 35,000 for the Confederacy . About 35,00 fought for Confederate forces in Civil War .
 Union troops won an important victory at Mill Springs in southern Kentucky in 1862 . Union troops were victorious in the battle .
 Both sides suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Perryville in October 1862 . The battle took place in the middle of October 1863 .
 Confederate troops retreated from Perryville into Tennessee . Confederate troops finally retreated into Tennessee after Perryville .
 After the Civil War ended in 1865, Kentucky became strongly sympathetic toward the South . Kentucky was strongly sympathetic to the South after the war ended .
 Soldiers remained in the state longer than the people thought necessary . Soldiers remained at the scene longer than they thought necessary. Soldiers remained there longer than people thought they needed .
 Kentuckians began to feel as though they had lost the war, rather than helped win it . Kentucksians felt they had helped win the war but had lost it .
 Kentucky was affected by the economic depression that hit the South after the Civil War . The state was hit hard by the depression after the war .
 Before the war, hemp had been used for bagging and ties for cotton bales and for cables and rigging of sailing vessels . Hemp was also used in bagging, ties and cables for sailing ships .
 The South's cotton production declined after the war, and steamships replaced most sailing ships in the 1860's . But the South's Cotton production declined .
 A decrease in boat traffic along the Mississippi and Ohio rivers has hurt Kentucky's smaller port cities . A decrease of boat traffic has hurt the economy in the past year .
 Louisville, Kentucky, was a major center for the exchange of goods between the North and the South . Louisville, with access to both river and rail transport, became a major trade hub . The city became a hub for trade between North and South in 18th century .
 An increased interest in horse racing after the Civil War encouraged Kentucky racing establishments to raise thoroughbred horses . The Kentucky thoroughbred racing establishments were established after the war .
 The development of burley tobacco in central and eastern Kentucky contributed to a tremendous increase in tobacco production . Burley tobacco was developed in Kentucky in the early 1900s .
 periodic depressions marked by falling tobacco prices resulted in many farm failures and a sharp rise in the number of tenant farmers . The farm failures have led to a sharp increase in tenant farmers in Ireland .
 By the 1890's, the railroad system had expanded so that the resources of eastern Kentucky could be developed . The railroad system expanded to help develop eastern Kentucky .
 Economic unrest contributed to a bitterly fought campaign for governor in 1899 . Economic unrest in the state contributed to the election .
 Republican William S Taylor won the election by a narrow margin over his Democratic opponent, William Goebel . Republican William Taylor was elected to the House of Representatives in 2010 .
 The Democratic-controlled legislature declared Goebel the winner of the election . The next day, the Democratic-run legislature declared him the winner . The election was the first of its kind .
 A special election for governor was held in November 1900, and Beckham won . Beckham won a special election in 1900 .
 During the late 1800's and early 1900's, a group of tobacco firms held a monopoly of all tobacco-buying in Kentucky . The Kentucky tobacco monopoly was formed in the early 1900s .
 Farmers in western and central Kentucky fought this monopoly during the Tobacco Wars, which occurred from 1904 to 1909 . The Tobacco Wars was fought over the monopoly of tobacco .
 Night riders burned warehouses, barns, fields, and fields of tobacco growers who had sold to the monopoly . Night riders set fire to warehouses and fields .
 For the region's tobacco growers, prices remained low, and their desperation grew . The region's desperate need for tobacco is growing .
 The United States Treasury established its gold vault at Fort Knox in 1936 . The U.S. Treasury established the gold vault in 1936.
 During World War II , farms and mines in Kentucky became productive again . During WWII, Kentucky mines and farms became productive .
 After the war, manufacturing grew and Kentucky began to shift from an agricultural to an industrial economy . Kentucky's manufacturing grew after the war and it became an important industry .
 Kentucky rose to second place behind West Virginia in coal mining in 1960s . The state's coal industry prospered in the 1960s, and the state's mining industry thrived .
 Tourism became a major industry, aided by new highways that made vacation spots easier to reach . New highways made it easier for travelers to reach vacation spots .
 In 1964, the Tennessee Valley Authority opened the first facilities of the Land Between the Lakes recreation area in western Kentucky . The area was opened in 1964 .
 In 1969, TVA completed its largest steam-generating plant, in Paradise . TVA's largest steam plant was built in Paradise, in 1969 .
 Lexington region experienced rapid industrial growth during the 1970s . Lexington region was once one of the fastest growing cities in the world .
 The state became the nation’s leading coal producer in the early 1970's . The state is known for its coal mining history .
 In 1972, the state legislature passed Kentucky's first tax on coal production . The tax was passed by the legislature in 1972 . Kentucky is the first state to impose a coal tax .
 The coal-mining industry boomed during the mid-1970's, when an energy shortage hit the U.S. Coal-mining was a boom in the 1970s .
 Increased production brought new revenue to coal-producing counties in Kentucky . Increased production brings new revenue for Kentucky counties .
 A 1980 state law helped these counties by returning half the revenue from the coal tax . The 1980 law returned half of the revenue to them by returning the revenue . The law was passed by 1980 state lawmakers .
 Strip mining, a method used to produce much of the state’s coal, came under attack in the early 1970's . Strip mining was used in the 1970s to produce the state's most of its coal .
 Rain washes away the loosened soil, causing soil erosion and water pollution . Rain also causes soil erosion, causing water pollution and soil erosion .
 In 1978, a federal law went into effect that requires strip mine owners to restore the land as nearly as possible to its original condition . The law requires strip mines to restore land as near as possible .
 In the 1980's, several Kentucky school systems sued state officials, charging them with inadequate and unevenly distributed funding for public schools . Several Kentucky schools sued the state officials for inadequate funding .
 Kentucky's Supreme Court ruled the state's public school system unconstitutional in 1989 . In 1989, the court ruled that the system was unconstitutional .
 A statewide school reform plan was adopted with the passage of the Kentucky Education Reform Act in 1990 . The state's first school reform act was passed in 1990, and the first state-to-means-schools plan was enacted in 1994 .
 The plan called for each school to be run by a committee made up of the principal, teachers, and parents .
 Other provisions included the establishment of preschool classes for children from low-income families, more funding for special education, and a testing system to evaluate school improvement .
 Toyota Motor Corporation opened an automobile manufacturing plant in Georgetown in 1988 . Toyota Motor Corp. opened the plant in 1988, producing cars for Toyota .
 Kentucky was one of the nation’s leaders in automobile production in the 1990's . Louisville and Bowling Green, Kentucky were among the nation's leading automobile plants in 1990s .
 At the end of the 1900's, a decreasing number of jobs for miners left many workers unemployed in the coal fields of the state . The state's coal fields were once the most prosperous .
 Levels of income, health, and education lagged behind the state’s urban areas and behind the nation as a whole . The levels of income and health in urban areas lags behind urban areas .
 He was the first Kentucky governor eligible to be elected to a second consecutive term since 1800 . He was also the first to be eligible for a second straight term .
 Voters approved a constitutional amendment in 1992 allowing reelection of state officers to a second consecutive term . Voters had approved a constitution amendment allowing reelection .
 In 2000, voters approved a constitutional amendment to allow the legislature to meet every year . Voters approved the amendment in 2000, allowing them to meet each year .
 Previously, the legislature had been holding sessions in even-numbered years . Previously, it had been held sessions in odd numbered years . The legislature will hold sessions again this year .
 Barkley, Alben W Boone, Daniel Breckinridge, John C Breck inridge, Sophonisba Buckner, Simon Bolivar Butler, William O Clark, George Rogers Clay, Henry Davis, Jefferson Ford, Wendell Hampton Harlan, John Marshall Johnson, John
 Mammoth Cave National Park is a national park in Kentucky . Kentucky is home to the Bluegrass, Kentucky Derby, Kentucky and the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions . The state's largest city is Kentucky .
 Level il Blakey, George T Hard Times and the New Deal in Kentucky, 1929-1939 . Hard Times: Hard Times in Kentucky in Kentucky was 1929-39 .
 It has colleges of agriculture, allied health professions, architecture, arts and sciences, business and economics, communications, dentistry, education, education and engineering . It also has nursing, nursing, pharmacy, and social work .
 The university's main library has a collection of more than 2 million volumes . The main library is home to more than two million volumes of books .
 The university also operates community colleges in Lexington, Louisville, and 12 other Kentucky cities .
 On all campuses, people 65 years old and older may take any regular course without charge . People 65-olds can take classes without charge on all campuses .
 Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions were declared declarations passed by the state legislatures . They were passed by state legislatures in both Kentucky and the Virginia state .
 Protesters protested against the Alien and Sedition Acts passed by Congress in 1798 . They were protesting against the Sedition and Alien and Alien Alien Act . The act was passed by the Congress of 1798.
 The resolutions were the first to claim that the states had the right to decide whether a law of Congress was unconstitutional . They were first to say that states should be able to decide if a law is unconstitutional .
 James Madison drafted the Virginia Resolutions, which were adopted in 1798 . Madison drafted them and they were adopted by the state legislature .
 There were two sets of Kentucky Resolutions, one prepared by Thomas Jefferson and passed in 1798, and the other adopted in 1799 . Thomas Jefferson prepared one of the Resolutions .
 Both states declared that the Alien and Sedition Acts violated the Constitution by giving the president judicial power . The act denied aliens the right to jury trial, and limiting freedom of speech and the press .
 Copies of the resolutions were sent to other states, producing a largely unfavorable response . The resolutions were met with a largely negative response from other states .
 Northern states say federal courts alone could declare an act of Congress unconstitutional . Most Northern states said that the federal court alone can declare a federal act unconstitutional . The federal courts could declare the act unconstitutional, the states said .
 Kentucky asserted that a state could nullify any act of Congress it believed to be unconstitutional . Kentucky says it can nullify Congress acts it believes unconstitutional .
 See also Alien and Sedition Acts; Jefferson, Thomas ; Nullification . See also Sedition Act .
 During the 1700's, people who had settled in Kentucky used the seeds of this tree as a substitute for coffee beans . The seeds of the tree were used by people living in Kentucky .
 Throughout the range, trees exist only as scattered individuals in open woods and forests . Throughout this range, the trees exist in open forests and forests.
 The leaves are doubly compound . Each leaf consists of a main stem with several side stems .
 The Kentucky coffeetree is one of the first trees to lose its leaves in autumn . It is also the last tree to open its buds in spring . The coffee tree is a Kentucky tradition .
 Those with female flowers produce dark brown seed pods 6 to 10 inches (15 to 25 centimeters) long . The seeds are produced by female flowers . The seed pods can be found in a variety of varieties .
 The Kentucky coffeetree belongs to the pea family, Leguminoseae or Fabaceae . Kentucky coffetree is a member of the Fabaceae family .
 This 1 5 -mile race for 3year-old horses is held annually on the first Saturday of May at Churchill Downs race track in Louisville, Kentucky .
 Aristides won the first Derby with Aristides winning a purse of $2,850 . About 10,000 spectators watched Aristides win the first .
 Since then, the Derby has become one of the most popular sports events in the United States . The Derby is one of America's most popular sporting events .
 The Derby, the Preakness, and the Belmont Stakes form the Triple Crown of United States horse racing . The Triple Crown is the Triple Triple Crown .
 Eleven horses have won the Triple Crown . Sir Barton in 1919, Gallant Fox in 1930, Omaha in 1935, War Admiral in 1937, Whirlaway in 1941, Count Fleet in 1943, Assault in 1941 .
 Typhoon Il Buttons Garner Garner 2 min.5s . 1961 Carry Back John Sellers 1 min. 5s . 1962 Carry Back was a success .
 Charles Kurtsinger 2 min.s. 4s.95 Thunder Gulch Gary Stevens 2 min .s. 20 Grand . Gary Stevens has two min.
 War Admiralt Charles Kurtsinger 2min.¢s.01 Monarchos Jorge Chavez 1 min..97 1938 ~Lawrin Eddie Arcaro 2min .02 War Emblem Victor Espinoza 2 min.¢S.01 War Emblem Charles Kurstsinger 1 min. $
 Only three fillies have ever won the Derby: Regret in 1915, Genuine Risk in 1980, and Winning Colors in 1988 .
 Eddie Arcaro and Bill Hartack are the leading Derby jockeys, each with five winners . The leading Derby winners have won at least five times in the past .
 The track opened on May 17, 1875, and held the first Kentucky Derby on its opening program . The Kentucky Derby was held on the opening program of the track in 1875 .
 Clark modeled the race after the Epsom Derby, held every year in Epsom, England . Clark modeled it after the English Derby held in the same city .
 Kentucky Lake is an artificially created lake in western Kentucky and Tennessee . Kentucky Lake was created in 1953 . It is located in Kentucky, Tennessee and Kentucky .
 Kentucky Dam was formed by the Kentucky Dam, which was built across the Tennessee River . The Kentucky Dam is one of the largest dams in the world .
 The lake can hold more than 6 million acre-feet (7. billion cubic meters) of water . It is the largest Tennessee River reservoir in the country .
 Kentucky Dam lies in Kentucky, about 15 miles (24 kilometers) southeast of Paducah . Kentucky Dam is located near Kentucky's Kentucky Dam .
 The gravity-type concrete dam has a hydroelectric power plant with a 160,000-kilowatt capacity . The dam has been built in the 1960s and 1970s . It is the largest dam in the world .
 The dam also has a lock that permits barges to move up and down the river . The dam is located in the heart of the Mississippi River .
 A canal near the dam connects Kentucky Lake with Lake Barkley, a reservoir on the Cumberland River about 1 mile to the east . Kentucky Lake is a reservoir 1 mile from the dam .
 Between the two lakes lies a recreation area called the Land Between the Lakes . The area is known as Land Between The Lakes . Between the lakes, the area is a recreation site .
 Beautiful sandy beaches, lagoons and swamps, and patches of rain forest line the coast . The area is known for its sandy beaches and lagoans .
 Inland, a vast plains area stretches over about three-fourths of Kenya . The plains are over three-quarters of Kenya's land .
 Its extremely dry climate and generally poor soil support only scattered plant life . The area is known for its dry climate, and its poor soil conditions .
 A highland in the southwest receives enough rainfall and fertile soil to support extensive farming . The highland receives enough rain and has enough fertile soil for farming .
 This wildlife attracts thousands of tourists to Kenya each year . Wildlife includes elephants, giraffes, lions, rhinoceroses, rhinos and zebras .
 Most of Kenya's people live in rural areas and farm the land and raise livestock for a living . Most of the country's rural population live in a rural area and farm .
 Each year, many rural people move to Kenya’s growing cities and towns, which are growing rapidly . But each year, the number of rural people in Kenya has grown dramatically .
 World Vision International provides food, medicine, and economic assistance to less developed countries . Nairobi is Kenya's capi, and it is the country's capital .
 The flag's black stripe represents the Kenyan people, the red stripe their struggle for independence, and the green stripe agriculture . The green stripe represents agriculture and the black stripe is the national flag .
 Mombasa, which lies on the coast, is its second largest city and chief port . The city is Kenya's second largest and most populous city and port .
 Britain ruled Kenya from 1895 until it became an independent nation in 1963 . Britain ruled the country from 1895 to 1963 . Kenya is now an independent country .
 During this period, the British influenced both the economic and cultural life of Kenya . The British influence both the economy and culture of Kenya during this period .
 Leaders of Kenya have emphasized the African heritage of the nation . Since independence, the leaders of the country have emphasized African heritage .
 Its Constitution grants the people such rights as freedom of speech and religion . Its Constitution, adopted in 1963, was adopted by the state .
 Kenya is headed by a president who is assisted by about 20 Cabinet ministers . Kenya's president is accompanied by a Cabinet of about 20 cabinet ministers .
 The president appoints 12 Assembly members and selects the vice president and the other Cabinet ministers . The president also appoints the vice-president .
 Cabinet members normally selected from among the members of the Assembly . Cabinet members are normally selected by among the assembly members . Cabinet is normally chosen from among among the Assembly members .
 Candidates for the presidency must run for a seat in the National Assembly at the same time as they run for the office of president . Candidates must also run for seats in the assembly at the time of the presidency .
 Kenya is divided into seven provinces and the district of Nairobi for purposes of local government . Kenya has seven provinces, one of which is the country's largest .
 A commissioner, who is responsible to the president, heads each province and district of Kenya .
 A city commission carries out the operations of the government of the Nairobi district . The city commission is responsible for the city's operations .
 Councils help govern rural counties and cities and towns within Kenya's districts . Councils are elected by rural counties, cities, towns and districts in Kenya .
 From 1982 to 1991, only one political party— the Kenya African National Union —was allowed . The Kenyan countryside is the home of many kinds of wild animals .
 The zebras are feeding on grass near the country’s southern border .
 Majestic Kilimanjaro, Africa's tallest mountain, rises above clouds in Tanzania, across the border . Tanzania is also home to the tallest mountain in Africa .
 Candidates who won the party's primary elections were certain to be elected in the general elections . Therefore, the candidates won the primary elections in order to be certain to win the general election .
 The Supreme Court hears appeals from lower courts and cases involving the constitutionality of laws . It hears appeals in cases involving constitutional rights and the constitution of the law .
 Kenya's lower courts include resident magistrate courts and district magistrate courts . The lower courts are based in Nairobi, Kenya's capital city, and the capital city .
 Armed forces of Kenya include an army, an air force, and a small navy and coastal patrol . Kenya's armed forces include a small army, air force and coast patrol .
 Bananas, beef, cassava, coffee, corn, pineapples, pyrethrum, sisal, sugar cane, tea, wheat, wheat .
 Manutacturing—cement, chemicals, light machinery, textiles, processed foods, petroleum products . Manutacting is a form of man-making .
 Other population groups, in order of size, are Asian Indians; Europeans, chiefly British; and Arabs . Asian Indians, Europeans, Arabs, Asians, Europeans and Arabs dominate the population .
 The largest group, the Kikuyu, make up about 20 percent of Kenya's population . The largest ethnic group is the largest group of people in the country .
 Four other ethnic groups make up between 10 and 15 percent of the population . The Kalenjin, Kamba, Luhya, and Luo each make up 10 to 15 percent .
 Kenya's ethnic groups are divided by separate languages or dialects, and, in many areas, by differing ways of life . Many of the country's main cities are home to ethnic groups of ethnic groups .
 Differences in economic and social development have sometimes led to friction between groups . Differences in social development sometimes leads to friction among groups .
 Kenya's government has made progress toward overcoming ethnic divisions since independence . Since independence, the Kenyan government has overcome ethnic divisions and given the people a sense of national unity .
 This building in Nairobi stands next to a vacant lot, where boys play soccer .
 Most of Kenya's ethnic groups have their own local language or dialect . Kenya's language is spoken by most of its ethnic groups . Most of the country's population has its own local dialect .
 Large numbers of people know Swahili {also called Kiswahili], as well as their local language . Large numbers also know their local languages . However, many people in the country are not fluent Swahilians .
 Swahili, Kenya's national language, is widely used for communication between people of different ethnic groups . It is also widely used to communicate with people from all over the world . Swahilili is Kenya's most popular language .
 Most of Kenya's rural people live on small farm settlements, raising crops and livestock for a living . Most of the rural people in Kenya live in small settlements raising crops, livestock .
 Many rural farm families struggle to produce enough food for their own use . Many of these rural families must struggle to get enough food to feed their families .
 Some of them work as blacksmiths, carpenters, shoemakers, or tailors, or in other trades . Some of the children are also involved in the trade .
 Others work part time on large farm estates, especially coffee and tea plantations, that are owned by wealthy landowners .
 About 3 percent of Kenya's people are nomads who raise livestock for a living . About 3 per cent of Kenyan nomads live in nomadic communities .
 People move from place to place in search of grazing land and water for their animals . These people move from places to places to find grazing land for animals .
 They rely on their animals for food, and judge a person's wealth by the number of animals owned . The animals are eaten by people who rely on them for their food .
 These tall, slender people are famous for their skill in the use of weapons and their strongly independent ways . They are famous .
 Most rural Kenyans find time for regular social visits with their neighbors . Although they must work hard to make a living, they find time to visit their neighbors regularly . Most of the people in rural Kenya are men and women .
 Most of the country’s urban people work in stores, factories, or business or government offices . The country's urban people are mostly urban dwellers .
 Kenyans who move to cities and large towns find they must adjust to the fast pace, regular work schedules, and impersonal relations that are typical of those urban areas . Kenysians who move into cities find it difficult to adjust to a new life in the country .
 Most urban Kenyans keep close ties with their rural friends and relatives through regular visits and letters . But most urban Kenysians keep ties with rural friends via regular visits or letters .
 Many Kenyan families have six or more children, and so the C oe. ‘en GF 2 © Robert Frerck .
 Almost all women of Kenya's farm families take part in the planting and harvesting of crops . In addition, almost all women are involved in farming in Kenya's farms .
 The Kenyan government recognizes the equality of men and women . It encourages women to become educated and achieve high-paying jobs . The government recognizes women's equal rights and encourages them to be educated .
 The vast majority are too busy with child care and farm work to advance to high positions . But the vast majority of those working in farm work and child care .
 Kenya's Arabs, Europeans, and Indians live chiefly along the coast and in Nairobi . Kenya's Arab, European, and Indian inhabitants live mainly in the country .
 Most rural Kenyans live in small houses with thatched roofs, walls made of mud or bundles of branches, and dirt floors . Most rural people live in a small thatched roofed house with mud, mud and branches .
 In the cities, however, these kinds of houses are crowded together in slum areas . In the slums, they are often crowded together .
 These dwellings range in style from simple, inexpensive units for working-class people to expensive, large houses and apartment buildings for the wealthy .
 Some rural Kenyans wrap a one-piece cloth around their bodies for clothing . Some nomads wrap it around their body for clothes .
 Kenyans often grind corn into a porridge and mix it with other vegetables to make stew . The country's corn is often used to grind it into porridge in a stew .
 Mobile motion-picture units bring films to rural areas on a regular schedule . City people attend movie theaters, and mobile motion-pictures are brought in by mobile motion pictures .
 Children and adults throughout the country play the game for fun . Organized soccer matches between organized teams draw large crowds .
 About two-thirds of the Christians are Protestants, about one-third are Roman Catholics . About one third of Christians are Protestant .
 About 25 per cent of the people practice traditional African religions . About 25,000 people in the country are believed to be part of the traditional religion .
 These faiths are based on the belief in one supreme being and many spirits that influence events . These faiths believe in the belief of a supreme being .
 Large numbers of Kenyan parents value education as a key to a better life for their children . But large numbers of Kenyans value education more than children's education .
 About 80 percent of the children receive at _ least an elementary education . About 80% of children in the city receive at least elementary education.
 Kenya's government has greatly increased the number of schools in response to demands for educational opportunities by the people . Since independence, Kenya's schools have greatly increased . Kenya has a history of growing demand for education in schools .
 In addition, groups of private citizens have set up schools in many places that have no government schools . Private citizens have also set up private schools in some areas without government funding .
 The students in high schools and all students in harambee schools must pay tuition . Students must also pay tuition for their education . Students in high school and all Harambee school must pay .
 Several private colleges and institutes of higher education also operate in Kenya . Several private institutions and colleges also operate there .
 Kenyans have created highly artistic dances that are performed during such ceremonies as birth celebrations, marriages, and funerals . The dance is performed during birth celebrations and marriages .
 Various ethnic groups compete with one another in traditional dance contests . Such traditional dances are also part of national holiday celebrations . National holiday celebrations are also celebrated .
 Maasai dancers wrap a one-piece cloth around their bodies for clothing . These dancers wrap their bodies around one piece of cloth around them for clothes .
 The region has beautiful beaches, lagoons, mangrove swamps, cashew trees, coconut palms and coconut palms, and a few small rain forests . The region is known for its beaches and mangroves .
 Much of the soil near the coast is fertile enough for farming, especially in the south . The area has been fertile enough to grow crops in recent years .
 Mombasa, Kenya's second largest city and its chief port, lies along the coast . The city is Kenya's most populous and most populous city of Kenya .
 The plains stretch inland from the coastal area and cover about three-fourths of Kenya . The plains are made up of three-quarters of the country's population .
 The plains form a series of plateaus, rising from near sea level at the coast to about 4,000 feet inland . The plains rise from sea level to about four feet inland and rise from about sea level .
 A large northern region is desertlike, receiving less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rain a year . The northern region receives about 10 inches of rain per year .
 Average temperatures vary with altitude, ranging from about 80 °F to about 60 °F at the highest levels . Average temperatures at altitude are about 80°F at low levels, about 60°F in altitude .
 Groups of nomads roam the region in search of grazing land and water for their livestock . The region is home to many nomads who live in search for grazing land .
 The soil and a good climate for agriculture make the highland Kenya's chief farming region . Highland Kenya is a good farming region with good soil and good climate .
 The Great Rift Valley divides the highland into eastern and western sections . The highland highland is known for its rugged terrain and culture . It is also known as the region's largest mountain range .
 Kenya's fertile soil and good climate make it Kenya's chief farming region . It is Kenya's main farming region, with fertile soil, good climate and fertile soil .
 Through much of eastern Africa from north to south, some of the continent's most fertile soil is fertile soil . This man is working on a tea plantation in the highland highland .
 Lake Victoria, Africa’s largest lake, lies at the western end of Kenya . Lake Victoria is the largest lake in the world .
 Most of the lake, known as Victoria Nyanza in Kenya, is within Tanzania and Uganda . The lake is also within Tanzania, Uganda and Tanzania . It is the largest lake in the world .
 The lake covers 26,828 square miles, of which about 1,460 square miles fall within Kenya .
 The country’s plains and—to a lesser extent, its highland are home to large numbers of fascinating animals . The country's plains and its highlands are the home of many fascinating animals.
 Antelope, buffaloes, cheetahs, elephants, giraffes, lions, rhinoceroses, and zebras roam open spaces . Leopard, elephant, lion, lioness, giraffe, hippo, elephant and lioness .
 Numerous large birds, such as eagles, ostriches and storks, live in Kenya . Dozens of species of small, brightly colored birds also live in the country .
 People have killed large numbers of wild animals in Kenya and have endangered some species . Through the years, people have killed many of the wild animals .
 Many animals were killed legally by people who had hunting licenses . Many of the animals were shot legally by hunters .
 Kenyas government established a number of national parks and game reserves to protect animals from poachers . In the mid-1900's, Kenyasa government established national parks to protect wildlife . But most were victims of poachers who killed animals .
 In 1977, the government outlawed hunting altogether to protect the animals . In 1977 hunting was outlawed to protect animals from hunting .
 Thousands of tourists visit the national parks and game reserves each year to see and photograph the wild animals that live there .
 It accounts for about a third of Kenya's economic production and employs more people than any other activity . Kenya's economy is the largest in the world and employs the most people .
 Manufacturing and the construction industry account for about a fifth of the economic production . Manufacturing and construction industry make up about a third of the economy's GDP .
 Service industries, including finance, government, tourism, and wholesale and retail trade, account for most of the rest of the population .
 Agricultural activity in Kenya is divided about equally between cash crops and subsistence crops . Agricultural activity is equally equally equally between the production of cash crops, subsistence crops.
 Coffee and tea are Kenya's chief cash crops and its most important source of income . Coffee is Kenya's most important crop of cash crops . Kenya's main cash crops are coffee and tea .
 Other cash crops include cashews, cotton, pineapples, sugar cane, pyrethrum, sisal and sisal, used to make insecticide .
 Other subsistence crops include bananas, beans, cassava, potatoes, sweet potatoes, and wheat .
 All the subsistence crops, as well as beef and milk, are also sold on a limited basis . The subsistence crops are also being sold on limited basis by the government .
 Most Kenyan farmers own the land they work or rent it from the government . Most of Kenya's farmers own or rent their land from government .
 Kenya has a number of large farm estates where cash crops are raised . The country has a large number of cash crops, especially coffee and tea, raised in large quantities .
 Use of modern equipment on Kenya's farms has been growing since the 1960's . However, the use of modern farming equipment is still growing in the country's farms .
 Kenya's chief manufactured products include cement, chemicals, household utensils, light machinery, motor vehicles, and paper and paper products .
 A petroleum refinery at Mombasa refines oi] that has been produced in other countries . The refinery refines petroleum products that have been produced by other nations .
 Tourism contributes more income to Kenya's economy than any other single economic activity except the production and sale of coffee and tea . Tourism contributes to tourism more than coffee, tea and tea production .
 More than 500,000 tourists visit Kenya annually to enjoy its scenic coastal area and view and photograph wildlife .
 The money that is spent by tourists contributes more than $200 million annually to Kenya's economy . Kenya's tourism industry is estimated to be worth $200million annually .
 Mining activity centers around the production of soda, fluorite, salt, and gemstones . Mining activity is based in the region around the world .
 Kenya's chief trading partners are Germany, Great Britain, Japan, and the United States . Kenya is one of the fastest growing economies in Africa .
 International a i ns — eee 8 3230s eee airports operate at Mombasa and Nairobi airports . International ai ns eee eee airport operates in Mombas and N.y. airports .
 The Voice of Kenya broadcasts radio and television programs in local languages, Swahili, and English . It is a government-owned network .
 Three daily newspapers are published in Kenya -- two in English and one in Swahili . Three daily papers are published each day .
 Scientists have found some of the earliest-known remains of human beings in the Great Rift Valley of eastern Africa, including parts of Kenya . The remains are believed to be the earliest known remains of humans in the region .
 Anthropologists say people may have first lived in the area about 2 million years ago . Studies conducted by the Leakeys and others have led scientists to believe that people first lived there .
 Kenya's location along the Indian Ocean made it a stopping place for many early seafaring peoples, including Greeks, Romans, and Arabs . The location of Kenya has been a stopping point for early seafarers, including the Greeks and Romans, including Arabs .
 They soon gained control of the coastal area, and they traded extensively . They traded extensively with the people of Kenya .
 In 1498, Vasco da Gama of Portugal reached the Kenyan coast after sailing around the Cape of Good Hope . He reached the coast of Kenya in 1498 .
 The Portuguese took control of the coastal area from the Arabs in the early 1500's . The area was taken over by the Portuguese in early 1500s .
 The Arabs defeated the Portuguese in the late 1600's and regained control of the area . But the Portuguese defeated the Arabs in the early 1600's . The Arabs were defeated by the Portuguese .
 Arabs and Portuguese had little influence over the people of the interior of Kenya . The Arabs and the Portuguese were not particularly influential .
 In 1887, a private British business association leased a part of the Kenya coast that was controlled by the sultan of Zanzibar . The area was part of a British-controlled part of Kenya that was once controlled by Sultan of the island .
 A motorvehicle assembly plant near Nairobi is one of many factories that have been established in Kenya since the 1960's . It received a charter from the government of Kenya in 2010 .
 Thousands of tourists visit the country each year to see and photograph these animals . from the British government as the Imperial British East Africa Company in 1888 . Thousands visit the animals each year .
 Britain completed a railroad between Mombasa and Lake Victoria in 1901 . In 1901, Britain completed the railway line .
 Britain encouraged British citizens and other Europeans to settle in Kenya . Britain encouraged many Europeans and others to settle there .
 Before long, many Europeans had established large farms in the country . Many Europeans were established in the area .
 British officials ruled Kenya, and the Africans had no voice in the government . Africans were not allowed to participate in the British government .
 The British also set up schools that were patterned after those in Britain . The British set up British schools to be modeled on their own .
 The chief opposition came from Kikuyu people of central Kenya, many of whom lived in poverty under the British . Many of them lived under British rule, but many still live in poverty .
 In 1944, the Kikuyu and other Kenyans formed a political party called the Kenya African Union . The party was formed to organize their opposition to the government of Kenya .
 The movement sought greater unity among Kenya's Africans . The movement demanded new British policies designed to improve the lives of the Africans .
 The British government took military action against the movement in 1952, after members, called nationalists, began committing terrorist acts . Members of the nationalist movement were called nationalists .
 In 1953, Kenyatta was convicted of leading the movement and was jailed in a remote part of Kenya . In 1953 he was jailed for his role in the movement .
 More than 13,000 people, mostly nationalists, were killed in the fighting in the 1990s . More than a million people died in the conflict .
 In the late 1950's, all of Kenya’s ethnic groups began demanding African rule . All of Kenya's ethnic groups demanded African rule in the 1950's .
 Britain agreed to the demand, and, in February 1961, elections were held to choose Africans for a new parliament .
 Kenyatta's political party, the Kenya African National Union, won the elections . Kenyata's party won the election in Kenya's first presidential election .
 The party refused to take office unless the British released Kenyatta . But the Kenyan government refused to accept the president's release . The Kenyan government has been accused of corruption .
 As a result, KANU’s rival party, the Kenya African Democratic Union formed a government . KANu's rival party KADU formed government after the election .
 In 1964, Kenya became a republic, and Kenyatta’s title was changed to president . Kenya is now a country that has become a democracy .
 Following independence, Kenya moved rapidly to expand the public school system . Kenya's school system was expanded after independence .
 The government replaced British colonial economic and cultural systems . The government also replaced the British colonial systems .
 It took over many farms and businesses owned by non-Africans, and sold or rented them to Africans . It also took over businesses owned and rented by African owners .
 Non-Africans who became Kenyan citizens were allowed to keep their property . Non-Africans who became Kenyans were able to keep some of their properties .
 At the time of independence, most Kenyans had more loyalty to their ethnic group than to the national government . Most of the country's ethnic groups were ethnic groups rather than national government members .
 Kenya's government has made some progress in promoting national pride among the people and reducing disunity . Since independence, Kenya's national pride has been boosted .
 President Kenyatta dissolved it in 1969, after accusing many of its leaders of antigovernment activities . But he later dissolved it, accusing many leaders of anti-government activities .
 A border dispute led to fighting between Kenya and neighboring Somalia shortly after independence . Kenya and Somalia fought over a border dispute between the two countries .
 Also in 1967, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda formed the East African Community . The East African community was formed in 1967 .
 This organization was created to promote trade among the three nations . It was created by the U.S. and Canada .
 It provided for the common administration of such facilities such as airports and railways . It also provided for common administration for such facilities as airports, railways .
 The organization's operations ended in 1977 after strained relations among member nations .
 President Kenyatta died in August 1978, and Vice President Daniel T arap Moi succeeded him as president .
 KANU had become Kenya's only political party in the 1960's . Others were not banned by law .
 In 1982, Kenya’s leaders changed the Constitution to make KANU the only legal party . But in 1982, the Constitution made it illegal to have a legal party in Kenya . The party is now the only party in the country .
 In 1990, demonstrations and riots broke out in Nairobi and other cities in support of a return to the multiparty system . Protests and riots were held against the return to multiparty systems .
 The Constitution was amended in 1991 to allow for a multiparty system . In 1991, the constitution was amended to allow multiparty parties to hold office .
 Multiparty elections for the president and National Assembly were held in 1992 . Elections were held for president and national assembly .
 Mai won the presidential election, and KANU won the majority of seats in the Assembly . Mai won a presidential election in 2012, and his party won the Assembly majority . Mai's election was the first time the country has seen a change in leadership .
 In 1997, protesters called for constitutional reforms to reduce the power of the presidency held many demonstrations . Protesters calling for constitutional reform held many protests .
 Kenya has made much economic progress since independence, but it still faces major problems . Kenya's economy has made a huge leap in recent years but still faces problems .
 Only about a fifth of its land is suitable for farming, and its population is growing at a rapid rate . Only about one fifth of the country's land is available for farming .
 The need to find ways to feed the growing population is perhaps the country’s chief challenge . The country's chief challenge is to feed its growing population .
 Since independence, Kenya has greatly increased its industry and tourist trade to lessen its heavy reliance on agriculture . Kenya is heavily dependent on agriculture, but has increased tourism and tourism since independence .
 Some of the capital for new industries has been provided by foreign investors . Foreign investors have invested heavily in the country's new industries .
 Some Kenyans object to foreign investments because they believe they give outsiders too much influence in their country . They say they believe foreign investments are too powerful to influence their country's politics .
 They object to the emphasis on tourism, because tourism makes Kenya rely on spending by outsiders . They also object to tourism making Kenya rely heavily reliant on outsiders .
 Some Kenyans compare the new economic trends to the colonialism of earlier days . The new Kenyan economic trends are similar to colonialism of the past .
 Others support the trends as ways of improving Kenya's economy and ending the reliance on agriculture . But others support the trend as ways to improve the country's economy .
 In 1999, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda agreed to reestablish the East Atrican Community . The East atrican Community was established in 1999 .
 The community aims to promote economic and political cooperation . The community was formally launched in 2001 .
 Nairobi Lake Turkana Maasai National park Lake Victoria Mau Mau . Mau Mau Outline I Government A National government B Local government D Courts E Armed forces C .
 People A Population C way of life G Recreation and ethnic D. Religion groups E Clothing I Education B Languages . Food and drink J The arts llll.
 Kenyatta, kehn YAH tuh, Jomo, /OH moh (1890?1978), was the first president of Kenya . Jomo was born in Kenya in 1890 .
 He took office in 1964 when the country became a republic, and served until his death . He served until he died in 1964 .
 He was educated by Church of Scotland Kenya Government Information Services Jomo Kenyatta / missionaries . He was born in Nairobi, Kenya .
 He denied the charge, but he was imprisoned and then restricted to a remote area of Kenya until 1961 . He denied it, but was imprisoned, and was restricted to remote area until 1961 until 1961.
 In 1963, when Kenya gained its independence, Kenyatta became the nation's first prime minister . He was Kenya's first Prime Minister and later Kenya's president .
 Carl G Rosberg Kepler, Johannes Kepler, yvoh HAHN uhs, discovered three laws of planetary motion . Kepler was a German astronomer and mathematician . Kepler discovered the laws of planet's motion .
 Every planet follows an oval-shaped path, or orbit, around the sun, called an e/lipse . Every planet orbits the sun around the globe, with an orbit around the planet .
 An imaginary line from the sun to the center of a planet sweeps out the same area in a given time . The imaginary line sweeps out an area in the same time as a planet .
 The time taken by a planet to make one complete trip around the sun is its period . The planet's period is the length of a planet's orbit around the solar system .
 The squares of the periods of two planets are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun . The squares are proportionate to the cube of the planets' mean distance from each other .
 He left Graz rather than undergo compulsory conversion to Roman Catholicism . Graz was forced to leave Graz to undergo conversion to Catholicism .
 He formed an association with Tycho Brahe, which shaped the rest of his life . While he was seeking another post, he formed a friendship with Brahe .
 Kepler joined Brahe's observatory in Prague, in what is now the Czech Republic . Kepler was the greatest astronomical observer before the introduction of the telescope .
 After Brahe died, Rudolf II, the Holy Roman emperor, appointed Kepler to be Brahe’s successor as imperial mathematician . Kepler was appointed to be the imperial mathematician after Brahe's death . Kepler died in 1883 .
 Kepler made his most significant discoveries trying to find an orbit to fit all Brahe’s observations of the planet Mars . Kepler's most significant discovery was the discovery of a planet on Mars .
 Earlier astronomers thought a planet's orbit was a circle or a combination of circles . Now astronomers say it's more complicated than a circle and a circle .
 Kepler could not find a circular arrangement to agree with Brahe’s observations . However, Kepler was unable to find the circular arrangement .
 He realized that the orbit could not be circular and resorted to an ellipse in his calculations . He used the figure to calculate an orbit around the globe .
 Kepler destroyed a belief that was more than 2,000 years old . Kepler used the ellipse to prove that Kepler's theory was true . Kepler was the first scientist to discover the idea of Kepler's discovery .
 Kepler was the first astronomer to openly uphold the theories of the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus . Kepler was an astronomer who openly upholds Copernic theories . Kepler first observed the formation of the solar system in 1783 .
 Keratin, KEHR uh tihn, is a tough, insoluble protein found in the outer layer of the skin of human beings and many other animals . Keratin is found in most of the world's skin and is insoluble .
 The keratin in these cells makes the skin tough and almost completely waterproof . Keratin is the material that makes skin waterproof and tough .
 In places exposed to much rubbing and pressure, the number of cells containing keratin increases and a callus develops . In places where the skin is exposed to a lot of rubbing, such as parts of the hands and feet .
 Cells containing keratin are constantly being shed and replaced by new ones . Cells that contain keratin constantly shed and replace new ones.
 The condition known as dandruff results when the scalp sheds such cells . Dandruff is caused by the scalp shedding such cells such as scalp cells .
 In animals, such growths as horns, hoofs, claws, feathers, and scales consist mainly of keratin . keratin is a protein protein protein found in keratin in many of the animal's growths .
 Keratin helps make these structures stronger and better suited to protect the body from the environment . Keratin is a key ingredient in the body's protection against the environment and helps make it stronger .
 He gained fame as a lawyer defending people whom the czarist government had accused of revolutionary activities . He was also a lawyer who defended people accused of being revolutionary .
 Kerensky was the only Socialist member of the first provisional government . After the revolution that overthrew the czar in March 1917, he was only Socialist in the provisional government.
 He became minister of justice, then minister of war, and finally prime minister . He was prime minister of the Netherlands in the 1970s .
 Kerensky fled Russia and settled in the U.S. in the 1940's .
 Kern, Jerome Kern wrote the music for many musical comedies and motion pictures . Kern was an American composer . He was born Jerome Kern and Jerome Kern .
 They were written for small casts and orchestras and had modern, everyday settings . The works had modern-day settings and were set in small casts .
 They introduced a realistic style into musicals, in contrast to the fantasy of the operettas that were popular at the time . They introduced realistic style to musicals .
 Kern's greatest success was Show Boat , for which Oscar Hammerstein II wrote the lyrics . Kern's Show Boat was his greatest success .
 Show Boat was one of the first musicals in which the songs and dances were integrated into the plot . Show Boat is one of many musicals that incorporated dance and dance elements into its plot .
 John Worth was the Democratic candidate for vice president of the United States in 1908 . Kern, John Worth, was a member of the Democratic Party . Worth was elected to the Senate of Representatives in 1906 .
 He and William Jennings Bryan lost to Republicans William Howard Taft and James S Sherman . Bryan and Taft lost to the Republicans in the presidential election .
 Kerosene is an important petroleum product, used chiefly as fuel . It is used mainly as fuel and used mainly in gasoline and electricity .
 At one time, kerosene lamps were the chief source of artificial lighting . Kerosene lamp lamps were used to light up .
 Kerosene supplies lighting and cooking fuel for people far from sources of electric power . Kerosenes supplies lighting, cooking fuel to people in remote areas without electricity . The fuel is also used to provide electricity for people living without power .
 Kerosene operates the generators that charge storage batteries on farms and small villages . Kerosenes operates the electric generators . It charges electricity to power storage batteries .
 Kerosene is a mixture of hydrocarbons, compounds containing the elements hydrogen and carbon . Kerosenes are known as kerosene, a form of carbon dioxide, which can be found in the Earth .
 Weedkillers and insecticides usually contain kerosene with a high aromatic hydrocarbon content . Kerosene is often used in weedkillers, insecticides and other insecticides .
 In kerosene used for lighting, a lower content is desirable because aromatic hydrocarbons provide a poor flame and much smoke . But a lower level of aromatic hydrocarbonbons are desirable because they provide poor flame .
 Refiners then treat kerosene to remove impurities such as sulfur compounds and some aromatic hydrocarbons . Refiners remove sulfur compounds from the kerosine .
 Refiners use liquid sulfur dioxide or other solents to dissolve impurities . Liquid sulfur dioxide is used by refiners in the United States . Refiners often use liquid to dissolve sulfur dioxide to keep impurities from being refined .
 Refiners may also treat kerosene with hydrogen at high pressure to remove aromatic hydrocarbons . Kerosene may also be treated with hydrogen in high pressure . Refiners also may also use hydrogen to reduce aromatic hydrocarbon emissions .
 Abraham Gesner, a Canadian doctor and geologist, patented a distilling process for refining oil in 1854 . Gesner patented the process in Canada in the same year .
 He derived the name kerosene from the Greek word keros, which means wax . Kerosene is the name of a type of gasoline made of wax .
 Kerouac, KEHR oo Ak, Jack, Jack , was an American author and a leader of the beat movement of the 1950's and 1960's . He was a member of the Beat movement and a leading author .
 Most of the beats were young people who reacted against what they felt were the commercialism and conventional quality of American life . The beats were created by young people against commercialism .
 Many describe his wanderings throughout the United States, Mexico, and Europe . Many describe him as a traveler .
 Kerouac’ novels emphasized spiritual liberation through sex, drugs, and the Asian religion called Zen . The Beat Beat Beat writer's novels emphasized sexual liberation through drugs and sex .
 Kerouac’s most famous novel is On the Road, an account of several beat characters who travel across the United States seeking personal fulfillment . The novel is a work of Beat Beat Beaten characters who traveled across the U.S.
 By the mid-1950's, Kerouac had become a celebrity as a spokesman for the beat movement . By the 1950's he had become an icon for the Beat movement .
 On its head it has a thick tuft, or forelock, which is usually combed between its eyes . This is the first time a large animal has been seen with a large tuft of hair .
 Kestrel, KEHS truhl, is the name of 13 species of small, brightly colored birds in the falcon fainily . The name of the birds is critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club .
 It is sometimes called the American sparrow hawk but is not a true hawk . The hawk is sometimes known as the American Sparrow hawk .
 The /esser kestre/ is found around the Mediterranean Sea and central Europe . It is found in central Europe and in the Mediterranean .
 The male American kestrel has a reddish-brown tail and grayish blue wings . It has reddish brown tail, grayishblue wings and reddish blue tail .
 The male common kestrel has a gray tail, a reddish-brown inner wing, and a dark outer wing . It has a dark gray tail and reddish brown inner wing . The male species has gray tail .
 The male lesser kestrel has a gray tail, a grayish-blue inner wing, and a dark outer wing . It has grayish blue inner wing and a gray gray tail .
 Most species are called windhovers because they fover (stay in one place) in the air while they hunt . Windhovers are often called windhorsers because of their ability to stay one place .
 They face into the wind and beat their wings while watching the ground for prey . The birds beat wings while looking for prey in the wind . They face . into the . wind .
 The American kestrel also feeds on mice, but it eats mostly insects when they are available .
 In Europe and North and South America, kestrels sometimes nest in cities, usually on top of church towers or other tall structures . Kestrelies nest in Europe, South America and Europe .
 Ketchikan, Alaska's First City, is often called Alaska’s First City or Gateway . The town is known as Alaska's Gateway .
 First city most tourists reach when they travel north by sea to Alaska . It is so called because it is the first city most people reach when traveling north . Alaska .
 Misty Fiords National Monument, near the city, is a national monument in the area . The monument is located in Misty Fiord National Park .
 White settlers established Ketchikan as a permanent settlement in 1884 . The town was established by white settlers in the early 1900s .
 The town grew in importance during the late 1890's as a supply base and port for miners during the gold rush to the Klondike of northwestern Canada . The town is located in northwestern Canada and is located on the coast of northern Canada .
 In the 1930's, Ketchikan became the world’s leading producer of canned salmon, but it now has only a few canneries . In the 1950s, the Alaskan city was the world's leading salmon producer .
 Ketchup is made from tomatoes, vinegar, sugar, salt, and various spices . It's made from tomato sauce, vinegar and sugar .
 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has established a “Standard of Identity” for ketchup . The standard of identity is set up by the FDA .
 Jane Ann Raymond Bowers Kettering, Charles Franklin, was an American engineer and inventor . Charles Franklin was an inventor . Kettering was the founder of Kettering's Kettering company .
 His first inventive position was with the National Cash Register Company in Dayton, Ohio . He worked for the company in the early 1950s .
 He invented several accounting machines but resigned to work on an idea for an automobile ignition system . The inventor also invented an accounting machine but resigned from his job .
 The success of the resulting invention, the selfstarter, enabled him to organize the Charles F Kettering Laboratories . Charles Kettering invented the self-starter .
 The organization was made part of the General Motors Corporation in 1916 . It soon became one of the most successful industrial research laboratories in the U.S.
 In 1947, he resigned to become a research consultant for General Motors . He resigned from his post in 1947 to become an advisor to the company . In 1947 he resigned from the company to become research consultant .
 During World War II, he was a military adviser and chairman of the National Inventors Council . He was also a military advisor during the Second World War . He is a member of the British Council of Science and Technology .
 Key is a musical term used to tell the tonal system in which a musical composition is written . Key is used in a musical phrase to tell a key to a piece of music . A key is a key in a composition .
 The key includes all of the tones of a particular scale and all the chords made from those tones . The key is a key that includes all the tones and chords of a scale .
 The first note of a scale is called the keynote, or tonic, and the key gets its name from that first note . The keynote is called a keynote, and it is the name of the key .
 Key of C, for example, has as its keynote C, which is the first note of the C scale . The key of C has as many as its first note, the keynote C .
 The term keyalso means the small finger piece that opens and closes the sound holes on wind instruments . The term 'key' also means a key that can be used to open and close sound holes in instruments .
 Francis Scott was a well-known Washington lawyer and amateur verse writer . Thomas W Tunks Key, Francis Scott, was a prominent Washington lawyer .
 He became famous for writing the words of “The StarSpangled Banner,’ the national anthem of the United States .
 Key's friend William Beanes was with the British when they retreated from Washington in the war . Key and Beanes were friends during their time in the U.S.
 President James Madison gave Key permission to intercede with the British for Beanes’s release . Key was able to secure the release of Beanes in 17th century .
 From this vantage point, he witnessed the British fleet's bombardment of Fort McHenry in Baltimore Harbor throughout the night . He witnessed the bombardment of the British ship .
 The next morning, he saw that “our flag was still there’ despite the ordeal . The next day, he said, “Our flag is still there' despite the incident .
 Key borrowed the tune from a popular English drinking song, “To Anacreon in Heaven,” to set it to music . Key borrows the song from an English drink song . Key says the song is a favorite drinking song from the English .
 Congress adopted his song, “The Star-Spangled Banner, as the United States national anthem in 1931 . Congress adopted the song as the U.S. national anthem .
 Key was born in Frederick County, Maryland, in an area that is now part of Carroll County . Key was also born in a Frederick County area, Maryland .
 Key’s law career included both private practice and public service positions . Key's law career was both private and public practice . Key has been married for more than 30 years .
 He was district attorney of the District of Columbia from 1833 to 1841 . He was the first district attorney to hold office in Washington, DC .
 President Andrew Jackson sent Key to settle a Jand dispute with Creek Indians in Alabama in 1833 . Key was sent to settle an 1833 dispute with the Creek Indians .
 Key helped found the American Colonization Society, a group that tried to end slavery by sending blacks back to Africa . Key was the founder of the society, which tried to send blacks back from Africa . He died in 1881 .
 Key West, Florida, is the southernmost city in the continental United States . Key West is located in Key Island, Florida . It is located on the Florida coast .
 Before the United States took over Florida in the early 1800's, pirates and people who fished for a living inhabited the Key West area .
 Many people from the Florida mainland and the Bahamas went there after 1823 and made fortunes salvaging ships wrecked on coral reefs .
 Key West became important in the 1870's for cigar making, fisheries, and food processing . Key West was important in 18th century for cigars, fisheries and food production .
 In 1912, a railroad, built on trestles over the water, linked Key West to the mainland . Key West is now a tourist hotspot in Florida .
 Overseas Highway replaced the railroad in 1938 and was modernized in the 1980's . The Overseas highway replaced the railway in 1938 .
 Peter O Muller Keyboard is a set of keys on a typewriter or on an input device used to enter information into a computer . Keyboard keys are keys used on typewriters or input devices used for entering information into computers. Keyboard keys can be used in typewriter, computer or typew
 Most keyboards in English-speaking countries use a layout known as QWERTY . The letters Q WER, T, and Yappear in succession near the upper left-hand corner of the keyboard .
 Christopher Latham Sholes, one of the inventors of the earliest practical typewriter, helped develop this layout . Sholes invented the typewriter's layout in the 1930s .
 Four arrow keys enable the computer user to move an electronic marker called the cursor or insertion point up, down, left, or right on the computer screen . The arrow keys can also be used to move the electronic marker up or down on the screen .
 A few keyboards have a built-in trackball, touch pad, or other device that can be used to control the insertion point . The insertion point can also be controlled by a trackball or touch pad .
 A computer keyboard also has numerical keys grouped in a keypad to help users enter numbers quickly . The keyboard has a group of keys grouped together to make numbers easier to enter quickly .
 A user can hold down such special keys as command, control, or alt, and then press other keys to command the computer in a number of ways . Command, control and alt are commands that can be used to command a computer .
 Computer users can reprogram the keys on many keyboards to produce other characters or perform special functions . Keyboard keys can also be reprogrammed to produce special characters or to perform functions .
 Some keyboards include buttons for adjusting the volume of the computer's speaker . Some keyboards also have buttons for playing audio compact disc or launching programs .
 Most computer keyboards have several status lights that indicate certain conditions . Status lights can be used to indicate conditions in certain areas of the keyboard .
 Caps lock light indicates that as letters are typed they will appear as capital letters . For example, a caps lock light will indicate that letters will be capital letters when typed .
 Many ergonomic computer keyboards have key arrangements that are considered to be better-suited to the human hand than the QWERTY layout . The keyboard layout is designed to be ergonomically suited to humans .
 The keys on ergonomic keyboards are often divided into two or three groups, with each group mounted at a different angle to the bottom of the keyboard . The keys are often mounted at different angles to the keyboard.
 His General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money is one of the most important books on economics . He also wrote a book on the economy .
 It changed economic theory and policy and laid the foundations of modern theories of macroeconomics . It laid the foundation for modern macroeconomic theories .
 Macroeconomics deals with the economy as a whole, including total production, overall employment, and general price levels . Macroeconomic analysis deals with total production and employment, including employment and production levels .
 Keynes maintained that governments should use fiscal policy to stabilize the economy . Keynes maintains that governments must use fiscal policies to stabilize economy .
 Overall level of economic activity depends on effective demand, economist says . Total spending by individuals, businesses, and government is key to economic growth, he says .
 Keynes said that major depressions occur as a result of a drop in effective demand . Keynes said the Great Depression of the 1930's was caused by a drop of effective demand in the 1930s .
 In periods of depression the government should increase its spending, cut taxes, or do both to stimulate the economy . He argued that in times of depression government should raise spending or cut taxes to stimulate economy .
 On most computer keyboards, the other groupings of keys include function keys along the top row; a number pad at the right; and navigation keys . navigation keys include arrow keys and the Home, End, Page Up, and Page Down keys .
 Special keys along the bottom row, such as Alt and Ctrl, can be held down at the same time as other keys to give those keys extra functions . Special keys include Alt, Ctrl and Alt and Alt keys .
 Keynes said the actions could lead to higher levels of investment and nongovernment spending . Keynes said it could also lead to full employment and higher investment levels .
 Keynes's recommendation that government intervene in the economy was contrary to /aissez faire, the economic theory that says government should not interfere in the private market . Keynes’s recommendation that . government . intervene in . the economy is contrary to . the theory that government . should not
 Many economists, especially those of the monetarist school, have challenged these ideas . But numerous economists have challenged the ideas of monetarist economics .
 Monetarists question whether Keynesian policies can achieve full employment or stabilize the economy . Keynesian economists question whether full employment can be achieved or stabilized .
 In particular, they blame such policies for the stagflation that the U.S. and other countries experienced in the 1970's .
 The book attacks the reparations that the Allies demanded from the defeated Central Powers after World War | ended in 1918 . The book also attacks the demands made by the Central Powers .
 He became a government adviser in 1940 and a director of the Bank of England in 1941 . He was also a government advisor in 1940, and was a director at the bank of England .
 It gathered political and military intelligence about other countries . It also gathered political, military intelligence on other nations .
 Such intelligence often involves a countrys national security, and governments keep much of it secret . Such intelligence is often a matter of national security .
 KGB also provided bodyguards for Soviet officials and patrolled the borders . KGB also patrolled Soviet borders and provided body guards .
 In other countries, besides gathering intelligence, the KGB conducted secret operations to aid governments or political organizations friendly to the Soviet Union . The KGB conducted various secret operations in other countries .
 In 1991, the head of the KGB took part in a failed attempt to take over the Soviet government . The KGB head took part with several other Communist officials in the failed attempt .
 In late 1991, the Soviet Union was replaced by the Com~ monwealth of Independent States .
 The KGB developed from the Cheka, a secret-police force established in 1917 . The Cheka was the first secret police force to be set up in Russia .
 KGB stands for the Russian words meaning Committee for State Security . In 1954, it received the name KGB, which stood for the Committee of State Security.
 Stuart D Goldman Khachaturian was an important Soviet composer . Aram Illich was one of the leading Soviet composers of the 1930s .
 His music successfully accommodates folk materials from the Caucasus Mountains region in Europe and Asia with conservative elements in Russian nationalist music of the late 1800s and early 1900s .
 The score contains the “Sabre Dance,” his best-known composition . Its colorful score accompanies scenes from life in an Armenian village .
 He also wrote three symphonies, three concertorhapsodies, a piano concerto, a violin concerto and motionpicture scores, and chamber music .
 Khalid ibn al-Walid was an Arab general during the Muslim conquest of Syria and nearby areas in the 600s . Edward V Williams was a general in the Middle Ages during the Islamic conquest .
 Khalid at first opposed Muhammad, but later became a Muslim . He helped Muhammad take control of the Arabian city of Mecca in 630 .
 After Muhammad died in 632, some Arabian tribes considered their allegiance to Islam to be ended . Some Arabian tribes believed their allegiance had been ended .
 Khalid, who became known as the “Sword of God,’ crushed rebellions among those tribes . Khalid became known for his role in crushing rebellion among the tribes of the Arabian Peninsula .
 Khalid crossed the Syrian Desert . Later, after invading the area that is now Iraq, he crossed the border .
 He captured Damascus, then a major outpost of the Byzantine Empire, in 635 . He captured the city, which was then a key outpost of Byzantine Empire . The city is now a major city in Syria .
 The next year, he defeated the Byzantines and their allies in the Yarmuk River Valley, in what is now Jordan . He defeated the Byzantine Empire in what now is Jordan .
 Kate Lang Khamenei is the supreme leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran . She is the wife of Iran's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei .
 Members of lran’s government selected him to succeed Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in this position, called the faqih . He succeeded him in the role of Ayatullah Ruhollollah Khomomini in 1989 .
 He is considered a rigid political and religious leader who is unwilling to compromise on improving relations with Western countries . He is seen as a rigid leader who wants to avoid compromise .
 Khamenei earned the religious title of ayatollah, the highest that can be held by a Shiite Muslim . Khamenei is Iran's highest ranking Shiite leader .
 Khamenei was a prominent opponent of the secu/ar government of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi . During the 1960's and 1970's, Khamenei became a prominent anti-Shah regime opponent . Khamenei is now a prominent Iranian leader .
 In 1979, revolutionaries overthrew the shah’s government and replaced it with an Islamic republic . The shah was overthrown in 1979, and replaced with a republic .
 Khamenei was named to the Revolutionary Council, which governed Iran after the revolution . Khamenei is Iran's highest-ranking cleric .
 As a result, he had much influence in shaping the shaping of the Islamic state, he was influential in shaping of Islamic state . He had influence over shaping the state of Islam .
 Rudi Matthee Khan, ka/fn or kan, is the word now used for mister in Afghanistan and other parts of central Asia .
 The city's factories make machinery, tractors, locomotives, and electrical equipment . The city’s factories also make machinery and tractors .
 Kiev was the capital of Ukraine until 1934, when Kiev became the new capital . It was the first capital of the country to be named .
 Khartoum, Kahr TOOM (pop.6,218; met. area pop. 817,364), is the capital of Sudan . Khartowm is located in Kahr ToOM, a suburb of Kahr to the north of Sudan's capital Kh
 Places of interest include the governor general's palace, churches, mosques, a zoo, and museums . Places are also included in museums, churches and mosques .
 Khartoum is a trading and communications center in Khatami, a rich cotton-growing area . The city is located in the country's rich cotton growing area .
 Rail lines connect it with other parts of Sudan and with Egypt . Boats carry cargo between the main towns of the Blue and White Nile .
 Egyptian leader Muhammad Ali conquered Sudan, and founded Khartoum in the 1820's . He conquered Sudan in the early 1800s . Muhammad Ali was the first Egyptian to conquer Sudan .
 Muhammad Ahmed, a Muslim leader called the Mahdi, destroyed much of the city in 1885 in his revolt against the Egyptians who ruled it . The Mahdi destroyed the city as part of a Muslim revolt against Egypt .
 Khatami was elected president of Iran in 1997 and won reelection in 2001 . He was elected President of Iran from 1997 to 1997 . He won reelection from 2001 .
 Khatami supports individual rights and a more open society in Iran, including a free press . For example, he supports individuals' individual rights, including that of the Iranian government .
 Iran has called for closer economic ties between Iran and Western nations . Iran has also called for better economic ties with the West . Iran is the world's only superpower in the Middle East .
 As president, Khatami has less power than the nation’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who is known as the fagih . As president of Iran, he has fewer power than Khamenei .
 Khatami's views have frequently brought him into conflict with Khamenei and other conservative members of Iran's ruling Islamic clergy . He is Iran's former president and former president of state television network .
 Islamic clergyman studied education, philosophy, and theology at schools in Isfahan, Qom, and Tehran . He became a clergyman and later became an Islamic cleric .
 In 1980 and 1981, he served in the Iranian parliament and as a newspaper editor . He served in Iran's parliament and newspaper editor during those years .
 He was minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance from 1982 to 1992 . His tolerant position on freedom of the media led to his dismissal from office .
 He was appointed to the less important position of head of the National Library . He was then appointed to a less important post at the end of the year .
 They are sometimes called Aottentots, but this name has become an insulting term meaning savage or barbarian . It has become a derogatory term for the savage or savage .
 Anthropologists prefer the word Khoikhoi, the people's own name for themselves . Anthropologists say Khoikehoi is the name of the people who live in the region .
 Only remaining Khoikhoi group, the Nama, live in Namibia . The Nama once lived in South Africa, but today the only remaining Nama live in the country .
 Khoikhoi was a traditional language of the Khoikehoi . It was unrelated to other African languages . The Khookehoi language included clicking sounds and clicks .
 Khoikhoi in South Africa gradually disappeared as a separate people through warfare and intermarriage with other African groups and with the settlers called Boers, most of whom were of Dutch descent .
 Khomeini was the chief political figure of Iran from 1979 until his death in 1989 . He was the Islamic religious leader of Iran .
 Khomeini made Iran an Islamic Republic and put Islamic laws into effect . Khomeinis made Iran a nation of Islamic republics and made it an Islamic republic .
 Kenneth J Perkins tions on the activities of the people . These laws included many restricencies .
 In October 1979, the shah was admitted to a hospital in the United States . The shah, who had fled from Iran, was admitted there in October 1979 .
 In November, Iranian revolutionaries took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran . The embassy was taken over by protesters in November .
 They held as hostages a group of Americans, most of whom worked for the embassy . Most of the hostages were Americans working for the U.S. embassy .
 Khomeini supported the revolutionaries, who said they would hold the hostages until the shah was returned to Iran for trial . The shah's trial was held in Iran until he was brought back to Iran .
 During Khomeini's rule, Iran fought a destructive war with neighboring Iraq over territorial and other disagreements . During the 1970s and 1980s, Iran was involved in a war with Iraq over territory .
 After nearly eight years of war, the countries reached a cease-fire in 1988 . The two countries were at odds for nearly 8 years before the cease-fires began .
 He was born in Khomein, a town south of Tehran, and changed his last name to Khomeini . Became a teacher of Islamic philosophy and law in the 1920s .
 Khomeini earned the title ayato/lah, a Persian word meaning reflection of Allah, a word for the reflection of the God .
 This title is the highest that can be held by a member of the Shiite division of Islam . The title is also the highest possible title held by Shiite Muslims .
 Khomeini became the chief figure among the Shiites in Iran in the early 1960's . Khomenei was the leader of Iran's Shiite movement in the 1960s . He became the most prominent Shiite leader in Iran .
 Khomeini was exiled in 1964, but he continued to work for the overthrow of the shah . He was exiled from Iran in 1964 but continued to fight for the overthrown shah regime .
 Khrushchev, KROOSH chehf Nikita Sergeyevich, nth KEE tuh surh surh GAY uh vihch , was the leader of the Soviet Union from 1958 to 1964 .
 He tried to raise the Soviet standard of living and greatly expanded his country’s exploration of space . He also greatly expanded the Soviet Union's space exploration efforts .
 Khrushchev had little pity for weaker nations and his political enemies . He had little sympathy for weaker countries and his enemies .
 He sometimes showed a good-natured humor and the simple tastes of his peasant background . But he sometimes showed his peasant roots and showed a sense of humor .
 Khrushchev strongly criticized the cruelty of the Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, who ruled the Soviet Union mostly by terror from 1929 to 1953 . The former Soviet Union leader died in 1953 .
 This policy helped cause a split between the Soviet Union and China and contributed to Khrushchev’ fall from power . This policy contributed to a split in the Soviet-China split .
 Khrushchev was born on April 17, 1894, in Kalinovka, near Kursk, in southwestern Russia . He was born in 1894 .
 In 1918, Nikita joined the Bo/sheviks (later called Communists) who had seized control of Russia in 1917 . Nikita later joined the Communist Party in 1918 .
 By 1939, Khrushchev had become a member of Stalin's top executive group, called the Politburo . By 1939 he had become the leader of the Soviet Union's top cabinet .
 In 1941, during World War Il, Germany invaded the Soviet Union and occupied Ukraine . Ukraine was then a republic of the Soviet Soviet Union . Ukraine is now a country in Russia .
 Khrushchev helped organize troops to fight the Germans there . He headed the effort to get war-torn Ukrainian farms, coal mines, and steel mills back into production .
 Nikolai Bulganin succeeded Nikolai Malenkov as premier of the Soviet Union in 1955 . Nikolai Bulganin was the first Russian premier of Soviet Union to become a leader .
 Khrushchev criticized Stalin for committing mass murder and other crimes against the Soviet people in 1956 . In February 1956, he said Stalin committed mass murder against Soviet people . In March 1956, the Soviet leader said Stalin's crimes were committed against the people .
 This attack began a program to dishonor Stalin that became known as destalinization . The attack began to be part of the program to honor Stalin . This is now known as "destalinization"
 The government destroyed statues and pictures of Stalin and re-named many of the places that had been named for the former dictator .
 In 1956, revolts took place against the Communist governments of Poland and Hungary . Hungary and Poland were the two countries where revolts occurred .
 Khrushchev replaced Bulganin as premier of the Soviet Union in 1958 . On March 27, 1958, Khrushchchev became the first prime minister of the USSR .
 He did not rule by terror, and he reduced the power of the country’s dreaded secret police . But he did not ruled by terror . He did .
 He began programs to increase the production of grain, housing, and such consumer goods as clothes and furniture . He began to increase production of such goods such as clothes, furniture .
 In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first spacecraft to circle the earth . The Soviet Union was the first country to orbit the earth in orbit .
 In 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to orbit the earth . He was the first man to orbit earth in 1961 .
 Khrushchev's policy in dealing with Western nations was a mixture of both gestures of peace and threats . The former Soviet leader's policy of dealing with the West was a mix of threats and gestures .
 His policy of peaceful coexistence with non-Communist countries caused bitter quarrels between the Soviet Union and China . His policy caused bitter disputes between the two countries .
 Khrushchev threatened the U.S. by installing missiles in Cuba in 1962 . In 1962, the United States was threatened by the threat of installing missiles there .
 President Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles, and Khrushchev withdrew them . President John F Kennedy demanded that the missiles be removed .
 Withdrawal of the missiles and the split between the Soviet Union and China disturbed many Soviet leaders . The withdrawal of missiles and split between China disturbed some Soviet leaders, including President Vladimir Putin .
 Khrushchev's attempts to raise farm production failed during the early 1960's . The rate of industrial growth slowed and the rate of growth slowed .
 Khrushchev spent his remaining years writing a book of memoirs called Khrushvich Remembers . The book, published in English in 1970, was published in French in 1970 .
 The Khrushchev era was a Soviet state of Soviet Communism . The Soviet Union of Soviet Socialist Malenkov, Georgi M Republics was one of the most successful statesmen in history .
 His tomb, the Great Pyramid at Giza (Al Jizah), near Cairo, ranked as one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World . His tomb is located in Giza .
 Scholars know little about Khufu’s life, in part because his tomb was robbed of its contents during ancient times . Scholars say little about his life because of the robbery .
 Khufu established a vast cemetery at Giza, which indicates that he was a powerful ruler and capable organizer . The Egyptian ruler was a ruler who was a strong ruler and a capable organizer.
 The tombs of his mother—Hetepheres—and other relatives lie near Khufu’s pyramid . His mother and other relatives are buried near the pyramid .
 Khyber Pass, KY buhr, is a famous and strategic mountain pass that links Pakistan and Afghanistan . It is one of the world's most famous mountain passes .
 The Khyber Pass cuts through the Safed Koh mountains, which are part of the Hindu Kush range . It is one of the largest mountain passes in the world .
 A narrow asphalt road and an unpaved caravan path run the length of the pass . The road is paved with narrow asphalt and unpaved paths .
 The Afridi, a Pashtun tribe, has lived in the region of the pass for hundreds of years . The Afrida tribe has lived there for more than 300 years .
 It lies along the easiest land route through the mountains and deserts that form a barrier between Southwest Asia and South Asia . The best way to get to the region is through the border between the mountainous mountains and desert deserts .
 Over the centuries, many travelers, traders, and invaders have followed this route . The route has been used by many travelers and invaders .
 Many other invaders, including the central Asian leaders Timur in the A.D. 1300's and Babur, also crossed the Khyber on their way into south Asia . Babur and Timur were also among those who crossed the border .
 The Khyber Pass is a strategic mountain pass that links PakAighaniston, istan and Afghanistan . During the 1800's, the pass played an important role in the struggle between the United Kingdom and Russia .
 It cuts through the Safed Koh mounOar tains, which are part of the aX. is x"" Hindu Kush range . It cuts  ian area of detaitmop ie through through through the Sohai moun oar tain .
 At that time, forces from British India used the pass to enter Afghanistan . The pass was used by British India during the British invasion .
 During the Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919), the Afghan and British armies fought in the pass . The pass was used by the British and Afghan armies during the war .
 Millions of Afghan refugees fled to Pakistan through the Khyber Pass when Afghanistan was torn by war during the 1980's, 1990's, and early 2000's . Millions of Afghans fled to the border in the 1980s and 1990's .
 Kibbutz, kih BOOTS , is a form of Jewish community in Israel based on the idea of social and economic equality .
 Members of a kibbutz share ownership of all the means of income production, including land and businesses . Members of the kibitzes share ownership .
 In most cases, members employed outside the kibbutz turn over their salaries to the kielz . Members employed outside of the kiez turn their salaries over their kielzeis' behalf .
 The kibbutz is responsible for providing education, health care, and housing to individuals and families . It also provides housing, education and health care .
 Before the 1980's, all kibbutz members worked for the kib butz and received goods and services for their labor instead of wages . Nowadays, the majority of kibButz members are paid for services and goods .
 When kibbutzim were first established, adults and children lived separately . Adults and children were often separated from each other . Some children and adults lived separately in kibzim .
 Children were raised in children’s houses, where they slept, played, and studied . Children were brought to children's houses by their parents .
 Since the 1970's, life has become more family-centered, and children are raised by their parents and live at home . Life has changed dramatically since the 1970s, with children living with their parents .
 In most kibbutzim, the highest authority rests in the general assembly, where each adult member gets one vote . The highest authority is in the General Assembly, with each adult kib butzim member getting a vote .
 In some kibbutzim, a representative body has replaced the general assembly . The general assembly is replaced by a representative council . In some of the world's largest kib butzim communities, the assembly has replaced it .
 Kibbutz ideals call for involvement in Israeli society and in Jewish communities worldwide . Kib butz ideals include involvement in society and Jewish communities .
 Kibbutz representatives serve in Israeli political parties, governmental offices, the military, and labor organizations . They also serve in Israel's military, military and labor groups .
 Kibbutzim also assign their young members to do community and educational work . The young people are assigned to community service and community service .
 Jewish immigrants from Europe founded the first kibbutz in 1909 in the Jordan River Valley, south of the Sea of Galilee . Jewish immigrants  founded the  in 1909 .
 Kickapoo Indians are a tribe who lived in the Great Lakes region of the United States before white settlers arrived there . Kickapoos Indians were the first to live in Great Lakes .
 One of the groups lives near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and another is in southern Texas and north .
 Until the 1800's, the Kickapoo inhabited woodland areas and hunted buffalo, deer, and other animals . Kickapoos lived in woodland areas until the 1800s and hunted deer and buffalo .
 The first white people to have contact with the Kickapoo were French explorers, who encountered the tribe in the mid-1600's .
 Kickapoo fiercely opposed sharing their lands with white settlers . Most Kickapoos were opposed to sharing their land with white settlement .
 The tribe fought against the colonists during the Revolutionary War in America and against the U.S. during the War of 1812 .
 Other tribe members remained in Illinois with a religious leader named Kennekuk, also called the Kickapoo Prophet . Other tribesmen remained with religious leader Kenneekuk .
 In the 1830's, the United States moved Kennekuk and his followers to a reservation in present-day Kansas . The United States government moved the followers to present day Kansas .
 Another Kickapoo reservation was established in 1883 in central Oklahoma . Another Kickawoo reservation in Oklahoma was established by the same tribe .
 In 1893, the government divided part of the Oklahoma reservation among members of the Kickapoo tribe . The rest of the land was sold to white people . The government divided the land between members and white settlers .
 Members of three Kickapoo groups meet occasionally for tribal ceremonies . Members of the three groups meet regularly for ceremonies .
 Kickboxing is a form of martial art in which competitors can use their elbows, feet, hands, knees and shins to deliver blows . Competitors can also use their hands, feet and feet to deliver the blows . R David Edmunds kickboxed for the first time in a
 Kickboxing is a sport and not necessarily a type of self-defense . Unlike such martial arts as karate, kickboxing is not necessarily self-defence . Unlike other martial arts, kickbox is not a martial arts .
 Rules vary, but generally matches last from 3 to 12 rounds, with each round running 2 to 3 minutes . Each match lasts between 2 and 3 minutes, and matches last between 3 and 12 rounds .
 Technical knockout stops the bout if one fighter cannot defend himself or is seriously cut . In a technical knockout, the referee stops the fight if the fighter is unable to defend himself . A technical knockout can be stopped by the referee if the bout is stopped .
 Under full contact rules, fighters may strike only above the waist . /nternational rules also allow kicks to the legs . Full contact rules also apply to fighters from all nations .
 Kickboxing originated in Thailand and came to the U.S. during the late 1960s . Kickboxing is a form of martial arts that originated from Thailand . The sport originated in the United States in the late 60s .
 Privateers are commanders of privately owned armed vessels hired by a government to attack enemy ships . Privateers were commanders of private armed vessels . Privateer ships were hired by the government as privateers .
 Kidd's birthplace is not known for sure, but it was probably Greenock, Scotland . Kidd is believed to have been born in Scotland .
 As a young man, Kidd became a privateer for England in the West Indies . Kidd was a member of the Royal Navy in the early 1900s .
 On his way, he attacked merchant ships in the Red Sea and captured several on the east coast of India . He attacked ships on his way to India and captured them .
 England was then at war with France and considered these ships prizes of war . The ships were considered prizes by the English government .
 Most of Kidd's men deserted him when his ship landed in Madagascar, east of the African mainland . Most of the men deserted Kidd's ship when it landed on the island .
 There, he discovered that the English government had declared him a pirate . He had been declared a pirate by the government of England .
 Kidd claimed he was forced to commit acts of piracy by his mutinous crew . Kidd claimed the mutiny crew had forced him to commit piracy by their mutiny . Kidd's crew was mutilated by the mutinees, Kidd claimed .
 Kidnapping is the act of seizing and holding a person against his or her will . Robert C Ritchie is the name of a man held against his will .
 The word kidnap comes from the two slang words kid, or child, and nab, which means to steal . At one time kidnapping referred especially to stealing children .
 The word kidnapping has come to be used also in cases where adults are seized and held . But the word kidnapping is also used also used in cases of adults being seized, held .
 Criminals often kidnap one or more people and hold them as /Aostages to reduce the chance of being captured . Fleeing criminals often kidnap or hold one of their victims as a 'Aostage'
 Kidnapping for ransom became common in the U.S. during the 1920's and 1930s . Kidnappings for ransom, or reward, became common during the 1930s and 1940s .
 This law makes kidnapping a federal crime if the victim is taken out of the state . Kidnapping a victim out of state is now a crime in federal law .
 In 1956, Congress changed the law to allow the Federal Bureau of Investigation to work on any kidnap case after 24 hours . The case is the first time the FBI has been allowed to investigate a kidnap case .
 The maximum punishment for kidnapping is life imprisonment under federal law . Under federal law, kidnapping is punishable by kidnapping .
 The kidneys perform many vital functions, including the production of urine . The two kidneys perform important functions such as producing urine, urine production .
 If the kidneys fail to function, poisons build up in the body, eventually causing death . If the kidney fails to function the body may die .
 The kidneys look like purplish-brown kidney beans and are about the size of an adult's fist . The kidneys are about to be the size size of a fist and look like they're about to grow .
 The right kidney, located under the liver, is a little lower than the left one . The kidney is located in the middle of the liver and under the kidneys .
 These layers are, in order, the cortex on the outside of the organ, the medulla, and the pelvis . The cortex is on the inside of the organs and the inside is the inside .
 In the medulla and cortex, the renal artery branches into increasingly smaller arteries . The renal artery branch branches into smaller arteries in the brain's medulla, cortex and cortex .
 Each of the arteries ends in a blood filtration unit called a nephron . Each of these arteries end up in a filthration unit known as the nephrons .
 Two healthy kidneys contain a total of about Medulla Kidneys . Ureters Urinary bladder Uretha Pelvis Renal vein is a sign of a healthy kidney .
 The urine flows through the ureters into the bladder and eventually leaves the body through the body's urethra .
 In the medulla and cortex, the renal artery divides into increasingly smaller vessels, each of which ends in a filtering unit called a nephron . Each of the smaller vessels ends up in a filter unit called the nephrons .
 Within each nephron, much of the blood’s fluid content filters through the glomerulus into the convoluted tubule . The tubule is the convoluted part of the convoluted portion of the nephrons .
 A nephron consists of a network of tiny blood vessels, the glomerulus, surrounded by Bowman’ capsule, a two-layer membrane that opens into a convoluted tubule . Bowman‘ capsule’ is a capsule that opens up a convoluted tube .
 Pressure forces much of the b/ood plasma (fluid portion of the blood) through the glomerulus and into Bowman's capsule . Pressure forces the plasma (part of the plasma) into the capsule . The capsule contains a capsule containing Bowman's plasma .
 The resulting tubular fluid, which contains water and dissolved chemicals, then passes into the convoluted tubule . The resulting fluid is then filled with water, dissolved chemicals and water and other chemicals .
 The portion of the blood that remains in the glomerulus flows into small vessels called capi/laries, which surround the convoluted tubule . The blood that is left in the tubule flows into the small vessels known as capi laries .
 As the tubular fluid flows through the tubules, substances needed by the body are absorbed by the cells of the tubule wall . The tubules are the cells that allow the passage of the fluid through the walls .
 These substances, which include amino acids, glucose, and about 99 percent of the water, then rejoin the blood in the capillaries . These substances then return to the body in capillsaries .
 The capillaries return the blood to the heart by way of the renal vein . The renal vein is used to return blood from the heart to the inside of the heart .
 Substances not absorbed in the tubule are wastes that the body cannot use . Substances that are not absorbed are waste that cannot be absorbed by the body . The tubule is an area of the body where the body absorbs waste .
 Other wastes are secreted into tubular fluid by the tubular cells of the kidney . The kidney contains a tubular cell, which contains waste from the kidney cells .
 Various substances, which include ammonia, urea, uric acid, and excess water, make up urine . These various substances, including ammonia and urea , make up the chemical mixture .
 The urine passes from the convoluted tubules into larger collecting tubules and then into the pelvis layer of the kidney . Urine passes through the tubules to the collection tubules in the kidney and pelvis layers . The kidney is the largest organ organ in the world .
 A tube called the ureter carries urine from each kidney into the urinary bladder . The tube carries urine into the bladder and carries it to the bladder .
 Urine collects in the bladder until it passes out of the body through another tube, the urethra . Urine is collected in a bladder until the bladder is emptied .
 Healthy kidneys produce from 1 to 2 quarts (0.95 to 1.95 liters) of urine daily . Healthy kidneys also produce from 0.95-1 liters of urine a day .
 The kidneys secrete a hormone called erythropoietin, which controls the production of red blood cells . In addition to producing urine, the kidneys also secrete erythrothroietin .
 If one kidney is lost in an accident or by disease, the other may enlarge and do the work of both . The kidney may be lost in accident or disease .
 If both kidneys are damaged or lost, waste materials accumulate in the body, causing death . But if both kidneys fail, waste material accumulates in body .
 Kidney infection, called pye/onephritis, ranks as the most common kidney disease . Kidney infections are often caused by a kidney infection .
 Pyelonephritis rarely leads to kidney failure . Unless it is complicated by blockage of the urinary tract, pyelonphritis is rarely caused by blockages .
 The kidneys also can be damaged by antibodies produced to fight bacteria or viruses elsewhere in the body . The kidneys can also be damaged if antibodies are produced by antibodies .
 This type of inflammation is called g/omerulonephritis, formerly known as Bright's disease . It is a form of inflammation known as g/OMERULONEphritis . It was formerly Bright's Disease .
 Long-term or severe high blood pressure can seriously damage the kidneys, as can diabetes . The kidneys can also be seriously damaged by long-term high pressure .
 The blocked urine can damage the kidneys by exerting pressure on them, or it may lead to pyelonephritis . Blockage can also lead to kidney problems, such as pyelonphritis.
 Kidney disorders may also result from birth defects, injuries, or poisoning, or as a side effect of certain medications . Kidney diseases may also end up as a result of birth defects or poisoning .
 Many people who have lost their kidneys or have suffered kidney damage are kept alive by a dialysis machine . Many people in the U.S. need dialysis to survive .
 Patients generally undergo this process, Called hemodialysis, for several hours, three times a week . Patients generally have to undergo this procedure several hours a day .
 Some kidney patients can use ambulatory dialysis, a continuous procedure that does not involve being connected to a machine . The procedure is a continuous process that doesn't involve a dialysis machine .
 In this process, a container of dialysis solution is emptied into the patient's abdominal cavity through a permanently implanted tube . The tube is permanently implanted in the abdomen .
 The solution remains there for several hours, picking up wastes from the bloodstream . The solution picks up the waste from the blood and picks it up from the body .
 The patient then drains the used solution and replaces it with a fresh supply . The patient is then given a new supply .
 Other kidney patients have their diseased kidneys replaced with healthy ones in a kidney transplant . Other patients in the transplant have healthy kidneys replaced by healthy ones .
 A replacement organ from a close relative is desirable because it closely matches the patient's tissues . The organ is a close family member's organ . It is desirable to replace organ from close relatives with a new organ .
 Most replacement organs come from unrelated individuals who have died in accidents or from other causes . But most replacement organs are taken from unrelated people who die in accidents .
 Modern medicines are usually able to control the rejection process and protect the transplanted kidney . Modern medicines can also be used to protect the transplant .
 Kidney stone is a hard object that forms in the kidneys . Bladder Nephritis Elimination Transplant Gout Urea Human body Uremia Kidney Stone Urine Kidney stones .
 Kidney stones range in size from microscopic to about as large as a golf ball . Kidney stone stones range between microscopic and large as golf ball size .
 They occur primarily in men and can cause intense pain if they become stuck in the urinary tract . They are caused by men who become trapped in the bladder . They can cause severe pain in the abdomen if they are stuck in a urinary tract.
 Some people who develop kidney stones absorb an unusually high amount of calcium from their diet . Some people absorb a lot of the calcium from a diet that can cause kidney stones .
 Some calcium may crystallize before it leaves the body, forming a stone . However, some of the calcium may crystalize before leaving the body .
 Most kidney stones pass out of the body with the urine, often accompanied by severe pain . The kidney stones are often accompanied with severe pain, according to experts at the hospital .
 Doctors also may use a laser ora machine called a /ithotripter to treat kidney stones .
 In laser treatment, an optical fiber is inserted into the ureter until it reaches the stones . An optical fiber—a thin thread of glass or plastic -- is inserted in the tube . The procedure is usually done by laser treatment .
 The laser then produces a beam of energy that travels through the fiber and breaks stones into frag_ ments . The stones are eliminated with the urine, which is eliminated .
 A lithotripter focuses shock waves on the stones while the patient sits in a water bath .
 Kiefer, KEEF uvhr, Anselm, is one of the most important artists to appear since the end of World War Il in 1945 .
 He is among a group of painters called neoexpressionists, who try to inject emotional and spiritual content into art . He is part of a group called neo-expressionists .
 Kiefer's large-scale paintings reflect the physical and psychological destruction of Germany during World War I. I.I. I . I. II . I . i. II. I wrote a book about the destruction of World War II .
 Rows drawn in the fields refer to the paths of marching soldiers rather than to plowing . Rows are drawn in fields to mark the end of the plowing process .
 His art often includes images from German legends . His art expresses the strength of the German character and faith that Germany will achieve its rebirth .
 Many of his paintings contain photographic images and real objects, such as straw, sand, sheets of lead, and copper wires . Many of the paintings contain images of photographic images .
 He was born March 8, 1945, in Donaueschingen, near VillingenSchwenningen, Germany .
 Kiel Canal is a waterway that provides a short cut for ships sailing between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea . The canal is a long-distance short cut to ships sailing in the Baltic and North Sea .
 Brunsbittelkoog is named after the Elbe River and Holtenau near Kiel, the Baltic seaport after which it was named . It is one of the most important rivers in the world .
 The Kiel Canal was begun by the German government in 1887 and completed in 1895 . The canal was completed by 1895 . It is located in the German city of Kiel .
 Frank Ahnert Kierkegaard is considered one of the founders of existentialism . He is considered a Danish philosopher and religious thinker . Soren Aabye, a Danish thinker, is considered an early existentialist .
 He has greatly influenced religious thought, philosophy, and literature . He has also influenced thought and philosophy .
 He was interested in the problem of what it means to be a true Christian . More specifically, he was . interested in what it meant to be . be a Christian .
 He insisted on the absurdity or logical impossibility of the Christian belief that God, who is infinite and immortal, was born as Jesus Christ, who was finite and mortal . Jesus Christ .
 He argued that God requires us to hold beliefs and perform actions that are ridiculous and immoral by rational standards . He said God requires people to hold certain beliefs that are irrational and immoral .
 The amount of objective evidence supporting a belief does not make the belief genuine or true . Furthermore, the amount of evidence supporting an objective evidence supports a belief is not true .
 "True belief is measured by the sincerity and passion of the believer," says the author . True belief should be measured in the sincerity of a believer, he says .
 Kierkegaard bitterly criticized all attempts to make religion rational . He bitterly criticized religion rationalism .
 Kierkegaard became convinced that many people who were officially Christian did not possess the unconditional faith demanded by Christianity . He became convinced people who considered themselves themselves as Christians didn't possess unconditional faith . He also became convinced many people in Kiev, Ukraine, considered themselves Christians .
 He often attacked the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Denmark . He said its membership no longer included any true Christians .
 Kierkegaard was born on May 5, 1813, in Copenhagen, where he spent most of his life . He was born in Denmark .
 He was usually so busy with his writing that he rarely invited people to his house . He rarely invited anyone to his home .
 When he was 22, he learned that his father, as a poor youth, had once cursed God . His father had seduced his mother before marrying her, he said .
 In 1840, Kierkegaard became engaged to a 17-year-old girl, Regina Olson, but he broke off the engagement after about a year . He broke it off with Olson in 1841 .
 Kierkegaard often attempted to explain and justify his behavior toward her in his writings . Their affair continued to haunt him throughout his life, and he frequently attempted to justify his actions .
 In Fear and Trembling, he suggested that he had to sacrifice his beloved Regina for religious reasons, just as Abraham had to . Abraham had . sacrificed his beloved Isaac because of God’s command .
 The city is the political, economic, and cultural center of the country . It is also known as the capital city of Uzbekistan .
 Sophia’s Cathedral and the Golden Gate of Yaroslav the Wise were completed in 1037, during the Middle Ages . The cathedral and Golden Gate were completed during the 1037-1038 period .
 Monastery of the Caves has a network of catacombs (underground burial tunnels) also dates from the Middle Ages . Monastery also has underground burial tunnels, which date back to the medieval times .
 The St. Andrew were built during the mid-1700's and are important examples of the architecture of that period . They are an important example of architecture of the 1700's .
 Kiev is known for its attractive parks and famous main boulevard, Khreshchatyk Street . The city is famous for its parks and its famous main street boulevard . Kiev is home to the city's most famous parks, parks and gardens .
 The city has a number of colleges, universities, and research institutes . The city is home to a large number of universities and research centers .
 Its chief products include chemicals, clothing, electronic products, footwear, and machinery . The company also sells electronics, clothing and electronic products .
 The city is an important highway and railroad junction, an air transportation hub, and a busy river port . It is also an important air and river port, and is a major highway and rail hub .
 Kiev was founded by Slavic people, possibly as early as the A.D. 400's . Kiev is a city of Slavic origin . It is thought to have been founded in the city of Kiev .
 By the 1000's, Kiev was one of Europe's greatest centers of commerce and culture . Kiev is now one of the world's most famous cities .
 In 1934, Kiev became the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic of the Soviet Union . Kiev was formed under Russia's leadership in 1922 . The Soviet Union had been formed in 1922, and Kiev was the capital .
 From 1941 to 1943, during World War Il, the city was occupied by the German army . The city was badly damaged during the war .
 Kiev has a hilly central area that includes many historic buildings . It ivan Soll © Sovioto Kiev . Kiev is located in the hilly area of the city .
 Andrew, rising in the background on the right, dates from the mid-1700’s . Andrew is a rising figure in the middle of the 17th century . He is the son of Andrew, who was born in 17th Century .
 It was built under Russian rule and rebuilt after the war and grew rapidly . It was rebuilt under Soviet rule and was rebuilt after war .
 Ukraine and other Soviet republics declared their independence in 1991 . In 1991, following an upheaval in the Soviet Union, Ukraine declared its independence . Ukraine is now one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Traders from many parts of the country travel to Kigali to sell their goods . Traders travel from all over the country to sell goods in the capital .
 Modern hotels and government and embassy buildings rise above the downtown area . Modern hotels, government and embassies are located in the area .
 Through the years, many rural Rwandans have moved to Kigali in search of jobs . Many of the jobless in rural Rwanda have been moved to the capital in search for jobs .
 Employment opportunities and good low-cost housing in the city are limited . However, employment opportunities are limited in the area .
 Kigali developed as a trading center for caravans during the early 1900s . The city was a center for trade in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Since then, Kigali has grown from a small administrative and commercial center to a crowded city . The city is now a tourist hotspot and tourist destination .
 René Lemarchand Kikuyu, kih Kih KOO yoo, are the largest ethnic group in Kenya, a nation in East Africa . They are also known as the largest people in Kenya .
 The Kikuyu, also known as the Gikuyu , make up about a fifth of the population . The Guyu are also called the Gukuyu .
 They speak a language called Kikuyu (which Africans call Kikikuyu) or Gkuyu . The language is spoken by African people .
 Land was owned jointly by the members of groups called mbari, which consisted of related men . Land was jointly owned by members of the groups, owned by related men, and owned jointly .
 Kikuyu life changed greatly under the influence of Western education and economic systems . Kikuyus life has changed greatly since the early 1900s under the rule of law .
 In the 1950's, the Kikuyu led a movement called Mau Mau, which opposed British rule . In the 1960s, Mau Mau was a movement which opposed the British rule of Kenya .
 By 1956, when most violence had ended, about 11,500 Kikuyu had been killed . Most violence ended in 1956, but most of the violence was over-ending .
 The British jailed many so-called rebels, including Jomo Kenyatta, a Kikuyu leader . The British jailed many of them, including the former president of Kenya .
 Thousands of Kikuyu were put in detention camps, and their homes were destroyed . Thousands were put into detention camps and their houses were destroyed.
 After Kenya became independent in 1963, Kenyatta was elected prime minister . He was the first president of Kenya .
 Since Kenyatta’s death in 1978, the new government has worked to equalize power among Kikuyu and other groups .
 The volcano lies in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park on the eastern slope of a larger volcano, Mauna Loa . It is located on the east slope of the larger volcano Mauna loa .
 In 1924, the lake sank out of sight and violent steam explosions took place . The lake sank in 1924, but was never seen again .
 Lyndon Wester Kilby, Jack , is one of the two inventors of the microchip, or integrated circuit . He is credited with inventing the first integrated circuit chip .
 Such chips are widely used in computers and other types of electronic equipment . The chips are used in computer chips .
 He shares credit for the invention with Robert Noyce, who developed a similar chip independently at the same time .
 There, he worked to miniaturize electronic components, especially for use in hearing aids . He worked at the beginning of his career in the United States .
 Such circuit elements as resistors, capacitors, and transistors could be included on a single chip . If they were all made of the same semiconductor material, they could be made of semiconductor materials .
 Kilby developed the first such chip, which contained all of the circuit elements on a narrow sliver of silicon about half an inch long . The chip was developed by Kilby in 1964 .
 Kibo summit measures 19,331 feet high at Uhuru Peak, its highest point . The summit of Kibo is located in Kenya . It is located on Uhuru peaks .
 Kibo's top is always covered by snow and ice even though it is near the equator . Kibo’s top is covered in ice and snow and snow, but it is always always covered .
 The other summit, Mawensi, stands 16,890 feet high and has no snow or ice . Maweni, 16,000 feet high, is 16,800 feet high .
 Kilimanjaro is a dormant volcano . It is one of a string of volcanic cones formed at the same time as the rift valleys of East Africa .
 Rich soils and heavy rainfall make the slopes of Kilimanjaro good for agriculture . Rich soil and heavy rain make it a good place for agriculture in the country's mountains .
 Farmers channel water from the highlands to the fertile, drier lower slopes . Farmers channeled water from highlands into fertile, fertile, lower slopes to fertile, dry slopes .
 Killarney was a quiet market town until it became a center of tourism in the 1800's . Killarny was a center-of-tourist tourism center in the 18th century . Killinney is located in the town of Kilinney .
 Killarney is one of Ireland's most popular tourist spots . The town is home to the most beautiful scenery in the world . Killarry is a popular tourist destination in Ireland .
 One of Kilimanjaro’s summits, called Kibo, is always covered by snow and ice at the top . Kibo is one of the largest summits in the world .
 Desmond A Gillmor Killdeer is a well-known p/over that ranges from southern Canada to South America . Desmond a Gillmor killdeer was a well known p/ over over the years .
 The bird is about 10 inches (25 centimeters) long, with a grayish-brown back and a white breast marked with two black bands . The bird has a white back and white breast with black bands and a gray back .
 When a predator approaches a killdeer’s nest or its young, the bird often tries to distract the intruder by dragging one of its wings as if it were broken . The bird often drags the wing as if the wing is broken .
 Killdeers eat many insects harmful to crops and are protected by game laws . Killdeer eat insects that are harmful to crop crops and protected by laws .
 Killer whales have from 40 to 48 teeth, with 10 to 12 teeth on each side of each jaw . Killer whales can have between 40 and 48 teeth . Killer whale teeth can be found in the teeth of up to 50 per cent of whales .
 They eat salmon and other fish, and sometimes attack small dolphins, seals, and baleen whales . They eat small dolphins and seals, but sometimes attack whales and seals .
 Each pod communicates with its own distinctive set of underwater sounds, called a dia/ect . The pods communicate with their own distinctive underwater sounds .
 The killer whale is found in all the oceans, but especially in cold regions . Killer whales are often found in the cold regions of the world, especially in the Arctic .
 It possesses a glossy black back, a white underside, and a white patch near each eye . It has glossy black and white back, with a glossy white underside and white underside .
 Some people have objected to the poem's sentimentality and mixed metaphors, but the poem has remained popular .
 Alfred Joyce Kilmer was born in New Brunswick, New Jersey, in 1886 . Kilmer is credited with saving the lives of Kilmer's life .
 He published two other collections of poetry and edited an anthology of Roman Catholic poets . He also edited a collection of poetry .
 Kilogram is the base unit of mass in the International System of Units . The modern metric system uses a kilogram of mass . Kilograms are the most common unit in the world's metric system .
 The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia, its resistance to changes in its motion . It is a measurement of its mass, and the mass of it can be measured by its inertia .
 A bar of platinum stored at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in France serves as the SI's standard for a mass equal to exactly 1 kilogram . The platinum bar is stored in France at the IBF's Paris bureau .
 In commercial and everyday activities, the term weight is understood to mean mass . People use the kilogram as a unit of weight, and people use a kilogram to refer to mass .
 In science and technology, weightis the gravitational force on an object . Weight is a function of weight, and weight is an object's weight .
 Kilohertz, K/HL uh Hurrs, is a unit used to measure the frequency of many kinds of vibrations and waves, such as radio and sound waves . The unit is used in radio, sound waves and vibrations .
 Waves sent out by one radio or TV station differ from those transmitted by others . The waves sent out from one station differ in frequency from those sent from others .
 A tuner of a radio or TV may be adjusted to receive individual stations . The tuner can adjust individual stations in order to receive them .
 Kilometer, K/HL uh mee tuhror kuh LAHM uh tuhr, is 1 a Hugh D Young unit of distance in the metric system . Kilometer is a length of 1 a Kilometer .
 One kilometer equals 1,000 meters, a distance of about five-eighths of a mile . One kilometre equals a kilometer, one kilometer is one kilometre .
 Richard S Davis Kilowatt, A/HL uh wan, is a unit of power in the metric system of measurement . Kilowatts is a measurement unit in the modern metric system .
 All countries use the unit to measure electric power . Even the United States, which does not customarily use the metric system, uses it .
 One watt is the power defined by a current of 1 ampere flowing under an electrical pressure of 1 volt . The power is defined by the current of a current flowing under the pressure of a volt .
 Kim I] Sung, kihm ih/l sung, headed the government of North Korea from 1948 to 1994 . He died in 1994 after his death .
 Kim led a strict dictatorship, exercising total control over North Korea's armed forces, economy, educational system, and other aspects of society . Kim led the North Korea regime, exercising complete control of the country .
 In the 1930's and early 1940's, Kim led Korean guerrilla forces against the Japanese in Korea . Kim was a Korean guerrilla leader in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In the mid-1980's, Kim's government agreed to allow international inspection of North Korea's nuclear facilities . Kim's regime agreed in the 1980s to allow inspection of the nuclear facilities in North Korea . North Korea has never allowed international inspections of its nuclear facilities since the 1970s .
 In 1994, after Kim's death, North Korea reached an agreement with the U.S. about these nuclear facilities . North Korea agreed to the deal with the United States .
 It was the first time the leaders of the two Koreas had met since the peninsula had been divided . It was also the first meeting since the Korean peninsula was divided .
 Kim I] Sung had, with Soviet support, established North Korea as a Communist state in 1948 . He was the first leader of North Korea, and he was its first leader .
 Kim Jong was born near Khabarovsk, in southeastern Russia, then part of the Soviet Union . He was born in the Soviet-era Soviet republic . Kim Jong is now president of the Korean peninsula .
 He gradually emerged as the chief interpreter of the party's principles and beliefs through his control of and support for North Korea’s arts, especially filmmaking . He has also been in charge of North Korea's film industry .
 He used these posts and his father’s support to develop and strengthen his leadership in both the party and the army, paving the way for becoming his father's successor . He is expected to take over from his father as prime minister .
 Kimberley, South Africa, is one of the world’s major diamond centers . Kimberley is a major diamond center in the world .
 They spend several hours each day with a teacher who helps them learn through playing and other activities . The children's teachers help the children learn through various activities .
 Kindergarten activities may involve art, music, language arts, science, and social studies . Activities may include art, science and language arts .
 Kindergartens provide activities designed to increase child's confidence, to encourage learning and creative expression . Activities designed to develop the ability to work in groups .
 Formal group activities offer organized, shared experiences for all the children in a class . Formals group activities include organized activities for children .
 Children learn to adjust their own plans to those of others . They also help children learn to adapt their plans to others' .
 This period gives each child a chance to report interesting experiences to other children . Each child's experience is reported on by parents and teachers .
 Taking turns and being quiet while others speak help children develop selfcontrol . Taking turns helps develop self-control skills .
 In many kindergartens, each child has a special daily assignment to do for the group . Each child has to do something special to do .
 In most classrooms, children participate in group reading of oversized books that feature illustrated stories, poems, or songs .
 These books have an easy-to-read vocabulary and print that is large enough for a group of children to see . These books are easy to read and easy to understand .
 Other group events help children understand numbers with such exercises such as counting, measuring, and matching quantities .
 Children explore their schools, neighborhoods, or communities . Many group activities involve projects involving children exploring their communities .
 Projects might include studying a nearby building under construction or visiting a post office, farm, zoo, or museum .
 After returning to school, children engage in classroom activities that deepen their understanding of their experience . After the children return to school they engage in classes that deepen the understanding .
 They may compose stories about their trip, make models of buildings or animals they saw, or dramatize events with puppets . They may make models, make puppets, or make stories about what they saw .
 Other shared activities include a music time in which children sing, dance, or listen as a group .
 Kindergarten children often work in small groups under supervision of their teacher . Many days in E.R Degginger children work under supervision . Victoria Beller-Smith from E. R. Deggingers has been involved in the project .
 The youngsters shown here are listening to their teacher read during a storytelling session . The youngsters are shown listening to a story by their teacher .
 When the class is not involved in a formal group experience, kindergarten children are free to choose many of their activities .
 Children learn to work in their own way and to recognize their own abilities and those of others . Children learn and appreciate their own ability and those others .
 Most kindergartens permit children to talk freely and share ideas and feelings during informal activities . Children should also be allowed to express their feelings in informal activities.
 Kindergarten children differ from one another in their readiness to work in informal groups . Children are prepared to work with informal groups in the classroom .
 The best kindergartens provide activities and materials that engage and challenge all children . The best kindergarten activities should involve engaging and challenging children, experts say .
 The kindergarten room should be big enough for children to move freely and not feel crowded . The room and the equipment should also be bigger than the room and equipment .
 A big room also provides an area for activities such as building or pretending, such as pretending, that require a large space . A room is also a good place to play and play in a big room .
 Such features as pets or plants make the room attractive, interesting and help children feel at home . Pets or plants are important to children, say experts .
 Most kindergartens have child-sized tables, chairs, washbasins, and toilets . Most kindergarten classrooms have a child-size table, chairs and chairs .
 Many kindergarten rooms are on the ground floor of a school so the children can exit quickly in the event of a fire or other disaster . The children can also exit quickly from the school's ground floor .
 Equipment in a kindergarten provides opportunities for play and creative expression . Equipment in the classroom provides opportunities to play, creative expression, according to experts .
 Some equipment helps children develop skill in handling or manipulating materials . Some equipment can be used to help children develop skills in handling materials .
 Standard supplies include puzzles and other toys; blocks of different sizes, shapes, and colors . Objects that can be arranged according to size or pattern are arranged .
 Most kindergartens also have miniature houses, cars, dolls, and animals . Most kindergarteners also have cars, cars and dolls .
 Some schools may have a workbench with real tools, where carefully supervised children are taught to sand wood, use a saw, and hammer nails . Some schools also have workbench where children learn how to use real tools .
 Art materials include paints and brushes, brushes, easels, fingerpaints, crayons, markers, colored pencils, and clay . Art materials can be used in art projects .
 Room may include a center for imagining and pretending that provides clothing, equipment, and childsized models of appliances and furnishings . Room may also include a play center for imagination and pretending .
 Additional centers may resemble familiar areas outside the home, such as a grocery store or office . Additional centers include grocery stores or offices .
 Some rooms have a piano, and most have a cassette tape player or compact disc player . Most rooms have cassette tape players and compact disc players .
 Teachers read stories to the children and show them pictures from the books . Teachers also read pictures of the children's favourite books .
 Children may examine books alone while they recite parts they have memorized during the teacher's presentation . Later, children may examine the books alone .
 For many children, recitation is a first step to learning to read . For many, reciting is a good first step in learning to learn to read.
 Teachers can help make words familiar by writing on the board as they discuss assignments, activities, or events . Teachers can also help students understand assignments and activities .
 Some rooms have computers and software that enables kindergarteners to practice reading and writing . Some rooms also have computers that enable children to read and write with them .
 A kindergarten may have its own outdoor play space with large climbing structures and other equipment . A kindergartners may also have outdoor play spaces with climbing structures .
 Youngsters develop their physical skills and coordination by climbing, running, and taking part in other active play .
 Kinderarteners also enjoy pretending that play structures are airplanes, cars, or spaceships .
 A good kindergarten teacher enjoys working with young children, a good teacher enjoys teaching them . A kindergarten teacher is a teacher who enjoys teaching young children .
 Such work requires great patience and the ability to understand children’s concerns and to talk with children on their own level . Such work must be done with great patience, says author .
 Teachers help children meet the challenges of kindergarten by providing many — kinds of support and guidance . Teachers also provide many other types of support .
 Kindergarteners may need help playing and working in a group, putting on boots and jackets, or developing good health habits . Kindergartners may also need help with playing, working and developing good habits .
 One of the most important ways in which teachers help kindergarteners is by encouraging independence, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 At the same time, teachers help create close ties with children’s homes . Teachers help create strong relationships with children's homes .
 Teachers talk to parents about their child's development throughout the year . Teachers talk with parents about the development of their children .
 Parents assist kindergarten teacher by helping with activities in and out of classroom .
 In most states of the United States, kindergarten teachers need a four-year teaching degree . In the U.S. kindergarten teachers must also have a four year teaching degree.
 In most Canadian provinces, they need a three-or four-year degree followed by an additional year leading to certification . In most Canada provinces, the degree is required for certification .
 Many states now offer a specialized teaching license that qualifies a person to work with young children in nursery school through third grade . Many states offer a special teaching license .
 Friedrich Frobel started his first kinder| garten in Blankenburg, Germany, in 1837 . Frobel was the founder of the kindergarten movement .
 Frébel invented the term kindergarten, which | means garden of children in German . Frébe invented the word kindergarten .
 Frébel believed that children’s minds and spirits grow naturally in the proper environment, much as plants grow freely in a garden . The children's spirits and spirits can be grown naturally in a proper environment like a garden, she said .
 Frébel devoted much of his life to designing methods and materials that would encourage this natur-*_ al growth . He dedicated his life in France to creating materials that encourage natural growth .
 Many of the materials that he developed re-mained standard kindergarten equipment for years . The materials have been re-used for years and are now a standard standard for kindergarten equipment .
 Before Frdébel established his kindergarten, Robert Owen had set up infant schools at New” Lanark, Scotland, and New Harmony, Indiana . The social reformer had also established infant schools in Scotland and Indiana .
 Owen be° lieved that teaching children good behavior and moral attitudes would help create an ideal society . Owen said children should be taught to be responsible for their behavior and attitudes .
 Margaretha Meyer Schurz, a student of Frébel’s in Germany, established the first kindergarten in the United States in 1856 .
 In her Watertown, Wisconsin, home, | she started a German-speaking school for her children and the children of her relatives . The school is now being run by her husband and his wife .
 Schurz expanded her kindergarten to include other children of the community . She moved the class to a small vacant building in a bid to expand her class .
 Elizabeth P Peabody, a teacher and author, started an English-speaking kindergarten in Boston in 1860 .
 The first public kindergarten in Canada was established in Ontario in 1871 . It was the first public school in Canada established in Canada .
 The first kindergartens served children from both low-income and wealthy homes . The first kindergarten centers were opened in 1903 .
 Many early public school kindergartens were privately funded by charities . Early public schools were funded by private foundations .
 These kindergartens tried to provide good experiences for children as young as 3 years old . They tried to give good experiences to children as little as 3 .
 Teachers spent almost half their time giving families the types of assistance that social workers today provide . Teachers spent most of their time helping families with assistance .
 Such assistance might include advice about child care, health, or housing . Such assistance may include advice on child care or health, housing .
 During the 1900's, more and more communities recognized the value of kindergarten programs . The kindergarten program was established in the early 1900s .
 As a result, the kindergarten movement continued to spread to smaller cities, towns and rural areas .
 Teacher-training schools gave increased attention to training kindergarten teachers . The focus of training was to focus on teaching kindergarten teachers in kindergarten classrooms .
 The National Association for the Education of Young Children recommends that classes for 5-year-olds consist of no more than 15 students . The group also recommends that the class should consist of only 15 students per class .
 The association is the largest organization in the U.S. of teachers and directors of preschools, kindergartens, and elementary schools . It is based in Washington, D.C.
 Budget limits force many schools to place 25 or more students in each class . Budget limits mean many schools have to place more than 25 students per class .
 Large classes make it hard for teachers to meet individual students’ needs, teachers say . Large classes are hard for individual students' needs, according to teachers . Teachers need to be able to meet students' individual needs .
 Half the students in a school district attended in the morning, and the other half went to school in the afternoon . Half of a district's students attended in a morning, half in the evening . Half went to the morning and half to the afternoon sessions .
 Some communities do not have the resources to provide full-day kindergarten . But some communities don't have the money to provide a full-time kindergarten .
 Such programs require twice as many teachers, classrooms, and materials as do half-day programs . Half-day program requires twice as much teachers, classroom materials as half-hour program .
 Many communities debate how best to meet the needs of an increasingly diverse group of students . Many communities also debate how to meet needs of a growing minority .
 Many 5-year-olds have some type of preschool education before they reach kindergarten . Many children in the U.S. have some form of education before kindergarten .
 Some people feel that kindergarteners are ready for formal instruction in reading, arithmetic, and other subjects . Some people therefore feel that kindergartners are ready to be ready to learn .
 Students who come to kindergarten with no preschool experience may not be ready for preschool lessons . But such instruction may be premature for students who come with no kindergarten experience .
 Because of immigration, many communities have students from a variety of countries and cultures . Students from all over the world are represented in the United States .
 Some of these students do not speak the local language and must learn it when they start school . Some of the students must learn the language when they begin school .
 Students would have difficulty understanding formal lessons given in a language they have not yet mastered . Such students would not have been able to understand formal lessons in English .
 Most experts feel informal learning provides a better opportunity to meet the needs of all kindergarteners than does formal instruction . Informal learning is a better way to learn than formal instruction, experts say .
 Another debate concerns the best age for students to start kindergarten . Another debate is over the age of when students should start kindergarten in kindergarten .
 Many public schools determine eligibility for kindergarten by setting a date by which an entering student must reach 5 years of age . Public schools set the age by which a kindergarten student must be 5 years old .
 Some parents feel children who are ready should attend kindergarten before they reach 5 . Some parents say children should start at age of 5 .
 Some families want to postpone enrollment while a child matures physically or intellectually . Others want to delay enrollment until a child's maturity is mature .
 Some kindergartens are experimenting with flexible Kindergarten entrance dates . Multiage groupings are also being experimented with .
 Such a grouping might include children ages 4 and 5 in the same classroom . Children ages 4 to 5 in a classroom could be grouped together in a group .
 Kinesics, kih NEE sihks, is the scientific study of the body movements involved in communication, especially as they accompany speech . It is the study of body movements as part of the communication .
 These movements include gestures, facial expressions, eye behavior, and posture . These movements can be used to communicate with others .
 The movements studied by kinesic scientists are commonly called body /anguage or nonverbal behavior . The movements are commonly known as body /language or non-verbal behavior.
 Kinesics was developed by the American anthropologist Ray L Birdwhistell . It was developed in the 1960s by an anthropologist .
 He used slow-motion films of conversations to analyze speakers’ behavior . Slow-motion videos of conversations were used to analyze speaker behavior .
 He borrowed many terms and techniques from linguistics to identify the basic motions that made up meaningful gestures and other behavior . He borrowed words from linguistic techniques to identify meaningful gestures .
 In many eastern countries, the king or emperor was once considered to be the representative of a god or a divine family . In China, this is considered a form of religion in China .
 When the tribes were converted to Christianity, the king gained prestige . The tribes were converting to Christianity . The king of the tribes gained prestige.
 The church crowned him and supported the idea that he was the source of justice in the realm as the vice regent of God . He was crowned as the 'vice regent' of God in the Bible's creation .
 The king was not all-powerful but was considered bound by his people's customary laws . However, he was not considered all powerful and was bound by the law .
 In the United Kingdom and other European countries, the monarch possesses little authority . The monarch has little authority in the UK and Europe .
 B B. is an American blues singer and guitarist . He is the son of the King of the United States . B B is a guitarist and singer .
 With his electric guitar named “Lucille,” he developed the urban blues sound . He developed the guitar named Lucille .
 This style of playing features wide vibrato , loud and ringing notes, and solos filled with piercing feedback . The style is known for its loudness and vibrato . It is also known for the piercing feedback of its solos .
 He has been a major influence on rock music, especially on British musicians who emerged in the 1960's . Eric Clapton, Mick Jagger, and John Mayall were among those who emerged from the 1960s to be influential .
 He heard and played the local variety of blues before moving to Memphis, Tennessee, when he was 23 . He moved to the blues center, Memphis, at the age of 23 .
 In Memphis, King sang on a local radio station and on Beale Street, the site of many blues clubs . King sang in Memphis, Memphis, during his early days .
 American tennis star Billie Jean King is one of the greatest women players in history . King was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey, in 1946 .
 In 1972, she won the women’s singles title in three of the most important tennis tournaments . She won the United States Open, the All-England Championships, and the French National Championships .
 She also won the United States National Championships in 1967 and 1971 . She was United States Open champion in 1971 and 1974 .
 King won a total of 20 Wimbledon championships in singles, in women's doubles, and in mixed doubles, which set a record for that tennis tournament . King won his first Wimbledon singles title in singles and doubles .
 She enrolled in the city’s tennis program when she was 11 years old . She quickly became one of the top young amateur tennis players in the U.S.
 King turned pro in 1968, the first year that major tournaments were open to professional tennis players . King turned professional in 1968 . King won the first major tennis tournament to be held in major tournaments .
 She became an important force in making a success of women’s professional tennis . She became a force in the sport's success .
 In 1971, King became the first woman tennis player to earn $100,000 in a single year . King won 19 tennis tournaments and became the world's first female tennis player .
 Coretta Scott is the widow of civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. Coretta King is an African American supporter of the civil rights movement . Arthur Ashe King's widow is a prominent civil rights activist .
 The center includes her husband's burial place near the church where he was pastor . King was pastor at one of the world's largest churches .
 She graduated from Antioch College and studied concert singing at the New England Conservatory of Music . She studied at the conservatory .
 She helped her husband in his civil rights work by giving speeches and recitals . King helped her give speeches and give recitals for his work .
 Much of King’s music was written for, or heavily influenced by, the circus . Much of his music was influenced by the circus.
 His Barnum and Bailey's Favorite became the theme song of that circus . It ranks as one of the most popular marches ever written . The march was written for the circus and became the main theme song .
 Karl Lawrence King was born in Paintersville, Ohio, near Xenia . Coretta Scott King was the daughter of MLK and wife of King .
 He grew up in Canton, Cleveland, and Xenia, Ohio, and studied music with the local bandmaster . He studied music at the age of 13 .
 For a time, he worked in a printer's shop during the day and composed at night . He worked at night in a printing shop in London .
 King became a professional baritone player about 1910 and played with several circus bands . King was a member of several circuaria bands .
 In 1920, he began a 50-year career as director of the Fort Dodge Municipal Band . He has been in Fort Dodge since 1920 .
 Stewart L Ross King, Martin Luther, Jr. was the main leader of the civil rights movement in the U.S. during the 1950's and 1960's . He was an African American Baptist minister .
 "He had a magnificent speaking ability, which enabled him to effectively express the demands of African Americans for social justice," he said . He said .
 King’s eloquent pleas won the support of millions of people—blacks and whites—and made him internationally famous . King's eloquent plea for African-American equality won millions of Americans and millions of others .
 He won the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize for leading nonviolent civil rights demonstrations . He was awarded the Nobel Prize for his role in civil rights protests .
 In spite of King’s stress on nonviolence, he often became the target of violence . King often faced violence in spite of his nonviolence message .
 White racists threw rocks at him in Chicago and bombed his home in Montgomery, Alabama . His home was bombed by racists in Alabama and in Chicago .
 King died at the age of 39, when an assassin shot and killed him . King was assassinated by an assassin in 1968 .
 Some historians view King’s death as the end of the civil rights era that began in the mid-1950s . King's death is seen as an example of the end to civil rights .
 Under his leadership, the civil rights movement won wide support among whites, and laws that had barred integration in the Southern States were abolished . The Civil Rights movement was abolished in 1964 .
 King's birthday is only the second American whose birthday is observed as a national holiday . King became the second U.S. citizen to have his birthday become a national day of honor .
 He was the second oldest child of Alberta Williams King and Martin Luther King . He was born in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1968 .
 In high school, Martin did so well that he skipped both the 9th and 12th grades . Martin skipped 9th, 12th and 9th grades in high school . Martin says he is a "very good person"
 King became an admirer of Benjamin E Mays, Morehouse’s president and a well-known scholar of black religion . King was a member of Morehouse's president and admired Benjamin Mays .
 He entered Crozer Theological Seminary in Chester, Pennsylvania, to earn a divinity degree . He is the son of former President Richard Nixon .
 In 1954, King became pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama . King was pastor at the Dexter Ave Baptist Church, Montgomery .
 King's civil rights activities began with a protest of Montgomery's segregated bus system in 1955 . King’s civil rights activity began with protest of segregated bus systems in Montgomery, Alabama .
 King began his civil rights activities by leading a protest against the segregated bus system in Montgomery, Ala., in 1955 . That year, King led a black passenger on a bus carrying black people .
 Rosa Parks was arrested for disobeying a city law requiring that blacks give up their seats on buses when white people wanted to sit in their seats or in the same row . King, center, insisted that the protest be nonviolent .
 The leaders formed an organization to run the boycott, and asked King to serve as president . King was the president of the organization .
 Terrorists bombed King’s home, but King continued to insist on nonviolent protests . King's home was bombed by terrorists, but he insisted on nonviolent protest . King was assassinated in 1968 .
 In 1956, the U.S. Supreme Court ordered Montgomery to provide equal, integrated seating on public buses . Montgomery was forced to comply with the court's order .
 The boycott's King, Martin Luther, Jr. success won King national fame . King identified him as a symbol of Southern blacks’ new efforts to fight racial injustice . King's success won him national fame and identification of him .
 King founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1957 to expand the nonviolent struggle against racism and discrimination . With other black ministers, he founded the SCLC in 1957 .
 At the time, widespread segregation existed throughout the South in public schools, transportation, recreation, recreation and such public facilities as hotels and restaurants .
 Many states used various methods to deprive blacks of their voting rights . Many states also used various ways to deprive black voters of their rights .
 In 1960, King moved from Montgomery to Atlanta to devote more effort to SCLC’s work . King moved to Atlanta, Georgia, in 1960, to focus on his work .
 In 1960, black college students across the South began sitting at lunch counters and entering other facilities that refused to serve blacks . Students sat at lunch counter counters and other facilities in the South .
 Civil rights protests expanded further, including major demonstrations in Albany, Ga. Civil rights demonstrations expanded further .
 King became increasingly unhappy that President John F Kennedy was doing little to advance civil rights . Also in the early 1960's, King was unhappy that he was not allowed to speak out against President Kennedy .
 Early in 1963, King and SCLC associates launched massive demonstrations to protest racial discrimination in Birmingham, Ala., one of the South's most segregated cities . King: "I'm not going to give up on racism, but I'm going to do it"
 Police used dogs and fire hoses to drive back peaceful protesters, including children . Demonstrators used dogs, hoses, water hoses and dogs to drive them back . Police also used dogs to scare protesters away from peaceful demonstrations .
 Heavy news coverage of the violence produced a national outcry against segregation . The violence produced an outcry against the segregation of segregation .
 Kennedy proposed a wider-ranging civil rights bill to Congress . Soon afterward, he proposed a broader civil rights legislation .
 The event was intended to highlight African-American unemployment and urge Congress to pass Kennedy's bill . The event, called the March on Washington, was meant to highlight black unemployment .
 Over 200,000 Americans gathered at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. on Aug. 1963 .
 The high point of the rally, King’s stirring ‘| Have a Dream’ speech, eloquently defined the moral basis of the civil rights movement . King's '| Have A Dream” speech was his stirring speech at the rally .
 The civil rights movement won a major victory in 1964, when Congress passed the civil rights bill . Kennedy and his successor, President Lyndon B Johnson, had recommended the bill .
 King led the 1963 March on Washington from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial . The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited racial discrimination in public places and called for equal rights . King was the leader of the 1963 march on Washington .
 His stirring plea for racial equality and justice was a high point of the massive demonstration . His plea was a stirring moment of the demonstration .
 "With this faith we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood," he said .
 This will be the day when all of God’s children will be able to sing with new meaning, “My country ‘tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee | sing.” ‘I’ll be singing again, ‘My
 The Heirs to the Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., is the author of a series of books . King's estate is the subject of an award-winning book, "Martin Luther King Jr.”
 The demonstrators protested against efforts of white officials to deny most black citizens the chance to register and vote . Demonstrators protested against the efforts of whites trying to deny black citizens access to voting rights .
 Several hundred protesters attempted to march from Selma to Montgomery, Montgomery, but police officers used tear gas and clubs to break up the group .
 The bloody attack, broadcast nationwide on television news shows, shocked the public . The bloody assault was broadcast nationwide .
 King immediately announced another attempt to march from Selma to Montgomery . King's march was the first attempt to take place in Selma .
 Johnson went before Congress to request a bill that would eliminate all barriers to Southern blacks’ right to vote . Johnson: "I want to see all barriers removed from the South"
 By 1965, King had come to believe that civil rights leaders should pay more attention to the economic problems of blacks . King: "By 1965, I believe that the economic issues of blacks should be a priority"
 In 1966, he helped begin a major civil rights campaign in Chicago, his first big effort outside the South . He helped start the Chicago campaign in 1966, which he helped start in Chicago .
 Leaders of the campaign tried to organize black inner-city residents who suffered from unemployment, bad housing, and poor schools . The campaign was organized by black residents who had unemployment, housing and schools .
 Leaders protested against real estate practices that kept blacks from living in many neighborhoods and suburbs . They also protested against keeping blacks out of many neighborhoods .
 King believed such practices played a major role in trapping poor blacks in urban ghettos . King said such practices were a major problem in the black community . King believed it was a problem for poor blacks .
 King and local leaders organized marches through white neighborhoods . King and the local leaders also organized marches against white neighborhoods in white neighborhoods.
 Angry white people in segregated communities threw bottles and rocks at demonstrators . Demonstrators say they were trying to protest against segregation . But angry white people threw rocks and bottles at them .
 Chicago officials promised to encourage fair housing practices in the city if King would stop the protests . Soon afterward, Chicago officials agreed to stop King's protests .
 King was a leader of white Americans who fought for racial equality . King used the term "black man" to refer to the black man's role in the civil rights movement .
 Many people thought the religious, nonviolent emphasis of the civil rights movement was changing . But it was changing, and the focus of the movement never changed .
 King repeated his commitment to nonviolence, but disputes among civil rights groups over ‘Black Power’ suggested that King no longer spoke for the whole movement . King repeated nonviolence but disputes over 'Black Power' suggest that King's commitment was not enough .
 In 1967, King became more critical of American society than ever before . King became critical of U.S. society . King was critical of the American society .
 True social justice would require a redistribution of wealth from the rich to the poor, he said . He said that true social justice . would require the redistribution . of wealth .
 King was arrested and jailed several times while protesting against injustice and discrimination . King was jailed for protesting injustice against injustice in the United States .
 King began to plan a Poor People’s Campaign that would unite poor people of all races in a struggle for economic opportunity . King began the campaign in order to unite poor with all races .
 The campaign would demand a federal guaranteed annual income for poor people . It would also demand other major antipoverty laws, including a federal guarantee .
 King went to Memphis to support a black garbage workers strike . King was in Memphis supporting a strike in support of the sanitation workers' strike .
 James Earl Ray, a white escaped convict, pleaded guilty to the crime in March 1969 and was sentenced to 99 years in prison . Ray was convicted of escaping from prison in 1969 and serving 99 years for the crime .
 Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which prohibited racial discrimination in the sale and rental of most housing in the nation . A few months later, Congress also passed the act of 1968 .
 Years after King’s death, some people still doubted that Ray had acted alone . Ray Ray was the son of King, who was found dead at the scene .
 In 1978, a special committee of the U.S. House of Representatives reported the “likelihood’ that Ray was aided by others . Ray was convicted of killing himself in 1978 .
 In 1974, Kings mother was shot and killed while playing the organ in Ebenezer Baptist Church . She was killed in 1974, while playing organ at the church .
 The gunman, a member of a small religious cult that opposed black Christian ministers, received the death penalty . The gunman was a cult member who opposed black Christians ministers .
 In 1980, an area including King’s birthplace, church, and burial place became the Martin Luther King, Jr., National Historic Site . King was assassinated in 1968 .
 In 1991, the National Civil Rights Museum opened at the site of King’s assassination in Memphis . King's assassination was the first civil rights museum in the nation .
 King’s son Martin Luther King II was elected president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1997 . King's son is the son of MLK II, who was elected to lead the conference in 1997.
 King, Rufus , was an American statesman and signer of the Constitution of the United States . King signed the Constitution in 17th Century .
 He was noted for his early opposition to the expansion of slavery into the nation’s western territories . He was also noted for opposing slavery expansion into the western states .
 While representing Massachusetts in the Congress of the Confederation from 1784 to 1786, King proposed that slavery be prohibited in the Northwest Territory . King proposed slavery in 1786 .
 In 1819 and 1820, King opposed admitting Missouri to the Union as a slave state . King opposed admission to the U.S. as a slavery state .
 King was born on March 24, 1755, in Scarboro, Maine, then part of Massachusetts . King was also born in 1755 .
 King represented Massachusetts at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 . King helped gain the state's approval of the Constitution .
 He was ambassador to the United Kingdom from 1796 to 1803 and in 1825 and 1826 . He was Ambassador to the UK between 1796 and 1824 .
 James C Curtis King was the Federalist candidate for vice president in 1804 and 1808 . Stephen King is a popular American author of horror fiction .
 The author skillfully introduces horrifying or suspenseful events into a recognizable everyday background . He skillfully introduced horrifying events into recognizable everyday backgrounds .
 Many of his stories show his ability to get inside the minds of children and adolescents . Many of these stories show him how he gets inside the mind of young people .
 The Shining is set in a haunted hotel . Sa/em’s Lot and The Shining are set in haunted hotels . The Shining was set in the haunted hotel in The Shining .
 The Stand (1978, revised 1990) describes a battle between good and evil that takes place after a plague has wiped out most human beings . The Stand was published in 1978 and revised 1990 .
 Several of his supernatural novels are set in the small fictional Maine towns of Castle Rock and Derry .
 Several King novels explore realistic suspense instead of the supernatural . King's novels explore realism instead of supernatural realism .
 He was a teacher until the success of his first novel, Carrie, permitted him to write fulltime . He was also a teacher .
 Thomas Starr was a Unitarian minister, humanitarian, and orator . King, Thomas Starr, was an orator, minister, orator and humanitarian leader . He was a member of the Unitarian congregation .
 His speeches played an important part in the state’s decision not to secede from the Union . His speeches were important in the decision to keep the state in the union .
 He raised money for the U.S. Sanitary Commission, which aided wounded soldiers and their families .
 William Lyon Mackenzie King served as prime minister of Canada three times between 1921-1926 and 1948 . King was Prime Minister of Canada from 1921-26 1926-1930 1935-1948 .
 He held the office a total of 21 years, longer than any other prime minister of Canada . He was the longest-serving Canadian prime minister .
 King guided Canada to independence and equality with other members of the Commonwealth of Nations . King guided the country to equality and equality in the Commonwealth .
 He helped organize Canada’s Department of Labour in 1900 . He became the first full-time minister of labour in 1909 . He was Canada's first full time labour minister .
 During his terms as prime minister, King also served as secretary of state for external affairs, except for his last two years in office . King was prime minister for two terms .
 His main goals in international relations were independence for Canada and improved cooperation with the governments of Britain and the United States . His main goal was to improve cooperation with Britain and U.S.
 Short, stocky, and shy, King did not look like the great statesman he was . King did look like a politician, but he was a statesman, not a politician .
 He wanted to be popular, but lacked the personality to inspire public affection . He was a popular but not popular enough to inspire affection, he said .
 Many Canadians thought King was stuffy and old-fashioned, but they greatly respected his political talents . King's political talents were great for Canada, but he was considered too much of a conservative .
 Mackenzie King was born in Berlin (now Kitchener, Ont., on Dec. Dec. 1874 . King was the first Canadian born in 1874 and died in 1883 .
 He was the first son, and the second of the four children, of John King and Isabel Grace Mackenzie King . He was born into a family of four .
 King was proud of his background and remained a loyal Presbyterian all his life . King remained a proud Presbyterian all the time . He was proud to be a member of the congregation .
 He had deep affection for his brother, Macdougall, and his two sisters, Isabel and Janet . He also loved his sister, Isabel, and two sisters .
 When King was about 8 years old, the family moved to a large house called Woodside on the outskirts of town . King moved to Woodside when he was about eight years old .
 Both parents had a strong interest in current events and discussed them in front of the children .
 King claimed he inherited devotion to British monarch from one grandfather and devotion to the Canadian people from the other . King claimed to have inherited devotion from his grandfather and from Canadian people . He said he inherited loyalty to the British monarchy from one of his grandfathers .
 She was the dominant personality in the household and gave her son the ambition to clear Mackenzie's reputation . Mackenzie was the son of the late Mackenzie Mackenzie, who died in 2011 .
 His pals nicknamed him ‘Rex,’ and a few close friends called him that throughout his life .
 During his senior year, King was one of the leaders in a student strike against school officials . King was a leader in the strike against officials at his school .
 The students refused to attend classes partly to protest the dismissal of a professor who had criticized the administration . The students are students at the University of Columbia University .
 While in college, King could not decide whether to be a lawyer or a minister . King decided not to become a minister or a lawyer in college .
 King met Jane Ad_ dams, founder of Chicago's Hull House, when she visited Toronto in 1895 . King met her in 1895 when she was visiting Chicago .
 Mackenzie King worked as a newspaper reporter for a year after his graduation in 1895 . After his graduation, King worked for a newspaper in London .
 Jane Addams invited him to live at Hull House, and King eagerly accepted . Addams lived in Hull House with Addams and Addams .
 He soon found the combination of school and social work too burdensome . But he soon found it too much to do with .
 After returning to Toronto in 1897, he investigated labor conditions there . After he returned to Toronto, he visited the city's labour camps .
 He indignantly reported this to William Mulock, the postmaster general of Canada . Mulock reported the incident to the Canadian Postmaster general .
 King’s suggestions Jed to the Fair Wages Resolution passed by Parliament . King's suggestions come after he was criticised for his comments .
 King went to London, where he again lived in a settlement house and continued to study social and Jabor problems . King went back to London where he continued to work and studied social problems .
 The Canadian government wanted King to be the editor of its new Labour Gazette . King was wanted by the government to be editor of the Labour Gazette in Canada .
 Postmaster General Mulock given the added title of minister of labour . Mulock was also given the title of postmaster general . Postmaster general Mulock is now known as the post-postmaster general of labour.
 To some extent, Canada's industrial relations laws are still based on the Industrial Disputes Investigation Act of 1907 . King drew up the law in 1907, which he drew up, and it is still relevant today .
 He won the Liberal nomination in the North Waterloo, Ont., district where he was born, then won the election . He was born in Waterloo, Ontario, and won the general election in 2011 .
 In 1909, Liberal Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier appointed King the first full-time minister of labour . King was appointed by Laurier in 1909, when he was appointed to be the first Labour Minister .
 The Liberal government was defeated in 1911, and King also lost his seat in Parliament . King was the prime minister of the Liberal government in 1911 .
 In 1912, King organized the Liberal Information Office and became editor of the party publication, the Canadian Liberal Monthly . He organized the party's information office and was editor of its magazine .
 King’s brother, a doctor, developed tuberculosis and had to give up his practice . King's brother was a doctor who died of the disease .
 Rockefeller Foundation asked him to direct its Department of Industrial Relations Department . Rockefeller Foundation asks him to take over at the end of his career .
 The book, which urges establishment of a welfare state, strengthened King’s reputation as a progressive thinker . King's reputation has since been strengthened by his work on welfare reform .
 His brother Macdougall fought his illness bravely, and wrote two books before his death in 1922 . His brother wrote two novels before he died in 1922.
 King was one of the few English-speaking Liberal former government ministers who stayed loyal to Laurier on the conscription issue . King was troubled by the issue, but he was loyal .
 King was defeated, as were most of Laurier’s supporters outside Quebec . Laurier was defeated by King, as was most of his supporters outside of Quebec .
 King immediately set to work to reunite the English-speaking and French-speaking members of the party . King set to set up a joint effort to unite English-French-speaking party .
 He was elected to Parliament from Prince County, P.E.I., shortly after his election as Liberal leader . He is currently serving as a member of Parliament for Prince County .
 King became prime minister of Canada in Dec. 1921 . He succeeded Arthur Meighen, a Conservative . King was the prime minister .
 The Balfour Report, adopted in 1926, declared that Britain and self-governing dominions of the British Commonwealth had equal status . Mackenzie was the first British Prime Minister to hold a cabinet post .
 Canada declared war on Germany in 1939, the first time it declared war independently . It declared war independent of Germany in 1941 . It was Canada's first independent declaration of war against Germany .
 Parliament authorized a draft in 1942, and Canada began drafting men for active duty in 1944 . It was the first time since 1913 that Canada had a draft since 1913 . Parliament authorized the draft for Canada in 1942 .
 The government-owned Canadian National Railways had been losing money . The company showed a profit in the first quarter of 2013 .
 King's outstanding first-term achievement was the enhancement of Canadian self-government in international relations . King was the prime minister of Canada during his first term .
 In 1922, he refused to support Great Britain in a possible war with Turkey . He refused to back Britain in 1922, refusing to support Turkey in possible war .
 In 1923, Canada for the first time signed a treaty alone with another country . The treaty was the result of a treaty signed by Canada in 1923 .
 King opposed efforts to have a common foreign policy for the entire British Empire . King opposed British efforts to achieve a common policy for all of the British empire .
 In 1925, the Liberals lost ground in the general election of 1925, while the Conservatives gained . The Conservatives won the election in 1925 .
 The first Canadian welfare program, old age pensions, was established in 1927 . Parliament gave his government a vote of confidence, and he remained in power .
 In February 1926, King ran for Parliament in a by-election in Prince Albert, Sask., and won . King won in February 1926 . King was elected to Parliament in 1926 .
 By June 1926, King saw that his government faced defeat in the House of Commons . King's government was defeated in the Commons in 1926 .
 He advised Governor General Julian Byng to dissolve Parliament and call an election . Mr Byng said he was disappointed with the outcome of the election .
 Mackenzie King again became prime minister in Sept. 1926 . Second term as prime minister .
 He continued his fight for full Canadian self-government at the Imperial Conference of 1926 . He continued to fight for self-governability at Imperial Conference in 1926 .
 The conference adopted a report which stated that the United Kingdom and all the self-governing dominions of the Commonwealth had equal status . The report said that the UK and the other countries in the Commonwealth were equal .
 The first Canadian federal welfare program began in 1927 with the establishment of old-age pensions . Canada's first federal welfare programs were established in 1927 .
 King also favored unemployment insurance but could not persuade the provinces to support it until 1940 . King was also opposed to unemployment insurance, which was introduced in 1940 .
 Unemployment became a major problem that Canada was unprepared to fight . Unemployment is now a major issue that Canada has to deal with .
 Unemployment became the main issue in the 1930 election, and King’s government was defeated . Unemployment was the main feature of the King's government in the election .
 The Conservatives, under Prime Minister Richard B Bennett, led Canada for the next five years . The Conservatives were in power for more than a decade .
 In the election that year, the people probably voted more against Bennett than for King . Bennett was a Democrat, but King was a Republican . Bennett won the election in 1964 .
 The Liberals won with the largest majority in Canadian history to that time . The Liberal Party won the majority in Canada's first election .
 On Oct. 1935, King began his greatest period as prime minister . King was Prime Minister of Canada for three terms .
 The government promoted freer trade to increase employment . The government negotiated major trade agreements with the United States and the United Kingdom .
 King appointed a Royal Commission to find ways of rebuilding the finances of the provinces . King appointed the commission to look at ways to rebuild the provinces' finances .
 He reasoned that if the British became involved in it, English-speaking Canadians would insist on joining them . French-speaking Canadian would prefer to stay out of the war, he said .
 King tried to follow a course to ensure Canadian unity if the nation went to war . King was trying to ensure the nation would be united in the event of a war .
 He was convinced that the decision must be made by Canadians in their own Parliament . He said the decision was made by the Canadian Parliament .
 When World War II did come, Parliament almost unanimously supported the governments decision to participate in the war . Parliament voted for the government to join the war effort .
 Canada declared war on Germany on Sept., 1939; against Italy on June 10, 1940; and on Japan on Dec., 1941 . Canada declares war on Italy, Germany, Italy and Japan on Sept. 9, 1939; .
 King side-stepped the issue as long as possible to maintain harmony between English Canadians and French Canadians . To maintain harmony, King kept the issue between English and French .
 In 1942, Canadians voted to release the government from its pledges not to draft soldiers for service overseas . The vote was part of a referendum on Canada's constitution in 1942 .
 Parliament authorized conscription that same year, but King did not put it into effect . Parliament authorizes conscription but King was not in effect .
 By late 1944, Canadian units overseas, made up entirely of volunteers, badly needed replacements . Canadian units abroad were made up of volunteers . The Canadian units were based on volunteers .
 King agreed to send draftees overseas, and Parliament supported him . King then agreed to go overseas . Parliament supported his decision .
 The policy succeeded because of Kings determination to maintain harmony between English Canadians and French Canadians, and the cooperation of most French-speaking representatives in the Canadian government . The policy was successful because of King's determination .
 King led the Liberals to victory by a narrow margin in 1945 election . In 1945 election, he led the Liberal Party to a narrow victory .
 The victory was a tribute to King’s success in managing the war, helping increase Canadian industrialization, and preserving Canadian unity during wartime .
 Welfare legislation and increased government spending stimulated the economy . Welfare legislation was passed through the 1990s .
 He also helped start secret negotiations that led to the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty in 1949 . He also started secret negotiations with the British government .
 King's government also took steps toward making Newfoundland a province of Canada . King’s government took steps to make the province a province . Newfoundland is currently a part of Newfoundland .
 He remained a member of the Canadian Parliament until April 1949 . However, he remained a Canadian Parliament member until April 1950 .
 King spent the last year of his life at Kingsmere, his country home in the Gatineau Hills near Ottawa . King spent most of his last year at his home in Kingsmere .
 In his will, King left Kingsmere and his Ottawa home, Laurier House, to Canada . King left his estate in Kingsmere, Canada, in his will . King died in 1953 .
 King believed in a spiritual world and often tried to speak with the dead, particularly his mother, through séances . King also believed in the spiritual world .
 By special act of Congress, he was permitted to take his oath of inauguration before an American consul in Havana, Cuba, where he was trying to recover from the illness .
 He died six weeks later, without ever performing the duties of the vice president .
 King served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1811 to 1816 as a Democrat from North Carolina . King was a Democrat in the United States Senate from 1819 to 1844, and from 1848 to 1852 . King also served in Alabama, North Carolina,
 King-Horn is the most important character in the first known English romance in verse, also named KingHorn . King Horn is the main character of the first recorded English romance, also known as King Horn, in which he is named .
 The poem describes the adventures of King-Horn, a child of the king and queen of the Isle of Man .
 Bradford Washburn, an explorer, discovered it in 1935, King Philip’s War .
 King Ranch is one of the largest privately owned ranches in the U.S. King Ranch in the United States is located in California . King Ranch was founded in 1903 .
 The huge ranch, which raises cattle and quarter horses, covers about 825,000 acres in southern Texas . The ranch is home to cattle and horses .
 Kingbird, also called bee martin, is a type of bird in the flycatcher family . Kingbird is a bird that is in size in size and size in shape .
 The eastern kingbird is helpful to farmers because it eats so many insects . It eats so much insects that farmers can use it to help their crops .
 It makes its home in all parts of the U.S. except the Southwest, and also lives in southern Canada . It makes it home in the United States except for the Southwest .
 The eastern kingbird has white-tipped tail feathers and white underparts . Eastern kingbirds have white tines and underparts of their underparts and tails .
 This bird has a patch of bright orange-red feathers on top of its black head . The bird has been seen in the wild for more than a decade .
 The kingbird gets its name from the way it attacks and drives off other birds, especially crows and hawks . The king bird attacks crows, hawks and crows in the way they drive them off .
 William Rufus King is the latest installment of a series of children's books . The story is set to be published in September 2015 .
 It aids farmers by feeding on insects that are harmful to crops . tacks them furiously in the air and makes them change course . It also helps farmers by tacking them furiously to avoid damaging insects .
 The kingbird does this mainly during the breeding season, to protect its nest, mate, and young . The king bird does this during its breeding season .
 Scientists have found that the kingbird actually eats very few bees . The kingbird eats very little bees, according to the scientists .
 All living organisms belong to a kingdom, but no organism belongs to more than one . No organism has ever been found to be in a different kingdom .
 Scientists group organisms in a kingdom because the organisms share certain basic characteristics . Scientists say organisms share basic characteristics such as basic characteristics of life . The kingdom is considered a kingdom by scientists .
 Scientists do not classify viruses in any kingdom because these microbes are not considered living organisms . Scientists say viruses are not classified as living organisms because they do not belong to any kingdom .
 Prokaryotae is made up of bacteria and blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria . It is a form of algae known as blue green algae, or algae .
 Prokaryotes are simple, one-celled organisms that can only be seen with a microscope . They are simple organisms that are only seen with the microscope .
 Prokaryote cells lack specialized parts called organelles and thus differ from other living cells . The cells are different from those of other living organisms, such as humans .
 In all other living cells, genetic material is concentrated in an organelle called the nucleus . The nucleus is a nucleus of genetic material that concentrates genetic material in a nucleus .
 Prokaryote cells have genetic material, but they do not have a nucleus . They are made up of genetic material and are not nucleated .
 Protista consists chiefly of microscopic organisms, such as diatoms and protozoans, that often live in colonies . Protista is a form of life that forms colonies of organisms .
 All other living things are mu/ticellular—that is, they are made up of many cells . This is the case for all of the world's animals .
 Protists have a well-defined nucleus in their cells . Unlike monerans, protists have well-defined nucleus in cells .
 Many also have specialized body parts that they use to gather food and to move in their environment . Many of the animals have special body parts to help them survive .
 Scientists divide protists into groups based on how these organisms move about . Protists are divided into groups of protists based on their movements .
 For example, ciliates move by heating hairlike structures called cilia . Ciliates are heated by heating structures like cilia in order to move .
 Fungi are multicellular organisms that obtain their food from dead or living organic matter . They obtain food from either living or dead organic matter, such as dead or dead .
 Fungi secrete proteins called enzymes into plants, animals, and decaying organisms on which they live . The fungus secrete enzymes into the plants and animals that they live on .
 The enzymes help break organic molecules into nutrients that the fungus can absorb . The enzymes are enzymes that help break up organic molecules and break up nutrients .
 Plantae is made up of such multicellular organisms as flowering plants, grasses, and trees . Plantae means plantae organisms are multicelled organisms . It also means plants and grasses are flowering plants .
 Some flowering plants live on other plants and absorb their food . However, some flowering plants also absorb food from other plants . This is not the first time flowering plants have eaten other plants in the wild .
 Plants are essential to the cycle of nature and provide food for animals and other organisms . Plants provide food to animals, other organisms, and are essential in nature .
 The cells of most animals are organized into tissues that perform special tasks . The cells are organized in tissues that do special tasks, such as performing special tasks.
 The tissues form organs, such as the brain, heart, and stomach, that, in turn, make up organ systems . Organ systems are made up of tissues, which form organs such as brain tissue .
 These include two important food fishes of the mackerel family and several species of the drum family . Several species of drum family are also important food fish species .
 The king mackerel, or kingfish, belongs to the same family as the Spanish . The kingfish is a member of the kingfish or kingfisher .
 Like the Spanish mackerel, it has a sharp, V-shaped tail fin and a bluish back . But it is longer and heavier and heavier than the other species . It has a long tail fin, but it is heavier and longer .
 It is usually found around coral reefs, especially near the Florida Keys .
 The northern kingfish, southern kingfish and gulf Theodore J Crovello kingfish are found in shallow coastal waters of the Atlantic .
 The king mackerel has a sharp, V-shaped tail fin and a bluish back . They are grayish brown above with silvery silvery white above with a silvery blue back .
 This type of kingfish lives in the Atlantic Ocean and is an important food fish . The kingfish is a type of fish that is important food in the ocean .
 The world kingfish is also applied to a number of related species of fish found off Australia, Southeast Asia and India and California .
 The king mackerel has been heavily fished along the Atlantic coast of the United States . It is also known to be a popular angler in North America .
 As a result, the government has imposed strict limits on commercial and recreational fishing of this species .
 Kingfisher is the name of a large family of birds that have large heads and long, heavy, pointed bills . Kingfishers are a family of large, heavy-pointed birds with large heads, long bills .
 The outer and middle toes of these birds are joined together by strong membranes . They are known as the toes of the birds of this species .
 The be/ted kingfisher, a water bird, is the only species commonly found in the United States . The species is only species that is commonly known to be in the U.S.
 Its upper parts and wings are colored deep blue, or bluishgray with white markings . The wings and upper parts of the bird are covered in deep blue and white .
 The underparts are white, and there is a broad collar of white around the neck . There is an underparts of white, with the underparts being white .
 The belted kingfisher may spend long hours sitting on a branch alongside a body of water watching for small fish that swim near .
 The bird dives after a fish, sometimes hovering for a moment in midair . Then, sometimes a moment after a moment of midair, the bird dives for a fish .
 Belted kingfishers nest in burrows in riverbanks or sandbanks . Kingfishers usually seize their food, but they some seize food . They some some of their food is stolen .
 Kingfishers also eat crayfish, frogs, tadpoles, salamanders, and insects . Kingfisher also eat frogs, frogs and salamander .
 Belted kingfishers burrow in the steep walls of riverbanks or sandbanks . The species burrow into the walls of rivers and sandbanks.
 They dig a tunnel from 4 to 15 feet long with a larger hollow at the end where the birds build a nest of fish bones and scales . The birds dig a hole from 4-15 feet long to build their nest in a hollow .
 Kinglet is the name of several tiny songbirds found in the Northern Hemisphere . Kinglets are a tiny songbird found in Northern Hemisphere found in northern hemisphere .
 They are olive-green, with a brightly colored patch on top of the head . The animals are olive green with a bright patch of head .
 Two species, the World Book, are two species of species . The World Book is published in September 2015 .
 The golden-crowned kinglet is one of two species of kinglets that live in North America . The golden crownlet is the only one of the two species to live in the U.S.
 The golden-crowned kinglet gets its name from a yellow patch on top of its head . It is the same name as the ruby crowned kinglets and live in North America . The small bird is called a golden crownlet .
 Most ruby-crowned kinglets fly to the southern part of the U.S. or to Central America until spring . Most of the kinglets are found in southern parts of the United States .
 Some kings, such as Solomon, Ahab, Hezekiah, and Josiah, are discussed much more extensively than the other kings . Some kings such as Ahab and Ahab are discussed more extensively .
 The books select and interpret events according to the idea that God demanded obedience and loyalty, the books select events . The books selected events in accordance with the idea God demanded loyalty and obedience .
 Kings Canyon National Park is a scenic wilderness in east-central California . Kings Canyon is a national park in the eastern part of the state .
 Sierra Nevada has some of the country’s oldest and largest giant sequoia trees . Some of the highest peaks of the Sierra Nevada mountains are located in the region .
 Grant Grove section of the park has trees that are 2,000 to 3,000 years old . The Grant Grove area has trees in the park that date back more than 1,500 years . Grant Grove is a popular tourist attraction .
 The south and middle forks of the Kings River carve out Tehipite Valley Canyon and Kings Canyon . Kings Canyon is one of the world's largest canyon systems .
 Park in California has snow-capped mountains dotted with ancient sequoia trees . Yosemite National Park is a national park in the state of California .
 Visitors can hike along trails or fish in the rivers that run through the canyons . Canyons can only be reached only by trail trails .
 It is recognized as the oldest English-speaking university in the Commonwealth of Nations . The university was founded in 1903 and is now the oldest in the UK .
 King’s divinity program is taught by the Atlantic School of Theology, the recognized School of Divinity for the Anglican Dioceses of Nova Scotia and Fredericton . The Atlantic School is a recognized school of Divinity .
 All degrees, except those from King’s School of Journalism and the Atlantic School of Theology, are granted through Dalhousie . All degrees are given through DalHousie, except for those from the Atlantic school of theology and journalism .
 He preached “Christian Socialism,” a religious and political philosophy that urged the Church of England to take an active part in easing social problems . He preached Christian Socialism .
 Kingsley’s first two novels, A/ton Locke and Yeast, are examples of the Christian Socialism philosophy . Kingsley wrote the first two of his novels were examples of Christian Socialism .
 Kingsley believed in developing a strong body along with a pious spirit . Kingsley was a devout Christian who believed in the Bible .
 The Water Babies, A Fairy Tale for a Land-Baby, was written for his son . It is a charming fantasy about a young chimney sweep who escapes from his dismal occupation into an underwater kingdom .
 He became involved in a famous controversy with John Henry Cardinal Newman . He was involved in the controversy with Cardinal Newman.
 Kingsley questioned Newman's motives and sincerity . Kingsley wrote a pamphlet questioning Newman's sincerity .
 Collins Kingsley, Mary Henrietta, was a British explorer, traveler, and pioneer social anthropologist . She was a pioneer social anthropologist and explorer .
 Her two books on her travels to western Africa, Travels in West Africa and West African Studies, influenced later generations of anthropologists, historians, and policymakers . Her books on western Africa influenced generations of historians, historians and policymakers.
 She also wrote numerous magazine and newspaper articles and gave lectures on African matters .
 She supported British commercial interests in Africa . But she argued that African cultures should be respected .
 She was raised in a middle-class family that believed the proper place for women was in the home caring for the family . She says she was raised to believe women should not be in charge of the home .
 She wrote in favor of this belief, though she lived most of her adult life otherwise . She wrote about her belief in the Bible, but she also lived her own life .
 In 1895, she became the first European woman to climb Mount Cameroon, one of the highest peaks in Africa . She climbed Mount Cameroon on Mount Cameroon in 1895 .
 Cora Ann Presley Kingsley, Sidney, was an American dramatist who probed the complex problems of individuals interacting with social conditions . She was born in 1941 .
 The Patriots studies the significance of the conflicts between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton . Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson were both assassinated in the Revolution .
 Detective Story and Darkness at Noon are Kingsley’s most complex studies of the individual conscience . Detective Story is one of the best studies of individual conscience in the world .
 Frank R Cunningham Kingsnake is any one of a group of snakes, all of which prey on other snakes . Kingsnakes are a group that prey on each other and prey on others .
 They are immune to snake venom and do not hesitate to attack and eat rattlesnakes . They are somewhat immune to venom .
 Kingsnakes also eat bird and turtle eggs, and rodents and other small animals . Kingsnake eat birds, turtle eggs and rodents, and eat small animals such as rodents .
 They may be marked with black, brown, white, red, or yellow bands or rings . They may also be marked by black or brown or white bands and rings .
 The city’s downtown area has many modern office buildings and luxurious hotels . The city's downtown area is known for its modern offices and luxury hotels .
 Kingston serves as the cultural, commercial, and industrial heart of Jamaica . Kingston is the cultural and commercial heart of the island nation .
 Principal industries include food processing, oil refining, and the production of cement and other building materials . Food processing and oil refining are key industries in the country .
 Kingston was founded in 1693 after an earthquake destroyed the city of Port Royal . Kingston was the first city to be founded after Port Royal was destroyed by an earthquake .
 In the mid1700's, the British rulers of Jamaica declared Kingston a free porta place where ships of other countries could trade .
 Kingston has suffered many disasters, including hurricanes in 1880, 1951, 1980, and 1988 . A fire in 1882; and an earthquake in 1907; . Kingston has also suffered hurricanes, fires, fires and earthquakes .
 Kingston's sprawling Kingston metropolitan region covers an area larger than many Caribbean islands . Kingston is the largest city in the Caribbean and has the largest population in the world .
 Kingstown's harbor serves the import and export trade that is the basis of the city's economy . Kingstown’s harbor is the hub of the Kingstown economy . The harbor is located in Kingstown, New Jersey .
 The Botanic Garden, the oldest such garden in the Americas, dates to 1765 . It is located in New York, New York and New York .
 Carib Indians lived in the Kingstown area, probably as early as the 1300's . Carib Indians are believed to have lived in Kingstown, New Hampshire, in the past .
 Kinkajou, K/HNG kuh joo, is a member of the raccoon family that can hang from tree branches by its long tail . The long tail is used to hang from trees by hanging from branches .
 The kinkajou has a slim body and grows about 3 feet (91 centimeters) long, including the tail . It grows about three feet long, with the tail, and has slim body, slim body .
 It can hang head-downward, with its tail grasping a limb. ly, yellow-brown fur. ly . It is the first animal to hang head downward with a limb grasping .
 They hide in tree holes during the day and feed at night on fruit and insects . They feed on fruit, insects and fruit during the night .
 He was 41 years old when he was elected party leader in 1983 . He became the youngest leader in the party's history . He was also 41 when he became party leader .
 He was a member of the party's left wing, which called for increased government ownership of businesses and unilateral nuclear disarmament . He was the leader of the left wing of the Communist Party .
 Kinnock was born on March 28, 1942, in the village of Tredegar in southern Wales . Kinnock is one of the most famous Welsh celebrities to be recorded in Wales .
 He became known for his dramatic style of speechmaking and his left-wing views . There, he became known as a leader of the Democratic Party .
 Kinnock promoted cooperation between the party's left wing and moderate wing . Kinnock was Labour leader in the 1970s and 1980s . He was the leader of the Labour Party's moderate and left wing .
 He resigned as the party's leader after it lost parliamentary elections in 1992 . He resigned from the party after losing parliamentary elections .
 A Roman Catholic priest founded at least 24 missions in southern Arizona and northern Mexico in the early 1900s .
 He joined the Society of Jesus, a Catholic order that did missionary work throughout the world . He was a member of the Order of Jesus .
 He preached to the Indians he met and gave them foods and animals they never had seen, including grains, cattle, sheep, and mules . He gave them grain, cattle and sheep .
 He gained fame for a map that proved southern California was not an island, as most Europeans then believed . The map proved that southern California wasn't an island .
 Kino opened San Xavier del Bac mission near present-day Tucson, Arizona . Mission is still used as a church .
 A statue of Kino represents Arizona in Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol . Kino is a member of the Arizona legislature .
 American biologist Alfred Charles was one of the first scientists to study human sexual behavior . Kinsey was a pioneer in the field of sexual behavior in the early 1900s .
 His research, which began in the late 1930's, contributed important insight into relationships among human beings . His research began in late 1930s .
 While teaching a marriage course, he realized that scientists had little knowledge about human sexual practices . He said scientists have little knowledge of human sexual behavior .
 Kinsey began to interview people about their sexual behavior and attitudes . Kinsey interviewed people about sexual behavior .
 In 1947, Kinsey founded the Institute for Sexual Research at the University of Cambridge . Kinsey was a pioneer of sexual research at the university .
 Kinsey and his colleagues interviewed thousands of men and women in the U.S. and Canada . Kinsey's work was published in the 1970s and '90s . The book was published by Kinsey in 1998 and is now published in New York .
 The two books became known as The Kinsey Report . Both were best sellers, though they had been written for physicians and sociologists .
 Many people charged they were immoral and some scientists considered them unscientific . They created controversy because many people charged it was immoral .
 He became known for his studies of gall wasps before entering sex research . He was also known for studies into the sexual relationship between men and women .
 The city lies on the south bank of the Congo River, in the far western part of the country . The city is located in far western Africa . It is the first city in the country to be located in the Congo .
 Kinshasa is the nation’s center of government, light industry, and transportation . The city is also home to government, industry and light industry . It is also the center of light industry and transport .
 An area of older, low-income housing extends south from the river, and most of Kinshasa’‘s people live there .
 Squatter zones, where Kinshasa's poorest people live in mudbrick dwellings, form an arc around the city . The poorest people in the country live in squatter zones .
 This growth has caused a water shortage, poor sanitation and transportation, and other problems . It has also caused a shortage of water and poor sanitation, according to CNN.com .
 Economy of Kinshasa is based chiefly on the activities of Congoss national government, the city’s largest employer . Economy is based mainly on activities of the national government .
 Industries include beverages, processed foods, soap, textiles, and tires . Industries include the production of beverages, food, soap and textiles .
 Many of Kinshasa's people earn their livings by selling items they make in their homes . Many of the city's residents earn their livelihoods by selling their home-made items .
 Congo's chief Atlantic Ocean seaport, Matadi, is the world's top Atlantic Ocean port . Trains and trucks carry cargo between Kinshashasa and Matadi .
 By the late 1400's, settlements based on fishing and trade had developed in the area that is now Kinshasa . By the mid 1400's the area had become a fishing hub for the city .
 In 1881, British explorer Henry M Stanley set up an outpost for King Leopold II of Belgium, his employer . The outpost was set up by the Belgian king in 1881 .
 The settlement was named Léopoldville after the king, who ruled the area as a personal possession from 1885 to 1908 . The settlement has been named after the French king .
 Belgium took control of Léopoldville in 1908 and made it capital in 1930 . Belgium took over the town in 1908, and made the city capital of Lopoldville in 1930.
 Congo became independent in 1960, and the capital was renamed Kinshasa in 1966 . Congo is now known as the Democratic Republic of Congo .
 M Crawford Young Kiowa Indians, KY uh wuh, are a tribe who live largely in Oklahoma and elsewhere in the southwestern United States . The Kiowa tribe live in Oklahoma, Oklahoma and Oklahoma .
 According to the 2000 United States census, there are about 8,600 Kiowa people in Kiowa County . Kiowa is one of the largest communities in the United States .
 Most of them live in rural communities near Anadarko, Carnegie, and Mountain View, Oklahoma . Most of the population live in the state of Oklahoma .
 Other Kiowa live in urban areas and work in law, medicine, teaching, and other professions . Kiowa people live in rural areas and live in law and medicine .
 They raided many white and Mexican settlements, especially from 1850 to 1870 . They were fierce warriors and raiders .
 According to tribal tradition, the Kiowa once lived as nomadic hunters in a region that was covered by snow much of the year . The Kiowa tribe is believed to have lived in the region covered in snow, not much snow .
 The family moved to the Rocky Mountains near what is now Yellowstone National Park . They later moved to what is known as the Rocky Mountain Mountains .
 Kiowa next migrated to the Black Hills of eastern Wyoming and southwestern South Dakota . Kiowa then moved to the southwestern plains of southwestern Wyoming .
 In 1867, Kiowa chiefs agreed to settle on a reservation in the Indian Territory (now Oklahoma) with two other tribes, the Comanche and the Kiowa Apache . The reservation is now Oklahoma .
 In 1963, the KCA tribes abolished their constitution . In 1970, the Kiowa adopted their own tribal constitution . The Kiowa tribe abolished its constitution .
 The Kiowa tribe is governed by the Kiowa Indian Council, which consists of all members who are at least 18 years old . The council is made up of all 18-year-olds .
 The Kiowa Business Committee manages tribal programs in such fields as business, education, and health . The committee is an elected group of elected tribal leaders .
 Everett R Rhoades Kipling, Rudyard, RUHD yuhrd, was a leading English short-story writer, poet, and novelist . Kipling was a prominent English short story writer .
 He is best known for his stories about India during the late 1800's, when India was a British colony . He is also known for stories about the British colonial era .
 Kinshasa is the capital and largest city of the Democratic Republic of Congo . It is also the largest city in the country's capital .
 In 1907, Kipling was the first English writer to receive the Nobel Prize for literature . Kipling received the prize for literature in 1907 .
 His father, John Lockwood Kipling, had come to Bombay after being appointed to a teaching post at a Bombay school of art . Kipling's father was appointed to be a teacher at the school in Bombay .
 Indian servants took care of Rudyard and taught him the Hindi language of India . Rudyard lived in India with Rudyard's family until his death .
 Kipling was brought to Southsea, England, when he was 5 years old, by his parents . Kipling's parents brought him to the city of Southsea near Portsmouth, England . He was born in the town of Portsmouth, near Portsmouth .
 It was the custom of English parents living in India to remove their children from the heat and deadly diseases of the colony by sending their children to school in England .
 At the age of 12, Kipling was enrolled at the United Services College . The school was established to educate inexpensively the sons of Army officers . Kipling died in his home town in New York City in 1918 .
 Stal/ky & Co. is a fictional record of his life there . The book is a collection of short stories, set in New York City .
 The stories emphasize adolescent brutality and practical joking but constitute a lively record of life in an English public school . The stories highlight adolescent brutality, practical joking and practical jokes .
 In 1882, he joined the staff of the Civil and Milrtary Gazette in Lahore, Lahore . He returned to India instead and joined the newspaper's staff .
 The newspaper also printed some of his poems, later collected in Departmental Ditties and enlarged in later editions .
 Kipling joined the staff of the Pioneer, a newspaper in Allahabad, in 1887 . Kipling was a member of the staff at the Pioneer .
 Kipling’s first book of fiction, Plain Tales from the Hills, consists of 40 stories . 32 of the stories were originally written for the Civil and Military Gazette .
 Stories for the Pioneer soon were collected in six paperback books in the Indian Railway Library series . Stories for Pioneer were later collected in paperback books .
 Kipling's books, sold in railroad stations, were popular with travelers and spread Kipling’s fame outside India . Kipling books were sold in railway stations and sold in India and around the world .
 His stories were reprinted in the collections Soldiers Three and Wee Willie Winkie in 1890 . His Indian Railway Library stories were published in 1890.
 Kipling'’s first novel, The Light That Failed, was also published in 1890 . Kipling’' first novel was published by Kipling in the same year .
 Kipling's novel about an artist going blind received mixed reviews . Kipling by this time was the most talked about writer in both England and the United States .
 Rudyard Kipling's stories include Without Benefit of Clergy . Kipling Brown Bros. explores doomed love affair between Englishman and young Indian woman .
 Kipling's Barrack-Room Ballads were published individually in periodicals in the early 1890's and collected in book form in 1892 . Kipling’s popularity grew tremendously with his Barrack Room Ballads, which were published separately in periodical periodicals .
 Kipling became friends with the American literary agent Wolcott Balestier after his return to England .
 Kipling married Balestier's sister, Carrie, in January 1892, in London . Kipling was married to Carrie's sister in 1892 .
 These stories describe the adventures of Mowgli, an Indian child who gets lost in the jungle and is brought up by a family of wolves . These stories tell of the experiences of an Indian Indian child .
 He wrote poems for the London Times that made bold political judgments . He prophesied the direction of international events .
 “Recessional” warned the British of complacency in the face of rising militarism in Germany . For example, "Recessional" warned the UK of complacentness .
 Kipling urged the need for a slow transfer of power from colonial governments to native populations in parts of the British Empire . Kipling also urged a slow transition of power between colonial governments and native populations .
 The story tells of an Irish orphan who adopts early and completely to Indian ways . The story is based on the story of an orphan who was adopted by an Indian orphan .
 The novel became a classic because of its rich rendering of the multiple cultures of India . It became a popular novel in India and has been translated into film and television .
 It offers portraits of unforgettable characters, especially native Indians . It also offers portrait of Native American characters .
 Another book of children’s stories, the /ust So Stories, appeared in 1902 . The book was published in 1902, and was published later .
 It gives humorous explanations of such questions as how the leopard got its spots and how the elephant got its trunk . It also gives humorous answers to questions such as how leopard's spots got .
 Kipling’s concerns about his own health colored the fiction of his later years . In addition, Kipling also had concerns about himself himself .
 He suffered from a bleeding ulcer for years before it was finally diagnosed in 1933 . He was diagnosed with it in 1933 after years of suffering from bleeding ulcers .
 Kipling’s last three volumes of short stories, A Diversity of Creatures, Debits and Credits, and Limits and Renewals, stress the realities of pain and death . Kipling's last three books, A diversity of Creatures and Debits & Credits, are published in New
 An unfinished autobiography, Something of Myself, was published in 1937, after his death .
 Kiribati, K/HR uh Bas, is a small country made up of 33 islands in the central Pacific Ocean . The country is made of 33 small islands in central Pacific .
 These islands spread across about 2 million square miles of the Pacific Ocean . These islands are spread across 2 million sq miles of oceanic waters .
 The United Kingdom ruled much of what is now Kiribati from 1892 to 1979, when it became an independent nation . The UK ruled the region between 1892 and 1979 when it was an independent country .
 The president is elected to a four-year term by the people from among candidates nominated by the Parliament . He is elected from among the candidates nominated for the president .
 Parliament consists of 36 members who are elected by the people to four-year terms . The country’s attorney general and an appointed representative of Banaba are also in parliament .
 Fishing and the making and sailing of canoes form an important part of their life . Fishing is a big part of the family's life, and they make and sail boats .
 Islanders used to wear soft, finely woven mats but now wear light cotton clothing . The islanders now wear soft-wound mats .
 Most of them speak English, which is used in official communications . But most of them also speak some English, as well as some other languages .
 Kiribati has a tropical climate, with temperatures of about 80 °F the year around . The island nation is known for its tropical climate . Kiribatas have an average of 80°F year-round temperatures .
 Most of the nation’s commerce goes through Tarawa, which has docks and an international airport . The island nation is home to the largest island in the world .
 Tarawa also has an earth station, which transmits and receives international communications through a satellite in space . Tarawa is also known for its ability to communicate with the world .
 Kiribati’s government runs a radio station and publishes a weekly newspaper in Gilbertese and English . The country's government also publishes a radio and weekly newspaper .
 The islands are believed to have been inhabited when Samoans settled there between the 1000's and the 1300's . The Samoan Islands are thought to be inhabited by Samoan people between 1000 and 1300 .
 There is evidence that the I-Kiribati lived there long before the Samoans . There is also evidence that they lived there before Samoan ancestors . Samoan people are believed to have lived in the region long before Samoa .
 Spanish explorers became the first Europeans to sight the islands in the 1500's .
 In 1892, Britain gained control of the Gilbert Islands and the neighboring Ellice Islands to the south .
 In 1916, the Brit336 Kirilenko, Andrei Pavlovich ish made these islands the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony .
 Some of the Line Islands, and the Phoenix Islands, were later added to the colony . The Phoenix Islands were later later added .
 The U.S. Marines invaded Tarawa in 1943 and defeated the Japanese in one of the bloodiest battles of the war . Tarawa was one of America's bloodiest battlefields in the war and was captured by the U.N. Marines .
 The Ellice Islands separated from the colony in 1975 and became the independent nation of Tuvalu in 1978 . The Ellices Islands are now the most populous nation in the world . Tuvaluvu is the largest island in the Pacific .
 In 1962, he was made a member of the Politburo, the party’s policymaking body . He was made member of party's policy-making body in 1962 .
 In 1982, Kirilenko resigned from the Politburo and the Secretariat, but he remained in the Central Committee until his death . In 1982 he resigned from his position as a member of the Communist Party .
 Kiritimati Atoll, also called Christmas Island, is one of the largest islands formed by coral in the Pacific Ocean .
 On Christmas Day, 1777, the British explorer James Cook became the first European to reach the island . Cook was the first to discover the island in 1777 .
 The island was annexed by Britain in 1888, and became part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony in 1919 . It is now part of a colony of British colonies called the Gilbert & Ellice islands .
 Kirkland, Lane , served as president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations from 1979 to 1995 . Kirkland was president of AFLO from 1979 until 1995 .
 Kirkland’s goal as AFL-CIO president was to persuade nonmember unions to join the federation . One of Kirkland's goals was to convince nonmember union members to join AFLCIO . Kirkland says he hopes to continue to work with the AFL-Union movement
 He graduated from the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy in 1942 and served in the Merchant Marine until 1946 . He served as a Merchant Marine .
 James G Scoville Kirkpatrick, Jeane Jordan, served as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations from 1981 to 1985 .
 After resigning from the UN position, Kirkpatrick resumed her teaching career at Georgetown .
 Although named to the UN post by a Republican, Kirkpatrick was a long-time Democrat . Kirkpatrick is a Democrat and a Democrat .
 In 1972, she and other leading Democratic scholars and officeholders formed the Coalition for a Democratic Majority . She and others worked to strengthen the party .
 She became critical of U.S. foreign policy during the late 1970's . She joined Reagan's group of advisers for the 1980 presidential campaign . She was critical of foreign policy .
 She served as a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research . She also served as resident scholar of the think tank .
 Samuel Jordan, a Republican, served as governor of lowa and as a United States senator from that state . Lee Thornton Kirkwood, Kirkwood and Samuel Jordan served as a U.S. senator from low .
 When the American Civil War started in 1861, he pledged his personal fortune and borrowed from friends to equip volunteers for the Union Army . When the war began in 1861 he pledged personal fortune .
 He served a second term as governor in 1876 and 1877 and became a senator again in 1877 . He was also a senator in the late 1800s .
 He joined President James Garfield's Cabinet as secretary of the interior in 1881 . He joined the president's cabinet as secretary for the first time .
 Kirlian photography, K/HR /ee uh, is the process of creating an image of an object by exposing it to an electromagnetic field .
 Images may be captured with ordinary photographic methods or by more sophisticated techniques . The images may be taken with ordinary photography methods or with more advanced techniques .
 Some scientists once suggested that the images seen in Kirlian photographs resulted from the aura or bioplasma, a theoretical energy field said to surround living things . The aura is said to have been created by an energy field .
 A Kirlian photograph shows discharges of light surrounding an object in this photograph of a human hand . The discharges appear as white and purple bands of light frees and accelerates electrons and positive ions from the object .
 The charged particles collide with neutral molecules and atoms, creating more electrons and ions . The charged particle collision creates more electrons, ions and electrons .
 The electrons and ions recombine and emit red, violet, and ultraviolet light . After a sufficient amount of positive ions has built up, the electrons and iones recombine .
 Kirlian photography can be used to monitor changes in the ions in living tissue . It can also be used in the study of living tissue in the body .
 Some scientists believe that such changes indicate physical or psychological changes in the organism . Scientists believe such changes can indicate physical and psychological changes .
 Researchers also have used Kirlian techniques to detect and measure damaged regions in solid materials .
 Many factors may affect the quality of a Kirlian image, such as the temperature and moisture of the object and the surrounding gas .
 The photographing of objects exposed to an electric field began in the 1890's . The subject subject subject to a field of electric light was photographed in the 1900s .
 The process was named for the Soviet scientists Semyon and Valentina Kirlian, who began to systematize the technique about 1940 .
 John G Michopoulos Kirstein, Lincoln Edward, was an important figure in the history of American ballet . Lincoln Edward was an American ballet master . He was also an important ballet teacher .
 Kirstein and choreographer George Balanchine helped found the School of American Ballet . The school was founded in 1933, and Kirsteins helped found it .
 Kirstein served as general director of the dance company and as president of the school . Kirsteins was also general director and president of dance company .
 The first important history of ballet written by an American . He wrote several books on dance, including Dance Dance .
 By With With To & From is a collection of memoirs, criticism, and poetry .
 Kissinger, Henry Alfred , served as secretary of state from 1973 to 1977 . Kissinger served as president of the U.S. State Department from 1973 until 1977 . Henry Alfred Kissinger is the son of Henry Kissinger .
 He was appointed by President Richard M Nixon and kept the post after Gerald R Ford became president in 1974 . Mr Nixon appointed him by President Nixon in 1972 .
 Kissinger also served as assistant to the president for national security affairs from 1969 to 1975 . Kissinger served as national security adviser to the White House from 1969-1975 . Kissinger was the president of the United States from 1968-1974 .
 Kissinger conducted secret negotiations with North Vietnamese diplomats in an effort to end the Vietnam War . Between 1969 and 1973, Kissinger held secret talks with North Vietnam diplomats . Kissinger conducted negotiations with the North Vietnamese between 1969 and 1972 .
 Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator, won the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the cease-fire . Kissinger and Tho won the peace prize for their role in the negotiations .
 He went to Moscow in 1972 to prepare Nixon's meeting with Soviet leaders . Nixon's visit to Moscow prepared Nixon's 1972 meeting with the Soviet Union .
 Kissinger helped arrange agreements to separate the fighting forces of Israel from those of Egypt and Syria . In 1974, Kissinger arranged an agreement to separate forces from Egypt, Syria and Egypt . Kissinger was in charge of the negotiations .
 In 2000, Kissinger became chancellor of the College of William and Mary . Kissinger was chancellor at the college in 2000 .
 His family came to the United States in 1938 to escape Nazi persecution of Jews . His family moved to the U.S. from Nazi persecution in 1938 .
 David S Broder Kitchen Cabinet was a nickname the enemies of President Andrew Jackson gave to a group of his political advisers . Andrew Jackson's political advisers were known as the "Kitchen Cabinet"
 Most of the advisers were not members of the president's official Cabinet . Most of them were not part of the Obama administration .
 During Jackson's first administration, he held few regular Cabinet meetings and consulted this unofficial cabinet instead . Jackson held meetings with this unofficial Cabinet instead of regular meetings . During his first administration he consulted unofficial cabinet .
 Critics objected to the influence they believed these advisers had on Jackson . Critics say they believed they had influence in Jackson's life .
 Leading members of the Kitchen Cabinet included Secretary of State Martin Van Buren . Major William B Lewis, second auditor of the United States Treasury . Isaac Hill, United States senator and former editor of the New Hampshire Patriot . Amos Kendall, auditor of U.S. Treasury .
 It was the birthplace of W L Mackenzie King, who served three terms as prime minister of Canada . It was also birthplace of the former prime minister, who was born in it .
 Kitchener lies next to the city of Waterloo and is the center of the regional municipality of Waterloo . Kitchener is located in Waterloo, Ontario .
 Kitchener and Waterloo form a single community, but each has its own government . Waterloo and Kitchener are located in Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario . Kitchener-Woolingham is one of the largest cities in Canada .
 Kitchener Farmers Market attracts many tourists because of its famous German and Pennsylvania Dutch food and style of cooking . Kitchener farmers market attracts tourists because it is famous for its German and Dutch food .
 Other points of interest include Woodside, King’s boyhood home; and Doon Pioneer Village, a reconstruction of a community as it may have appeared in the mid-1800s . The town is home to King and his boyhood .
 Thousands of visitors come to Kitchener and Waterloo for the Oktoberfest every fall . Thousands of people are expected to attend the event in Waterloo and Kitchener .
 This nine-day celebration is based on the famous beer festival of Munich, Germany . Beer festival is a popular beer festival in the city .
 Kitchener serves as the trading center for a rich agricultural area in the Great Lakes Lowland region of Ontario . Kitchener is located in Kitchener, Ontario . The area is known for its rich agricultural history .
 Mennonites from Pennsylvania established the first permanent settlement in what is now the Kitchener-Waterloo area in 1805 . In 1805, Menn on Mennonite Mennites established a settlement in the area .
 Sand Hills is located in Sand Hills, a fertile area of fertile land . The community was named Sand Hills by the Sand Hills family .
 About 1830, the settlement was renamed Berlin, for the capital of Germany . It was renamed about 1830, and later renamed Berlin .
 Berlin became the county seat of Waterloo County in 1876 and was incorporated as a city in 1912 . Berlin was incorporated in 1912 and became the city of the same name in 1903 .
 In 1916, during World War I, the voters renamed the city Kitchener to show their support of Canada and the United Kingdom . Kitchener was renamed during the war to show support of the U.S. and Canada .
 Horatio H Kitchener was a famous British soldier who drowned at sea a short time before . Kitchener drowned in the Battle of the Great War .
 Many new industries opened in Kitchener after World War II ended in 1945 . Kitchener became a hub for many new industries after the war ended in 1946 .
 Thousands of new jobs helped the city’s population rise from 44,867 in 1951 to 74,485 in 1961 . The jobs created thousands of new . jobs and helped the . city's population rise .
 Kitchener began to redevelop its downtown section in the early 1970s . Kitchener's downtown section was redeveloped in the 1960s .
 In the late 1970's, Mackenzie King Square was completed near downtown Kitchener . The square was completed in the 1970s .
 The complex includes a 2,000-seat theater called Center-in-the-Square . The complex also includes an art gallery and a theater . It is located in New York City .
 In the early 1990's, the regional headquarters of Canada Trust and a Toronto-Dominion banking center opened in Kitchener . Kitchener is now home to Canada Trust, Canada's largest bank .
 Donald G Cartwright Kitchener, Horatio Herbert, was a distinguished British soldier . He was a member of the Corps of Engineers and Engineers .
 As governor general of the Sudan and then commander of the Egyptian Army, he put new spirit into the army . He also broke the power of the dervishes, a fanatic religious group, he said .
 Kitchener went to South Africa in 1899 as second in command to General Frederick Sleigh Roberts in the Boer War . Kitchener served in South Africa with the British Army in 1899 . He died in 1915 at the age of 92 .
 Kitchener became commander of the South African army when Roberts returned to England . When Roberts returned, Kitchener was commander of South Africa .
 He served as commander in chief of the army in India and later advised the Australian and New Zealand governments on army reforms . He also advised the New Zealand and Australia governments on reforms .
 From 1911 to 1914, Kitchener served as head of the British administration in Egypt . In June 1914 he was made Earl of Khartoum and Earl of Broome .
 Kitchener was secretary of state for war at the beginning of World War I . He was appointed Secretary of State for War at the start of the conflict in 1914 .
 He raised a large British army, an important factor in the eventual success of the Allies . He was a key figure in the Allied success .
 He was drowned on June 5, 1916, when a ship on which he was a passenger hit a mine . He was killed by a mine on a ship he was on board .
 They live on all the continents and on the large islands in the southwestern Pacific . They live in the United States, Europe, Asia and the Pacific .
 Its head and underparts are white and its back, wings, and tail are black . Its head, underparts, and back are white .
 Adults have light gray on the back and wings and a large black patch on the shoulder . Adults are light gray with light gray wings and large black patches on the shoulders .
 The adult Mississippi kite has a gray body with light gray on the head and underparts . The adult kite is gray and gray gray .
 The snail kite has broad wings, a white band at the base of the tail, and a slender, sharply hooked bill . It is the largest kite kite of its kind, with broad wings and broad, white wings .
 The female and young have streaks of brown on their light-colored underparts and orange legs . Female and young females have streaks on their underparts .
 The American swallow-tailed kite is Flanoides forficatus . The black-shouldered kite, F/anus caeruleus, the Mississippi kite and the snail kite are also known .
 Some kites consist of material such as paper or cloth mounted on a frame made of sticks, to which a line or lines are attached . Some kite kites are made of paper, cloth or cloth, mounted to a frame and attached to a line .
 Synthetic coverings are lighter and more durable than paper or cloth . Many kite builders use synthetic coverings, such as plastics or nylon, that are lighter .
 Kites have also been used for scientific research and for military purposes . Kites are also used in military and scientific research .
 Kites carrying measuring devices into the sky helped develop the science of weather forecasting in the 1800's . Kites were used to carry measuring devices in the sky .
 A kite’s ability to fly in the wind depends on its construction and the way its lines are attached . How kites fly depends on the way they are attached to the kite .
 For example, a diamond-shaped kite flies when its covered side is facing the wind .
 The lines should pull the nose of the kite into the wind, creating the necessary angle against the wind . The kite should be pulled in the wind to create the angle needed to make it work .
 The kite will strike the air with greater pressure against its face than against its back . This angle of attack is called the ang/e of attack . Kite's construction and angle of strike are correct .
 The difference in air pressure between the face and back surfaces creates lift, which is the force that makes the kite rise . The difference between the air pressure and the pressure on the back creates lift .
 The resistance of the air to the forward motion of the kite is called drag . Drag is the resistance of air to a kite's forward motion, known as drag . A kite kite can be seen as a giant kite in the sky .
 The forces of lift, drag, line tension, and gravity combine to keep the kite in the air . Kite can be controlled by a kite flyer .
 The bridle consists of two or more short lines, called /egs, that attach the kite to the flying line . The kite is attached to a kite by a line that attaches it to a line .
 The place of attachment, called the towing point, sets the kite’s angle of attack . The place . of attachment is called the . towing . point, which is the point of attachment . The kite is attached to a kite at the point .
 The bridle distributes stresses on the kite to help it keep its shape and fly . The kite also distributes stress to help keep it in shape .
 The kites come in a variety of styles and are designed to do precise maneuvers, such as sharp turns and loops . The kite kites are designed for precise maneuvers . They come in various styles and come in different styles .
 A kite must be flown in such a way that its angle of attack provides enough lift to overcome its drag and gravity . Kites are flown by a kite that must be able to overcome the drag of gravity and drag . The kite can be flown by anyone in the world
 The angle of attack can be controlled by the placement of the bridle legs and the towing point . It can be used to control the movement of the horse's legs and towing .
 World Book diagram by Bill and Judie Anderson . Towing point — Flying line BS in L Leg wind. Towing line BS .
 It can maintain this position through a tail, a rudder, a keel, tassels, vents, or combinations of these . It can be maintained through tail, rudder or rudder .
 Stunt kites look similar to other kites but are built to be more precisely controlled in flight . The stunt kites are designed to be controlled by precise control of the kite .
 Flat kites need tails to supply drag and keep the kite pointed toward the sky . Flat kite needs tails to provide drag to keep it in the air and keep it pointed .
 A kite should begin with a tail at least seven times its diagonal length . A tail should be seven times the length of a kite's diagonal length. A tail is seven times that length .
 The bowed kite is curved on its face to create an angle into the wind, called the dihedra/ angle . The curved kite creates an angle in the wind known as the dihedral angle .
 A favorite bowed kite is the two-stick diamond-shaped kite patented in 1891 by an American named William A Eddy .
 In India and other countries, fighter kites, which become bowed in the wind, are used in the sport of kite fighting . Fighter kites are bowed in wind and used in kite fights .
 When several people are flown on one flying line or in a train, the pull can be great enough to lift a person off the ground . When several are flown, it can be the pull of a person flying on one line or flying line .
 Most delta kites have a flap of material, called a kee// which is perpendicular to the surface . The kee is a piece of material perpendicular to a plane's surface . This flap is called a "kee/", and the kite has a flap that is
 Flexible kites, such as the parafoil, take their shape when filled with wind . The parafol is a flexible kite that can take shape when it is filled in the wind .
 The flexible kite is sewed or taped together in a design that takes shape when it's filled with wind . Delta kite can be sewed together in the shape of a shape when the kite's shape takes shape .
 Parafoil is similar to a parachute and consists entirely of fabric . An example is the parafoil, which consists of fabric and consists of parachute material .
 A complicated bridle with many legs attaches the parafoil to the flying line . A complicated brade can be used to attach the line to a rider's flying line.
 The kite was invented by Domina C Jalbert of the U.S. in 1963 . Domina Jalbert invented the kite in 1963.
 Stunt kites resemble basic types of kites but can be operated with more precision to perform complex acrobatics . They can be controlled with precision and can also be controlled using more precision .
 Most stunt kites have two flying lines attached to the bridle and are called dual-line control kites . The kites are controlled by a control kite using a control line .
 Stunt kites can be manipulated to do figure eights, sharp turns, or stops in the air, or flying backward . Kites can also be manipulated by manipulating kites to do sharp turns or stop .
 Good locations include schoolyards, parks, farm fields, empty parking lots, and beaches . Good locations are schooleys, parks and farm fields .
 Kites should not be flown on public streets and highways, in areas where kites would interfere with airplane traffic, on bumpy or rocky land, or near trees . Kites are not allowed to fly on public roads and highways .
 Never fly kites in stormy or wet weather because static electricity can travel down the flying line and injure—or even kill— the person holding the line . Static electricity can injure or kill a person holding a kite .
 Never fly a kite near electric lines or antennas, or use any metal in the kite lines . Never fly kites near antennas or electric lines . Use metal in your kite line .
 By wearing gloves, kite fliers may prevent /ine burn, which is caused by the kite cord pulling too quickly through the fingers . The kite burn is caused when the cord is pulled too quickly .
 Before flying a kite, make sure that the kite has been properly assembled . Make sure that your kite is being properly assembled properly .
 Take along extra supplies, such as tail materials, line, and a winder for the line . Also, take along extra equipment, including tail materials and winder .
 Some kites need only a light breeze of 3 or 4 miles (5 or 6 kilometers) per hour to fly . Kites can fly with only a small breeze of up to 6 kilometers per hour .
 Two people—a launcher and a flier—provide the easiest way to fly a kite . A launcher and flier are the two easiest ways to fly kites .
 After pulling the flying line so there is no slack, the flier signals to the launcher to release the kite . The kite can be pulled up by a flier who signals to release it .
 The flier should keep tension on the flying line but allow it to feed out smoothly . Flier should also keep tension low on the line but let it feed out .
 If wind drops, repeated hauling on the flying line will force the kite up into higher breezes, which are usually steadier . Repeated hauling will force kite into higher winds, which usually work in steadier winds .
 If the kite begins to tumble, the flier should slacken the flying line . The kite should be slackened when it begins to fall .
 This helps the kite regain stability and prevents it from diving and crashing to the ground . This helps to keep it in shape and prevent it from diving .
 When ready to bring a kite in, the flier should walk to the kite while pulling the flying line in . Then wrap the line on the winder .
 During the Han dynasty, the Chinese military attached bamboo pipes to the kites . The kites were attached to bamboo pipes during the Han Dynasty .
 As the kites flew over the enemy, wind passed through the pipes, causing a whistling sound . Wind passed through pipes causing the whistling of the sound .
 Benjamin Franklin conducted the most famous kite experiment in history in 1752 . In 1752, Benjamin Franklin used a kite to test his theory of flying kites .
 Franklin flew a homemade kite during a thunderstorm, with a metal key attached to the flying line . Franklin flew the kite with a key to the line .
 Lightning struck a pointed wire fastened to the kite and traveled down the wetted flying line to the key, causing a spark . A bolt of lightning struck the pointed wire attached to the wire . The kite was struck by a lightning bolt that struck the wire fastening the k
 In 1847, a kite helped pull a cable across the Niagara River between the U.S. and Canada . A kite pulled the cable across Niagara River in 1847 . The cable was used to pull cable between the United States and Canada.
 The results of these tests enabled the Wright brothers to make the first airplane in 1903 . The Wright brothers' first airplane was built in 1903 in New York .
 Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone, also created kites . Bell invented the telephone and invented the invention of the kite . Bell created the first kite in the 1800s .
 From 1898 to 1933, the United States Weather Bureau (now the National Weather Service) operated kite stations . Kite stations were operated by the U.S. Weather Bureau .
 Some kites are used to propel people in buggies or boats or on skates or skis . Kites are also used for people on buggies, boats or in skates, skis and in boats .
 Kite lovers worldwide form clubs and participate in festivals and other kite events . Kites are flown around the world by kite enthusiasts .
 Several books, newsletters, and a magazine called Kite Lines provide information about kite kites .
 Kitimat, British Columbia, was carved out of low, wooded land at the head of Douglas Channel on the North Pacific Coast . The community is located at the top of the Douglas Channel, on the north Pacific coast .
 In 1951, the Aluminum Company of Canada started building a huge new aluminum smelter and the community of Kitimat to house workers’ families . The aluminum company built the community to house its workers and their families . In 1951 the aluminum company started building the huge new smel
 It picked this site because of its harbor and the area’s abundance of water to provide inexpensive hydroelectric power . The site is located in an area known for its harbor, and its harbor .
 A 10-mile tunnel through the Coast Mountains carries water to the western side of the mountains . The tunnel is one of the largest tunnels in the country's history to carry water .
 Water drops to a power plant built inside the mountains at Kemano, 50 miles south of Kitimat . There, water drops to the power plant .
 In 1989 the company, now called Alcan Aluminium Limited, began to build another tunnel . In 1989, the company began the construction of the second tunnel .
 The residential area lies east of the channel head, and the industrial area lies southwest of the head . The industrial area is also located in the residential area . The channel head is located in a residential area and industrial area .
 Kittiwake, K/HT ih wayk, is a gull that gets its name from its mournful cry . The gull is known for its mourned cry . It is also known as a mourned gull .
 The black-legged kittiwake lives in the Arctic regions of Europe, Asia, and North America . It is the largest species of its kind in the world .
 The red-legged kittiwake nests on islands near Alaska in the Bering Sea . Red-legged birds are found in Alaska's Alaskan islands .
 Adult kittiwakes measure from 16 to 18 inches (41 to 46 centimeters) long . Adult cats are 16-18 inches long and can reach up to 46 inches long .
 They are white with a bluish-gray back and black-tipped wings . The wings are black, white and white . They are also white .
 The scientific name for the black-legged kittiwake is Rissa tridactyla . Rissa is the name of a species that is black and white .
 Kiwanis International, kih WAH nihs, is an organization of local clubs of business and professional men and women interested in community service .
 Hundreds of thousands of members form thousands of Kiwanis clubs worldwide . Hundreds of thousand of members of the world's most famous children's charities .
 Kiwanis members also support conservation and take part in community drives, including safety and fund-raising campaigns . Kiwanas members are also involved in conservation and community drives .
 Kiwanis International sponsors three youth service organizations—Builders Club for junior high school students, Key Club International for high schoolers, and Circle K International for college students .
 At a majority of these meetings, an invited speaker gives a talk to the club . The club meets with invited speakers at the end .
 Kiwanis club members have an opportunity to enjoy fellowship and broaden their interests . Club members have a chance at enjoying fellowship and broadening interests .
 The name &7wanis comes from an old American Indian term meaning We make ourselves known . The name and 7wanis is an old term meaning "We make us known"
 Kiwi, KEE wee, is a New Zealand bird that cannot fly . Critically reviewed by Kiwanis International Kiwi Kiwi is a bird that can't fly .
 The birds are shy, and usually run away when anyone comes near them . They are shy and will run away if they are approached .
 The neck and legs of the kiwi are short, and its bill is long and flexible . The neck, legs and bill are short and the bill is flexible .
 The Kiwanis emblem has no tail, and its wings are tiny, consist of only tiny wings . The emblem has been designed by Trevor Boyer, Linden Artists Ltd.
 It has short legs and a long bill, and its body is covered with shaggy feathers . The bird is covered only of several stiff feathers .
 The bird uses them to smell food in the thick, wet forests where it lives . The wet forests are thick and wet forests in which it lives.
 The female kiwi lays one or two very large white eggs in a hole in a bank . The female Kiwi lays a large white egg in the hole in the bank .
 It is also used for a member of an air service who is confined to ground duty . It is often used for members of the air service .
 Kiwi fruit, KEF wee, is a berry with a brown, fuzzy skin and is similar in size and shape to an egg . It is similar to a small egg and similar to the shape and size of an egg.
 Kiwi fruit has emerald-green pulp surrounding a cluster of soft, black seeds . Kiwi fruits have emerald green pulp and soft seeds with emeralds-coloured seeds .
 The pulp has a pleasant, mixed-fruit flavor and is rich in vitamin C . People eat kiwi fruit fresh, frozen, or canned and use it to make fruit salads, pies, ice cream, and wine .
 Kiwi fruit is named after a New Zealand bird called the kiwi . World Book illustration by James Teason shows the fruit's resemblance to the fruit .
 New Zealand ranks as the leading producer of kiwi fruit, followed by France, the United States, Italy, Spain, and Japan . New Zealand is the world's leading fruit producer, followed in order by France .
 Kiwi fruit is native to southeastern China . It is also known as the Chinese gooseberry . The fruit is known as a gooseberry and is also called Kiwi .
 Cultivation of the fruit spread to other parts of the world during the early 1900's . Cultivation began in France, Belgium and Germany .
 Its economic activities include fishing, food processing, shipping, shipbuilding, and textile production .
 Zvi Gitelman Klamath Indians, KLAM wfth, are a tribe of southwestern Oregon . They are the tribe of the Klamach tribe . They were also known as the Zv Gitelman and Klamak tribes .
 In earlier times, the Klamath made clothing and many other objects from cattail and tule, two marsh plants abundant in the area . The Klamah made clothing, other objects and clothing from the plants .
 For example, they made fringed skirts, hats, and moccins from tule and animal skins . They also made moccasins, skirts and hats from animal skin .
 The Klamath built two types of houses, one for winter and one for summer . One of the houses was for winter, the other was for summer, the others for the summer .
 For winter, they constructed an earthen lodge by digging a pit in the ground . The lodge was dug for winter in a pit dug by the team .
 They then built walls and a roof of wood and covered them with layers of earth and tule mats . They then laid out walls and roofed them with tule mat mats and earth layers .
 An opening in the roof served as both an entrance and a hole to let out smoke . It was used as a place to let smoke out of the roof .
 For summer, the Klamath built a shelter called a wickiup . It consisted of a willow frame covered with tule mats . The shelter was built from willow frames .
 They also built small sweat /odges, where they took ceremonial steam baths to purify themselves . The group also built sweat and sweat baths .
 Individuals called shamans, believed to have contact with the spirits, cared for the sick . Individuals believed to be shamans cared for sick people .
 In 1826, trappers for the Hudson's Bay Company became the first Europeans to meet the Klamath . They were trappers in 1826 for the company . Trappers were the first European to visit the area .
 In 1864, the Klamath, the Modac, and a band of Paiute Indians signed a treaty with the U.S. government . The treaty was signed in 1864 . The Klamat, Modac and other tribes signed the treaty .
 In 1954, Congress passed a law that abolished the reservation and ended federal services for the Klamath tribe .
 Most members of the tribe sold their reservation land to the United States government . Most of the land was preserved as Winema National Forest . The U.S. government preserved much of it as a national forest .
 The tribe continues to elect tribal leaders and maintains a business office . In addition, the tribe also maintains a tribal council .
 Klee, k/ay, Paul , ranks among the greatest and most original masters of modern painting . Klee is one of the world's most famous artists .
 Klee’s thousands of paintings, drawings, and prints are masterpieces of fantasy, wit, and invention . Klee is a masterwork of fantasy and invention, and his art is considered a masterpiece .
 His pictures are usually small and filled with childlike symbols and writing that hint at a mysterious inner vision of the world .
 Klee was born near Bern, Switzerland, but established himself as an artist after moving to Germany . He was born in Switzerland but moved to Germany and became an artist .
 Some of his ideas on art have been published as the Pedagogical Sketchbook . He has also written a book about his work on art .
 Deborah Emont Scott Klein, A M. Klein, was a Canadian poet, novelist, short-story writer, and journalist . Klein was also a short story writer, novelist and a journalist .
 The Hitleriad is a long poem that satirizes German dictator Adolf Hitler . It was written by Adolf Hitler in the early 1930s .
 In The Rocking Chair, Klein portrayed French-Canadian life, with the rocking chair symbolizing movement without progression . Klein portrayed Canadian life in his book, "Rocking Chair"
 This book presents a mirror of Jewish events from 1917 to the founding of the state of Israel in 1948 . The book is published by Jewish publisher Yaddi Meir Cohen .
 The narrator of the story finds a new identity with the people of Israel . The narrator recognizes the relationship between good and evil .
 Abraham Moses Klein was born in Ukraine and grew up in Montreal, Canada . He is best known for his role in the film "American Idol"
 Ronald B Hatch Klein, Calvin Klein, is an American fashion designer . He is famous for his stylish yet casual designs aimed at the active woman . Calvin Klein is known for his casual designs .
 Klein's understated clothes are made of luxurious fabrics made of soft earth tones . Klein's relaxed and fluid lines have relaxed lines .
 Klein sees the elegant informality Klein sees in the American life style . Klein: "American life style" is a form of American life .
 Klein has become a celebrity as a designer, and his celebrity status has been a factor in his success . Klein's success has been attributed to his success as a fashion designer .
 With Barry K Schwartz, his partner, he started his own fashion business in 1968, manufacturing women's coats and suits .
 Early in his career, Klein designed collections of related separates . He designed collections that could be worn in various combinations .
 Klein believed such designs met the desire of women for practical clothes . Klein believed women wanted practical clothes for practical purposes .
 During the 1970's and 1980s, Calvin Klein licensed the sale of cosmetics, jeans, menswear, and underwear under the Calvin Klein label . During the 70's and 80s, the company licensed cosmetics and jeans under the label .
 Lawrence Robert won the 1980 Nobel Prize in economics . Lawrence Robert was an American economist . He won the Nobel Prize for economics .
 He received the award for pioneering the use of computers to forecast economic activity . The award was given to him for his work on forecasting economic activity in the 1990s .
 Klein put economic relationships into a mathematical form that could be analyzed by computer . Klein: "Klein's economic relationships were put into mathematical form" Klein: Economic relationships can be analyzed with computer analysis .
 In one of his best-known projects, Klein developed a set of mathematical formulas to describe the U.S. economy . Klein developed the model, which he called a model, to help explain the economy .
 The model dealt with the relationships among such elements as income, prices, and unemployment . The model was based on the relationships between such elements such as income and prices .
 Klein is known for his work with Project LINK, an attempt to develop a model of the world economy . Klein is also known for work on Project LINK and Project LINK .
 He supervises an international team of economists who create economic models of their own countries . The model is based on economic models created by economists around the world .
 Klein hopes to discover how the economies of the world affect one another . He hopes to find out how the world's economies affect each other by linking models .
 Klein was born in Omaha, Nebr., and received a Ph.D. degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Klein is the author of a new book, "The New York Times"
 Barry W Poulson Kleist, k/yst, Heinrich von, HYN rihkh fawn (17771811) was a German writer . Kleist was a member of the Kleist family . He died in 1945 .
 Kleist's short novel Michael Koh/haas is a story of extreme personal rebellion against public injustice . Kleist: The novel is the story of a rebellion against injustice in the world .
 He served as an Officer in the Prussian Army, but became dissatisfied with military life and resigned in 1799 . He was a member of the Royal Family of Prussia .
 Finally, overcome by inner torment, Kleist shot and killed a woman friend and himself at the age of 34 . Kleist was overcome with inner torment and killed himself at age 34 .
 Jeffrey L Sammons Klemperer, KLEHM puhr uhr, Otto , was a famous conductor of opera and of symphony orchestras . He was also a conductor of the symphony orchestra orchestra .
 In his later years, he was respected, especially in England, as a link with the great romantic tradition of the 1800's . He was respected in England especially in the late 1800s .
 Gustav Mahler played a large role in determining Klemperer's approach to conducting . The composer and conductor was influenced by Mahler's work .
 Klemperer led the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra from 1933 to 1939 . He led the orchestra from 1933 until 1939 .
 After World War I ended in 1945, Klemperer became one of the leading conductors in England . He was one of England's most famous conductors .
 Martin Bernheimer Kleptomania is a recurrent failure to resist the impulse to steal things . Kleptomaniia is the name of a person who fails to resist a desire to steal .
 Kleptomaniacs experience an increasing sense of tension before stealing things and feel relieved while or after committing the act . Kleptomsaniacs also experience an increased tension before committing the crime .
 Psychiatrists consider kleptomania a symptom of mental illness . It may be associated with other psychiatric disorders, such as other mental illnesses .
 The word k/eptomania comes from two Greek words which mean fo stea/ and madness . The word was coined during the 1800's to describe what was then thought to be insanity .
 Like other art nouveau artists, he painted in a flat, richly patterned, and colorful style that emphasized curving and rhythmic lines .
 Klimt's last major project was a group of mosaics in the Palais Stoclet in Brussels . His last major work was a set of mosaic mosaics at the Stoclets in Belgium .
 The mosaics are composed of glass, semiprecious gems, gold, and enamel . They are made from glass, semi-cious gemstones and enamels .
 Their human figures are alinost lost in the brilliantly patterned abstract design . The human figures were lost in their human figures in the artworks .
 Pamela A Ivinski Kline, Franz Franz, was an American abstract expressionist artist . Franz Franz was noted for his large, starkly simple, black-and-white paintings .
 In these works, strong black forms seem to sweep across raw white surfaces with whirling speed . Strong black forms sweep across bare white surfaces .
 His powerful compositions inspired many younger artists to experiment by using fewer colors and working with simple, giant symbols .
 He later taught at Black Mountain College, Pratt Institute, and the Philadelphia Museum of Art . He also taught at Pratt Institute and the Pratt Institute .
 Dore Ashfon Klondike is a region in the Yukon Territory of northwestern Canada, where one of the world’s greatest gold rushes took place . The region was the site of the first gold rush in the world .
 On Aug., 1896, George W Carmack, his Indian wife Kate, and her relatives found a larye quantity of gold in the gravel of a creek he named the Bonanza . On Aug. 1896, 1896, Mr Carmack and Mrs Carmack found the gold in a
 Residents of Dawson now celebrate this date as “Discovery Day,” and it is a territorial holiday . The town of Dawson, Canada, now celebrates it as a territorial day .
 An earlier prospector, Robert Henderson, had found some gold in Gold Bottom Creek, and suggested that Carmack search for gold in the area .
 Most of the miners at Forty Mile moved up to Bonanza Creek, about 50 miles (80 kilometers) from Dawson . When Carmack and the others recorded their claims, most of the mining camp moved . Most of those who recorded claims moved up from Forty Mile to Bonanzanza Creek
 News of the rich strike did not reach the outside world until July 1897, when the steamship Portland arrived in Seattle, Wash., with a load of gold from the region . News of a rich strike in the region was not reported until July 1883 .
 It brought a stampede of prospectors to the Klondike in the fall of 1897, and an even greater one in 1898 .
 The Klondike gold rush in the late 1890s drew many prospectors to the Yukon Territory . Many prospectors were prospecting for gold in Yukon .
 Location of the Klondike duced in the region, mostly by individual placer mines . The region was largely formed by individual mines .
 Since then, dredges have produced millions of dollars worth of gold each year . Millions of dollars of gold have been produced each year by dredges .
 The growing season in the Klondike rarely permits the ripening of grain crops but allows hay farming . Growing season rarely permits ripening grain crops .
 Duane A Smith Knee is the joint where the thighbone meets the large bone of the lower leg . Knee joint is joint between thighbone and large bone in lower leg joint .
 The knee moves like a hinge, but it can also rotate and move a little from side to side . The knee is a hinge and can move like a little bit from side or side .
 The knee is more likely to be damaged than most other joints because it is subject to tremendous forces during vigorous activity . Knee is more susceptible to injury than any other joint to damage than most joints .
 Most knee injuries that occur in football and other sports result from twisting the joint . Most of the knee injuries in football or other sports are caused by twisting joints .
 Synovial capsule secretes a liquid called synovial fluid, which resembles raw egg white . The liquid is a liquid similar to the liquid used to make eggs white .
 The synovial fluid nourishes the joint surfaces and reduces friction between them . The fluid is used to nourish the joints and reduce friction .
 Smooth tissue known as cartilage covers the ends of the leg bone and thigh bone . Smooth tissue called cartilage is smooth tissue that covers the end of the thigh bone and leg bone .
 Knife is a cutting instrument used as an eating utensil, a tool, or a weapon . Knife is used as a cutting tool, a knife or a knife, or an eating tool .
 Knife blades are made from steel, and most handles are hardwood or plastic . Knife handles are made of hardwood, plastic or hardwood .
 For example, surgeons make incisions with small, straight knives called sca/pels . The knife is used to make small incisions known as sca-pels, which are used by surgeons .
 Many artists use flexible palette knives to paint rugged lines and broad splashes of color on their pictures . Artists use them to create rough lines and splashes on their images .
 Early human beings fashioned the first knives from flint or obsidian and used them to skin animals and cut meat . Early humans fashioned the knives from obsidian or flint .
 Materials for making blades progressed to bronze, then iron, and steel . Materials for blades began to be made from bronze and then iron . The blades were made of bronze and iron .
 During the Middle Ages, many people carried their own knives and forks and used them for eating . People used to carry knives, forks and knives in medieval times .
 The rounded table knife came into limited use in Europe during the 1400's . The rounded knife is still in use today .
 Fixed-blade knives have a blade with a solid steel extension, called a tang, that fits into the handle . Fixed-bladed knives have blade with blade with solid steel . A tang is a solid blade that fits in the handle of a knife .
 The handle is attached to the tang by such materials as glue and rivets . The tang is attached by the handle to the handle .
 The Bowie knife is a fixed-blade knife, made popular by American frontiersman Jim Bowie . Bowie knife was made popular in the early 1900s by Jim Bowie, a member of the Bowie family .
 A spring holds the blade closed, and on some knives a lock holds it open . On some knives, the blade is held by a spring or lock .
 Some folding knives have several blades hinged to both ends of the handle . The blades are hinged onto the handle of some folding knives . A folding knife has several blades that can be hinged together .
 Blades differ according to thickness, depth (average distance from top to edge) and shape of their point . Blades are different from thickness to the shape of the point and thickness . Blades differ in thickness and depth of their points, and shape .
 The French chefs knife, a kitchen utensil, has a blade designed to slice food evenly . The blade is designed to cut food evenly and slice it evenly .
 This knife is known as “the master of cooking’ because it also carves and dices well . It is known for its ability to cut and cut well .
 Both the French chefs knife and the boning knife are fixed-blade knives . The French chef knife is a fixed-bladed knife .
 The Aunting knife and the combat knife differ greatly from knives used as kitchen utensils . The combat knife is a combat knife, not a kitchen knife .
 The hunting knife has a thick, deep blade that narrows slowly to a point . The knife is a thick-deep blade with a thick and deep blade . It has a narrow, deep and narrow blade that can narrow slowly to point .
 This sturdy knife can be used to skin an animal or slice vegetables for a stew . It can also be used for skinning or slicing vegetables or cutting vegetables .
 The combat knife is made to be used as a camping tool and, if necessary, as a weapon . It is made for camping and can be used to be a weapon or camping tool .
 The second is a thin, shallow, and sharply pointed blade for delicate cutting . The third is a sharp, thin, and sharp blade that can be used in delicate cuts .
 The third blade is a bottle opener and screwdriver, and the fourth is a can opener . The fourth blade is the can opener and bottle opener .
 Knives can be dangerous, but observing the rules of knife safety can lessen the danger . Obsessive knife safety is a key to reducing the risk of injury .
 Never place loose knives in a drawer or a sink full of dishwater, where people may cut themselves accidentally . People should not be left with loose knives or place them in the sink or drawer .
 Bob Knight, Bob Knight is one of the most successful coaches in college basketball history . Knight has won more than 100 NCAA titles . Knight is considered the best college coach in history .
 He became known for his ability to teach and motivate his players as well as for his controversial outbursts of temper .
 Knight's Indiana teams won the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments in 1976, 1981, and 1987 . Knight won the 1979 National Invitational Tournament . Knight was a member of the Indiana University basketball team .
 Lassie escapes and makes the difficult return journey to her original masters in England . However, she escapes and returns to her former masters in the UK .
 The character of Lassie has appeared in several movies and a long-running television series . The character has also appeared in numerous television series and movies .
 Eric Mowbray Knight was born on April 10, 1897, in Menston, West Yorkshire, near Bradford . Knight was also known for his role in the World War II film "The Great War"
 Knights of the Middle Ages banded themselves together together in groups called orders . Knights banded together together together under the name of orders . Order is a medieval order of knights .
 They vowed loyalty to their king or lord and formed a military organization to defend his land against enemies . The group was formed in order to protect their land from enemies .
 During the Crusades, orders of knighthood fought Muslims in the Holy Land . Order of Knighthoods fought Muslims during the Holy War .
 The knights who joined these orders took religious vows to live as monks as well as loyal fighting brothers . The knights joined the orders in order to be a loyal fighting brother . They were known as 'monks' and 'brothers'
 George — United Kingdom Order of the Bath (Civil badge) - Order of St. George . United Kingdom orders were the Knights Hospitallers, the Knights Tem_ plars, and the Teutonic Knights . Order of Bath was created in the 13th century .
 Honorary orders of knighthood were copied from the military orders of the Middle Ages . The Middle Ages were used for military honours and honours .
 They were founded by a ruler or lawmaking body to honor achievement and give special favor . They are founded by rulers or lawmakers who give special favors .
 In many countries, membership in these orders is given for achievement in the arts, the sciences, and | business, as well as for military distinction . membership is given in many countries for achievement .
 It has five different classes for men and women, two of which carry the honor of knighthood . Two of the classes carry the title of a knight or an honour of honour .
 A knight who does not belong to any special order is known as a knight bachelor . A knight bachelor is a knight who doesn't belong to a special order .
 In the United Kingdom, new knights are named on New Year's Day or in the spring . In the UK, new knight is named in the New Year, or after the spring, in a new year .
 A woman who is given the rank corresponding to knighthood is called Dame . Dame is a woman who has been given the title 'Dame' and is called a Dame . A woman with a knighthold title is also known as Dame .
 A person who is made a member of an order of knighthood receives a badge or jewe/at a ceremony . Called an investiture, the ceremony is a ceremony known as an 'investiture'
 Women who enter orders of knighthood are called Dame. wears the star of the order on his or her chest . Women who become Dame wear the star on their chest .
 The Knights of Columbus is a fraternal order of Roman Catholic men . The best known of these groups is the Knights of Christopher, a Roman Catholic order .
 Another organization, the Knights of Labor, formed a major trade union movement . Another organization formed a labor movement in the 1930s .
 A number of poems describe the adventures of Sir Perceval as he searched for the Grail . The poems include a number of tales of his adventures .
 This tapestry shows Sir Perceval kneeling before the Grail in the presence of three angels .
 The word knight comes from the Ola English word cnight which means a household retainer . Knight is knight, knight or knight, from the word knight . Knight was knight in 18th century and knight was knighted in 17th century .
 English people used the word to describe French mounted soldiers who first came to England after the Norman conquest of 1066 .
 These knights were merely warriors equipped and trained to fight on horseback . The knights were not knights, but they were trained to be horsemen .
 Knighthood carried no social distinction, and any man could be a knight . Knightholders were not social distinctions, and they were not all knighted .
 Many lords had knights, who performed household duties in peacetime and fought in time of war . Many lords of the time had knights performing household duties and fighting in war .
 Between 1100 and 1300, most knights became vassa/s and received some land . Between 1100 to 1300, the knights were vassas/s, and received land .
 As the cost of armor and a war horse increased, only wealthy men could equip themselves to fight as knights . Only wealthy men were able to equip themselves with armor and horses .
 The knights became a class divided from the rest of the community . Thus the knights became part of the knight class .
 Any man could be made a knight, but most new knights had fathers who were knights or members of the nobility . Most new knights have fathers who are knights or who belong to the nobility.
 The word chivalry comes from the Old French word chevalerie, meaning horse soldiery . Chivalry is a French word that means "horse soldiery"
 The term came to mean the code of behavior and ethics that knights were to follow . But the term also referred to a code of conduct by knights .
 It lasted as long as wars were based on heavy cavalry and combat between individuals . It was also known to be a form of warfare in Europe .
 Knights became less important in warfare by the 1400's because of changing military tactics and the introduction of gunpowder . Knights were used to be Knights of the Knights of England . Knights of Europe were once the most powerful and most powerful in Europe .
 In the United Kingdom, knighthood is now an honor bestowed on individuals by the king or queen in recognition for outstanding merit or service . In the U.K. it is now a prestigious honor bestowed by the queen or king .
 In the Middle Ages, a young boy in training to be a knight spent the first years of his life chiefly in the care of the women of his family .
 When a boy reached the age of about 7, he left home to begin training for knighthood . He left home aged seven to train for the honour . He has been awarded a knighthold for his bravery .
 He learned the code of courtesy and behavior expected of a knight . He also learned to be polite and courteacher .
 He acted as a va/et, or personal servant, to the knight who was his master . He was a personal servant to his master and acted as his personal servant .
 In battle, squire wore silvered spurs to distinguish him from a knight, whose spurs were gilt . Squire's spurs are silvered to distinguish them from knight's .
 Sometimes men were knighted on the field of battle, but the ceremony usually took place during times of peace . Ceremony was usually held during times when men were not fighting .
 A knight buckled on the armor of the squire and proclaimed him a knight . The squire was a squire, but was not a knight.
 The parrain struck the squire on the back of the neck with the palm of his hand . The squire was struck by the parrain, who struck him with his palm .
 This tap was called the accolade, from the French word co// meaning neck . This tap is called an accolade - from the word co/. meaning neck - is a tap .
 Religious ceremonies became part of the knighting ceremony when the ideals of Christianity became more closely linked with knighthood .
 "He confessed, fasted, prayed, and pledged to use his weapons for sacred causes and ideals," he said . He said he would fast, fast, pray, and pledge to use weapons to support sacred causes .
 Feudal custom allowed an overlord to levy money from his vassals when his eldest son was knighted . Feudic custom allowed the overlord of his overlord's eldest son to levy the money .
 The code of chivalry grew with the songs of the minstrels in the 1000‘s and 1100’s . In the 1100's and 1100's, chivalry became more widespread in Europe .
 Their poems show that a true knight had faith and a deep love of the Christian religion . The poems were written by the Knights of the Faith .
 Knights followed a code of behavior and ethics that became known as chivalry . Knights followed the code and ethics of chivalry, which is now called chivalence .
 During this period, he learned to fight with swords and played chess and other games that taught skill and strategy . During this time, he also learned to play with swords .
 A page learned to hunt with falcons and hawks . A page also learned to serve his master and hunt with them .
 A squire acted chiefly as a servant to his master while training for knighthood . The squire was a squire in training to be knighted .
 A squire rode at his master’s side in battle and took charge of prisoners . The squire was a squire who rode at master's side and led his men to victory .
 Some men knighted on the battlefield if they had shown great bravery . Some men were knighted if they showed great bravery in battle . Others knighted for bravery .
 In a tournament, knights on horses galloped toward each other and tried to drive their lances through each other's armor . Knights on horses on horses try to drive lances into each other’s armor . Knight on horse: "I am not afraid to be afraid to ride
 A knight championed right against injustice and evil, and never surrendered or flinched in the face of the enemy . A knight never gave up or surrendered, never flinced in the fight against the enemy, he said .
 In real life, a knight did not always resemble the ideal knight of the minstrels . The real life of a knight didn't always resemble a knight in real life .
 His code of honor and loyalty was sometimes applied only to members of his own class . He often acted brutally toward people of low birth, often acting brutally .
 The violent life of the Middle Ages made it difficult to prevent violations of the code . It was difficult to enforce the code because of the violence of the medieval era .
 Even dedicated knights were also soldiers interested in conquest and plunder . Even dedicated knight was also interested in plunder and conquest .
 A knight who was proved guilty of cowardice or other serious misconduct was disgraced by having his sword and his spurs broken . A knight found guilty of serious misconduct had his sword broken .
 “serious misconduct’ usually meant violations against other knights and their families . However, ‘serious misconduct' usually meant violation against other knight and their family .
 In the 1100's, a knight wore a sleeved under tunic of linen or wool, reaching below the knees . A sleeved beneath the knees was worn to reach below the waist .
 Over this was a sleeveless tunic, open at the sides and fastened with a belt . Over this, the tunic was fastened to a belt, fastened by a belt and open at sides .
 He had a cloak fastened at the shoulders, and wore long stockings and leather shoes . He had to wear it fastened to the shoulders .
 In the 1200's, the under tunic reached to the ankles, and the knight also wore a fur-lined surcoat . The surcoat had long sleeves and a hood that covered his head . The under-turban tunic was worn to ankles .
 The surcoat was pleated, edged with fur, and fastened at the waist with a belt . It was fastened to the waist by a belt and worn with fur .
 Shoulder padding and stiffening over the chest created an exaggerated waistline . Shoulder padded and stiffened over chest created a waistline.
 Shoes became so pointed that the front was often curled up and fastened to the knee with a small chain . Shoes were so pointed they were often fastened with a chain to the front .
 From the 1200's to the 1400's, knights dressed colorfully and carefully followed changes in fashion . Knight knights wore colorfully, carefully following changes in style .
 Early knight wore a conical helmet with a projection to cover his nose . The early knight wore the helmet to protect his nose from attacks .
 He also wore a long garment of padded fabric or leather covered with inter-aced metal rings, called mail . The mail is a long padded garment covered in metal rings .
 In 1300's, a stronger helmet covering the entire head of the wearer replaced the conical helmet . In the 1300s, the helmet was made to cover the entire wearer's entire head .
 Patches of plate armor were added to protect places the mail did not adequately defend . Patches were added after the mail was found to be too thin .
 Strips of plate were designed to protect the elbow, the arm, the knee, and the part of the leg between the knee and the ankle . Strips were designed for elbow, arm, knee and part of leg .
 Plates of metal, called pau/drons, covered the opening in the armor at the junction between the arm and the body . Plates were placed at the opening of the armor, which is covered in metal .
 The shield became much smaller and could be shifted to protect the face and head . The shield was much smaller than the shield used to protect people from harm .
 The lance was the knight's principal weapon, but he also used a sword, mace, and battle-ax . The knight used the lance as well as a sword and battle ax .
 A mail collar covered the gap between the helmet and the top of the body armor . The mail collar was designed to cover the gap in helmet and top of armor .
 The new armor was designed to protect against gunfire . The armor was so heavy that the knight had to be lifted on his horse by a crane .
 If he fell off during battle, he could not get up without help, and often lay at his enemy's mercy .
 The coat of arms provided the only recognizable feature of a knight when his face was covered . The coat was only recognizable features of the knight when he had his face covered .
 It was painted on his shield and on the surcoat that he wore over his armor . It is painted on . His shield and surcoat were also painted .
 Every knight's coat of arms was different, and knights became very good at identifying each other at a glance . Knights became very familiar with each other by looking at each other's coats of arms .
 Tournaments Tournaments developed in the 1100's, probably in northern France . Tournaments were probably held in the early 1100's .
 Large numbers of knights gathered and split into two sides to fight each other . The battle was fought between knights and knights in the Middle Ages .
 These fights were much like real battles, and they provided valuable military training . These fights provided valuable training .
 The defeated knights often had to pay ransoms to recover their freedom and possessions . The defeated knight had to have to pay a ransom to recover his freedom .
 A tournament could last several days and range over the countryside . The tournament is expected to last for several days . It could be held over several weeks .
 Kings opposed tournaments because such large gatherings of armed men could lead to rebellion, and because they were bloody and wasteful . Kings opposed tournament tournaments because they could be bloody, wasteful and bloody .
 In the 1200's, warlike tournaments gave way to jousting, which was combat between two men . Jousting is a form of combat in which two men are engaged in combat .
 Jousting took place with blunt weapons and was confined to an enclosed field . Joustings took place in the 1930s and 'was confined to a field'
 Throughout the night, he knelt in front of a church altar, confessing his sins, fasting, and praying . The story goes back to the original version of this article .
 The Vigil is a detail of an oil painting by John Pettie; the Tate Gallery, London attended by ladies and common people .
 In tilting, two knights on horseback charged at each other in the /ists, or narrow lanes, separated by rails to keep the horses apart . The /ists are narrow lanes of narrow lanes separated by rail to keep horses apart in tilting .
 The purpose of the tilt was to unseat the opponent with a blunt lance or pointless sword and win the honor of the day . The purpose was to topple the opponent .
 Knighthood and chivalry were favorite themes in medieval literature . Chivalry was a favorite theme in medieval novels .
 Poets and minstrels of Western Europe created stories of kings, heroes, and their ladies . Poets created stories about kings and heroes in Europe .
 The stories centered on life in the castle, chivalry, and tournaments and jousts . The stories were told by the author of the book .
 In the 1100's, French poet-musicians called troubadours began composing songs known as chansons de geste .
 These songs idealized love and described the knights heroic adventures . These songs were written by the Englishmen .
 Some troubadours were knights and wrote exaggerated accounts of their own adventures . The troubadour's account is based on the fact that he was a knight .
 Many European kings, such as Richard the Lion-Hearted of England and Alfonso X of Castile, also composed chansons . The chanons were composed of chanos by the kings of Europe .
 Geoffrey of Monmouth wrote the first detailed account of the King Arthur legend in 1136 . Geoffrey's account appeared in the work of a Welsh chronicler, Geoffrey of Monmouth . The earliest detailed account appeared about 1136 in Geoffrey's work .
 The Norman poet Wace used this legend in his work Le Roman de Brut . This work was the inspiration of Chrétien de Troyes, who wrote verse romances between 1165 and 1181 .
 The Arthurian themes inspired Marie de France, author of the narrative poem Lanval, written about 1189 . Lanval is a narrative poem of the same name, written in 1189.
 Sir Thomas Malory published his version of the Arthurian legends in Le Morte Darthur in 1485 .
 The Knights of Malta were the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem and the Hospitallers . They were later known as the Knights and Knights of Rhodes . They are also known for their role in the Crusades, Rhodes and Malta .
 The order originated with a group of men who rana hospice for Christian pilgrims in Jerusalem during the late 1000's . The order was created by men who died in the city of Jerusalem .
 Pope Paschal II recognized the group as a religious order in 1113 . In 1113, while the group was under the leadership of a man named Gerard, Gerard . The group was recognized by the Pope in 1112 .
 Hospitallers had also become a military order of Christian knighthood . By the mid-1100's, they had become an order of military knightholds .
 During the 1100's and 1200's, the order helped provide a permanent force for the defense of Christian territories in the Holy Land . The order was established during the 1100s and 1200s .
 In 1291, the order was forced to leave the Holy Land and located on the island of Cyprus . The order was located in Cyprus, Cyprus .
 About 1309, it took the island of Rhodes from the Byzantine Empire and established itself there . It established itself in Rhodes, establishing itself there in 1309 .
 From its base on Rhodes, the order became a Mediterranean seafaring power . The Order became a major maritime power in the region .
 For hundreds of years, it distinguished itself as a major Western European force against the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was a major force in Europe against the Empire .
 In 1522, the Ottoman ruler Siileyman | defeated the order, and the last knights left Rhodes on Jan. 23, 1523 . The last Knights left Rhodes in 1522 .
 In 1530, the order reestablished its headquarters, on the island of Malta . The order was established in 1530 .
 French general Napoleon Bonaparte took Malta in 1798 . From Malta, it defended European interests in the Mediterranean until the French general took Malta .
 The organization's purpose was to give moral support to Catholic families . It was to provide them with benefits they were unable to obtain through insurance companies of that time . The organization was established in the 1930s .
 The K of C also sponsors religious, welfare, and educational programs . Today, the K ofC sponsors religious and welfare programs .
 The K of C has about 1,500,000 members in more than 9,000 councils in the United States, Canada, Mexico, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Panama, Guam, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic .
 The K of C also operates the Columbian Squires Department, an organization for Roman Catholic boys from 13 to 18 years old . The organization also operates a program for boys aged between 13-18 years old and older .
 The Knights of Columbus started the Catholic Advertising Program in 1948 . The Catholic advertising program was started in 1948.
 Free printed information that explains various Roman Catholic beliefs has been distributed to non-Catholics . The program aims to help promote interfaith understanding .
 Knights of Columbus activities include camps and schools for underprivileged children . Aid to orphans, sick people, and disabled people; and citizenship training programs; .
 The society has established a Knights of Columbus Vatican Film Library at St. James' Chapel in Rome . The Vatican film library has been established by the society .
 This library has microfilms of about 12 million pages from books and rare manuscripts in the Vatican Library . The Vatican Library is housed in a Vatican Library in Rome, Italy . Microfilms from books, rare manuscripts and rare books have been microfilmed .
 The society has 65 state or provincial councils and an international board of directors . The society is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 The organization’s international headquarters are located in New Haven, Connecticut . The organization is based in Connecticut .
 Knights of Labor was one of the most important early labor organizations in America . Knights of labor was an important labor organization in the early 1900s .
 It was the first to organize all workers into a single union, rather than into separate trade unions . The union was organized in the 1930s, organizing all workers in a single trade union .
 Uriah S Stephens and other Philadelphia tailors founded the Knights in 1869 as a secret fraternal lodge . The Knights were founded by Uriah Stephens and others .
 Anyone except bankers, stockbrokers, professional gamblers, lawyers, and those who sold or manufactured liquor could become members of the group .
 The organization grew after Terence V Powderly became its Grand Master Workman in 1879 . Powderly was the Grand Master of Workman at the time .
 Knights of Columbus forced railroads owned by Jay Gould to meet its demands in 1885 . The K, of C emblem became powerful when a strike struck the railroads . It was used to force railroads to meet demands .
 Knights lost a second strike against Gould's railroads in 1886 . However, the Knights lost the second strike .
 The Haymarket Riot in Chicago caused the group’s membership to decline . That defeat, and the antilabor feelings that followed the Haymarket riot in Chicago, led to the group's membership decline .
 Knights of Pythias, P/HTH ee uhs, is a fraternal order to which members of any religion may belong . Members of any religious affiliation may belong to the order . Order is based in the United States .
 The organization performs charitable work and emphasizes high moral standards in its members . The organization is based in New York City .
 It supports homes and retirement centers for the aged and children’s homes and summer camps . It also supports retirement centers, retirement centers and children's homes .
 Each U.S. state and Canadian province has local lodges and a district Grand Lodge . The lodge is located in the United States and Canada .
 The Pythian Sisters, the Dramatic Order Knights of Khorassan, and others help in its work . Three organizations associated with the order help with its work: the Pythian .
 Knights of Pythias is a fraternal organization . It is the largest fraternal organisation in the world .
 The organization was originally called the Roman Catholic Union of the Knights of St. St. Louis . The organization is now known as the Catholic Union .
 St. John began as a semimilitary organization at a time when immigrant Roman Catholics were often subjected to discrimination and persecution . The organization was founded by immigrants who were often subject to persecution .
 It was founded to defend the faith, foster fraternity among its members, and support the families of members in need . The church was founded by members of the Catholic community .
 The organization takes its name and inspiration from the Knights of St. St. Mary's Knights . The organization is based in New York City .
 Knights Hospitallers was founded in the 1100's to protect pilgrims in Palestine, the Holy Land of the Bible . It was founded to protect and aid pilgrims in Palestine and protect pilgrims .
 Members of the organization have distinctive uniforms that they wear when serving as escorts at important church functions . They wear distinctive uniforms when they are escorts to important events .
 As Catholics came into the mainstream of American life, the organization's once semimilitary character became largely ceremonial . The Catholic Church is now largely ceremonial.
 The Knights are ruled by a central governing body called the supreme commandery . The Knights rule the Knights in a stateless society known as The Knights of the Bloodbloods .
 This body is headed by the supreme secretary, who bears the title brigadier general . The supreme secretary of the body is called a brigadier secretary .
 Local commanderies are found throughout the Knights of Pythias . The K of P emblem is found in the United States, Canada, Central America, Caribbean Islands, and Africa .
 Knights Templars were members of a religious military order of Christian knighthood . Knights Templar was a military military order, known as the Knights of the Knights Templar .
 The order was founded about 1119 in Jerusalem by the French knights Hugh des Payens and Godfrey of St. St. Louis .
 The order was first called “the poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and the Temple of Solomon” because of their early state of poverty and the lodgings given them by King Baldwin II of Jerusalem .
 The lodgings were in the compound of the kings palace known as the Temple of Solomon . They were in a compound called the Temple of Solomon .
 The original purpose of the Templars complemented that of the Knights Hospitallers . The Templars were founded in 12th century . Templars became Knights of the Hospitals of the Order .
 The Knights Hospitallers aided pilgrims in the Holy Land . The Templars protected pilgrims on the way to and from the holy Land .
 Templars organized under a ru/e (regulations for religious life) composed by Saint Bernard of Clairvaux . The Templars were organized under under a r/e composed by Bernard . The Order of the Templars was organized under the rules of the Templar Order .
 They avoided extravagant ceremony and clothing, wearing the white mantle of the Cistercian order, with a red cross added .
 At first the order included only knights, but gradually it admitted chap/ains—priests who ministered to the knights—and sergeants—wealthy members of the middle class .
 The pope took the knights under his special protection, and the order added to its purpose the duty to fight all ‘infidels’ who threatened Christianity .
 Templars played a key role in the Crusades and became a powertul military organization . The Templars were a key military organization in the early Crusades .
 They grew rich with properties that were donated by grateful kings and princes . They were given the properties that they grew rich .
 Templars entered the banking business, and Temples established throughout Europe drew deposits of massive wealth . Templars established throughout the continent drew deposits from massive wealth.
 Princes and commoners alike banked with the Templars, and many states became indebted to them . The Templars were the most powerful men in medieval times .
 With the fall of the Holy Land to the Muslims in 1187, the order lost its founding purpose and became a target for unhappy and envious debtors . The order was founded in the Middle Ages in 1181 .
 Philip ordered all the Templars in France thrown into prison, where they were tortured until they confessed to accusations of heresy, unnatural practices, and dishonest business activities . The Templars were tortured into confessions of heresy and unnatural practices .
 Templars in England, Germany, Spain, and Portugal also stood trial . Most were acquitted because they were beyond Philip's immediate control . Most of the Templars were acquitted .
 In 1312, Pope Clement V yielded to Philip's pressure and issued a decree to suppress the Templars . Pope issued the decree in response to pressure from Philip's father .
 The pope awarded the Templars’ property to several military orders in Spain and Portugal . The pope also awarded the Knights Hospitallers' cash holdings to several other military orders .
 Templars’ last grand master, Jacques de Molay, confessed to false charges . During the French trials, he admitted to the charges against him . The Templars were the last to be held in France .
 He later withdrew the confession but was burned at the stake anyway in 1314 . He later withdrawn the confession and later withdrew it . He was burned to death at stake .
 David G Schultenover Knitting is a method of making fabric by looping yarns around each other using one or more knitting needles . Knitting involves looping around yarns using knitting needles to make fabric .
 Much of the clothing we wear is made by knitting, including sweaters, stockings, scarfs, and hats . Knitting is a form of art form .
 Knitted clothes are popular because they can stretch, then return to their original shape . Knitted clothing is popular because it can stretch and then return .
 A knitted fabric can be formed to create such items as wallhangings and stuffed fiber sculpture . The fiber sculpture can be used to create wallhanging or stuffed fiber sculptures .
 Knitting can also decorate other fiber forms made by crocheting, macramé, and weaving . Knitting is also a way of decorating other fibers made by other fibers .
 One end is pointed, and the other end has a knob to prevent the fabric from slipping off . The other end is a knob that prevents the fabric slipping off, and is pointed .
 Today, knitting needles have smooth tips and are generally made of aluminum, wood, or plastic . Knicker needles are made of aluminium, wood or plastic and generally made from aluminum .
 The thickness of the needles and the type of yarn can be varied according to the nature of the fabric desired . The thickness and type of the yarn can also be varied depending on the fabric .
 Slender needles and lightweight yarn may be chosen for a delicate knit . The delicate knit is a delicate choice of needles and yarn .
 Wool has been the traditional yarn for knitting, but cotton, silk, and synthetics such as acrylic have also become popular . Cotton, silk and synthetic yarns are also popular .
 First, cast on a row of stitches as described in this article . Cast on a stitch pattern as described by the author .
 Hold the needle with the cast-on stitches in the left hand and the other needle in the right hand . Use the left and right needles to make the stitches .
 Insert the tip of the right-hand needle into the top stitch on the left-handed needle . Use the tip to insert the needle in the stitch top stitch . Insert the needle's tip into the stitch's top stitch in the needle top .
 Guide the yarn forward around the tip of the righthand needle . Use the yarn to create a quicker scarf .
 Pull the yarn through the top stitch, using the tip of the right-hand needle . Pull the needle through the stitch . Use the tip to pull the yarn out of the needle .
 Three or four needles with points at both ends are used to create tubular pieces for socks and skirts .
 The fabric is made by wrapping a series of looped threads around one needle in a required number . It is then wrapped around a needle in the number of threads in the required thread .
 The second needle is inserted into one or two loops at a time, and the yarn is wrapped around in a certain way . The yarn is then wrapped around with the second needle inserted .
 The two basic stitches are the Anitand the purl . There are many additional stitches, and hundreds of methods of combining the stitches to add variety .
 Another common decorative stitch is the cable stitch . Knitting with various colors and textures of yarns adds interest to the designs .
 Most knitters follow written patterns that contain a standard vocabulary of abbreviations . Knickerknicker patterns are written in written patterns with written patterns .
 A pattern gives directions on the types of stitches used, the order in which they are used, and the size and shape of the finished piece of fabric . A pattern is a guide to how to make the finished fabric .
 A knitter usually makes a sample about 3 inches (8 centimeters) square to determine the gauge . The knitter typically makes a small sample of the yarn to determine a gauge .
 The gauge is the exact number of stitches and rows per inch produced by the needles, yarn, and type of stitch . The exact number and rows of stitches per inch is the number and length of each stitch .
 Knowing the gauge is essential when sizes are required for clothing because each persons hand-knitting differs in tension . Each person hand knickerknitting is different in tension.
 If the knitted sample does not match the pattern gauge, the knitter must either change the needle size or the thickness of the yarn . If the pattern is not met, it must be changed to match the gauge .
 If the gauge measure is too small, a larger needle or a thicker yarn needs to be used . If the needle or yarn is too thin, a thicker needle or thicker yarn is needed .
 The origin of knitting is not known, but the craft has been practiced by many cultures for centuries . Knickering is a form of knitting that is practiced in many cultures around the world .
 The technique gradually became known to much of the ancient world over the next few hundred years . As neighboring peoples traded with the Arabs, the technique became known .
 Peoples of the Middle East taught Europeans how to knit during the 600's . People of the region were taught to knit in the Middle Ages . People in the region learned to knit from around the world .
 Knitting guilds were soon formed throughout Europe, and for the rest of the Middle Ages, knitting was considered as much an industry as weaving . Knitting was considered an important industry in Europe .
 Knitters had to serve as apprentices for six years before they could enter a guild . Knitters would have to serve six years apprentices before they were allowed to join a guild. Knitters were also apprentices at the beginning of their careers .
 Knitters also had to prove their ability to knit stockings, berets, shirts, and after 1602, elaborately designed carpets . Knitters were required to knicker stockings and berets and shirts .
 The Spanish carried knitting to South America and Central America in the 1500's . Knickering may have already been known by some people there .
 In SpanishAmerican cultures, knitting became a popular and practical pastime for the peasants . Knickering is a popular pastime in Spanish American cultures .
 In cold climates, knitting has always been an essential way of creating warm clothing . Knitting is essential way to create warm clothing in cold climates .
 Some examples are the knitted hats of the Peruvians in the Andes Mountains and the fisherman's sweaters of Ireland .
 Knitting machine is a device that makes fabric by forming loops in yarn and linking them to one another by means of needles . Knitting machines can be used to make fabric by joining loops of yarn with needles .
 Knitting machines use many needles and produce up to 12 million stitches per minute . Knitting machine produces up to a million stitches a minute . The knitting machine uses needles and needles to knit .
 Fabrics produced by knitting machines range from delicate lace to heavy drapery and rugs . Knicker machines can be used to make furniture, clothing and furniture .
 Other common knitted-fabric products include hosiery, sweat shirts, and other kinds of clothing .
 There are two main types of knitting machines: weft knitting machines and warp knitting machines . There are also two types of knit machines: warp knitting machine and weft knicker machines .
 Weft machines knit crosswise loops using one continence . Weft machine knicker crosswise loopers .
 The circular machine shown here has its needles arranged on a rotating cylinder . The needles are placed on the rotating cylinder of a circular machine .
 It produces a tube-shaped fabric, and produces a fabric that stretches easily. uous yarn, and produce a fabric .
 Most weft machines are circu/ar—that is, their needles are arranged in a circle on a rotating cylinder . The weft machine is made of weft needles that are arranged around a circle .
 Warp machines knit lengthwise loops with many interlocking yarns . They produce a flat fabric that is less elastic than a weft-knit fabric . Warp machines knicker lengthwise loopers with interlocking knickers .
 Many design effects can be created on knitting machines by using different types of yarns and stitches . Knitting machines can also be used to create design effects using different yarns, stitches .
 Some machines can be programmed to drop and add stitches to produce fabric that is shaped according to a specific pattern . Some machines are programmed to create fabric that can be shaped in a specific way .
 William Lee, an English minister, invented the weft knitting machine in 1589 . He invented the knitting machine with the help of a minister .
 Marc Isambard Brunel patented a circular knitting machine in 1816 . Brunel invented the machine in the same year as the invention of the knitting machine .
 In 1864, William Cotton, an English textile worker, patented the first successful machine that could knit full-fashioned fabric .
 Knopf published the work of hundreds of the most important authors of the 1900's . 16 winners of the Nobel Prize for literature, including 16 Nobel Prize winners .
 Working closely with his wife, Blanche, he introduced many European, Latin-American, and Asian writers to American readers .
 Knopf also gained respect for insisting on high-quality printing and design . The publisher also insisted on high quality printing, design and printing .
 He was its president from 1918 to 1957, and chairman of the board from 1957 to 1972 . He was also its chairman from 1958 to 1972, and was chairman from 1972 .
 From 1972 until his death he was chairman emeritus but maintained an active interest in the company . He died at the age of 92 . He was a member of the company's board of directors and a former chairman .
 Knopf was also an amateur photographer, and published many of his own informal portraits of authors he had known . He was also known for his informal portraits .
 In 1900, Sir Arthur Evans, a British archaeologist, began the excavation of the palace at Knossos . The palace is believed to have been the palace of the ancient Greek kingdom .
 His work added much new information about the Bronze Age in the Aegean area's Bronze Age . His work was published in the 1920s and 1930s .
 International nautical mile equals one-sixtieth of one degree, or a minute of arc, of the earth's circumference . Nautical mile equal to one degree or one minute of one minute arc of the Earth's circumference.
 Navigators use the nautical mile because of its simple relationship to the degrees and minutes by which latitude and longitude are measured . Navigator use nautical miles to measure the degree and minute by which a person travels by .
 The international nautical mile equals exactly 1.852 kilometers, or 6,076.115 international feet, or 1.151 statute miles . International nautical miles equals exactly exactly 1,852 km or 6.076 feet .
 The term knot came into use in the earlier days of sailing, when ships carried a speed-measuring device called a /og chip and line . It was used to measure speed of a ship's speed by using a speed measuring device .
 The chip, a piece of wood, was allowed to drag in the water behind the ship . The chip was allowed by the ship's captain to drag it in behind .
 An interval of twenty-eight seconds is to one hour approximately what a distance of 47 feet 3 inches is to 6,076 feet . The interval of 20-28 seconds is . approximately what an interval of . approximately the distance of an hour approximately . what a . distance
 If the log pulled out 5 intervals of line in 28 seconds, sailors knew the ship was moving at 5 knots, or 5 nautical miles an hour . Therefore, if the log had pulled out . out 5 . intervals in 28 . seconds, the sailors knew they were moving .
 Knots, hitches, and splices are methods used to tie ropes or fasten them together . Knots are often used to fasten ropes or tie them together in knots .
 Experts generally recognize a difference between knots, hitches, and splices . But experts say there's a difference in knots and hitches in splices.
 A splice permanently joins the ends of two ropes, or forms a single rope into a permanent loop . The splice is a piece of rope that joins the end of a rope or joins a rope in a loop .
 A fourth type of knot, the bend, is used to tie the ends of two ropes together . A bend is a knot that is used in knots to tie two ends together .
 A square knot weakens a rope by 50 per cent, and a bowline weakens by 40 per cent . For example, a square knot is a 50-per-cent weaker than a bow line . A bowline can also weaken a rope and weakens it by more than
 In general, hitches weaken a rope less than knots and bends do, and splices weaken it even less than hitches do . Splices are even more difficult to tie than knots or bends, but hitches are harder to tie .
 In spite of the development of wire rope and mechanical fastenings, knots are still important to people in many occupations . Uses of knots still important in people's occupations .
 The ability to tie knots has always been one of the chief skills required of sailors . It remains important on ships and boats, and is essential to sailors' survival .
 Sailors use knots to fasten ropes on objects to be lifted on or off vessels . Sailors also use knots for fastening ropes on ropes to lift objects onto or off ships .
 Sailboat owners must master the skill of tying knots in order to adjust the rigging . The rigging is lines attached to the sails, booms, and masts .
 Sports enthusiasts use knots to set up tents, to prepare fishing tackle, to build traps, and to do hundreds of other jobs . The knots are used to prepare tents, fish traps and build traps .
 Farmers have to be able to tie knots in the rope used to make halters for animals . For example, farmers have to tie knot knots in rope used for making halters .
 A sheet bend is used primarily to join two ropes of different sizes . Knots, hitches, and splices resemble each other and are often called by the general term knot .
 The overhand knot is the smallest, simplest and most common knot . It often serves as the beginning of other knots . It is also called the weavers knot .
 Other persons who make wide use of knots and rope include explorers, mountain climbers, builders, and weavers .
 Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts learn the art of tying knots because of their use in camping and hiking . Girl Scouts and Boy Scouts learn to tie knots because they use them in hiking .
 The language of knots was developed to name the various parts of a rope and the simple shapes into which they can be formed . Tying knots is a popular form of rope .
 The simple shapes that can be made with rope form the basis for all knots . Simple shapes can be the basis of knots .
 A person forms a bight by placing the end of the rope alongside the standing part to form a loop . The end of a rope can be placed alongside the remaining part of a loop to form the end .
 In an overhand loop, the end of the rope is crossed over the standing part . The end of a rope can be crossed over a standing part in a loop .
 This knot is used on the end of a rope as a stopper to keep it from running through small openings . It is also used to stop the rope from running into small openings in rope .
 Most experts do two things to a rope before putting it to use . However, most experts do not use the rope .
 Most new rope is stiff, so experts usually work the rope, or stretch, twist, and pull it to take the stiffness out of it . Experts usually stretch and twist the rope or stretch it to remove the stiffness .
 The granny knot is often tied by mistake instead of a square knot . It can be dangerous because it slips and jams. It can also be dangerous to tie by mistake because of the slip and jam .
 Angler’s knot is a safe, strong knot used in fishing to tie a loop in a leader, which connects the hook with the line . The angler's knot is used to tie the loop in the leader to a hook hook .
 In one simple method, form a piece of light yarn into a loop and place it along the rope near the end to be whipped .
 Then tightly wind the yarn around the loop and rope to bind them together . Wrap the loop around the rope and wrap the rope around tightly .
 Keep winding until the length of the whipping equals the diameter of the rope’s diameter . Leave a small part of the yarn loop exposed, but leave a part of it exposed .
 When the winding is completed, draw the short end of the twine through the loop, and pull both ends until the loop is drawn beneath the winding .
 They call it the pa/m and needle method because it involves the use of a needle similar to that used for sewing, and a leather glove, or palm . The method involves using the same needle as that used to be used to sew and the same glove or palm.
 Some of the most useful knots are described and illustrated by this article . The most important knots are the knots used to make knots .
 It serves to join the ends of two ropes, and has the advantage of strength and ease of tying and untying . It is the type of rope used to join ends of ropes .
 Two half hitches is the name of a knot used to temporarily but quickly fasten a line to a post, a hook, or a ring . A knot is a temporary fastening of a post or hook to a ring or a hook .
 At the end of a rope, the bowline forms a strong loop that will not slip or jam if properly tied . The bowline should be a strong, strong loop, not slip .
 Its uses include fastening animals to objects and forming seats from which people may be suspended while painting, cleaning, or doing other jobs .
 Two half hitches are used to fasten a rope temporarily to a post, hook, or ring . Half hitches fasten the rope to a ring, or post, to a hook or post .
 Other useful hitches include clove hitch for fastening rope to smooth timbers, and timber hitch for dragging logs . Clove hitch is used to fasten rope and smooth timber timbers to smooth wood .
 People used them to tie arrowheads to their shafts, and to tie bowstrings to bows . They were used to tie arrows to shafts and bowstrings .
 Early uses of knots included making clothes and fishing nets, and binding wood together to make a hut or shelter .
 The ancient Inca Indians of Peru used knots to keep records of sums and figures . The ancient Inca Indians used knots as a way to record sums and numbers .
 One of the most famous knots is the Gordian knot, mentioned in Greek mythology . The Gordian Knot is a knot made up of knots and knots made by knots .
 Knotweed is the name of a large group of weeds found in the northern United States and in Canada . It is a large weed found in northern U.S.
 It is used to make a sling by joining two ropes or two ends of the same rope . It is also used to join two ends or join two ropes by joining ropes or joining two ends .
 The clove hitch, or ratline hitch, is a quick and simple method of fastening a rope around a post or a stake . The rat line hitch is a simple method to fasten a rope to a post .
 The timber hitch is a strong knot used for lifting crates and bales and towing logs and other cylindrical objects . It is also used to towing crates, bales, logs and logs .
 knotweed has jointed stems that lie flat against the ground . It can be used to make a temporary noose or a lasso .
 Know-Nothings were members of certain secret societies that flourished in the U.S. from 1852 to 1860 . Know-nothings are members of several secret societies .
 They objected to immigration and the election or appointment of Roman Catholics and the foreign-born to official positions . The Catholic Party has a history of opposing immigration .
 The Know-Nothings split over the slavery question in the election of 1856, and the party rapidly declined . The party declined rapidly after the split over slavery .
 He ran for vice president of the United States with Alfred M Landon on the Republican ticket in 1936 . He was defeated in the 1936 presidential election .
 Knox selected the officers who planned the major U.S. naval campaigns during World War II . Knox selected officers for the United States entered World War It in 1941 .
 He bought a controlling interest in the Chicago Daily News in 1931 . He served as its publisher until 1940 . He was publisher until he died in 1940 .
 Alonzo L Hamby Knox, nahks, Henry Henry , was an American Revolutionary War general and the nation’s first secretary of war .
 He joined the Boston Grenadier Corps in 1772 and studied military science and engineering . He was a member of the 1772-1772 Grenadier Regiment .
 In 1775, he became a colonel in charge of the artillery of the Continental Army . He was a major commander of the army's artillery .
 Knox directed Washington's troops when they crossed the Delaware River in December 1776 and then marched on Trenton, New Jersey . Knox directed the troops in the Battle of Trenton .
 Knox was promoted to brigadier general . Washington commended him publicly for his role in the campaign . Washington praised Knox for his work .
 Knox became secretary of war in 1785, before the adoption of the Constitution . Knox was Secretary of War before the Constitution was adopted . Knox became Secretary of war before the 1785 Constitution was ratified .
 Knox proposed that a national militia be organized in 1790, but Congress rejected the plan . Congress rejected Knox's proposal . Knox proposed a militia to be organized, but it was rejected .
 Paul David Nelson Knox led the Protestant Reformation in Scotland . He led the Scottish Protestant Reformers .
 His strong personality and fiery preaching made him one of the most powerful Scots of his day . He was known for his fiery preaching style and strong personality .
 Under Knox, the Church of Scotland adopted a declaration of faith, a form of government, and a liturgy . Knox was the leader of the church in Scotland . Knox died in 1883 .
 The Church reflected the teachings of the reformer John Calvin, who greatly influenced Knox . Knox was a member of the Calvinist movement .
 The church owned much of the wealth, and the kings and nobles controlled the church . The king and nobles control the church, but the church was the center of the world .
 Politically, Scotland was merely one small part of the rivalry between France and England . Scotland was one of the most important battlegrounds between England and France .
 During Knox's early years, a few Scots tried to become Protestant reformers . But they had little hope for reform in either church or government . Knox's first Scottish leader was in 18th century .
 In the early 1540's, Knox became a follower of the Protestant reformer George Wishart . Knox was born in London, England, in the 15th century and died in 1541 .
 Early in 1546, Wishart was arrested on the orders of Cardinal Beaton of St. Louis . Wishart's arrest was ordered by the cardinal in 1545 .
 In revenge, a group of Protestants assassinated the cardinal later that year and seized the castle of St. St. Louis . In revenge for the assassination, the cardinal was assassinated and the castle seized .
 Knox did not take part in the assassination, but he joined the Protestants in the castle . Knox was not involved in the murder, but was a Protestant . Knox joined the Protestant movement in the 16th century .
 Mary of Guise, the Roman Catholic pro-French regent of Scotland, asked for assistance from France . She asked for help from France to take over the Scottish government .
 Knox and several others were taken to France as galley slaves in 1547 . Knox was taken to St. Andrews in July 1547 as a galley slave . Knox died in August 1547 in France .
 Jn 1549, the English government obtained the release of Knox and his associates . Knox was released by the government in 1549 .
 The government wanted them to build a pro-English Protestant party in Scotland . The party was wanted to be pro-protestive in Scotland by the government .
 Pro-French Catholics in Scotland were too strong, so Knox went to England as a minister . However, the pro-French Catholic community in Scotland was too strong . Knox was a minister of Scotland and later became a diplomat .
 Berwick was known as a radical Protestant reformer . He preached in Berwick for two years and became known for his radical Protestant reforms .
 In 1553, Mary Tudor became queen of England and made Roman Catholicism the state religion again . Roman Catholicism was made state religion in 1553 .
 Knox was one of the Marian Exiles—Protestants who fled to the European continent as religious refugees . Knox was a Marian Exile; Knox was born in France and England .
 Late in 1554, Knox became pastor of a church of English refugees in Frankfurt, Germany . Knox served as a pastor for English refugees during his time as a minister in Germany .
 He was forced to leave Frankfurt after a conflict with moderate Protestants . The former mayor was forced out of the city after a clash with moderates .
 He returned to Geneva with most of the English radicals from Frankfurt, and founded a new refugee church . He founded a church in Geneva, Switzerland .
 In Geneva, Knox corresponded secretly with Protestants in England, Scotland, and France . Knox was a Protestant in Geneva, Switzerland .
 He also wrote pamphlets justifying the rights of persecuted people to rebel against tyrannical rulers . He also defended the rights to persecuted people in his writings .
 Queen Mary died in 1558, and her successor, Queen Elizabeth, restored England's independent state religion . Queen Elizabeth restored the state of religion after her death . Queen Mary's reign was the first to restore state religion in England .
 English government helped him establish Protestantism as Scotland's national religion . Protestantism was established by the English government in Scotland in 17th century .
 Under Knox's leadership, the Scottish Parliament established a Reformed Protestant national church in 1560 . Knox was the leader of Scotland's Reformed Presbyterian Church .
 From 1560 until his death, Knox was Scotland's most powerful political and religious leader . Knox died in 1560 at the age of his death in Scotland .
 St. Giles’s Cathedral became the political and religious center of Scotland . The cathedral was the center of the country's religious and political life .
 His unfinished History of the Reformation of Religion in the Realm of Scotland is a dramatic autobiographical account of the Scottish Reformation to about 1564 .
 Knoxville, Tennessee, is one of the largest cities in Tennessee . Knoxville has a population of 3,890,000 .
 Knoxville lies on the Tennessee River in the heart of the Appalachian Ridge and Valley Region of eastern Tennessee . Knoxville, Tennessee, is located in the middle of the country's Appalachian Ridge region .
 The Tennessee Valley Authority has its headquarters in Knoxville, Tennessee . It is a federal development agency .
 The city also serves as the gateway to Great Smoky Mountains National Park . The city is also gateway to the national park .
 In 1786, the James White family of North Carolina became the first permanent settlers in the area of what is now Knoxville . Knoxville, Tennessee, was founded by the White family in 1786 .
 White chose the site due to its location near the junction of three rivers used as travel routes . White, a trader and farmer, chose the location due to the location of the rivers .
 The site became part of the newly organized Territory of the United States South of the River Ohio in 1791 . In 1791, the site became the site of the first settlement in the area .
 White's settlement, named Knoxville, became the new territory's capital . Knoxville was named to honor Secretary of War Henry Knox . White was the first white settler to settle there .
 Knoxville Symphony Orchestra performs regularly throughout the year . The Knoxville orchestra is based in Knoxville, Tennessee .
 Blount House was built for Governor William Blount in 1792 . It is one of the oldest frame houses west of the Blue Ridge Mountains . It was built in the 17th century .
 Manufacturing is a less significant part of the city’s economy than it once was . Manufacturing is now less significant in the city's economy than in the past .
 The West Town Mall and Knoxville Center shopping complexes help make the city the major commercial center of eastern Tennessee . Knoxville is a major shopping destination in the state .
 Gatlinburg in the Great Smoky Mountains and Pigeon Forge, with its country-music theaters, outlet malls, and Dollywood theme park, attract many visitors . Gatlinberg in the area is known for its country music and country country music theaters .
 City voters elect the mayor and nine city council members to four-year terms . Voters also elect nine members of the city council .
 Cherokee Indians lived in the Knoxville area when the White family arrived in 1786 . White family moved to Knoxville, Tennessee, from 1786 to 1786, and lived there for years .
 Union troops led by Major General Ambrose E Burnside defeated Confederate forces under General James Longstreet in Knoxville . During the American Civil War, Burnside led the Union forces to victory . Burnside's victory over the Confederate forces was a major success .
 TVA dams made the Tennessee River navigable to large vessels from New Orleans to Knoxville via the Mississippi and Ohio rivers . The Tennessee River was navigable by large vessels between New Orleans and Knoxville .
 Most of TVA’s electric power comes from nuclear and coal-burning plants . TVA is the largest electricity company in the world .
 In the last half of the 1900's, many old buildings near the center of Knoxville were torn down and replaced by new ones . The Knoxville area has a history of tearing down and replacing buildings .
 Redevelopment of an old industrial area along the Tennessee River began in the 1990's and continued into the 2000's . The area was redeveloped in the late 1990s and 2000s .
 The project included the construction of parks, condominiums, and restaurants . The project was completed in 2010 .
 Koala, koh AH AH /uh, is an Australian mammal that looks like a teddy bear . Koala is a koala, a koaloo, or a koah, which is a small Australian mammal . Koaloo is a very similar Australian mammal to a
 It is sometimes called a koa/a bear or native bear, but the koala is not related to any kind of bear . It is also sometimes known as a koala .
 Koalas have soft, thick fur; a large, hairless nose; round ears; and no tail . Koala have soft fur, a large nose, round ears and a large round nose . They also have round ears .
 They spend nearly all their time in trees and come down only to move to another one . They spend most of their lives in trees, often only to come down from trees .
 The word koa/a comes from an Australian Aborigine word meaning no drink . It comes from a word that means 'no drink' and 'no drinking' in Australia . The word 'koa' comes from the word "no drink"
 The young koala, known as a joey, is carried inside of a pouch on its mother's belly until it is more completely developed . The joey is carried in a pouch inside a pouch until it's more developed and is carried around the world .
 The koala has a pouch that opens toward the rear of its body . Unlike most other marsupials, the koala is a koala with a pouch which opens toward its rear .
 The joey spends its first seven months in the mother’s pouch and the next six riding on her back . pouch . pouch for about seven months, suckling on one of the mother's two nipples . pouch is the largest pouch in the world .
 People have cut down eucalyptus forests for housing developments, resorts, and farmland . People cut down trees for housing development, resorts and farmland.
 Much of the koala population is also infected by chlamydia, a disease that can cause blindness, infertility in females, and pneumonia . Much koala are infected by the disease .
 Australian and international conservation organizations are working to counteract the effects of the disease . Conservation organizations are also working to counter the effects .
 Kobe was built on a narrow, fan-shaped plain that stretches between the sea and a row of high mountains to the north . Kobe is one of Japan's most famous cities, with the city of Kobe .
 Kobe has long rows of docks, and is an important center of heavy industry and shipbuilding . Kobe is known for its docks and shipyards . Kobe has a long history of shipbuilding and heavy industry . Kobe was founded in 1903 .
 Many people worship at the ancient Buddhist temple of Nofukuji, which houses a wooden statue carved about 794 . The temple is located in Japan and Japan .
 In 1956, construction of new buildings and repair of harbor facilities made Kobe the leading export and import center of Japan . Kobe is now the most important port in the world .
 It caused over 6,000 deaths and enormous property destruction and damage . It was caused by the eruption of the Second World War, which killed thousands .
 Kenneth B Pyle Kobuk Valley National Park, KOH buk or koh BUK, is in northwestern Alaska . The park is located in the northwestern part of the state .
 The Great Kobuk Sand Dunes, soine of the few sand dunes in the Arctic region, lie near the center of the park . They are soine one of only the few dunes of the region in North America .
 The area became a national monument in 1978 and a national park in 1980 . The area is now a national national park .
 Koch, kawhk or kohk, Robert , a German physician, played a key role in helping bacteriology develop as a science during the 1800's . Koch was a key figure in the development of bacteriology .
 He introduced new techniques of staining and cu/turing bacteria . He became the first scientist to show that specific bacteria cause certain diseases .
 He received the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine in 1905 for his work on tuberculosis . He also received a Nobel Prize for work on the disease .
 He began to study anthrax, a disease that affects people and livestock . He studied anthrax in the early days of his life .
 Koch discovered rodlike bacteria in the blood of diseased animals caused anthrax . Koch discovered that rod like bacteria in blood of animals caused the disease . Koch's discovery of anthrax was the discovery of the disease-causing bacteria .
 His research on the anthrax bacterium becanie a model for the study ot gernis that cause specific diseases . His research is a model of the study of specific diseases that cause them .
 Koch won fame in 1877, when he published an article describing a method to study bacteria . Koch published the article in which he described a method of studying bacteria in the natural world .
 The method included exarnining thin films of bacterial cultures on glass slides and photographing them to record their structure . The method was developed by scientists at the University of Cambridge .
 The same year, he published a book that described a series of steps to detertnine whether a certain germ Causes a particular disease .
 Kochss postulates are still used by bacteriologists . Kochss is now known as Kochs postulates . Kochs is a form of a bacteriologist .
 Also in the early 1880's, he developed bacterial cultures that he grew in gelatin, agar, and similar solid substances . His technique revolutionized bacteriology in the 1880's .
 Koch discovered the cause of cholera epidemics in Egypt and India in 1883 and 1884 . Koch was the first person to discover the disease in Egypt, India and India . Koch also discovered the causes of the epidemics .
 In 1891, Koch founded and becanie director of the Institute for Infectious Diseases in Berlin . Koch died in 1946 at the age of 92 .
 In 1897, he demonstrated the cure for rinderpest, a disease killing cattle in what is now South Africa . He demonstrated the cause and cure for the disease in 1897 .
 In 1905, he conducted important research on sleeping sickness in what is now Tanzania . In 1905 he conducted an important research into sleeping sickness .
 Kodaly, koh DYor koh DAH ee, Zoltan, ZAWL tahn , was a Hungarian cumposer, music historian, and educator . Kodaly was also a Hungarian music historian and composer .
 Kodaly promoted modern music and collected and studied Hungarian folk music . Kodaly was a friend of Béla Bartok .
 Compositional style, like that of Bartok, is rooted in Hungarian folk idioms . His compositional style is similar to Bartok's .
 Kodaly's music is less intellectually complex than Bartok's more advanced works . Kodaly’s music isn’t intellectually complex, but it's more complex . The composer's work is published in New York, New York .
 Kodaly believed strongly in the expressive capabilities of the human voice . His compositions are characterized by the beauty and inventiveness of their vocal lines . Kodaly's compositions are .
 Kodaly's method of music education was based on the idea that choral singing is the easiest and most rewarding way for most people to learn about music . Kodaly’s method of teaching music education .
 The International Kodaly Society, based in Budapest, was founded in 1975 . It was founded by the Budapest-based group of Kodaly enthusiasts .
 Stewart L Ross Koestler, KEHST /uhr, Arthur , was a Hungarian-born novelist and essayist . He was born in Budapest, Hungary, in 1953 .
 His most successful political novels, Darkness at Noon and Arrival and Departure , reject dictators and Communism . His novels reject dictators .
 He was a foreign correspondent in the Spanish Civil War . He was jailed by the fascists during the war .
 It was called the Kofun era because dead leaders were buried in large tombs called kofun . The era was known as the 'Kofun' era . It was the era when the country was ruled by rulers and rulers .
 It is sometimes called the Yamato period because emperors began to rule from the Yamato area . Emperors ruled from the area around what is now the city of Nara . The period is known as the Yamato era .
 Japan’s royal family traces its ancestry to the emperors of the Kofun era . The Japanese royal family is a descendent of Japanese emperors .
 Chinese culture and Buddhism greatly influenced the development of Japanese art, literature, and government . In the later part of the Kofun era, Chinese culture influenced the Japanese art and literature .
 Buddhism became popular among rulers and leading families, but Shinto remained a chief religion . Buddhism was popular in Japan, but Buddhism remained a main religion .
 In 646, the emperor began the Taika Reform, a program to establish a central government . The emperor began this program in 646 . The reform was part of a plan to establish central government in China .
 In 710, the central government was moved to Nara, and the Nara period began . Nara was the Japanese capital of Japan . The central government of Nara is located in Nara .
 Helmut Helmut, HEHL moot, was chancellor of West Germany from 1982 to 1990, and chancellor of reunified Germany from 1990 to 1998 . Helmut was also chancellor of the West German government from 1982 until 1998 . He was also the German leader of the 1980s and 1990
 From 1949 to 1990, Germany had been divided into two countries— West Germany and East Germany . West Germany was divided between 1949 and 1990, with East Germany being West Germany .
 He supported close ties between West Germany and the United States . He forged new links with the Soviet Union and forged close ties with West Germany .
 Neo-Nazis and other right-wing groups protested immigration and attacked foreigners . Neo-Nazi and other groups protested the immigration .
 Kohl served in the parliament of the West German state of RhinelandPalatinate from 1959 to 1976 . Kohl was a member of the state's parliament from 1959 until 1976 .
 In 1976, he became a member of West Germany's lower house of parliament . In 1976 he was first elected to parliament in West Germany .
 The upper house of parliament had voted to remove Helmut Schmidt from office and replace him with Kohl . Helmut Kohl was replaced by the former president of Germany .
 West Germany and East Germany were reunified into the nation of Germany on Oct., 1990, with Kohl as chancellor . East and West Germany was reunified in 1990 .
 Kohl's coalition won a majority in the parliamentary elections of 1990 and 1994, but failed to win a majority . Kohl won the majority in 1998 but his coalition failed to reach a majority again in 1998 .
 Kohl stepped down both as chancellor of Germany and as chairman of the C.D.U. in 1998 . Kohl also stepped down from the German government in 1998 as a result of his resignation .
 In 1999, Kohl admitted that the CD.U. had engaged in illegal fund-raising while he was chairman . Kohl was chairman of the CDU. In 1999 he admitted that he had been illegally involved in fund-raisers .
 Melvin Croan Kohler, KUHL ur, Wolfgang , a psychologist, helped to develop Gestalt psychology . Melvin was a member of the KHLU .
 Gestaltists argue that behavior is best understood when studied as an organized pattern rather than as separate parts . Gestaltist says behavior should be studied as a pattern, rather than separate parts of behavior .
 Kenneth E Clark Kohirabi, koh/ RAH bee or KOHL rn bee is a garden vegetable grown for its large, edible stem .
 The top of the stem is shaped like a bulb and grows just above the ground . The top is shaped as a bulb .
 The bulb looks and tastes like a turnip, but it is sweeter and more delicate . The bulb tastes more like turnip than turnip and tastes more delicate than turnips . It's the first bulb of its kind to be made from a bulb .
 Kohlrabi is a good source of vitamin C . It grows best at temperatures between 60 and 65 °F and matures in 50 to 50 °F .
 Kokoschka, koh KAWSH kuh, Oskar , was an Austrian painter associated with the expressionist movement . He was associated with expressionist movements .
 Kokoschka painted his best-known pictures in a restless, energetic style that reflects a feeling of anxiety and agitation . His best known works include a series of portraits of the artist .
 His first paintings were portraits of friends and prominent individuals that skillfully capture the inner nature of the subject . His first portraits were portraits .
 Kokoschka traveled through Europe from 1924 to 1931, painting dramatic views of major cities from an elevated viewpoint .
 From 1938 to 1948 he lived in London, where he painted many historical and mythological subjects as well as landscapes .
 Kola nut, also spelled cola, is the seed of several types of evergreen trees that are native to West Africa . The seed is also known as cola or cola .
 They contain the chemicals caffeine and theobromine, which have a mild, stimulating effect . Caffeine is a stimulant stimulant and can be found in coffee shops .
 Kola nut trees reach Pamela Ivinski . World Book illustration by Stuart Lafford, Linden Artists Ltd.
 Kokoschka’s View of the Thames was one of several panoramic views of cities that the artist painted between 1924 and 1931 . Kola nuts Oil painting on canvas r 926; Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, N.Y., .
 They have oblong, leathery leaves, yellow flowers, and star-shaped fruit . They are oblong leaves, with yellow flowers and leathery, brown fruit .
 Kola nuts are grown in Asia, South America, western Africa, and the West Indies . Kola nut nuts are also grown in South America and West Africa .
 Cola acuminata is an important commercial species of Cola Acuminata . The scientific name for the important commercial Cola is Cola . Colaacuminata was used in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The city has some of the worst living conditions in the world because of overcrowding, poverty, and starvation . The city is known for its overcrowded conditions and starvation levels .
 In 2001, the city’s official name was changed from Calcutta to Kolkata, the Bengali name for the city . The city's official name has since been changed to 'Kolkata'
 The city covers about 40 square miles (104 square kilometers) on the east bank of the Hooghly, a branch of the Ganges River . The city is located on the west bank of a river branch of Ganges river .
 Haora, the second largest city of the Kolkata metropolitan area, is on the west bank of the river . Haora is located on the banks of the River Gaya in the east of the city .
 Maidan, a large park, occupies 2 square miles (5 square kilometers) in the center of Kolkata . The Maidan is a popular tourist attraction in the city of the city .
 Government buildings line the Esplanade, a wide street north of the Maidan Maidan .
 Victoria Memorial is an impressive building of white marble . It houses a picture gallery and a historical museum . The Victoria Memorial was the Victoria Memorial .
 The Indian Museum, built in 1875, features collections of cultural materials . The museum was built in the 1880s and features cultural materials from India .
 Most of Kolkata’s people speak one of three languages—Bengali, Hindi, or Urdu . Most of the city's people speak a Bengali or Hindi language .
 Hinduism is the principal religion in the country . Muslims make up about 15 percent of the population . Hindus are Hindus, Muslims are Muslims .
 Wealthy Kolkatans live near the center of the city in pleasant neighborhoods with wide streets and modern houses . Wealthy people live in Kolkata, near the city center, in pleasant areas .
 Many bustee dwellings have no electricity or running water, and some have no sewage disposal . Some have no running water or electricity or electricity .
 Conditions, plus constant and widespread undernourishment, lead to frequent outbreaks of cholera and other diseases . These conditions lead to widespread under-nourishness, which is often accompanied by constant and under-eating conditions .
 Since the 1960's, the government has worked to improve living conditions in the bustees . The bustees have been working to improve their living conditions .
 It installed electricity, running water, and sewage facilities in many bustees . The government installed electricity and running water in the busts .
 Other Kolkata products include electric equipment, metal goods, paint, and shoes .
 The city is the shipping outlet for the coal and iron mines in northeastern India . It is a shipping hub for the mines in northeast India .
 The East India Company, an English trading firm, founded the city as Calcutta in 1690 . The city is now known as the capital of West Bengal .
 The settlement grew rapidly in size and importance, and many neighboring villages became part of it . Many neighboring villages were also part of the settlement .
 By 1900, Calcutta ranked second only to London as the largest city in the British Empire . By 1900 the city had become the second-largest in the Empire .
 In 1912, India’s capital was moved to Delhi, which has a more central location . Delhi is now the capital of the country .
 When India gained independence in 1947, Calcutta became the capital of the new state of West Bengal . When West Bengal became West Bengal, the city became the state capital .
 Outbreaks of political and religious violence continued to occur frequently in the city . The city was heavily populated with people of African descent .
 The Weavers by Kathe Kollwitz was the artist's first important series of prints . Kathe was the first important print of his first important work .
 The series portrayed the tragic results of a strike by impoverished German weavers against factory owners in 1840 . The series portrays the tragic consequences of the strike in Germany .
 This final print in the series shows dead weavers being returned to their homes after the violent end of the strike . The final print of the series of pictures shows the return of the weavers .
 Kollwitz lived in the slums of Berlin, and championed the cause of the poor in her art .
 She became famous for powertul woodcuts that feature roughly cut black and white shapes . She became especially noted for her woodcuts .
 Historical events depict historical events in which the poor fought their oppressors . The poor are shown fighting their oppressorates in the film .
 Kollwitzs War, a series of seven wood-block prints, expressed a woman's reaction against the violence and destruction of war . The series of wood-blocks expresses the reaction against war .
 This giant lizard inhabits the tropical island of Komodo and a few other islands of Indonesia . It is the largest lizard in the world and inhabits Komodo .
 Komodo dragons have scaly bodies with long necks, strong claws, and sharp, sawlike teeth . Komodo dragon has long necks with strong claws and sharp saw-like saw-saw teeth .
 Their forked tongues have an organ of smell that helps them detect rotting animals several miles or kilometers away . Their tongues have a forked tongue that can smell rotting animals .
 They use speed and strength to overpower deer, wild pigs, and even water buffaloes . They use their speed to overpower animals, such as deer and pigs .
 Their saliva contains bacteria that can kill wounded prey in a few days . It can also kill prey in days if saliva contains the bacteria that kills them .
 Her eggs hatch in eight to nine months, and the young may take five years to mature . The young are expected to grow up to five years old .
 Komodo dragons have become endangered because people destroyed their habitat or overhunted their prey . Komodo dragon's habitat has been destroyed by people destroying habitat and overhunting prey .
 People trapped dragons to sell them as pets or kill them for body parts . People also trapped dragons and killed them for their body parts to sell .
 Indonesia now protects dragons from poachers, and biologists are trying to save their habitat . Indonesia is trying to protect dragons from poaching, but poachers continue to kill them .
 Komondor, KOH mahn daw, is a breed of dog that was raised for centuries to guard livestock on the Hungarian plains . Komondors were raised in Hungary and used to guard cattle on the plains .
 The large white dog is thought to have been brought to Hungary from central Asia by the Magyars in the 800’s . The dog is believed to be thought to be a large white white dog .
 Full-grown komondor is covered with a heavy coat that falls toward the ground in cords . A full-grown Komondor covered in heavy coats that fall toward the floor .
 Komondors make excellent guard dogs, and many are kept as household pets . Komondor dogs make excellent guards dogs and are often kept as pets by their owners .
 Kon-Tiki have been known to protect children as well as other pets in the family . Critically reviewed by the Komondor Club of America Kon-tiki .
 Kongo, KAHNG goh, was an African kingdom that lasted from the 1400's to the early 1700's . Kongo was the first African kingdom to be ruled by Kongo .
 Each district was ruled by a chief chosen by the king or the governor of the province in which the district was located . The king or governor of each district ruled the district .
 Kongo was divided into six provinces, each ruled by a governor . By 1500, the Kongo had been ruled by governors in six provinces . The Kongo kingdom was ruled by the King of Kongo in 1500 .
 He had no army, so he needed a strong personality to keep the kingdom together . He needed to keep his kingdom together, and he had to rely on his personality .
 They converted some Kongolese, including King Nzinga Nkuwu, to Christianity . They converted many of them to Christianity, including some of the King's children .
 The Portuguese enslaved many Kongolese and made them work in Portuguese colonies . But beginning in the early 1500’s, the Portuguese enslaved them in their colonies . The enslaved many were made to work in the colonies of the island nation .
 By the early 1600's, the slave trade had weakened the Kongo, and the kingdom was breaking apart . The slave trade was a major factor in breaking apart the kingdom of the Kongos .
 The invaders defeated the king's forces and killed him and many members of the nobility . The invaders were defeated by the king and killed many of the noblemen .
 In 2001, she was awarded the Regina Medal by the Catholic Library Association . Basil E Frankweiler won the award in 1997 for The View from Saturday .
 Virginia L Wolf Konoye, koh noh yeh, Prince Fumimaro (18911945) was premier of Japan from 1937 to 1939 and from 1940 to 1941 . She was the first Japanese Prime Minister of Japan in Japan .
 Konoye was a leading moderate, but his willingness to compromise with the militarist extremists helped them accomplish their war aims . Konoyo was a leader moderate who was willing to compromise .
 He gave way in 1941 to General Hideki Tojo’s Cabinet, which led Japan into World War I . But he gave way to the Cabinet which led to World War II .
 Konoye was born into one of Japan’s most aristocratic families on Oct 12, 1891, in Tokyo . He was born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1891 .
 Konoye helped bring about Japan's surrender in World War II in 1945 . He was named a war-criminal suspect and took poison after being named as a war criminal suspect . He died in 1945 at the age of 80 .
 Kookaburra, KUK uh Bur uh, is the name of a group of woodland kingfishers . They live in Australia and New Guinea .
 A kookaburra’'’s call sounds like a loud laugh, and it is sometimes called the /aughing jackass . The kookaurra's call is similar to that of a laughing jackass.
 The birds have large heads, long bills, and brown, black, or white feathers . They have large bills, brown or black feathers, with brown or white bills .
 Kookaburras eat caterpillars, fish, frogs, insects, small mammals, snakes, worms, and even small birds . They also eat small mammals and small birds, including small mammals .
 The scientific name for the most familiar species, the laughing kookaburra, is Dacelo novaeguineae . The laughing koobaburras are the most common species in the world .
 Dean Koontz is one of the most popular and productive American authors of suspense fiction . He is best known for his work in suspense novels .
 His best thrillers combine elements of horror, suspense, and romance, and sometimes science fiction . He has written more than 1,000 books, including thrillers .
 He worked as a high school English teacher from 1967 to 1969, when he became a full-time author .
 Koontz earned widespread attention with Whispers , a story about a psychopath stalking a woman . He earned widespread acclaim with Whisper .
 /ntensity portrays the battle between a psychology student and a vicious killer . Strangers mixes mystery and the supernatural .
 Koontz also has written under a number of other names, including Deanna Dwyer, Brian Coffey, Leigh Nichols and Owen West Kootenay Indians .
 English-born newsman, Ted Koppel, is one of the most respected journalists in U.S. television .
 On the nightly program, Koppel explores the major news stories of the day . He often interviews the most important people involved in the story . The nightly program airs at 9 p.m. ET on PBS .
 Koppel praised for his intelligent, evenhanded, and informed interviewing style .
 He moved to the United States with his family in 1953 and became a U.S. citizen in 1963 .
 In 1979, a group of Iranian revolutionaries invaded the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and took several Americans hostage . Several Americans were taken hostage in 1979 .
 The kookaburra, or /aughing jackass, has a long, heavy bill; and brown, black, or white feathers .
 North Korea is North Korea’s largest city and its cultural, economic, and industrial center . It is the country's cultural and economic capital, Pyongyang .
 The other is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea— commonly called North Korea . North Korea is one of two countries in the Middle East region .
 In non-Communist South Korea, the people elect their national political leaders . South Korea's political leaders are elected by the people of non-communist countries . The South Korean people vote for their national government .
 North and South Korea lie on the Korean Peninsula, which extends south from northeastern China . The Korean Peninsula is located on the peninsula .
 North Korea covers the northern half of the peninsula, and South Korea occupies the southern half . North Korea is located in North Korea, South Korea is in the middle of the world .
 North Korea is slightly larger in area than South Korea, but the South has about twice as many people as the North . North Korea has about two million people in South Korea .
 Plains stretch along the western, northeastern, and southern coasts of Korea . Plains are located along the west, northeast, and south coasts of the Korean peninsula .
 The majority of the Korean people live on the coastal plains or river valleys . The majority live in river valleys or coastal plains .
 Until the 1900's, Korea’s economy was based almost entirely on agriculture . Until the 1800's, Korean economy was almost entirely based on farming .
 Today, industry is far more important than agriculture in both North and South Korea . Agriculture is more important in North Korea than agriculture .
 Scientists have evidence that people lived in what is now Korea at least 30,000 years ago . People lived in the region of Korea at the time of the first known life there .
 Various Korean and foreign states ruled the Korean peninsula from ancient times to the 1900's . Various Korean states have ruled the peninsula since ancient times . The Korean peninsula has been ruled by various states since the 1800s .
 Korea was a colony of Japan from 1910 until World War II ended in 1945 . It was a Japanese colony from 1910 to 1945 .
 It is South Korea’s largest city and one of the largest cities in the world in population . It is also one of South Korea's largest cities .
 This action started the Korean War, which was part of the Cold War struggle between Communist and nonCommunist nations . The Korean War was the result of a U.S. invasion of Korea .
 Neither side won a complete victory, and a permanent peace treaty has never been signed . Neither side has ever won a victory in the battle .
 Small-scale fighting between South and North Korea has occasionally taken place since the war .
 In the 1970's and 1980's, representatives of the two states held discussions from time to time about reunifying Korea . Representatives from both countries held discussions about reuniting Korea .
 South and North Korea signed an agreement not to use force against each other in 1991 . In 1991, the two countries signed a deal to avoid use of force .
 In 2000, the leaders of North and South Korea met for the first time since Korea was divided . The leaders of the two Koreas met in 2000 . North Korea is now the most divided country in the world .
 The Constitution calls for the election of national government leaders by the people . The constitution calls for a national government leader to be elected by people .
 President of South Korea is both head of state and head of government . He is also the head of the government . South Korea's president is the country's only democratically elected president .
 The president appoints a prime minister, who carries out the operations of the government . The prime minister is responsible for the country's operations .
 President appoints 15 to 30 State Council members, who head government departments . State Councils are made up of 15-30 members .
 The North's flag and coat of arms have ared star that represents Communism . The North has been ruled out of Communism by the Communist Party . North has a flag that represents communism .
 Rice and an electric power plant on the coat of arms stand for the importance of agriculture and industry to the North . Rice and a power plant stand for an important agricultural and industry in North .
 The country also has five cities, Inchon, Kwangju, Pusan, Taegu, and Taejon, that have the same status as provinces . Five cities have the status of provinces and have the right to be provinces .
 Each province is divided into two kinds of government units—cities and counties . Each province has two kind of local government units, cities and counties, each province has a different kind of government .
 For many years, the president of South Korea appointed most local leaders . South Korea's president has appointed most of the country's local leaders in recent years .
 In 1995, for the first time since the 1960s, elections were held for provincial governors, city mayors, and other city and county officials . Elections were held in 1995 for first time in 25 years .
 Since the 1980's, political parties in South Korea have frequently changed and reorganized . South Korea's political parties have frequently been reorganized since the 1980s .
 The Supreme Court is South Korea’s highest court . It consists of a chief justice and up to 13 other justices .
 The president appoints the chief justice with the approval of the National Assembly . The National Assembly also approves the chief justices .
 South Korea has a Constitution Court that rules on such questions as the constitutionality of laws . South Korea's Constitution Court is a constitutional court that rules upon such questions .
 Other courts include appeals courts, district courts, and family courts . Other courts are family courts, appeals courts and district courts .
 Manufacturing—cement, chemicals, iron and steel, machinery, metals, processed foods, textiles. Manufacturing . Manufacturing . manufacturing .
 This ancient Asian symbol represents the balance in the universe between opposites, such as night and day, and life and death . The symbol is a symbol of the balance between the universe and opposites .
 The Sea of Japan, known to Koreans as the East Sea, lies to the east and the Yellow Sea to the west . The sea is also known as the Red Sea and the Sea of China .
 Agricu/ture: Apples, barley, Chinese cabbage, melons, onions, potatoes, rice, soybeans, sweet potatoes .
 Manuftacturing—automobiles, chemicals, clothing, computer equipment, iron and steel, machinery, plywood, processed foods, rubber tires, ships, shoes, television sets .
 The armies of both South and North political units include cities, counties, towns, villages, Korea are among the world's largest . Korea is one of the world’s largest .
 South Korea has a navy of about 60,000 and an air force of about 50,000 . South Korea also has a people's assembly that directs the local government .
 About 35 million people are —_ laws, chooses all candidates for elections, and approves members of the civilian defense corps . The United States is the world's largest state of origin .
 North Korea has a number of other political parties . The North Korean Constitution gives North Korea a constitution . North Korea also has a constitution that gives the right to a party .
 The Central Court is North Korea's highest rights as freedom of the press, religion, and speech . North Korea is the country's highest court, the Central Court . The court is the highest court in North Korea .
 Communists maintain strict control over all aspects courts in North Korea . Courts include provincial courts and peoof life to ensure their dominance of the country .
 The chairman of the National Armed forces of North Korea consist of a1 million members . He is considered the head of state member army, an air force of about 85,000 members . North Korea's most powerful official .
 People’s Committee is the most powerful policymaking in the army reserve and about 65,000 in the naval rebody . About 600,000 people serve People's Committee .
 These officials are high-ranking members of the __ tia forces . About 4 million people are members of local miliasts .
 North Korea's legislature, called the Supreme Peoples, must serve 5 to 8 years . Members of the army must serve between 5 and 8 years in North Korea .
 The air force requires 3 to 4 years of Assembly, elects the chairman of the National Defense service, and the navy requires 5 to 10 years . Air force requires three to four years Assembly, and navy requires five to ten years .
 Women join Commission and the members of the Central People’s the armed forces on a volunteer basis . Women are allowed to join the Commission and members of armed forces .
 Powsettled in what is now Korea by at least 30,000 years ago . But the legislature has little to do with powsettling in the region .
 It meets only one or two weeks a year and functions only once or twice a year . They came from regions to the north and northwest .
 They may have come from the sponsible for carrying out government policies . They may be from the sponsors responsible for carrying on government policies.
 It is north about 5,000 years ago. headed by a premier, who is appointed by the Supreme Population . headed by the premier, appointed by a governor .
 Seoul is also the largest heads of government ministries and commissions in the South Korean city . Seoul, the capital, is also home to a number of government departments and commissions .
 It has more than 10 million people appointed by the Central People’s Committee .
 Four Special Cities—Kaesong, Najin Sonbong, Nampo, make up almost the entire population of Korea . Koreans four Special Cities make up about 80% of Korean population .
 South Korea's 1990 census for largest cittes, 1975 census for all other places . South Korea is the largest country in South Korea .
 Scholars classify it in the same language family as Japanese, but Korean is unlike any other language . Scholars classify the language as one of the Korean languages .
 It was developed by scholars at the court of King Sejong in the 1440's .
 South Koreans use some Chinese symbols in addition to han gul in their writing . South Koreans also use other Chinese symbols .
 Korea was an agricultural society built on strong family ties . Before the 1900's, Korea was a farming society built up by strong family relations .
 The oldest male served as head of the family, and all people were expected to obey their elders without question . All people in the family were expected not to question their elders .
 Japan seized control of Korea in 1910 . This way of life changed quickly after it was taken over by Japan .
 The Japanese brought industry to Korean cities and took much farmland away from farmers . The Japanese took over farmland from farmers in South Korea .
 The old way of life in Korea changed even more after Korea's division in the 1940's . The Korean people still live in Korea .
 In the North, the Communists took steps to make the country an industrial society . The Communist Party took steps in the North to make it an industrialized society . In the 1980s, the Communist Party tried to take over the Soviet Union .
 Following Communist ideas, they also tried to weaken the importance of the family, they said . The family is the most important family in the world .
 In the South, economic and political ties with Western nations brought South Koreans under the influence of Western customs . South Koreans are now more likely to be influenced by Western customs.
 Changes in both North and South Korea since the 1950's have led to a rapid increase in the proportion of city dwellers .
 South Koreans are attracted to cities because of the opportunities there . South Koreans move to cities in search of opportunities in order to stay in cities .
 The cities have colleges and universities, better health-care facilities, and a variety of entertainment . The cities also have better health care facilities and entertainment .
 South Korea’s housing styles include apartment buildings and traditional-style houses . Many high-rise apartment buildings have been built in Seoul and other large cities .
 Many apartment buildings rise in Pyongyang, North Koreas capital, far /eft . A traditionalstyle house in a South Korean suburb has a tile roof .
 Many people have been forced to live in distant suburbs . But it has been difficult to meet the rapidly rising need for housing . Many people are living in remote areas of the country .
 The rise in population has strained such public services as water, sewerage, and transportation . The rise of population has also strained services such as water and sewerage .
 As South Koreans become more prosperous, the number of automobiles continues to increase . The number of cars in South Korea continues to rise .
 Traffic jams are frequent, and major cities suffer from a severe pollution problem . Major cities have a severe air pollution problem, with traffic jams and pollution .
 The majority of Koreans live in one or two-room apartments built after Korea’s division .
 Pyongyang is North Korea’s most modern city, with skyscrapers, broad boulevards, cultural centers, and sports stadiums . Pyongyang is the capital of North Korea, North Korea .
 Many South Koreans, including those in rural areas, live in houses made of bricks or concrete blocks, with roofs of cement tiles and slate .
 Many houses are two or three stories, though such houses are less common in rural areas than in the cities . Many of the homes are two and three stories .
 Most houses have ondo/-floors of thick stone slabs covered by oiled papers or mats . Most houses are covered in thick stone floors covered in mats or oiled mats .
 Channel channels under floors carried hot air from the kitchen or an indoor fireplace to heat rooms . Traditionally, channels under the floors carried air from kitchen or indoor fireplace .
 In many homes today, pipes carry heated water under the floors to provide heat . Many homes today use heated water to heat up their floors .
 The South Korean government maintains a campaign to improve roads, irrigation, and living conditions in rural areas . The campaign includes improvements to roads and irrigation, living conditions, and infrastructure .
 Communists in the North built many apartments on co-lective farms in rural areas . Communists in North Korea built many apartment apartments in the countryside .
 All North Korean farmers work on such farms, which are operated cooperatively by a large group of farmers . North Korea is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Most farming is done with modern machinery, and virtually all homes have electric power . Most farming operations are done by modern machinery and electricity .
 Many people wear traditional clothing for holidays and special occasions . However, many people wear it for special occasions, such as special occasions.
 Traditional clothing for women consists of a long, full skirt and a tight-fitting jacket . Traditional clothes for women are a long skirt and tight-fitted jacket .
 Other common foods include barley; fish; such fruits as apples, peaches, pears, melons, and melons; and such vegetables as beans, potatoes and sweet potatoes .
 One of the most popular dishes other than rice is kimchi, a highly spiced mixture of Chinese cabbage, white radishes, and several other vegetables .
 Adults drink soju, a distilled alcoholic beverage usually made from grain, as well as chongju, known in the West as sake or rice wine . Adults drink the distilled alcoholic beverages, usually made of grain, or soju .
 In the rural areas, home-brewed drink known as makkol/i, made from rice, has also been popular .
 Television and radio broadcasts of local and national athletic meets attract a wide audience . TV and radio coverage of sports events is broadcast on television and radio .
 In North Korea, the government operates gymnasiums and promotes participation in organized sports programs . North Korea is known for its organized sport programs .
 South Korean cities and towns have many theaters for motion pictures, plays, and concerts . South Korea has many theaters in South Korea .
 In North Korea, most forms of entertainment are supported and controlled by the state . North Korea is a stateless stateless country .
 Drama groups travel throughout the country to perform for workers in rural areas . Drama groups perform for the poor in rural communities .
 Both North and South Koreans enjoy reading novels, short stories, and poems . Both Koreas enjoy reading each other's novels and short stories . The North and the South enjoy reading short stories and short fiction .
 North Korea discourages the practice of religion. complete freedom of religion . North Korea encourages religious freedom in North Korea .
 The government discourages religion because it conflicts with the teachings of Communism . But religion is banned in Russia .
 Confucianism traditionally has been the most widely followed set of beliefs in Korea . It is more a philosophy than a religion, more than a philosophy . Confucanism is a philosophy rather than religion .
 Most South Koreans believe in at least some of the teachings of Confucianism . Today, most South Koreans no matter what religion they follow, believe in some of their teachings .
 Most families in the South follow the Confucian practice of honoring their ancestors in special ceremonies . For example, most families in South follow Confucilian practice of honoring their ancestors .
 About 20 percent of South Koreans are Buddhists, about 18 percent are Protestants, and about 3 percent are Roman Catholics . About 3 percent of those are Roman Catholic .
 South Korean musicians are playing copies of instruments used hundreds of years ago . They are members of the National Classical Music Institute in Seoul .
 Since the late 1940's, South and North Korea have made special efforts to improve their educaKorea terrain map tional systems .
 South Korean law requires that all children complete elementary school, which in that country goes through grade 6 . In that country, grade 6 is required for all children to complete grade 6 in South Korea .
 The vast majority of children aged 12 to 17 attend secondary school . Nevertheless, the majority of those aged 12-17 are still attending secondary school.
 Technical training prepares students for industrial jobs, beLand region boundary . Pe gins in the middle schools and continues through all Deg f\ Su “eB sani tadee eencnaak higher levels of education .
 More than 1 million students attend universities, coe Ry UE sey (UE) aes colleges, and junior colleges in South Korea .
 North Korea requires children to attend school for 11.5 years, including a year of preschool . North Korea has a minimum of 11 years of education, including preschool .
 Those who continue attend a two-year high ti ee, ie Ps fea ly school, or a three© ere 2 7 SF Rg KOre or a four-year technical school that provides training for engineering and scientific jobs .
 Students who finish high school or technical school may go to college immediately . Students who graduate from technical school or high school can go immediately to college . Students at technical school can also attend college immediately.
 Vocational school graduates must complete a year of special study before they enter college . Vocational high school students must complete the year before entering college . Students must also take part in special study to prepare for college .
 Early Korean art developed under the influence of both Chinese art and the teachings of Buddhism and Confucianism .
 i aad hae most widely practiced art forms included music, poetry, pottery, sculpture, and painting . The i aaad haa haa was the world's most popular form of art .
 In South Korea, artists work with tradifone iand) LUE 1 SapungReservoir 0.0.0 .
 Western art has influenced all forms of South Korean art . BT tional themes and with various forms of Western art have influenced all of the South Korean .
 More than 3,000 islands, which are part of Korea, lie off the southern and western coasts of the peninsula . The islands are located off the south and west coasts of South Korea .
 East Sea, also called the Sea of Japan, lies east of the peninsula . The East Sea is also known as the East Sea .
 The Yellow Sea lies west of Korea, and the Korea Strait lies to the south . The Korea Strait is also located in the Yellow Sea .
 The Northwestern Plain stretches along the entire western coast of North Korea . North Korea is located on the Northwestern Plain .
 The Northwestern Plain has most of North Korea's farmland and its major industrial area, including Pyongyang . It is also home to most of the North Korean capital, Pyongyang .
 The Northern Mountains region, east of the Northwestern Plain, covers almost all of central North Korea . It is the most mountainous region in the country .
 These mountains are an important source of valuable minerals and forest products . The mountains are important sources of valuable mineral and forest resources .
 Almost a fourth of North Korea's people live in the Northern Mountains region . Almost a fifth of the North Korean population lives in the region .
 The Eastern Coastal Lowland covers almost all of North Korea’s east coast . It is a lowland region covering almost all the east coast of the Korean peninsula .
 The strip of land between the Northern Mountains region and the East Sea consists of a series of narrow plains separated by low hills .
 The plains of the Eastern Coastal Lowland provide much farmland, and the sea makes fishing important in the region . The plains are also home to much farmland .
 Like many of Korea's coastal areas, it consists of rolling hills and plains that make fertile farmland . live in this small but heavily populated region of Korea .
 The Central Mountains region extends throughout most of central and eastern South Korea . The region extends into a small part of southern North Korea .
 Forested mountains cover most of the region, including much of the seacoast . The region is home to many of the world's most beautiful beaches .
 River valleys, hillsides, and some land along the coast are used for farming . River valleys and hillsides are used to farming .
 More than a fourth of South Korean people live in the Central Mountains region . The region is home to more than a quarter of the country's population .
 This important agricultural region consists of a series of plains separated by low hills . The region is known for its plains and hills, but is also known as a region of fertile plains .
 Pusan, South Korea's second largest city and an important industrial center, is located in the region . The region is also known as a region of Korea's largest cities .
 This rugged land is an important source of minerals and forest products . The rugged land in the region is important for minerals, forest products and minerals .
 It flows through the Southern Plain from mountains in the north to the Korea Strait . The Korea Strait is the source of much of the Korean Ocean .
 Almost a fourth of the South Korean people live in the Southern Plain region . Almost a fifth of the country's people live there .
 The Southwestern Plain extends along almost the entire western coast of South Korea . It is located in almost every part of the country's western coast .
 Like much of the rest of coastal Korea, this region consists of rolling hills and plains . The region is a farming center and is known for its farming .
 Han River flows through the region from mountains in the east to the Yellow Sea . The Han River is one of the main rivers in China .
 The South's major industrial area is located around Seoul, which is the South’s largest city .
 Cheju Island, about 50 miles south of the peninsula, is the largest island in South Korea . Cheju is located about half a mile from the peninsula .
 South Korea's highest mountain, Halla-san, rises 6,398 feet on Cheju Island . Halla San, the highest mountain in South Korea, is located in the country's eastern region .
 Seasonal winds called monsoons affect Korea's weather throughout the year . The Korean weather is affected by monsoon winds, known as monsoon rains .
 A monsoon blows in from the south and southeast during the summer, bringing hot, humid weather . The monsoon is a powerful, humid, unpredictable weather system .
 A cold, dry monsoon blows in from the north and northwest during the winter, bringing cold weather . The cold monsoon winds in from north and west, bringing the cold weather in some areas .
 Korea's massive mountains protect the peninsula's east coast from the winter monsoon . South Korea's mountains are protected by the mountains .
 The east coast of Korea generally has warmer winters than does the rest of Korea . As a result, the east coast generally has a warmer winter than does rest of the country .
 Average January temperatures range from about 35 °F to about —5 °F in parts of the Northern Mountains region . January average January temperatures in Korea range from 35°F to —5°F .
 Precipitation averages from 30 to 60 inches a year in most of North Korea . Precipitations in North Korea can reach 30-60 inches in a year .
 Heavy rainfall from June through August accounts for about half of Korea’s yearly precipitation . Rainfall from June-August rainfall accounts for half of the country's yearly rainfall .
 In most years, one or two typhoons hit the peninsula during July and August . Most of the time, one typhoon hits the peninsula in the months of August .
 After the Korean War ended in 1953, the economies of South and North Korea grew rapidly . North and South Korea's economies grew rapidly in the 1950s .
 Before the war, the economies of both parts of Korea had depended chiefly on agriculture . North Korea had some heavy industry and South Korea had light industry . South Korea has some light industry, but North Korea has little heavy industry .
 After the war, industrial production, especially manufacturing, gained much importance in both economies . Industrial production became more important after the war .
 Service activities as communication, government, trade, and transportation grew in importance, particularly in South Korea . In addition, such service activities as communications, government and trade, grew in popularity .
 The value of goods and services produced each year in South Korea totals about $485 billion . South Korea is the world's largest economy and has the largest GDP in the world .
 Service industries account for about 51 percent of South Korea's GNP . Industrial production accounts for about 43 percent of the GNP, which is based on service industries .
 Agriculture employs 12 percent of all South Korean workers, industry 28 percent, and service activities about 60 percent . Agriculture employs about 12 percent, industry employs about 28 percent . South Korea's agriculture sector employs about 80 percent of its workers .
 Service industries are economic activities that provide services, rather than produce goods . Service industries provide services rather than production of goods . Services are provided by service industries rather than manufacturing .
 Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants make up the main service industry group of South Korea .
 This service industry group benefits heavily from tourist activities, and it employs more than 25 percent of all workers . The tourism industry group is based on tourism .
 Government services and such community, social, and personal services as education and health care also employ many people .
 Other service industry groups are becoming increasingly important in South Korea . South Korea is one of the world's largest economies .
 They include finance, insurance, and real estate; transportation, communication, and utilities . They include real estate, finance and real-estate; transportation and communication .
 Manufacturing accounts for about 60 percent of the South's industrial production . Manufacturing is a key part of the state's economy .
 The manufacture of clothing, shoes, and textiles employs more of the people of South Korea than does any other industry .
 After the Korean War, South Korea developed heavy industry . It now ranks as a major producer of chemicals, fertilizers, iron and steel, machinery, and ships .
 In the 1970's and 1980's, South Korea expanded its production of automobiles, computer equipment and parts, electric appliances, optical goods, and television sets .
 Other manufactured products include paper, plywood, porcelain, and rubber tires . Rubber tires, paper and plywood are among the products made from paper .
 South Korea's change from an agricultural economy to a modern industrial economy spurred a boom in construction . Construction boom in South Korea has seen construction boom in recent years .
 Manufacturing has helped make South Korea one of the world's fastest-growing economies . Laffont, Sygma Manufacturing has made South Korea's manufacturing industry one of its fastest growing countries .
 The production of clothing, shoes, and textiles provides jobs for many people in Seoul . highways, and water and sewerage systems have been built throughout the nation .
 Construction accounts for 23 percent of industrial production, mining accounts for about 2 percent . Mining accounts for 2 percent of the industrial sector .
 South Korean farms also produce apples, barley, Chinese cabbage, melons, onions, potatoes, soybeans, sweet potatoes, and hogs .
 The South's major agricultural areas lie along the western and southern coasts . The South is home to the largest agricultural areas in the country .
 A large orange crop is harvested on Cheju Island, off the southern coast of South Korea . The orange crop was harvested on the island's southern coast .
 South Korea's chief trading partners are China, Japan, and the U.S. South Korea is one of the world's largest economies .
 The South's main exports include automobiles, clothing, electrical equipment, electronics, fish, ships, shoes, steel, and textiles . The South is one of the world's largest exporters .
 Its main imports include chemicals, crude oil and other industrial raw materials, and machinery . The country's main exports include chemicals and crude oil .
 Coal-, gas-, and petroleum-burning plants together provide about 60 percent of South Korea’s electric power . Coal-to-coalt-gas-topped plants provide about 50 percent of the country's electricity supply .
 South Korea has an excellent government-owned railroad system and a highway network that includes expressways between the principal cities . South Korea also has a government-run railroad system .
 South Korea has an average of about 1 automobile for every 6 people, and most city dwellers own a car . South Korea is home to about 1 car per person in the country .
 Korean Air and Asiana Airlines provide international flights and service between major South Korean cities . Korean Air is one of two privately owned airlines .
 Private and government-owned radio and television networks broadcast throughout South Korea . South Korea is one of the world's most populous countries .
 South Korea has an average of about 1 TV set for every 3 people and 1 radio per person . South Korea is home to about 1 television set per person and about 1 radio each person .
 Choson Ilbo, Dong-A IIbo, Hankook Ilbo and Joong-ang I/bo are all privately owned, published in Seoul, and sold throughout the country .
 North Korea releases little information about its economy, and so the statistics are estimates . The statistics are based on the fact that North Korea has released little information on its economy .
 Agriculture employs about 30 percent of North Korea’s workers, industry and service activities . North Korea is home to about 40 percent of its workers, according to the UN .
 North Korea was the chief industrial region of the peninsula until 1950 . Until 1950, it was the main industrial region on the peninsula .
 North Korea has rivers suitable for producing electric power, as well as some of the richest mineral deposits in eastern Asia . North Korea also has rivers and mineral deposits suitable for power production .
 Community, government, and personal services form North Korea's leading service industry group . North Korea is leading country in the world's most populous country .
 This group includes such activities as education, health care, government, and the military .
 The North's chief manufactured products are cement, chemicals, iron and steel, machinery, metals, processed foods, and textiles . The North is home to the world's largest manufacturing industry .
 The government owns nearly all North Korean factories, and tightly controls all industry . North Korea tightly controls industry .
 North Korean mines yield coal, graphite, iron ore, lead, magnesium, phosphates, salt, silver, tungsten, and zinc . North Korea mines also yield coal and graphite .
 Workers on farms receive a share of the products and some cash payment . Workers on these farms receive some cash and share of products .
 A few farms, called state farms, are owned and managed completely by the government . State farms are managed by the state government . A few state farms are owned by state farms .
 North Korea's chief trading partners are China, Japan, Russia and the other former republics of the Soviet Union . North Korea is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 North Korea's leading exports are mined products, chiefly iron ore, lead, tungsten, and zinc . North Korea is the world's only major trading partner in North Korea .
 Its major imports are grain, machinery, petroleum, and transportation equipment . The country's major imports include grain and machinery .
 Three-fourths of North Korea's energy is produced by coal-burning plants . North Korea is the world's most populous country . About three-fifths of its energy is made from coal .
 The rest of the North's energy comes from petroleum-burning plants and water power . The North's rest of its energy is from water power and other sources .
 Railroads carry most of North Korea’s long-distance freight and passenger traffic . Railroads are used in most of the country's long-range freight, passenger travel .
 Almost all cars are government-owned and are intended for official business use . Almost all government cars are Government-owned .
 The government controls all broadcasting, publishing, and other means of communication in North Korea . North Korea controls all communications in the country .
 It runs the country’s radio and TV networks and its broadcasting stations in the provinces . The government is responsible for radio and television .
 North Korea has an average of about 1 radio for every 6 people and 1 television set for every 20 people . North Korea is home to about 1 TV set per person and 1 radio per person .
 Scientists have found evidence that people lived in the southwestern part of the Korean Peninsula about 30,000 years ago . People lived in southwest of the peninsula around the time .
 In 2333 B.C, according to tradition, the first Korean state developed along the Taedong River, near presentday Pyongyang . The first state of Korea is believed to have been formed by the first Koreans in 2333 BC.
 Other territory, called Nangnang in Korean and Lelang in Chinese, remained under Chinese control . The other territory, known as Nangtang in Korea and Niangnang, is under Korean control .
 Several Korean tribes united and formed the state of Koguryo in the northeastern part of the peninsula . During the last century B.C., several Korean tribes unified and formed a state .
 Two other Korean states -- Paekche in the southwest and Silla in the southeast -- were formed at about the same time . Two other Koreas were formed around the time of the Korean peninsula .
 In 313, Koguryo conquered Nangnang and took control of the northern half of Korea . In 314, Kuryo took over the northern part of Korea and took over . Kuryuryo was the first to take control of Korea in 313 .
 Buddhism became the chief religion of the Three Kingdoms in the 300's and 400's . Buddhism, which the Koreans had learned about from the Chinese, became the main religion . Buddhism was the religion of Korea's Three Kingdoms .
 In the 500’s and 600's, wars raged among the Three Kingdoms for control of Korea . The Korean peninsula is now known as Korea .
 Silla conquered Paekche and Koguryo in the 660's and took control of most of the peninsula . With the help of the Chinese Tang dynasty, Silla took over most of peninsula in 660's .
 Confucianism, introduced from China, became a strong influence on Korean thought and behavior . Confucanism was introduced to Korea in 18th century .
 In the 800's, Silla broke apart as the kingdom lost control over former Koguryo and Paekche territories to rebel leaders . Silla lost control of territories to rebels .
 The government of Koryo built schools and encouraged the development of printing to make more books available . The government built schools to encourage printing .
 Mongol tribes from the north repeatedly attacked Koryo from the early 1230's until they conquered it in 1259 . Mongol tribes repeatedly attacked the country from the beginning of the 1260's .
 Koryo regained its freedom in 1368 when the Ming dynasty rose to power in China . The country regained its independence in the 1368-1368 period .
 Two groups, one allied with the Mongols, the other with the Ming dynasty, fought for control of Koryo . Two groups were allied with each other, one with the Mongols .
 General Yi became king of Koryo in 1392 and renamed the country Choson . General Yi was the first general to become a ruler of the country . He ruled the country until 1392 .
 King Sejong’s court scholars created the Korean alphabet . Japanese forces invaded Korea but were driven out . Manchu armies invaded Korea and forced it to acknowledge the Manchu as lords .
 Yi ended the governments official support of Buddhism, which had existed since the 700’s . Yi ended government support for Buddhism, a form of Buddhism that had existed in the 700's .
 Buddhism declined in importance and did not become popular in Korea again until the 1900's . Buddhism declined to become popular again in Korea in the early 1900s .
 Yi and the rulers who followed him reunited Korea, reorganized the government, and promoted the arts . Yi and his rulers reorganized Korea's government and reorganized its government . Yi's reign was one of the most successful in Korea's history .
 In the 1400's, they regained lost territory and established the present northern boundaries of the country . In the 14th century, they re-established their northern borders .
 During the 1500's, government officials and wealthy landowners began to struggle for political power . But during the 1500s, wealthy landowners struggled for power .
 Japanese forces invaded Korea in the 1590's but were driven out with the assistance of Chinese forces . The Japanese invasion was driven out of Korea with the help of China .
 The Manchus forced Koreans to submit tributes, but members of the Yi family continued as kings . The Yi family of Korea continued to be kings .
 In the 1600's, Korea's rulers closed the country to all foreigners except Chinese and Japanese . In the 16th century, Korea closed the doors to foreigners except China and Japan .
 Korean authorities persecuted missionaries and killed thousands of Koreans who had become Catholics . Thousands of Koreans were killed by Korean authorities after becoming Catholics .
 U.S., Russia, Russia, and several European nations signed commercial treaties with Korea . Soon thereafter, the United States, Russia and several other countries signed commercial agreements .
 Japan defeated China in the Chinese-Japanese War of 1894-1895 . Japanss influence in Korea became stronger than China's influence .
 Japan's victory over Russia in the Russo-Japanese War forced Russia to recognize Japan's superior influence in Korea . Russia recognized Japan's superiority in Korea as a result of the war .
 The Japanese governed Korea as a colony to benefit their own interests . The Japanese ruled Korea out of the Korean peninsula .
 During the 1930's, the Japanese built heavy industries in Korea to supply Japan with chemicals, iron and steel, machinery, and other goods . The Japanese built factories in Korea in the 1930s to supply them with goods .
 In the 1940's, the Japanese forced the Koreans to take Japanese-style names, and they banned the use of the Korean language .
 Some Korean women were forced to work as prostitutes for the Japanese armed forces . Some were forced into prostitution for the sake of the Japanese forces .
 Korea remained under Japanese control until 1945, when Japan was defeated in World War I. Korea . Korea was under Japanese rule until 1945 .
 After Japan's defeat, U.S. troops occupied the southern half of Korea . Soviet forces occupied the northern half of the country .
 The United States and the Soviet Union tried to develop a plan for reuniting Korea . The U.S. and Soviet Union were involved in the effort .
 The U.S. submitted the problem to the United Nations in 1947 . They failed, and the United States submitted the issue to the U.N. They failed .
 The United Nations wanted to supervise elections to choose one government for Korea . The U.N. wanted to oversee the elections, which were held in South Korea .
 The Soviet Union refused to allow UN representatives into the North . The North was occupied by the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 UN representatives supervised an election of representatives to a National Assembly in 1948 . In the South, in 1948, the UN supervised a vote in the South's National Assembly . UN representatives also supervised elections in 1948 in South Africa .
 In July 1948, the Assembly elected Syngman Rhee president of the Republic of Korea . The Republic was formed on August 15, 1948, after the election of Rhee .
 In northern Korea, the Communists announced formation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on September 9 . Both governments claimed to represent all of Korea .
 In December 1948, the Soviet Union announced that all its troops had left North Korea . The Soviet Union said in December 1948 it had left the Korean peninsula .
 The United States withdrew its last troops from South Korea in mid-1949 . The U.S. withdrew its final troops from the Korean Peninsula in the 1950s .
 North Korean troops invaded the South in June 1950, and the Korean War began . North Korea invaded the S. Korean Peninsula in 1950 .
 The war involved not only the two Koreas, but also the most powerful Communist and nonCommunist nations . The war was fought in Korea between the Koreas and other nations .
 Members of the National Assembly had become increasingly critical of Rhee, he said . He feared the legislators would not reelect him . But he said he feared they would not .
 He pushed through a constitutional amendment that turned over election of the president to the people . The amendment was passed through the Assembly in 2007 .
 Rhee again had the Constitution amended to permit him to serve more than two terms . In 1955, Rhee had to amend the Constitution to allow him to run for more terms . Rhee was re-elected to office in 1955 .
 An increasing number of South Koreans strongly opposed Rhee’s undemocratic methods for keeping control of the government . But an increasing number oppose the methods of keeping control in government .
 He was unopposed because his opponent died one month before the election . His opponent died a month before his election . He is unoppopposed .
 In March and April, students led widespread demonstrations against the government .
 Rhee saw that he was rapidly losing political and military support, and he resigned in April . He resigned from the Korean government in 2007 .
 South Korea's economic difficulties continued . The new government weakened as rival groups fought for political power . But the new government was weakened as rivals fought for power .
 In May 1961, a group of military officers led by General Park Chung Hee overthrew the government . The government was overthrown by the military in May 1961 .
 His government concentrated on developing industries and increasing foreign trade . His government was known for its emphasis on developing foreign trade and developing new industries .
 In 1972, Park forced through a new constitution that gave him almost unlimited powers . Park was elected president of South Korea in 1972 . Park is now president of Korea's largest state .
 It also provided that the president might serve an unlimited number of terms . The president could serve as president of the U.S. for unlimited terms .
 Park was reelected by the country’s electoral college in a special election held that year . Park was elected by the electoral college, whose members had been chosen by his supporters .
 Park frequently used his power to suppress opposition to his government . Park often used his powers to silence opposition to the government .
 Freedom of speech and of the press was limited, and many South Koreans who opposed Park were jailed were jailed . Park was a leader of the South Korean government .
 During the Korean War, United States troops had fought on the side of South Korea . The U.S. had fought for South Korea during the war .
 Thousands of U.S. troops were stationed in South Korea after the war .
 The U.S. government then said it would postpone further withdrawals until relations between North and South Korea improved . But the United States government then decided to postpone further withdrawal .
 President Ronald Reagan announced in 1981 that no more U.S. troops would be withdrawn from the United States . In 1981, President Reagan announced that no . more United States troops would . be withdrawn .
 Prime Minister Choi Kyu Hah was elected president by the electoral college in December .
 Chois government ended some of the restrictions on freedom of expression that Park had imposed . Chois had imposed some restrictions on free speech . Park's government ended the restrictions .
 The government has delayed a promised constitutional revision that would allow the people to elect the president directly . But the government has also delayed a constitutional revision .
 In May 1980, military leaders declared martial law and reestablished restrictions on freedom of expression . The military re-imposed restrictions on freedoms of expression in the 1980s .
 Choi remained president, but the military, led by Lieutenant General Chun Doo Hwan, dominated the government . Choi was succeeded by the military as president . Choi's government was dominated by the army .
 Violent clashes broke out between demonstrators and the military in Kwangju, South Korea . Violent clashes break out between protesters and military in the city of Kwangjju .
 Hundreds of demonstrators were killed in what came to be known as the Kwangju Massacre . Hundreds of protesters were killed during the massacre .
 In August 1980, Choi resigned and the electoral college elected Chun Chun president . Choi resigned in August 1980 . Chun was elected president of the United States .
 Chun’s government stabilized prices and increased exports, but scandals involving his relatives lessened its popularity . The scandals involving those of his relatives have lessened the popularity of the government .
 Many students demonstrated against Chun and demanded a more democratic constitution . Chun Chun was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 Chun pledged to allow direct election of the president by the people rather than by the electoral college in 1987 . A new constitution was created in 1987 to allow the president to be directly elected by the electorate .
 In October 1987, a new democratic constitution was adopted by a referendum of all the voters . The constitution was followed by a new constitution in October 1987 .
 Students have demonstrated in large numbers demanding correction of many social problems . Since its adoption, students have demonstrated against the school system .
 Laborers have staged frequent strikes for higher wages and better working conditions . Laborers are striking for better conditions and higher wages .
 The political and economic turmoil have interfered with South Korea's economic growth . South Korea has been hit by political turmoil and economic instability .
 Kim I]. Sung became North Korea’s leader when the government was established in 1948 . Kim I] Sung was the leader when North Korea was established .
 In 1946, when North Korea was still under Soviet occupation, the Communist government took farmland from wealthy landowners and gave it to poor farmers . North Korea is still under the Soviet occupation .
 From 1953 to 1956, Kim's government organized all farmland into collective farms . Kim was in charge of all farmland in North Korea until 1956 .
 In 1954, it announced the first of a series of plans for economic development, all emphasizing heavy industry . The first of the series of economic plans was for heavy industry in 1954 .
 After the Korean War ended in 1953, the two sides remained hostile and suspicious of each other . After the war ended, the North Korea-South Korea relationship remained hostile .
 In 1967, North Korean forces began making attacks in the demilitarized zone between the North and the South and into South Korea . North Korea began attacking the area in 1967 .
 In 1971, representatives of the South and the North began formal reunification discussions for the first time since the Korean War . Representatives of the S. and North met in 1971 .
 North Korea refused to participate after its request to be named co-host was denied . North Korea's request to participate in the Olympics was denied by the South Korean government .
 North and South Korea joined the UN as separate states in 1991 . In 1991, the two governments agreed to accept each other's existence . The two countries now live in separate countries .
 In 1991, talks resulted in several agreements, including a pact in which the Koreas agreed not to use force against each other . Also in 1991, the two Koreas also agreed to an agreement in which they would not use force .
 As part of the pact, the two governments also agreed to increase trade and communication between them . The pact also includes increased trade between the two countries .
 Another accord prohibited North and South Korea from using or possessing nuclear weapons . The accord also prohibits North and S. Korea from having nuclear arms .
 In 2000, for the first time since Korea was divided, the leaders of North and South Korea met face-to-face to discuss relations . The leaders of both Koreas met in 2000 to discuss their relations . North Korea's president and South Korean president visited North Korea in 2000 .
 Kim Dae Jung was elected president of South Korea in 1997 . He is a strong advocate of democracy . He was elected to office in 1997.
 He was the first politician from an opposition party to hold South Korea’s presidency . He was a member of the opposition party that does not have a majority of seats in parliament .
 The leaders of North and South Korea met in 2000 for the first time since Korea was divided . North Korea's leaders met with South Korea's President Kim Jong-won in 2000 .
 Asia experienced severe economic problems in the late 1990's . North Korea's leader, Kim Jong Il, greeted South Korea’s president, Kim Dae Jung, right .
 The value of South Korea’s currency fell, and its stock market plunged . South Korea'‘s currency plunged, and the value of the country's stock market also fell .
 A crisis threatened to develop in 1994, when North Korea refused to allow international inspections of its nuclear sites . North Korea's nuclear sites were not inspected by international inspectors .
 North Korea signed a broad agreement with the United States promising to halt all nuclear weaponsrelated activities in return for energy assistance . But North Korea has also agreed to halt nuclear weapons activities in exchange for energy aid .
 North Korea began experiencing severe food shortages during the mid-1990's . North Korea has been experiencing food shortages since the 1990's .
 Experts estimated that hundreds of thousands of North Koreans starved to death . Hundreds of thousands starved or starved in North Korea . North Korea is estimated to have starved hundreds of millions .
 Donations of food from around the world began arriving during the late 1990's . Donations began arriving in the late 90's . Food was donated to the foundation .
 The head of the National Defense Commission would act as the country’s highest living official . It then decreed that the head of a national defense commission would act . The move was decreed by the government to be the country's highest official .
 Kim Il Sung’s son, Kim Jong II, held this position and thus became North Korea's leader . Kim Jong Jong II became the leader of North Korea after Kim Jong III became the dictator .
 Kim I] Sung Seoul Kim Jong Il Tae kwon do Martial arts Taegu October Yalu River Outline I Government ll. Army Panmunjom Asia .
 The land D The Central Mountains E The Southern Plain A The Northwestern Plain B The Northern Mountains F The Southwestern Plain C The Eastern Coastal G Islands Lowland V Climate Vi.
 Korean War was the first war in which a world organization, the United Nations, played a military role . Korean War first war was first in which the U.N. played a major military role in the war .
 The Korean War was a major challenge for the United Nations, which had been formed only five years earlier . The U.N. was formed in 1950s .
 The Korean War began on June 25, 1950, when troops from Communist-ruled North Korea invaded South Korea .
 The UN called the invasion a violation of international peace and demanded that the Communists withdraw from South Korea . The UN demanded that they withdraw from the communist country .
 The UN asked its member nations to give military aid to South Korea . After the Communists kept fighting, the UN asked for military aid .
 16 UN countries sent troops to help the South Koreans . 41 countries sent military equipment or food and other supplies .
 The United States provided about 90 percent of the troops, military equipment, and supplies that were sent to South Korea . The U.S. provided most troops, equipment and supplies .
 China fought on the side of North Korea, and the Soviet Union gave military equipment to the North Koreans . China fought against North Korea .
 The Korean War ended on July 27, 1953, when the UN and North Korea signed an armistice agreement . North Korea and the UN signed a cease-fire agreement in July 1953 .
 A permanent peace treaty between South Korea and North Korea has never been signed . The Koreas have never been able to sign a peace treaty .
 U.S. military forces remain in South Korea to discourage a resumption of hostilities between the two parts of Korea .
 About a million South Korean civilians were killed, and several million made homeless . Several million were made homeless during the Korean invasion .
 The Japanese gained control of Korea in 1895 and made it part of Japan in 1910 . It was made part of the country in 1910 and is now Japan .
 Allies defeated Japan in World War II . U.S. and Soviet forces moved into Korea in Korea in 1950s .
 After the war, Soviet troops occupied Korea north of the 38th parallel of north latitude . The imaginary line cuts the country about in half .
 UN General Assembly declared that elections should be held throughout Korea to choose one government for the entire country . In 1947, the UN declared that the elections should take place to choose a government for Korea .
 The Soviet Union opposed this idea and would not permit elections in North Korea . North Korea was ruled out of elections by the West .
 On May 10, 1948, the people of South Korea elected a legislature, the National Assembly . The National Assembly is the South Korean parliament . South Korea is one of the largest economies in the world .
 North Korean Communists established the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on September 9 . North Korea was established by North Korea Communists in 1953 .
 Both North and South Korea claimed the entire country, and their troops clashed near the border several times from 1948 to 1950 . Both countries claimed the territory, and the border was disputed by both .
 The United States removed its last troops from Korea in 1949 and indicated early in 1950 that Korea lay outside the main United States defense line in Asia . The U.S. removed its final troops from the Korean Peninsula in 1949 .
 When North Korea invaded South Korea, the North Korean Army had about 135,000 soldiers . The North Korea invasion was the first invasion of the Korean peninsula in decades .
 Many of the soldiers had fought for China and the Soviet Union during World War I. Many of them had fought in China and Soviet Union . The soldiers were killed in the battle .
 The South Korean Army had about 95,000 soldiers, few planes or heavy guns, and no tanks . South Korea had few planes and few tanks, and had few tanks .
 At first, the South Korean Army put up little resistance to the enemy attack . The South Korean army put up . little resistance . The North Korean government has been unable to defend itself .
 U.N. troops from 16 countries fought Communist troops during the Korean War . U.S. troops fought Communist forces during the war .
 Maps show four stages of the Korean War . North Korean invasion June to September 1950 The Korean War began in 1950 . North Korea invaded June 1950 .
 The first map shows the farthest extent of the North Korean invasion—to the Pusan Perimeter in September 1950 . The second map shows how far the North Korea invasion went from September 1950.
 The second map shows the site of the Inchon landing by the United Nations forces . The map was created by the U.N. forces in the 1950s .
 UN troops advance as far north as the Yalu River by October 1950 . UN troops advanced north of the border as far as possible .
 The third map shows the extent of the retreat by the UN forces after China entered the war in October 1950 .
 The fourth map shows the territory held by the two sides when they signed an armistice agreement on July 27, 1953 . Yellow Sea Area occupied by communist forces 1953 . Red-Russian forces occupied the area in 1953 . The area was occupied by Communist forces .
 About 39,000 came from Australia, Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Ethiopia, Ethiopia and France . The Philippines, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey also came in .
 The UN Security Council issued a resolution demanding that the Communists stop fighting and retreat to the 38th parallel . The resolution was issued on the day the war began, the day of the war .
 The Soviet Union, a member of the 11-nation Council, could have vetoed the resolution . It is not clear whether the Soviet Union would have vetoed it .
 Soviet Union was boycotting Council meetings to protest Nationalist China's membership on the Council, and the Soviet delegate November 1950 to January 1951 2 .
 Parailel Yellow Sea was absent when the vote on Korea was taken . UN advance and armistice January 1951 to July 1953 . UN TROOP VACUATIONS .
 North Korea ignored the UN demand, and on June 27 its troops reached the outskirts of Seoul, the South Korean capital . On June 27, the North Korean army crossed the border with South Korea's capital .
 President Harry S Truman and the UN took action to try to halt the Communist advance . That same day, both President Harry and UN tried to take action to stop the advance .
 Truman ordered United States air and naval forces to South Korea . UN asked its members to aid South Korea. Truman ordered U.S. forces to help South Korea and the UN asked for help .
 Congress supported Truman's actions and the UN’s policy, but did not formally declare war against North Korea . Congress supported the UN's policy but not formally declared war .
 On July 1, part of the U.S. Army 24th Infantry Division flew from Japan to Pusan at the southern tip of Korea .
 The next day, these troops began to move into battle positions near Taejon, about 75 miles south of Seoul . The South Korean capital is located in the region .
 Troops from other UN nations began arriving in Korea shortly after the Americans . Troops began arriving shortly after they arrived in Korea .
 On July 8, with the approval of the UN Security Council, Truman named General Douglas MacArthur commander in chief of the U.N. Command . MacArthur was the first president of the United Nations Command in 1945 . He was named by Truman on July 8 .
 Command had authority over all the Allies—South Koreans, Americans, and other UN troops from other UN countries . Command was in charge of South Korea, the U.S. and other Allies .
 MacArthur directed Allied operations from his headquarters in Tokyo, Japan, during the Battle of the World War One .
 Lieutenant General Walton H Walker, head of the United States Eighth Army, became field commander of the Allied ground forces in Korea . On July 13, Lieutenant General Walker became the field commander in Korea.
 Units of the U.S. Army 1st Cavalry Division and 25th Infantry Division landed in Korea on July 19 to aid the outnumbered soldiers of the 24th Division . Units landed in South Korea to help the outnumbered 24th division .
 The United States 1st Marine Provisional Brigade and the 2nd Infantry Division of the Army arrived in South Korea in late July . The U.S. Army and Marine Corps arrived in the country in July .
 The Pusan Perimeter was a battle line in the southeast corner of South Korea . It was formed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 It extended roughly from the city of Pohang on the southeast coast, west around Taegu, and south and southeast nearly to Pusan . It was also located in Taegu and the east of the peninsula .
 The North Koreans lost about 58,000 soldiers and much equipment while advancing to the area . North Korea lost about 60,000 troops and equipment during the advance to the region .
 The rapid growth of American military strength gave General Walker flexibility in the use of his troops . General Walker was able to use his troops in the U.S. military .
 North Korea tried to break through the perimeter by making scattered attacks along it . North Korea has made scattered attacks on the perimeter of the border .
 Walker reacted by using reserves to meet each enemy thrust, keeping his main defense line intact . Walker reacted to each thrust with reserves .
 Overhead, United States planes provided air support and fired at the long enemy supply lines . The U.S. was involved in the battle .
 More American tanks and artillery have arrived at Pusan to strengthen the defense of the perimeter . The U.S. military says more tanks have been deployed to bolster the perimeter of the Korean peninsula .
 North Korea saw that the Allies were gaining military superiority . The North Koreans saw that they had gained military superiority. The Allies were winning military superiority in North Korea .
 They mounted a major attack and succeeded in crossing the Naktong River on August 6 . The North Korean government has been unable to find out what happened .
 United States marines and Army forces counterattacked and prevented a general breakthrough . The U.S. Marines and Army troops counterattack and prevent a major breakthrough .
 The North Koreans advanced to within shelling distance of Taegu, but major losses of troops and equipment forced them to pull back on August 25 . The North Korea pulled back from Taegu after major losses .
 The Allies halted the enemy advance on September 8 . They captured Pohang three days later, but the Allies halted it on September 9 .
 The Inchon landing was a surprise move that changed the course of the war . The landing was the first time the U.S. invaded Korea in 1944 .
 In mid-September 1950, soldiers of the United States X Corps, accompanied by United States marines, sailed from Japan to Inchon, on the northwest coast of South Korea . Soldiers of the U.S. X Corps were accompanied by marines .
 Each boat had to land at high tide because any boat near the shore when the tide dropped would be trapped in mud . Each boat would have to land in high tide to avoid being trapped by mud .
 The troops who landed at Inchon cut off the North Koreans in the Pusan Perimeter area from those north . The troops cut off North Korea in the area from the north of the border .
 X Corps moves toward Seoul, 24 miles (39 kilometers) northeast of Inchon . Commanded by Major General Edward M Almond, the X Corps moved toward Seoul .
 Seoul was captured on September 26 . President Kim Jong-won visited the area near Inchon and Seoul . He and his aides inspected the area after landing .
 General Walker's troops fought their way out of the Pusan Perimeter, inflicting heavy losses on the enemy . Meanwhile, General Walker’s troops suffered heavy losses .
 MacArthur broadcast a demand for surrender, but North Korea rejected it . MacArthur broadcast the demand, but it was rejected by North Korea . North Korea refused to surrender .
 South Korean troops crossed into North Korea on October 1 . They captured the coastal cities of Wonsan, Hungnam, and Hamhung . South Korean forces crossed into the North Korean border .
 Eighth Army troops reached North Korea on October 8 and drove the North Koreans toward Pyongyang, the capital . The Eighth Army forces were deployed to North Korea from October 8 .
 Pyongyang captured on October 19, and the Communists retreated farther north . North Korea captured Pyongyang, North Korea's capital .
 Eighth Army marched through northwestern Korea toward the Yalu River, the border between North Korea and China . The Eighth Army is on its way to the border with China .
 General MacArthur hoped to end the war before winter set in, but ordered the Allies to press on . General MacArthur, hoping to end it before winter, ordered the Allied forces to press ahead .
 United States and Chinese troops first clashed on October 25, near the Changjin Reservoir and at Onjong, near Pukchin . U.S. and Chinese forces first clashed in October 25 .
 MacArthur and his sources of information underestimated the size of the Chinese armies . MacArthur underestimated the Chinese army's strength, according to sources .
 Chinese troops crossed into North Korea in October and November . More than 300,000 Chinese troops cross into North Korean territory .
 MacArthur believed the Allied forces outnumbered the Chinese and that the Chinese would be used for defense only . MacArthur believed that the Japanese would be only used to defend only .
 Allied air power could prevent additional Chinese troops from entering North Korea, he said . Allied air force could prevent more Chinese troops entering the country, he added .
 Political leaders in Washington and most of the Allied commanders shared MacArthur's confidence that the war would be over by Christmas . MacArthur: "I believe the war will be over within a few days"
 China sent a huge force against the Allies on November 26 and 27 and forced them to retreat . The Allies were forced to retreat from China .
 By the end of November, the Communists had driven a wedge between Eighth Army troops in the west and the X Corps in the east . The Communists drove the wedge between the Eighth and X Corps .
 20,000 U.S. marines and infantrymen, surrounded by Chinese, retreat from the Changjin Reservoir to the port of Hungnam . Four days later, the United States began a historic retreat . The retreat was a retreat from Changjin reservoir to Hungnam.
 By Christmas Eve, 105,000 U.S. and Korean troops, 91,000 refugees, and 17,500 vehicles had been evacuated by sea from Hungnam . The evacuation was the largest operation in the history of the Korean peninsula .
 In the west, the Communists crossed into South Korea and captured Korangpo, 28 miles from Seoul . In the east, the Communist Party captured Koreangpo and captured the city .
 General Walker was killed in a jeep accident . Lieutenant General Matthew B Ridgway took command of the Eighth Army on December 27 . General Walker took command in December .
 The Communists began to attack Seoul on New Year's Eve, and they occupied the city on Jan. 27, 1951 . Seoul was occupied by the Communists in 1951 .
 The Allies dug in about 25 miles south on January 10, and their retreat ended . The Allies are now in control of the U.S.
 Ridgway quickly restored the confidence of the Allied troops, and they soon inflicted heavy losses on the enemy . Ridgways restored the morale of the Allies, and the enemy soon died .
 Ridgway used a new tactic calling for slower advances that would wipe out all enemy forces instead of by-passing some . Ridgways used the tactic to wipe out enemy forces rather than bypassing some forces .
 The two sides dug in and began fighting along a battle line north of the 38th parallel . The battle line began in the early 1940s .
 Neither side made important advances, but they fought many bitter battles for strategic positions . Neither side fought important battles for either side, but fought for strategic gains .
 Battlefields included Bloody Ridge, Finger Ridge, Heartbreak Ridge, Old Baldy, and Pork Chop Hill . Bloody Ridge was one of the most famous battlefields in American history .
 President Truman removed General MacArthur from command and replaced him with Ridgway in 1951 . President Truman made the controversial move in April 1951 . MacArthur was replaced as the top commander of the Army .
 The presidents action resulted from a continuing dispute between MacArthur and defense leaders in Washington as to how the Allies should conduct the war .
 MacArthur had issued public statements that there was no substitute for total victory . From the outset, MacArthur had said there were no substitute to total victory, he said .
 He said he wanted to bomb bases in Manchuria, a part of China, and use other “all-out measures’s” measures . Now he wants to use “an all-out measure’, he said .
 Truman feared such actions might lead to a third world war . Truman and his advisers feared such a war might have led to a world war in 1950s .
 Truman decided he could no longer accept MacArthur's open disagreement with national policy . Truman decided to end the war with MacArthur after MacArthur's refusal to accept his views .
 Ridgway went to Tokyo to replace MacArthur . Lieutenant General James A Van Fleet became commander of the Eighth Army .
 Allied bombers and fighter planes based in Japan, Okinawa, and South Korea roared over North Korea unopposed early in the conflict .
 Allied troops supported Allied troops, killed enemy troops, and damaged Communist bases . They supported Allied forces and killed enemy forces .
 The Soviet Union soon began to supply North Korea with MiG-15 jets, and dogfights became an important part of the war .
 Allied planes were not permitted to cross the Yalu River, and MiG-15's never flew south of the 38th parallel . All the dogfights occurred over North Korea . Allied planes never flew over the 38nd parallel .
 Most of the battles took place in “MiG Alley,” an area between the Yalu and Pyongyang . The battles were fought in the area known as MiG Alley .
 The Allies used helicopters to carry wounded soldiers from battle zones to hospitals . The Allies carried wounded soldiers to hospitals in hospitals .
 Helicopter pilots made daring rescues of Allied fliers who had been shot down . Allied pilots were able to rescue them from their own aircraft .
 The United States Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps lost more than 2,000 planes during the war . The U.S. Air Force and Navy lost over 2,200 planes during WWII .
 Navy and Marine fliers killed about 100,000 Communist troops . Air Force and Navy fliers also killed about 184,800 Soviet troops .
 Allied naval forces included 80 destroyers, 16 aircraft carriers, 8 cruisers, and 4 battleships . The Allied naval force was the largest in the world, with the most active in Europe .
 The United States Navy helped troops land by firing shells at enemy targets on shore . The U.S. Navy fired shells at enemies on shore to help troops land .
 Wonsan, a Communist oil refining and industrial city, was under naval siege for more than two years . The city, which was under siege by the Korean peninsula, was a Communist city .
 Hopes for peace increased when Jacob Malik, the Soviet delegate to the UN, proposed a cease-fire in 1951 .
 On June 30, Ridgway, acting on instructions from Washington, suggested a meeting between Allied and Communist military officers to discuss a truce . The meeting took place on June 30 at the end of the war .
 The truce talks began July 10 at Kaesong and were moved to Panmunjom on October 25 . They are now being held at Panmunmunmunnjom in the region .
 North and South Korea agreed that the existing battle line would be the final dividing line if a truce were reached within 30 days . A settlement seemed near on November 27, when both sides agreed that a truce was reached .
 Neither side had much to gain by winning ground it might later have to surrender . This agreement had the effect of limiting combat, because neither side could win ground it later had to surrender.
 Several issues, especially voluntary repatriation of prisoners, prevented a settlement within the 30-day period .
 The UN Command had insisted that prisoners of both sides be allowed to choose whether or not they would return to their homelands . The UN had insisted both sides were allowed to decide whether to return home to their homeland .
 Many Chinese prisoners of the Allies had fought against the Communists during the Chinese civil war . Many of them had fought for the Allies in China .
 They staged a violent protest against a forced return to life under Communism . The protesters were protesting against the forced return of life under communism .
 The Communists could not agree to the UN demand without admitting that Communism had thus far failed to secure the loyalty of all its citizens . The Communist Party has not been able to secure all its loyalty from its citizens, it says .
 By late April 1952, the truce talks were firmly deadlocked over voluntary repatriation . The truce talks had been deadlocked for more than a decade .
 On October 8, the UN Command Korean War armistice line was established . North Korea and South Korea was established by July 27, 1953 . The UN Command was established in 1953 by the end of the war .
 A buffer zone, 2 } miles wide, was created along the final battle line . The area is 2.5 miles wide .
 Talks will resume when Communists are ready to offer a helpful suggestion for settling the one remaining issue, voluntary repatriation, the Communist Party says .
 General Mark W Clark replaced Ridgway as commander in chief of the U.N. Command in May 1952 . General Clark was replaced as commander of the United Nations Command in 1952 .
 Dwight D Eisenhower became president of the United States in January 1953 . Eisenhower was the first President of the U.S. to be elected to office in 1953 . He was elected to the White House in 1945 .
 After Stalin’s death, Soviet leaders began talking of the need to settle disputes peacefully . Soviet leaders later began talking about the need for peaceful resolution .
 On March 28, the Communists accepted an earlier offer by the UN Command for an exchange of sick and wounded prisoners . The Communists accepted the earlier offer on March 28 .
 The truce talks were resumed on April 26, and the Communists accepted voluntary repatriation . The Communists were repatriated from the Soviet Union .
 The Neutral Nations’ Repatriation Commission agreed to let prisoners indicate their choice . The commission was formed by representatives of Czechoslovakia, India, Poland, Sweden, and Switzerland . They agreed to allow prisoners to indicate their choices .
 An armistice agreement was signed on July 27, 1953, and the fighting ended . The fighting ended in 1953 .
 South Korea gained about 1,500 square miles (3,880 square kilometers) of territory . South Korea now has about 1.5 million square miles of territory in total .
 A Military Armistice Commission, with representatives from both sides, was set up to enforce the armistice terms . A military commission was formed to enforce those terms .
 The armistice also provided for a political conference to work out a final settlement . It provided for the end of World War II .
 Each side charged the other with torture and starvation of prisoners, and other war crimes . After the armistice was signed, each side charged each other with war crimes, including torture .
 The UN General Assembly adopted a general resolution condemning such acts of terrorism . The resolution was adopted by the General Assembly of the UN .
 1 million civilians were killed in South Korea . Property damage was estimated at more than $1 billion . About 1 million people were killed .
 Statistics were not given for civilian deaths and damage in North Korea . Statistics were also not given on civilian deaths .
 The UN Command and the Communists completed an exchange of 88,559 prisoners in September 1953 . The exchange took place between the two sides of the warring nations .
 The Neutral Nations’ Repatriation Commission took custody of prisoners who refused to return to their homelands . The Commission took control of prisoners held by the Neutral Nations .
 The armistice provided that delegates from the various countries could visit these prisoners and try to persuade them to go home . Delegates from various countries were able to visit the prisoners and persuade them home .
 Soviet officials and representatives of countries that had fought in Korea met in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1954 . In 1954, Soviet officials met with representatives from countries that fought in the Korean conflict .
 In 1991, North Korea began to boycott the Military Armistice Commission, and China withdrew from the commission in 1994 . North Korea also began boycotting the commission, but China withdrew in 1994 after North Korea's boycott .
 Korean War Veterans United Nations (The Korean Memorial War) MacArthur, Douglas Outline I Causes of the war ll. Air force (Air forces in limited Panmunjom wars) Ridgway, Matthew B Clark, Mark W Truman, Harry S. Truman and Harry S (The
 The memorial includes 19 large statues of American combat troops in the Korean War . It includes a circular Pool of Remembrance, and a commemorative mural wall .
 The statues, sculpted by Frank C Gaylord I] and made of stainless steel, stand from 7 } to 7 5 feet (2. to 2. meters) tall .
 Rain gear symbolizes the Korean climate; and trudging uphill on a bed of evergreen shrubs for the rugged Korean terrain .
 Their symbolic destination is an American flag on a flagpole in the distance . The group's symbolic destination was the U.S. Capitol Hill .
 The wall, designed by Louis Nelson and made of black granite, stands to the right of the statues . It was designed by Nelson and is made from black granite . The wall is designed to protect the public from harm .
 Pictures of about 2,500 U.S. military people who supported the combat troops in Korea are etched into the wall . Pictures of 2,000 U.K. troops who supported combat troops are etched in the wall of the wall in Korea .
 The images include chaplains, clerks, doctors and nurses, engineers, and helicopter pilots .
 Kosciuszko, Kans ee UHS koh or kawsh CHOOSH kaw, Tadeusz, tah DEH oosh , was a Polish patriot who fought for the independence of the United States and Poland .
 He went to America in the summer of 1776, during the Revolutionary War in America . He was in America during the 1776-1776 war .
 He offered his services to the Continental Congress and was appointed engineer with the rank of colonel . He offered to the Congress and became a colonel in the ranks .
 He built fortifications near Saratoga and strengthened American defenses along the Hudson River, including those at West Point, New York .
 Congress made Kosciuszko a brigadier general after the war ended in 1783 . After the war, Congress made him a general general .
 In this struggle, he combined Poland's fight for independence with the people's struggle for social justice . Poland's independence and social justice were key issues in his life, he said .
 Defeat of the insurrection led to the third partition of Poland by Russia, Prussia, and Austria . The defeat of the uprising led to a third partition of Poland .
 Kosher, KOH shuhr, also spelled kasher, is a Hebrew word that means fit or proper . Kosher means "fit or proper" in the Hebrew .
 The word usually refers to food, but it may apply to anything considered ritually correct or acceptable according to Jewish law . The word is usually used to refer to food but may also refer to anything deemed to be acceptable .
 A witness in a trial conducted under Jewish law may be called a kosher witness . For example, a witness in such a trial may be a witness to a Jewish law .
 These laws are based on passages from the Biblical books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy . These laws were inspired by the Bible's books of the Bible .
 The laws specify that bread is kosher if it contains no forbidden fat and was not baked on the Sabbath . For example, bread is not allowed to contain any forbidden fat or to be baked on Sabbath .
 Only certain parts of acceptable animals such as cattle and sheep may be eaten . Cattle and sheep can be eaten only if they are eaten .
 The preparation of food according to Jewish dietary laws is called koshering . The preparation is known as koshering by Jewish dietary law .
 This method is designed to kill animals as quickly and painlessly as possible . The method is meant to be quick and painless . It is not the first time animals have been killed in this way .
 Before the meat is cooked, it must be drained of blood by being soaked in cold water and then salted . The meat must be salted before being cooked .
 Jews who keep a kosher home must have one set of dishes and cooking utensils for meat meals and another set for meals that include dairy products . Jews must also have two sets of dishes for meat and one for dairy dishes . Jews keep kosher homes with one set for meat .
 The Gothic cathedral of St Elizabeth was begun in the 1300's . It in_ cludes the Gothic cathedral built in the 13th century . The cathedral is located in central London .
 Since World War 11 ended in 1945, sprawling industrial areas have sprung up around the old part of the country .
 Construction of a huge steel-manufacturing plant attracted many rural people seeking jobs . Construction of the plant attracted people to rural areas seeking jobs.
 Large blocks of apartment buildings were constructed to house the work force . Large blocks were constructed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 KoSice also has food-processing and textile industries and fertilizer plants . Kosice has food processing, textile industries, fertilizer plants and food processing plants .
 In 1241, King Béla IV of Hungary chartered a settle_ ment that then existed at KoSice . King Béla IV chartered the settlement in 1241 . The settlement was then known as KoSice.
 The city was chiefly controlled by Hungary until the end of World War | in 1918 . It was mainly controlled by the Hungarians until end of the war .
 Czech Republic and Slovakia were created in 1993 to replace Czechoslovakia . Czech Republic is now the Czech Republic of Slovakia and Czech Republic Republic of Hungary . Slovakia is Czech Republic's largest country in history .
 Vojtech Mastny Kosovo, KOH soh vol, also spelled Kosova, is a province in southern Serbia . It is one of the republics of Yugoslavia, one of Serbia's provinces .
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Kosovo was torn by ethnic conflict . Kosovo is now a relatively stable state of peace .
 Kosovo's natural resources include coal, lead, zinc, and many other minerals . Kosovo has a wide range of natural resources, including coal and lead .
 The Ottoman Empire ruled Kosovo from the mid1400's until 1912, when the Serbian army took control of the region . Kosovo was ruled by the Ottoman Empire until 1912 .
 In 1918, it was made part of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, which later became Yugoslavia . It was part of Yugoslavia's Kingdom of Serbs and Croats .
 The government limited the rights of the Albanians of Kosovo and drove thousands from their homes . Thousands of Albanians were driven from homes by the government .
 By the end of World War II in 1945, Yugoslavia had come under Communist control . Yugoslavia was at the center of the conflict in Yugoslavia .
 Kosovo was first a self-governing region and later a province of Serbia . Kosovo is now a self governing province of the Serbija region .
 Serbia ended Kosovo's self-rule in 1989 and 1990, depriving Albanians of many rights . Kosovo was ruled by Serbia in the early 1990s . Kosovo's Albanians were deprived of rights by Serbia .
 Serbia and Montenegro formed a new Yugoslavia after the other four republics declared independence in 1992 . Serbians and Montenegrans became part of the new Yugoslavia in 1991 . Serbia, Montenegro and Serbia formed the new republic in 1992 after Yugoslavia split .
 Kosovo Liberation Army attacked Serbian police units in 1997 . In 1997, the group seeking independence for Kosovo attacked police units . Kosovo is now a member of NATO .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization tried to organize a cease-fire, but fighting continued . The North American military has been fighting in the region for years .
 In December, Serbian forces launched a campaign against Kosovo's Albanians, driving many from their homes . Serbians have been driven from homes by Serbian forces since December .
 NATO-sponsored peace talks led to a peace plan that was rejected by Serbian delegates . Kosovo's Albanians approved the plan but Serbian delegates rejected it .
 NATO began air strikes against military targets in Yugoslavia in March to force the government to accept the peace plan . In March, NATO began to air strikes on military targets to force Yugoslavia to accept a peace deal . NATO air strikes were launched against Yugoslavia's military targets .
 NATO stopped the bombing and sent an international peacekeeping force to Kosovo . Kosovo was bombed by the U.S. in the 1990s, but the bombing was stopped .
 Tensions ran high between Serbs and Albanians in the province . Many refugees returned, but tensions ran high . Many Serbs returned to Serbia .
 Despite the presence of peacekeepers, the tension frequently erupted into violence . The tension frequently erupts into violence between the two sides .
 Serbs boycotted the first local elections since the end of the war in 2000, and the Yugoslav government refused to recognize the results . In 2000, Serbs refused to vote in local elections in Yugoslavia, and refused to accept the result .
 Kossuth, KAHS ooth or KAW shut, Lajos, LAH yawsh, is a Hungarian national hero . He led the unsuccessful Hungarian rebellion of 1848-1849 .
 In 1825, Kossuth entered parliament, where he led a movement for liberal government reform . He was a member of the British House of Representatives . He died in 1825 .
 When uprisings broke out in the Austrian Empire in 1848, the Hungarians, led by Kossuth, also revolted . The Hungarians were the first to revolt in Austria's Austrian Empire .
 Kossuth refused to grant independence to minority groups in the Hungarian part of the empire . But he refused to give independence to minorities .
 Kossuth toured the United States, where he was hailed as the Hungarian George Washington . Afterwards, he toured the U.S. and toured the world, and claimed to be George Washington.
 Burks Kosygin, kah SEE gihn, Aleksei Nikolaevich, ah lehk SAY nih kah LAH yuh vihch, was premier of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1980 . Burks    was premier of
 He fought on the Communist side in the civil war that broke out in Russia in 1918 . He fought for the Communist Party in Russia .
 After the war ended in 1945, Kosygin held a variety of government posts . He earned a reputation for being an excellent administrator .
 He served directly under Nikita S Khrushchev, the party chief and premier of the Soviet Union . He also served under the Communist Party .
 By the early 1970's, Brezhnev had become the country's most powerful leader . By the 1970s, he had become Russia's most influential leader .
 The two men continued to work together despite Kosygin’s loss of power . The two worked together for decades .
 In 1965, he began a program to give factory managers greater control over their plants . In 1965 he began giving factory managers more control over plants .
 His efforts met with resistance from the Communist establishment and were eventually stopped . His efforts were ultimately stopped by the Communist Party .
 Koufax, KOH faks, Sandy , became one of the greatest pitchers in the history of baseball . Koufax was one of baseball's most famous pitchers . Sandy Koufax is the son of legendary baseball greats .
 Koufax pitched four no-hit games, a major league record until Nolan Ryan pitched his fifth no-hitter in 1981 . Koufax was a lefthander, a former baseball star .
 Koufax was voted the most valuable player in the National League in 1963 and the best pitcher in baseball in 1963, 1965, and 1966 . Koufax also won the NL MVP in 1964 and 1965, 1966 and 1965 .
 Retired from baseball after the 1966 season due to arthritis in his pitching arm . He retired from baseball in 1966 due to the problem of arthritis .
 The kouprey is a rare animal found in Southeast Asia . He joined the Brooklyn Dodgers (now the Los Angeles Dodgers) in 1955 .
 Dave Nightingale Kouprey, KOO pray, is a type of wild cattle that lives in Cambodia, in Southeast Asia .
 The kouprey has small narrow ears, a large dewlap, long slender legs and hoofs, and a long tail . It has small small ears, small legs and legs, and long long legs . It is also known for its dewllap and dew
 Koussevitzky, xoo suh VIHT skee, Serge, sairzh , was a Russian-born symphony orchestra conductor . He was also known as the "Russian-born" conductor of the Soviet Union Symphony Orchestra .
 From 1924 to 1949, Koussevitzky served as conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra . He died in 1949 at the age of 65 .
 From 1936 to 1950, Koussevitzky was conductor and director of the Tanglewood Music Festival in Lenox, Massachusetts . He was conductor from 1936 until 1950, when he was conductor at the festival .
 In 1940, he helped found the Berkshire Music Center in Lenox, Massachusetts, where he trained many conductors . In 1940 he helped to found the Berks Music Center, which he helped open .
 After graduating from the Moscow Philharmonic Music School, he began a successful career as a double bass soloist . He graduated from the Moscow Philharmonic Music School . He is currently a soloist on double bass .
 In 1909, he formed his own orchestra, which popularized the works of young Russian composers, such as Sergei Prokofiev, Sergei Rachmaninoff, and Igor Stravinsky . He formed his orchestra in 1909 .
 In 1922, Koussevitzky commissioned Maurice Ravel to make his famous orchestration of the piano composition Pictures at an Exhibition by the Russian composer Modest Mussorgsky . Ravel's orchestration was made by the composer of the composition .
 John H Baron Krakatau, krah kuh TOW, is a volcano that lies in the Sunda Strait of Indonesia . It lies between the islands of Sumatra and Java .
 Much of the volcano is underwater . It is also called Krakatoa (pronounced krah kuh TOH uh) Much of it is underwater.
 Krakatau, Lang, and Verlaten are the largest of the islands in the world . The islands are also known as Anak, Anak and Anak Krak atau .
 These waves, called tsunamis, washed ashore and caused most of the deaths . These waves washed ashore in the early 1900s and caused the deaths of many people .
 Other people were killed by scalding ash and other material shot out of the volcano . The volcano is believed to be the largest in the region in the world .
 Volcanic dust in the atmosphere caused spectacular red sunsets over the next three years in the Northern Hemisphere . Red sunsets are seen over the Northern hemisphere .
 Volcanic dust may also have caused a worldwide drop in temperature that lasted five years . The volcanic dust may have caused the temperature drop in the world .
 Eruptions from 1927 to 1930 created Anak Krakatau in the caldera’s center . The volcano is the largest in the world .
 Katharine V Cashman Krakow, KRAK ow, or KRAHK ow, is a city that lies on the Vistula River in southcentral Poland . The city is located in south-central Poland and is located on the south-west side of the V
 Krak6éw also has many historic buildings and museums, including the Royal Castle . The Royal Castle is one of the most famous buildings in the world .
 The Royal Castle, once the home of Poland's kings, has important collections of paintings and tapestries . Poland's Royal Castle was once home to the country's kings .
 Poland's largest steel mill, the Nowa Huta plant, is located near Krakéw . It is Poland's second largest steel plant, Nowa Huta .
 The city manufactures chemicals, drugs, leather, textiles, and processed foods . The city also manufactures drugs, drugs and leather .
 Krakéw had become an important crossroads of trade between Asia and Europe by the 700's . Krakésw was an important trade hub for Europe and Asia .
 The city became self-governing in 1815, but was seized by Austria in 1848 . Austria seized it again in the same year after it took control of the city .
 Krebs, Sir Hans Adolf , a German biochemist working in England, shared the 1953 Nobel Prize for physiology or medicine . Krebs was the first person to win the Nobel Prize .
 In this cycle, tissues use carbohydrates, fat, and protein to produce energy . This cycle, called the Krebs cycle, is called the "Krebs cycle"
 In 1932, Krebs announced the discovery of how another cyclic process forms the compound urea in the liver . Krebs' discovery was made in 1932 .
 Eric Howard Christianson Kreisler, KRYS /uhr, Fritz , ranks as one of the best-loved violinists of all time . The violinist is known for his violin performances .
 His expressiveness created an intimacy between himself and his audience that was unique among performing musicians . He created a unique intimacy between the audience and the audience .
 Kreisler wrote many short compositions, including Caprice Viennois, Tambourin Chinois, Liebesfreud and Liebesleid, and Schén Rosmarin .
 Many pieces were first published as the work of earlier composers . Many other pieces of music were later published in the same way .
 Later, Kreisler admitted that he had written the music “in the style” of those composers and had modestly denied authorship . He later admitted to writing the music in the style of composers .
 Three years later, he entered the Paris Conservatory and studied there under Joseph Massart and Léo Delibes . He studied at the Conservatory .
 In 1939, after Germany annexed Austria, Kreisler became a French citizen . He became a citizen of France after the annexation .
 Later, he settled in the United States and became a U.S. citizen in 1943 .
 Kremlin, KREHM Iuhn, is a fortified enclosure within a Russian city . The Kremlin is located in the city of Krehm Iuhan .
 Moscow was the center of one of many Russian states in the 1100's . Its princes ruled from the Kremlin .
 The Kremlin was the center of czarist rule from the mid-1500's until 1712, when Peter the Great moved the Russian capital to St. Petersburg . The Kremlin is the site of the first Russian capital in Russia since 1712 .
 The Kremlin remained the seat after the Communists formed the Soviet Union in 1922 . The Kremlin was the seat of the Communist Party in the early 1920s .
 The Kremlin became the seat of government of an independent Russia in 1991 . With the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Kremlin was the center of government .
 Kremlin is a triangular enclosure extending almost 1 3 miles around . The Kremlin is the largest Kremlin in the world and is located in central Russia .
 Especially impressive are its gilded domes, its tapered gate towers, and the contrast between the threatening boundary wall and the richness and intricacy of the interior .
 The variety of styles and lavish decoration give an impression of powerful magnificence . It is the first time the building has been restored to its former glory .
 The Kremlin's treasures include paintings, jewels, and crowns worn by Russia's czars . The Kremlin is home to paintings, crowns and jewels worn by the czars.
 The present Kremlin walls have stood since the late 1400's, when Moscow became the most powerful Russian city . The walls have been in place since the early 1400's .
 During the 1600's, the Kremlin’s towers and buildings were enlarged and redecorated . During the 16th century, Kremlin's towers and . buildings were . enlarged and . redecoreated .
 In the 1700's and 1800's, construction continued but in the baroque and later neoclassical styles .
 The great hall of the Palace of Congresses houses government meetings and performances of ballets and operas . It is also used to host government meetings .
 William J Hennessey Kreps, Juanita Morris, was secretary of commerce from 1977 to 1979 under President Jimmy Carter . William J. Kreps was Secretary of Commerce from 1977-1979 . J. Morris was a labor economist from 1977 - 1979 .
 She was the first economist and first woman to head the Department of Commerce . She was also the first female head of the Commerce Department .
 Kreps then taught at Duke until 1977 and also served as vice president from 1973 to 1977 . Kreps was vice president of Duke from 1973 until 1977 .
 In 1979, she returned to Duke as professor emerita and vice president emerita . In 1979 she returned as professor and vice-president emerita.
 Kreps is known for her outspokenness and her dedication to women’s rights . Kreps has been married for more than 20 years .
 Krill are small shrimplike animals that live in oceans throughout the world . Krill is small, shrimple-shaped creatures that live on the world's oceans .
 Blue, fin, and humpback whales eat vast amounts of krill and other planktonic organisms daily . Blue and fin whales eat krill, other organisms daily.
 Many species of krill are surface dwellers, and others live at deeper levels or migrate up or down in the water . Many species live on the surface or in deeper levels .
 Animals that eat krill, including whales, seals, fish, and squids, follow along with the animals that eat it .
 Young krill hatch from eggs as /arvae, immature animals that do not resemble the adults . Young animals hatch from egg eggs as immature animals . Krill hatch as larvae .
 Krill larvae larvae may go through as many as 10 molts before reaching adulthood . The larvae may reach adulthood in adulthood .
 Various problems must be overcome before krill can provide a source of protein-rich food for people . However, various problems must still be overcome to provide a protein rich food for humans .
 efficient harvesting methods must be developed to make large-scale krill fishing economically profitable, scientists say . For example, efficient harvesting techniques must also be developed .
 Krishna is one of the most popular Hindu gods, worshiped throughout India . Krishna is a Hindu god worshipped throughout the country .
 He is often shown with a flute in his hand and his consort, the milkmaid Radha, standing at his side . He often is shown with his flute and his milkmaid, Radha .
 They believe Krishna was born to rid the world of evil and give delight to his many friends and lovers . Krishna is believed to have been born in order to rid evil from evil .
 Krishna's story is told in many Indian writings, most notably in the epic the Mahabharata and in the Bhagavad-Purana, a story collection . Krishna is known for his role in the creation of the Hindu religion .
 Krishna appears in human form in a portion of the Mahabharata called the Bhagavad-Gita . He is the wise chariot driver of the warrior hero Arjuna . Krishna is seen as a wise charotot driver in the Mahapharata .
 Krishna reveals his divine nature and teaches Arjuna the way to achieve freedom while remaining active in the ordinary world . Krishna reveals the way of achieving freedom while staying active in an ordinary world. Krishna reveals how he reveals the true nature of the divine nature .
 Krishna grew up in a forest near Mathura, India; rid the earth of many demons . He then lived as a prince in what is now the western Indian city of Dwarka . Krishna is believed to have been a Hindu prince .
 Kristallnacht, KR/HS tah/ nahkt is a name given to the night of Nov.-10, 1938, when Nazis attacked Jews and destroyed Jewish businesses and synagogues throughout Germany and Austria .
 Krista//nacht is a German word meaning Crystal Night . In English, the event is called the Jonathan Green Night of Broken Glass because the Nazis shattered the windows of many Jewish-owned stores .
 Adolf Hitler had made anti-Semitism a government policy when he came to power in Germany in 1933 . Hitler made it a policy to prevent Jews being discriminated against in Germany .
 On Nov., 1938, a young Polish Jew whose parents recently had been deported from Germany shot a German diplomat in Paris . The incident happened in Paris, France, on Nov. 1938 .
 That evening, Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels made an anti-Semitic speech . The speech was made in the wake of anti-Semitism . The Holocaust was the first time Jews were targeted by the Nazis .
 The violence of Kristallnacht began after the speech and lasted for about 24 hours . Thousands of businesses and many synagogues were destroyed in Germany and Austria . The violence began after a speech by Hitler .
 Aaron T Kornblum Kruger, KROO guhr, Paulus, was a South African statesman and soldier . He was a member of the South African National Socialist Party .
 He was a frontiersman, uneducated and simple in his ways, and deeply religious . He was uneducated, simple and uneducated . He died at the age of 92 .
 Kruger was born Stephanus Johannes Johannes Paulus Kruger in the British Cape Colony . Kruger died in 1903 at the age of 92 .
 His family moved in the Great Trek, when many Dutch Boers traveled north into the interior of Africa to escape British rule . The family moved to Africa in the early 1900s to escape the British rule of Africa .
 Kruger's family helped organize the Transvaal, the new Dutch state in South Africa . Kruger was born in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 1903 . He was a member of Kruger family who organized the new state .
 After internal feuding and opposition from the British, the Transvaal obtained its freedom in 1881 . After much internal feuds and opposition, it became South Africa's first country .
 The discovery of gold brought thousands of Ujitlanders to the republic . Thousands of British settlers, mostly British, settled in the Ujitland region .
 Bruce Fetter Kruger National Park in South Africa is one of the largest national parks in the world . Kruger is the largest of the world's most famous national parks .
 It covers an area of 7,500 square miles along the borders of Zimbabwe and Mozambique . It covers the area, which is also known as the Great Lakes region .
 The landscape in Kruger National Park varies from fairly flat to gently rolling . The landscape includes scattered trees, dense brush, open grasslands, rocky areas, and six rivers .
 The park supports over 1,000 kinds of plants and a wide diversity of animals . The park is home to a wide variety of animals and plants .
 Thousands of large plant-eating mammals, including antelopes, African buffaloes, elephants, giraffes, rhinoceroses, wildebeests, and zebras roam the grounds .
 The park is also home to cheetahs, hyenas, leopards, lions, lions and other large meat-eaters . It is home to a number of kinds of snakes, including a large number of snakes .
 The government of South Africa made the reserve a national park in 1926 . The government made the park a park in 1925 .
 It is named after Paulus Kruger, the last president of the South African Republic . Kruger is the name of a former president of South Africa Republic .
 The South African Republic covered the northern part of what is now South Africa . It included the area that now makes up the park . The park is named after the area covered by the Republic of the Republic .
 Gene Krupa was the first jazz musician to popularize the drum as a solo instrument . Krupa, KROO puh, Gene , was the original jazz musician who popularized the drum .
 He became a symbol of the excitement and enthusiasm of the swing era in jazz . He played with the Benny Goodman band from 1934 to 1938 . He was a symbol .
 Krupa was famous for his exceptional drum technique and for the image he presented to the public . Krupa's image was his shock of black hair flying, his face and body in continuous motion .
 In the 1920's, he played in dance bands but also worked in small jazz groups with Eddie Condon and other pioneers of early Chicago jazz .
 Frank Tirro Krupp was the name of one of Germany's leading industrial families . The name of the family is one of the most famous industrial families in the world .
 Krupp became one of the world’s major manufacturers of steel, machinery, and weapons . The Krupp firm was founded in 1903 .
 Firm struggled at first and faced competition from British products . Firm struggled to cope with competition from other countries .
 Under Friedrich’s son, Alfred, it slowly found a market for high-quality steel rolls, steel railway tires, and axles . Under Alfred, the company found a new market for steel rolls and tires .
 Krupp steel made possible the production of outstanding artillery . The superior quality of Krupp's steel made it possible to make artillery .
 Firm had close association with Prussia, the most powerful German state . This in turn led to the firm’s close relationship with the state of Prussia . Firm's close ties to Prussia led to close ties with Germany's most powerful state .
 Krupp cannons helped Prussia defeat Austria in 1866 and France in 1870 . The firm's reputation as the leading arms maker in Europe .
 Alfred Krupp expanded the factories in Essen, bought companies overseas, and introduced a welfare plan for workers . Krupp introduced the welfare plan in the 1930s and 'welfare reform'
 Her husband, Gustav, took the Krupp name and became head of the firm in 1906 . Gustav, who took the name Krupp, took over the firm from Krupp .
 After Germany's defeat in World War I, the Krupp works were dismantled . After World War II, Krupp was dismantled .
 He secretly produced new arms, even though Germany had been forbidden to rearm . Germany had to produce arms even though it had been banned from rearmming .
 They were married in 1898 in Siberia, where both had been exiled for various revolutionary activities . The couple were exiled from Russia for their involvement in the revolution .
 Krupskaya helped Lenin lead the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, in which the Communists seized control of the Russian government . She was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Krupskaya became people's commissioner of education in the new government . She helped form the Soviet system of public education and helped form a Soviet system .
 She had little influence on Joseph Stalin, who headed the government . But she was able to influence the Soviet Union .
 Krypton, KR/HP tahn, is a chemical element that makes up only about one-millionth of the earth's atmosphere . Krypton makes up about 1,000,000th of Earth's atmosphere and makes up just one millionth of atmosphere .
 The British chemists Sir William Ramsay and Morris W Travers discovered it in 1898 . The discovery was made in 1898 by the chemists William Ramsay, Morris Travers .
 Krypton is also used in certain electronic tubes, and in luminous sign tubes where a greenish-yellow color is desired . Krypton also is used in some electronic tubes .
 Ku Klux Klan, KOO kiunks KLAN, is a group of white secret societies who oppose the advancement of blacks, Jews, and other minority groups . KKK is a white secret society that opposes advancement of minorities .
 The Ku Klux Klan, also called the KKK or the Klan, is active in the U.S. and Canada . The Klan is also known as the Klu Klux Klan in the United States .
 Klan members wear robes and hoads, and burn crosses at outdoor meetings . Klan members burn crosses, burn them at outdoor meeting . KKK members are dressed in robes, and robes, as they burn crosses .
 The KKK was formed as a social club by a group of Confederate Army veterans in Pulaski, Tenn., in 1865 or 1866 . The group was formed by Confederate soldiers and women .
 Nathan Bedford Forrest, a former Confederate general, was the Klan’s first leader, called the Grand Wizard . Forrest was a former Confederate general . Forrest is the Klan's first Grand Wizard, called Grand Wizard.
 The group took its name from the Greek word kyk/os, meaning circle, and the English word clan . The group was formed from a circle of circle and clan .
 Klan members terrorized blacks to keep them from voting or exercising the other rights they had gained during Reconstruction . Klan members believed in the superiority of whites and believed in their superiority .
 The Klan threatened, beat, and murdered many blacks and their white sympathizers in the South . Many blacks and whites were killed by the Klan in the Southerners .
 To hide their identity, Klan terrorists wore robes and hoods, draped sheets over their horses, and rode at night . Klan terrorists used to wear robes, hoods and robes to hide identity .
 The KKK spread rapidly throughout the Southern United States and became known as the Invisible Empire . The Invisible Empire spread rapidly through the Southern U.S. The KKK was known for its rapid growth in the South .
 In 1871, Congress passed the Force Bill, which gave the President the authority to use federal troops against the Klan .
 The Klan directed its activities against groups it considered un-American, including blacks, immigrants, Jews, and Roman Catholics . The Klan was active in the 1930s and '40s .
 The KKK grew rapidly and by the mid-1920's had more than 2 million members throughout the country . The KKK was founded in the 1920s and grew rapidly in the U.S. The KKK had over 1 million members .
 Some Klan members burned crosses and whipped, tortured, and murdered people whose activities angered them . Most relied on peaceful means, including burning crosses and whipping crosses .
 By electing public officials, the Klan became a powerful political force throughout the South and also in many Northern and Western states, including Colorado, Indiana, Kansas, Maine, Ohio and Oregon .
 Public criticism of Klan violence and quarrels among Klan leaders weakened the organization . However, public criticism of the Klan violence weakened the Klan .
 Green died in 1949, and the Klan split into many competing groups . The Klan then split into other groups, including the KKK .
 Increased civil rights activities during the 1960's brought a new wave of Klan violence . The Klan was active during the time of the Klan's violent suppression of blacks .
 Klan members were involved in many terrorist attacks, including the killing of three civil rights workers in Mississippi, and the bombing of a Birmingham, Alabama, church in which four black girls were killed . Klan members are responsible for many of the most terrorist attacks .
 President Lyndon B Johnson used the Federal Bureau of Investigation to probe the Klan . The FBI was used to investigate the Ku Klux Klan in the late 1960s .
 Some members were sent to prison, and membership fell to about 5,000 by the early 1970's . Some members of the original group were imprisoned .
 Beginning in the mid-1970's, new leaders tried to give a more respectable image to competing Klan groups .
 The KKK appealed to whites who resented special programs designed to help blacks . Whites resented job competition from blacks and recent immigrants . The KKK especially appealed to white people .
 The KKK still attracted people with extreme views who often used violence . The KKK was still attracted to extreme views .
 In 1979, Klan members and their supporters killed five anti-Klan demonstrators in Greensboro, North Carolina . Klan members killed five protesters in 1979, including five members of KKK .
 Declining interest in the Klan and some prosecutions for illegal activities have reduced KKK membership to about 6,000 . Since then, declining interest in Klan and prosecutions have reduced Klan membership .
 Kuala Lumpur, KWAH /uh loom POOR (pop. 1,145,342), is the capital and largest city of Malaysia . Kuala Lumpur is the largest city in the country .
 Kuala Lumpur spreads out from the junction of the Klang and Gombak rivers . Kuala Lumpur lies along both banks of the rivers .
 The Petronas Towers, the world’s tallest skyscrapers, are located in Kuala Lumpur . The high-rise buildings include the Petrona Towers, which are the world's tallest skyscraper .
 The area west of the rivers includes modern government buildings, the National Museum, and the National Mosque .
 Most of Kuala Lumpur's oldest buildings were constructed after a fire destroyed the city in the 1880's . The city was destroyed by a fire that destroyed it in the mid-80s .
 This style, which developed in northern Africa, features arches, domes, towers, and spiral staircases . This style of architecture is known for its arches and domes .
 The points represent the 13 states of Malaysia and the 5 Pillars of Islam . The points are based on the 13 countries and the five pillars of Islam in Islam .
 Other sites include Lake Gardens, which combines tropical forests and planned gardens . Parliament House, where the national legislature meets, is where the government meets .
 Near the city are the National Zoological Park, which is one of the most beautiful zoos in Southeast Asia . Batu Caves, which feature huge caverns, are one of Asia's most beautiful caves .
 Malays and people of Chinese ancestry make up a majority of Kuala Lumpur's population . Malays are a minority of the city's population, with Chinese ancestry making up a large proportion .
 Malaysian national government employs many of Kuala Lumpur's people . Kuala Lumpur is home to many of the country's most influential citizens .
 The city is a center of banking, trade, and other commercial activities . The city has been a center for banking and trade .
 Its industries include rubber, tin, and food processing; and the production of textiles and electronic products . The country's industries include food processing and textiles .
 Kuala Lumpur International — —_ — eee airports in nearby Subang and Sepang serve Kuala Lumpur . Subang, Sepang and Subang airports in Malaysia also serve Subang .
 Kuala Lumpur was established in the late 1850s, after rich tin mines were discovered nearby . Kuala Lumpur is located in Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur .
 People from southern China and elsewhere moved there to work in the tin mines . People from China and other parts of the world worked in the mines .
 Many of the Chinese later established businesses and gained great wealth there . Many of them later became successful in China .
 Kuala Lumpur became capital of the independent nation of Malaya in 1957 . Kuala Lumpur was the capital of independent Malaya .
 Malaya and nearby states united in 1963 and formed the nation of Malaysia . Malaysia was formed from Malaya in 1963 .
 Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan, founded the Mongol, or Yuan, dynasty that ruled China from 1279 to 1368 . He founded the Yuan dynasty, which ruled China between 1279-1368 .
 Kublai was the son of Tolui and brother of the fourth Great-Khan, Mangu . He was the first great Khan of the Mongols . He is one of the most powerful men in the world .
 Kublai conquered Yunnan and Annam, and when Mangu died in 1259, he became Great-Khan and ruler of the Mongol Empire . He conquered the region and became Great Khan of the Mongomans .
 Genghis Khan's heirs disregarded his warning to remain united under one Great-Khan . The unity of the All-Mongolia Empire soon ended . They disregarded Khan's warning to his heirs to remain unified under one .
 For the first time in history, a “barbararian’ people had conquered all of China . The first time a ‘barbarian’ had conquered China . For first time, a "barbaric people" had conquered .
 Burma, Cambodia, and other countries of Southeast Asia were forced to recognize the Yuan dynasty as their rulers .
 He also failed to gain control over the western half of the Mongol Empire . The Mongol Empire was ruled by the Mongols in the 13th century .
 Under Kublai's rule, art and science flourished, trade expanded, and cultural relations with countries throughout the world . Art and science thrived under the rule, and trade expanded .
 Genghis Khan; Mongol Empire (Later empire); Polo, Marco, Marco. Marco. Richard L Davis See also Genghi Khan; . Genghs Khan .
 How | Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb is a bitter but comic treatment of how the Soviet Union and the U.S. accidentally start a nuclear war . How | learned to stop worrying and love the bomb .
 Robert Sklar Kuchma, KOOCH muh, Leonid Danylovich, LAY oh nihd dah NEE loh vihch, was elected president in 1994 .
 He defeated Leonid M Kravchuk, who had become president in 1991, after Ukraine declared its independence from the Soviet Union .
 From October 1992 to September 1993, Kuchma was prime minister in Kravchuk’s Cabinet . He was the prime minister of the Soviet Union from 1992 to 1993 .
 Kravchuk resigned after his attempts to introduce economic reforms were blocked by the parliament . He resigned that position after his efforts to introduce reforms received little support from the parliament and received little from Kravch .
 During the presidential campaign, Kuchma called for reestablishing economic ties between Ukraine and other former Soviet republics . He called for economic ties as a way of improving the ailing Ukrainian economy .
 He held various positions in the Soviet aerospace industry until becoming director of the country's largest missile factory in 1986 . He was director of Soviet state missile factory .
 Two kinds of kudus live in the grassy regions of southern and eastern Africa south of the Sahara . The two types of animals live in grassy areas of southern Africa .
 Kudzu, KOOD zoo, is a fast-growing climbing vine common in the southern U.S. It is common in southern states .
 Kudzu originated in Asia, where people eat its thick, starchy roots and make the stems into a fiber called kKohemp . People eat the roots of kudzu and eat the stems to make it into a fruit .
 For many years, it was grown as an ornamental porch vine and for livestock feed . It was grown for many years as a porch vine .
 In the 1930's, farmers in the South began to plant kudzu as ground cover to prevent soil erosion . Kudzu is a ground cover used by farmers to protect soil from erosion .
 Bacteria that live on the roots take nitrogen from the air and help enrich the soil . The bacteria that live in the roots of trees help enrich soil .
 Many farmers, foresters, and property owners consider kudzu a weed because it spreads rapidly and is difficult to control . Kudzu is considered a weed by many because of its rapid growth and spread rapidly .
 Kuiper belt, KY pur, is a band of objects in the outer regions of our solar system . It is known as the "KY pur" region of the outer solar system.
 KBO’s are “building blocks” left over from the formation of the planets, which occurred about 4. billion years ago . Scientists believe that KBO's are ‘building blocks left over’ from the . formation of . the planets .
 A KBO strays so close to Neptune that Neptune’s gravity hurls it toward the sun . Sometimes, a KBO is so close that it is hurled toward Neptune's sun .
 KBO may turn into a comet by absorbing enough heat to vaporize some of its ice . The KBO could vaporize its ice by vaporizing some of the ice .
 The Kuiper belt is also called the Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt or the trans-Neptunian disk . It is also known as the Ed-Edgeworth or the Trans-Nunian Disk .
 An Irish scientist named Kenneth E Edgeworth suggested in 1943 that the belt existed . The belt is believed to have been created by the Second World War .
 The Dutch-born American astronomer Gerard P Kuiper described it in more detail in 1951 .
 The fruit is frequently eaten whole, or is candied and made into preserves, marmalade, and jelly .
 Their homeland extends mainly over parts of Armenia, Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Turkey . Their homeland includes parts of the Armenian Peninsula, Iran and Iraq .
 The number of Kurds in the area has been estimated at about 25 million . The Kurds are estimated to be around 25 million people .
 Kurds live in cities such as Mahabad, Sanandaj, and Bakhtaran in Iran; Arbil, Kirkuk, and As Sulaymaniyah in Iraq; and Diarbakir and Van in Turkey . Other Kurdish cities include Mahabad in Iran, Arbil in
 Since the late 1900's, many Kurds have migrated to large cities outside the Kurdish homeland, such as Istanbul and Ankara in Turkey . Many Kurds have moved to cities outside their homeland .
 Historically, the name Kurdistan (a Persian word meaning the Land of the Kurds) has been used for the area where the Kurds live . The name Kurdistan means Kurdistan, the land of the Kurdish people .
 Only a small province in Iran is officially named Kurdistan . But today, only a small part of the country is officially called Kurdistan .
 Efforts to establish self-government were crushed by the Turks during World War 1 (19141918), by the Iraqis in the 1970's and 1980's, and by the Iranian government after the Iranian revolution of 1979 .
 Iraq attacked Kurdish villages with bombs containing poison chemicals in 1988 . It has been estimated that several thousand Kurds were killed in 1988 when Iraq attacked them .
 Kurdish rebels in southeastern Turkey have waged a guerrilla military campaign against the Turkish government since 1984 . Since 1984, Kurdish rebels have been fighting against the government .
 Kurds in Iraq rebelled in March 1991, soon after Iraq's military forces were defeated in the Persian Gulf War . Kurds also rebelled soon after the Gulf War, rebelling against Iraq in 1991 .
 Japan claims several of the islands, including Iturup, Kunashir, Shikotan, and the Hanobi Islands . The islands are part of Russia, but Japan claims them .
 The chain includes 36 large islands, 20 smaller islands, and many large rocks . The chain is home to many of the world's most populous islands .
 Most of the Kurils were formed by volcanoes built up from the ocean floor . The Kurils are formed by volcanic eruptions from the Earth's surface .
 Many otters and seals once lived on the Kurils, but have become scarce due to hunting . The Kurils have become extinct due to the hunting of otters, seals and whales .
 The Kurils came under Japanese rule in 1875, when Japan traded the southern half of Sakhalin Island to Russia for the Kurils . Japan traded part of the southern part of Russia to Russia in the 1875 deal .
 When the Soviet Union broke up in 1991, Russia gained control of the islands . The islands are now uninhabited .
 Japan still claims several islands in the southern part of the chain . The islands are located in the chain, but Japan claims several of them .
 Dispute over ownership has strained relations between Japan and Russia since 1945 . The dispute over ownership of the world's largest oil fields has strained ties between the two countries .
 Akira became the first Japanese motion-picture director to gain worldwide fame . Craig ZumBrunnen Kurosawa, koo roh sah .
 /kiru (To Live, 1952) movingly illustrates the Christian maxim, “He who will lose his life shall find it.” in contrast, Stray Dogs is a tough crime melodrama .
 Many of these movies seem to say that by the time people are wise enough to understand where their true interests lie, they are caught in a tangle of events created by their own passions .
 Kuroshio is a warm, dark-colored current in the western Pacific Ocean . The current is warm and dark .
 Kuroshio is Japanese for black current . It is also called the Japan Current . The Kurosio is also known as Japan Current.
 It begins in the Philippine Sea, where it separates from the North Equatorial Current . The current is the current current that forms the Pacific Ocean .
 The Kuroshio resembles the Gulf Stream, a current in the Atlantic Ocean . The current is similar to the current current that flows in the Pacific Ocean .
 Mark A Cane Kush, also known as Meroe, was a kingdom along the Nile River in what is now northern Sudan . The kingdom was also a kingdom in Sudan .
 Kush developed after 1000 B.C. at the end of a period of Egyptian control in Nubia . Kush is the name of a group of ancient Nubians who lived in Kush . Kush was the most important Nubian culture in ancient times .
 Kush, shown in yellow, occupied an area along the Nile River in what is now northern Sudan . Kush was an area of Kush, which is now Sudanese territory .
 The Kingdom of Aksum was ruled by the Kushite kingdom of Kushite tribes . It was ruled out of the Arabian Desert by the Kingdom of Khana .
 Kush continued to prosper as an independent state south of Egypt . Kush was ruled by the Egyptian state of the Khaled state of Egypt in 1881 .
 The Kushites built pyramids centuries after the Egyptian pyramids were constructed . The Kushite were built centuries after Egypt's pyramids . They were the first to build pyramids in Egypt .
 Kushite pyramids were smaller than those in Egypt and shaped differently . They were also shaped differently and smaller than Egypt's pyramids .
 Most Kushites spoke their own language, which was different from Egyptian . The Kushite language is different from that of Egyptian .
 The Egyptians developed their own alphabet based on Egyptian writing and symbols . They also developed an alphabet using Egyptian symbols .
 Kushites worshiped Nubian gods as well as ones borrowed from the Egyptians . Kushites worshipped Nubians and Egyptians . They worshiped gods borrowed from Egypt .
 Many of Kush’s pyramids and temples, as well as the ruins of settlements, still stand . Today, many of the pyramids, temples and settlements still stand in Kush .
 The region had iron, copper, and gold mines, and items made from these metals were exported . The region was known for its iron and copper mines .
 Kush gathered ivory, ebony, and animal skins from other African states for trade to Egypt and other parts of the ancient world . Kush also gathered such goods as ivory and ebony for trade with Egypt .
 Kushites received glassware, fine metalwork, jewelry, and other manufactured goods . In return, Kushites were given glassware and fine metal work, jewelry .
 Kushan Empire, ku SHAHN, flourished in what is now Pakistan, Afghanistan, and northern India from about A.D. 50 to the mid-200's . Empire flourished in the region of what now known as Pakistan and Afghanistan . Kushan empire flourished from around A
 The Kushan were a central Asian people, originally from northwest of China, who had settled in five kingdoms in what is now Afghanistan . They settled in the region of Afghanistan, where they had settled .
 His successors extended the Kushan Empire into the Indus and Ganges valleys . He extended the empire into the Ganges and Indus Valley valleys .
 Kushan Empire linked central Asian, Chinese, Indian, and Persian cultures and trade . The Kushan empire was one of the world's most successful cultures .
 Kushan emperors opened and protected the Silk Road, a major trade route for caravans carrying silk and other luxury goods from China to India and the Middle East . The Silk Road was a major trading route for the ancient world .
 Cloth, spices, and medicines left Indian ports in ships bound for the Roman Empire . Ships bound for Roman Empire included cloth, spices and medicines .
 Buddhist missionaries spread this religion throughout much of Asia . Buddhism started in India and spread throughout Asia .
 The first stone images of Buddha were created by sculptors in the towns of Gandhara and Mathura .
 Gandhara artists created their Buddhas by combining Greek, Roman, and Asian art forms . They created the Buddhas using art forms from ancient art forms to create them . The Buddhas are believed to be the world's most powerful art form .
 Kutenai Indians, KOO tuh nay, also spelled Kootenai, formed a tribe in what is now southeastern British Columbia, northwestern Montana and northern Idaho .
 Their way of life somewhat resembled that of the Plains Indians, though they lived in a mountainous region and are considered mountain Indians . They lived in the mountains and lived in mountainous regions .
 Kutenai bands, each made up of a few families, existed by hunting, fishing, and collecting wild plants . The bands were made of families .
 They built shelters of skins and rushes, and traveled in dugouts and bark canoes . They traveled in canoes and dugouts, dugouts .
 The shamans (medicine men and women) once exercised great power and leadership within the tribe . But the shamans were once able to exercise great power, leading the tribe.
 They acquired horses and took up farming, lumbering, and cattle raising . The family moved on to farming and lumbering .
 The Kutenai Indians now live on reservations in Montana, Idaho, and British Columbia . They now live in Idaho, Montana, British Columbia.
 The name comes from a Turkish word that means armed guard of the nobility . The name means "armed guard" and "army guard"
 The kuvasz has a broad, muscular body but walks with a light-footed gait . It is a broad body but has a light, muscular gait.
 The dog's pure-white coat grows long on the neck and the backs of the hind legs . The dog is a pure white coat .
 A poor country until 1946, Kuwait is now one of the richest countries in the world . Kuwait was poor until 1946 and is now the world's richest country .
 The amazing change that has taken place there results almost entirely from one thing—oil . The amazing changes are almost entirely due to the fact that oil is being used to fuel the oil industry .
 With wealth gained by selling oil, Kuwait's rulers turned desert wilderness into a prosperous welfare state . Kuwaiti rulers have turned desert wasteland into a modern welfare state.
 Kuwait is one of the world’s wealthiest nations in terms of national income per person . Kuwait is a nation of one in the world's wealthiest nations .
 It has free primary and secondary education, free health and social services, and no income tax . It also has free health, social services and free education . It is the only country in the world to have a national income tax system .
 Horizontal green, white, and red stripes join a black, vertical stripe at the flagstaff . The flagstaff is a symbol of unity in the United States .
 Kuwait's population has grown rapidly since the discovery of oil beneath the desert of Kuwait in the 1930's . The discovery of the country's oil reserves was discovered in the 1920s .
 Other major non-Kuwaiti groups in Kuwait include Egyptians, Asian Indians, and Iranians . Other non-Arabians include Asians, Asians, and Asians .
 Relatively few Kuwaiti children attended school until the 1950's . Oil wealth enabled the government to begin building many schools .
 More than 85 percent of school-age children in Kuwait attend school . Today, more than 80 percent of Kuwaiti children are enrolled in school .
 Special schools provide education for disabled individuals, and for adults who want to learn to read and write . Special schools are special schools for disabled people .
 Until the mid-1900's, few Kuwaiti women held a job outside the home or received much education . Until the 1950s, few women were allowed to hold a job or receive much education outside of the home .
 Increasing numbers of women work in business offices and earn college degrees . Today, increasing numbers of young women are working in business and college offices .
 Faylakah, the most important island, lies about 12 miles (19 kilometers) off the coast of the country's coast . The island is located in the middle of the world's largest group of islands .
 The city of Kuwait lies on the southern side of Kuwait Bay, which is an excellent harbor . The city is located on the south side of the bay .
 Before 1950, it had few known sources of fresh water apart from the scanty rainfall . It is now the world's largest reservoir of water .
 In 1950, engineers began making fresh water by distilling seawater and mixing it with well water . Engineers distill seawater to make fresh water .
 A large underground source of fresh water discovered in 1960 also increased the freshwater supply . The city's water supply was also increased by the discovery of underground sources .
 The climate is not extremely unpleasant until August and September, when the humidity is relatively high . But the climate isn't very unpleasant until the end of August .
 Some grass grows from October to March, when an average of 2 to 6 inches of rain falls . An average of about 6 inches falls rain falls during that period . Some grass can grow from October until March .
 The sale of oil to other nations by the government created most of Kuwait's wealth . The government sold most of the country's oil wealth .
 The high cost of the Iraqi invasion and Kuwait's recovery after the Persian Gulf War severely reduced the country’s financial reserves . The country's financial reserves were depleted in the aftermath of the invasion of Iraq .
 Natural gas, produced in conjunction with oil, is Kuwait's second most important product . Natural gas is produced alongside oil and is the country's second biggest gas production .
 The relatively few farms raise camels, goats, and sheep, and grow dates, tomatoes, and a few other crops . A few farms in the area are raised on camels and goats .
 The government uses much of its income from oil to support Kuwait's welfare system and modernize the country . Much of the country's oil wealth is used to support its welfare system .
 Kuwait is promoting the growth of economic activities other than oil production . Kuwait is trying to provide more jobs by promoting more economic activities .
 The city of Kuwait lay shrouded in smoke from oil well fires after the Persian Gulf War ended in 1991 . Government plans call for the development of new oil facilities .
 Iraqis set fire to hundreds of wells in Kuwait during the war . Industries that manufacture products from petroleum industries were set to be destroyed .
 The government also plans to build more houses, oil refineries, ships for transporting oil, electric power stations, and distillation plants .
 It is working to increase agriculture by turning part of the desert into fertile land through irrigation . It is also working to turn part the desert around fertile land .
 Scientists are also attempting to produce crops by Aydroponic farming . They are trying to grow crops in trays of sand fed with water and plant foods .
 Many Kuwaitis lack the education and skills needed to perform available jobs, and they depend on welfare for a living . Many of the Kuwaitis are poor and rely on welfare .
 The Kuwaiti government believes that its emphasis on education and job training will enable more Kuwaitis to handle jobs in the future . The government says it believes that more people will be prepared for jobs in future .
 About 1710, some members of the Arab Anaza tribal confederation settled on the southern shore of Kuwait Bay, where they found fresh water . The tribe settled there to find fresh water in the bay .
 Between 1756 and 1762, the group elected the head of the AlSabah family to rule them as Sabah 1 . The head of this family was elected to rule the group from 1756 to 1762 .
 The British made Kuwait the starting point of their desert mail service to Aleppo, Syria, in 1775 . In 1775, the British made it a starting point for their desert service to Syria .
 This route formed part of a system that carried goods and messages from India to England . This route was part of the system that brought goods and message from India into England .
 Kuwait's ruler granted a concession to allow the Kuwait Oil Company, a joint American-British enterprise, to drill for oil in 1934 . In 1934, the Kuwait oil company was granted permission to drill .
 Kuwait became a major petroleum exporter after World War II ended in 1945 . Kuwait was a major oil exporter during the war .
 It soon changed from a poor land to a wealthy one as a result of oil sales . It soon became a wealthy land .
 Kuwait sent troops to Egypt during the Middle East Crisis in June 1967 . Kuwait was one of the countries involved in the Mideast Crisis in 1967 .
 For about two months, Kuwait cut off its oil shipments to the U.S. and other Western countries . The country's oil exports to the United States were halted for two months .
 Kuwait agreed to pay Egypt and Jordan a total of $132 million annually to help their economies recover after the war . Kuwait also agreed to help Egypt, Jordan and Egypt recover from the conflict .
 A small number of Kuwaiti troops took part in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Kuwaiti forces were involved in the war .
 In October 1973, Kuwait and other Arab oil-exporting nations stopped shipments of oil to the U.S. and the Netherlands . In 1973, oil shipments to the United States and Netherlands stopped .
 Kuwait's prime minister denounced the National Assembly for blocking legislation in 1976 . In 1976, Kuwait's Prime Minister denounced the assembly's blocking of legislation .
 A new National Assembly was elected in 1981, but the emir dissolved it and suspended the constitution in 1986 . A new constitution was suspended in 1986, and a new assembly was inaugurated in 1981 .
 In the 1980's, much fighting was centered in the Persian Gulf area . Much of the fighting was between Iran and Jraq in the 1980s . The two countries were involved in a war centered around Iran and Iran .
 Iran began attacks on Kuwaiti oil tankers in 1986 because of Kuwait's financial aid to, and other support for, Iraq . In 1986, Iran began attacking Kuwaiti tankers because of its support for Iraq .
 In 1987, Kuwait asked the Soviet Union and the United States to help provide safety for its shipping . Kuwait asked them to help with its shipping in 1987 .
 Several Kuwaiti ships were reregistered as United States vessels and flew United States flags . Several of the ships were later reregistered with the U.S. flag .
 United States warships began escorting these vessels in the Persian Gulf to protect them from attacks . The U.S. warships are protecting the vessels from attacks on them .
 Hussein claimed that Kuwait was legally a part of Iraq, and he announced that his country had annexed it as an Iraqi province . Hussein claimed to have annexed the Iraqi province of Kuwait, which he claimed was a province .
 Iraqi forces in Kuwait killed and tortured many people and stole or destroyed much property . The Iraqi forces were responsible for the deaths and torture of many people in Kuwait .
 The United Nations Security Council declared lraq’s annexation of Kuwait null and void . The U.N. Security Council has declared the annexation null-and-void of Kuwait .
 Some people believed that Iraq would next invade oil-rich Saudi Arabia . Some thought it would invade oil rich Saudi Arabia.
 Allied forces drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait in February 1991 . Kuwaiti citizens celebrated the liberation of their country . The United States and many other countries contributed to the liberation .
 The Iraqis had invaded and occupied Kuwait in August 1990 . nations sent forces to defend Saudi Arabia from the Iraqi invasion .
 Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other nations formed an allied military coalition . The nations formed a coalition of Arab nations .
 In November 1990, the United Nations approved the use of military force to remove Iraqi forces from Kuwait if they had not left by Jan. 1991 . The U.N. approved the removal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait in November 1990 .
 Iraq refused to leave, and war broke out between the allied forces and Iraq . Iraq refuses to leave and Iraq is still at war with the U.S.
 Most Iraqis who were not killed or | taken prisoner fled from Kuwait . Most of the Iraqis who survived the invasion fled from the country . Most were killed or taken prisoner .
 See also Arab League; Gulf Cooperation Council; Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries . Malcolm C Peck . Malcolm Peck .
 Kuwait, koo WYT or koo WAYT , is the capital and chief port of the country of Kuwait . Kuwait is the country's chief port and capital city .
 Kuwait is the center of a large urban area that has about two-thirds of the country's people . The Kuwaiti capital is home to about 80,000 people .
 It is a modern city whose economy is supported by the country’s enormous petroleum wealth . It is also a city of oil-rich cities like New York .
 Residential areas lie between ringlike roads that form a grid around the city center . The ring-shaped roads form a ring around the center of the city .
 Many of Kuwaiti citizens live in attractive, villa-style homes . Many of the city’s residents live in the city of Kuwait .
 Modern Kuwait was founded in the 1700's by the Utub tribe of north-central Arabia . The Utub was a branch of the Anaza tribal confederation of north, central Arabia .
 After World War I ended in 1945, the country of Kuwait became an important producer of petroleum . Kuwait is now an important oil producer .
 Wealth earned from petroleum led to the growth and modernization of the city . Oil wealth earned from the city's petroleum wealth led to modernization of city .
 From August 1990 to February 1991, troops from Iraq occupied the city and the rest of Kuwait .
 Simon Kuznets, Simon, won the 1971 Nobel Prize in economics . He was an American economist who won the Nobel Prize for economics .
 He did important studies of national income, economic cycles, and modern economic growth . He also studied national income and economic cycles .
 Kuznets laid the foundation for modern national income accounting in his National Income and Its Composition, 1919-38 and other works .
 He found evidence of recurring cycles of economic growth that are 15 to 20 years long . He also found evidence that economic cycles are 15-20 years long, he says .
 Kuznets studied capital formation, population change, industrial structure, and how invention, innovation, and scientific advancement lead to economic growth .
 He also identified a pattern called the inverted U hypothesis or Kuznets hypothesis . Kuznetnets hypothesis is the name of a pattern known as inverted U .
 This pattern consists of a trend away from, and then toward, equal distribution of income over the course of economic growth . This pattern is seen in the U.S. economy .
 Kuznets was born in Kharkov, Ukraine (then part of the Russian Empire), but spent all of his adult life in the United States . Kuznetnets is a noted author .
 Kwakiutl Indians live on the northwest coast of North America . Kwakiutsi live on northwest coast .
 The Kwakiutl hold these ceremonies to celebrate weddings and other social events . The ceremonies are held in honor of weddings and social events held by the people .
 Chiefs sponsor potlatches, at which huge quantities of valuable property are displayed, given away to guests, and occasionally destroyed . Chiefs sponsor potslatches at which they display valuable property .
 Acceptance of the gifts symbolizes recognition of the prestige and social rank of the sponsoring chief and the chiefs family . Acceptance is a symbol of respect for the prestige of the sponsor and the chief family .
 Traditionally, the Kwakiutl made their living by fishing, hunting, and by gathering clams, berries, seaweed, and other foods .
 They lived in villages of plank houses along beaches on what is now Vancouver Island and the mainland of British Columbia in Canada .
 Many family groups placed totem poles in front of their homes and elsewhere to signify their ancestry and social rank . The poles were placed by family groups to signify social rank and ancestry .
 Today, over 6,000 Kwakiutl live mainly on small reserves in their traditional homeland or nearby in Canadian and US cities . Today, they live mainly in Canada and the United States .
 Robert S Grumet Kwanzaa, KWAHN zuh, is an Afro-American holiday based on the traditional African festival of the harvest .
 The word Kwanzaa comes from a phrase which means first fruits in Swahili, an East African language . The word "Kwanza" is sometimes spelled Kwanzza, or "first fruits" in the name of the first fruits .
 The holiday was developed in 1966 in the United States by Maulana Karenga, a professor of Pan-African studies and black cultural leader . The holiday is celebrated by African Americans .
 It combines traditional African practices with Afro-American aspirations and ideals . The project is based on African practices and aspirations of the American people .
 The holiday centers around the Nguzo Saba, seven principles of black culture that were developed by Karenga . The holiday is based on the seven principles developed by the African-American leader .
 Near the end of the holiday, the community gathers for a feast called karamu . The feast is a traditional feast known as a feast for the community .
 A typical karamu features traditional African food, ceremonies honoring the ancestors, assessments of the old year and commitments for the new, performances, music, and dancing .
 Maulana Karenga Kwashiorkor, KWAH shee awe kawr, is a disease caused by a severe lack of complete protein . The disease is caused by the absence of a complete protein protein .
 Only complete protein has the nine amino acids that the body either cannot make, or cannot make sufficient amounts . The body cannot make enough amino acids to produce complete protein .
 Kwashiorkor occurs mostly in developing nations whose people lack foods high enough in complete protein . Kwashiorksor occurs in developing countries where people lack food high enough to eat .
 It generally strikes children from 1 to 3 years old, and it can be fatal . It can also be fatal for children from the age of 1-3 .
 Young children need large amounts of complete protein for growth and various body functions . The protein is essential for many of the body's functions and growth .
 Many mothers breast-feed their babies for two years in addition to feeding them solid foods . Many mothers continue breast-feeding their babies until they are two years old . Breast-feeding mothers continue to feed their babies with solid foods for two more years .
 The amount is generally small and protects against deficiency only if the basic diet is reasonably adequate . But the amount is not small and should be kept in mind .
 In many cases, the child then eats only starchy, low-protein foods and kwashiorkor is likely to occur . The child is then likely to eat low-fat, starchy foods .
 In severe cases, the muscles waste away, and the skin swells with body fluids . The muscle waste away and the body swells in severe cases .
 The child becomes extremely listless and resents any kind of disturbance, even feeding . The child's condition is often described as a severe reaction to any disturbance .
 As the disease progresses, the skin loses its natural color and may develop dark patches . The skin may also become dark patches as it progresses .
 Kwashiorkor also damages the liver and the small intestine . It may also cause black hair to turn reddish-brown .
 Treatment generally consists of supplementing the diet with dried skim milk and other high-protein foods . Treatment generally involves supplements of high- protein foods .
 Antibiotics are often given because kwashiorkor lowers a child’s resistance to infection . Antibiotic is often given to children who have a low resistance to infections . The drug is thought to be effective in reducing the risk of infection .
 Many children who survive kwashiorkor do not reach their potential physical growth . Many children in the orphanage do not live up to their potential potential .
 It occurs as long flat bands of crystals, and its surface varies in hardness . The surface of this crystal varies from hardness to hardness .
 Kyanite is found in Australia, East Africa, India, and the U.S. It is also found in East Africa and the United States .
 Kyanite is used as an insulating substance because it is heat resistant . It is also used as a heat resistant insulating material .
 Some ovens used to manufacture glass and ceramics are lined with kyanite . The ovens are lined in some ovens to make glass and ceramic products .
 John Butler Kyd, kihd, Thomas , was an English playwright . He greatly influenced the development of Elizabethan drama .
 In The Spanish Tragedy, Kyd created a new style of drama by blending elements of classical Roman tragedy with the lively but crude popular drama of his day .
 He based this form on that of the revenge play, which was developed by Seneca, a Roman philosopher and dramatist .
 The Spanish Tragedy is the story of a nobleman’s revenge for his murdered son . The story follows the murder of his son in Spain .
 In the drama, Kyd also used such classical elements as a ghost, much bloodshed and violence, and formal poetic language . In the play, the main character is played by a ghost .
 Kyoto is an important religious center, with many Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines housing priceless works of art . Kyoto is also home to priceless artworks .
 Golden Pavilion was built in 1397 and rebuilt in the 1950's . The Golden Pavilion is one of the most beautiful sights in the world .
 Deputies of the Tokugawa shoguns lived in Nijo Castle from the 1600's to the 1800's . Deputies lived in the castle from the 16th century to the 18th century .
 Workers in small factories produce exquisite textile, ceramic, lacquer, and cloisonné goods . Workers produce exquisite textiles, ceramic and lacquer .
 Many Japanese called it Miyako, meaning imperial city, or Kyoto, meaning capital city . Many called it  Miyako or Kyoto - or Kyoto .
 Kyrgyzstan, kihr guh STAHN or KIHR guh sTAnn, is a mountainous country in central Asia . The country is known for its mountainous terrain .
 Kyrgyzstan became an independent country in 1991, after about 70 years as part of the Soviet Union . The official language is Kyrgyzh, the national language of KyrgyZ .
 Kyrgyzstan's president is the country’s most powerful government official . A president serves as head of state and is the most powerful official in the country .
 A prime minister and a cabinet of ministers run the daily operations of the government . The prime minister is in charge of the country's daily operations .
 President appoints prime minister, who then appoints cabinet of ministers . The president appoints the prime minister . The cabinet is then appointed by the president .
 The Assembly of People’s Representation has 70 members . It consists of the Legislative Assembly, which has 35 members, and the Assembly of 35 .
 Slightly more than half of Kyrgyzstan’s people belong to the Kyrgygyz ethnic group . The country is home to one of the largest cities in the country's history .
 Most of the ethnic Kyrgyz live in rural areas and live by herding and farming . Most of them are herding, farming and herding .
 They speak Russian, live mainly in urban areas, and hold most of the country’s industrial and technical jobs . Most of the Russian population speak Russian and live mainly urban areas .
 World Book maps the people of other ethnic groups are Christians . Most of Other city or town Elevation above sea level is Christian . World Book Maps: People of Other ethnic groups include Christians .
 Among the ethnic Kyrgyz, tribal organizations and large kinship units called c/ans play important roles in social customs . Tribal organizations and social customs are important to social customs in the region .
 Kyrgyz clan includes all people who are descended from a common ancestor through their father’s side of the family . Kyrgygyz clans include all people descended from common ancestors through their fathers' side .
 Traditionally, tribal leaders have been the most respected members of Kyrgyz society . Tribal leaders are most respected member of society in Kyrgygyz .
 They hold most of the country’s regional and national government offices . They are also in charge of the national and regional government offices.
 The household might include parents, children, married sons and their children, and other relatives . The household may also include parents and children of the deceased .
 Most urban dwellers live in concrete apartment buildings or stucco houses . Most of the world's cities are located in concrete buildings or concrete houses .
 Most rural people live in mud-brick houses in villages and are involved in farming . Most of the rural people in villages live in houses in mud, mud and farming .
 Some people raise livestock in a nomadic (wandering) lifestyle at least part of the year . Some people live nomadic lifestyles, raising livestock in the wild .
 These people live in portable, tentlike yurts, made of a round wooden frame covered with felt . They are made up of a wooden frame made of felt .
 Lowest—Naryn river at the western border, 1,640 ft (500 m) above sea level . Lowest-estest-ever place in the world is Naryn river, at the west border .
 Agricu/ture—cattle, cotton, eggs, fruit, goats, grain, milk, vegetables, wool, wool .
 Manufacturing: Manufacturing materials, food products, machinery, metals, textiles . Manufacturing: Textiles, food, machinery and textiles. Manufacturing: Food, clothing, clothing and machinery .
 The sun bears a yellow disk with two intersecting sets of three curved red bands . It bears two intersected sets of red bands with intersecting yellow disk .
 Traditional clothing for men includes a padded or a sheepskin coat, boots, and a white felt hat with black flaps . Traditional clothing includes padded or shepherskin coat and boots .
 One of Kyrgyz's most famous epics is the Manas, a poem describing Kyrgygyz history . The Manas is the most famous poem in the world .
 About three-quarters of the country lies at an altitude of more than 4,950 feet (1,500 meters) above sea level . About 3,700 feet (4,950 meters) of sea level in the country .
 Peak Pobedy, the highest mountain in Tian Shan, rises 24,406 feet in the Tian Shan along the border with China . Peak PObedy is the tallest mountain in the region, and is located in the north of China .
 About 15 percent of Kyrgyzstan is below 3,000 feet above sea level . Only about 15 percent is below that level .
 Summers are very warm and dry in the valleys and plains, and cool in the mountains . Summer is very warm in the valley and plains and plains .
 July temperatures average 60 to 75 °F in the valleys and plains and about 41 °F  in the mountains . July temperatures in the valley and plains average about 40 °F .
 Winters are chilly in the lowlands, but extremely cold in the mountains . Winters in the winter can be very cold in some of the world's coldest places .
 January temperatures average 7 to 23 °F in the lowlands and —18 °F  in the mountains . January temperatures in the region range from 7°F to 23°F in January .
 Agriculture accounts for about two-fifths of the value of Kyrgyzstan’s economic production . Agriculture is a key source of economic growth in the country's economy .
 Chief agricultural products include cotton, eggs, fruit, grain, milk, vegetables, and wool . Chief agricultural product is cotton and eggs, eggs and milk .
 Livestock raising is Kyrgyzstan's chief agricultural activity . Sheep are the nation’s most important kind of livestock . sheep are the most important type of livestock in the country .
 Mines in Kyrgyzstan yield a number of minerals, including antimony, coal, gold, lead, mercury, petroleum, uranium, and zinc .
 Nomads who raised livestock were the first people to live in what is now Kyrgyzstan . Nomads raised livestock and lived in the region of the country . They were first nomads to live there .
 Beginning in about the 700’s, Turkic tribes began to move into the region . The region was largely populated by people from around 600 years ago .
 Mongols established regions called khanates, which were ruled by chieftains . Mongols ruled regions known as khanats, which are ruled by rulers .
 Some of the country’s people are descended from the Turkic and Mongol tribes . The country is descended from some of its people, including Turkic, Mongol tribes.
 In the 1600’s, Islamic missionaries called sufis brought Islam, the Muslim religion, to the region . In the 16th century, the Islamic missionaries brought Islam to the area .
 Kyrgyzstan remained primarily under the domination of Mongol peoples until 1758, when China gained control of the region .
 The Chinese maintained loose rule over the Kyrgyz until the 1830's, when the oppressive Khanate of Quqon conquered the people . The Chinese maintain loose rule until the 18th century, when they conquered the country .
 The Russian Empire began to expand into central Asia in the mid-1800’s . The Empire began expanding into the region in the 1800s .
 It defeated the Khanate of Qugon in 1876 and made the region a Russian province . The region was made a Russian Province in the early years of the Russian Empire .
 Russian government took control of vast areas of land and encouraged Russian, Ukrainian, and other Slavic peasants to settle there . The Russian government encouraged Russians, Ukrainians, and others to settle .
 The settlement restricted grazing land and lowered the Kyrgyz standard of living . The settlement also lowered the country's standard of life .
 Kyrgyz staged an unsuccessful rebellion against the Russians in 1916 . In 1916, the country staged a failed rebellion against Russia .
 As many as 150,000 Kyrgyz people fled to China . Thousands were killed on both sides of the conflict . Thousands of people were killed .
 The Bolsheviks seized control of the Russian government in 1917 . They were known as the Bolsheviks .
 The Soviet Union was formed in 1922 under Russian Communist leadership . It was formed under the leadership of the Soviet Union .
 In 1924, the Soviets made Kyrgyzstan an autonomous oblast (self-governing region) of the Soviet Union called the KaraKyrgyz Autonomous Oblast . The region was made an autonomous region of the USSR in 1924 .
 In 1936, Kyrgyz Soviet Socialist Republic became a republic . In the 1940s, the region became a Soviet republic . Kyrgygyz is now a republic called the Kyrgygz Soviet Republic .
 The Soviet Union established a powerful Communist government and took control of all industry and land in the country . The country was ruled by the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 For hundreds of years, large numbers of rural Kyrgyz had been nomadic herders . They raised livestock in mountain valleys in the summer and moved them to the foothills in winter .
 In the 1930s, the Soviet Union set up government farms and forced the herders to live on them . In the 1950s, herders were forced to live at government farms .
 Soviet law forbade certain traditional cultural practices, such as religious instruction . In addition to religious instruction, Soviet law also forbade cultural practices such as cultural instruction .
 Soviet government helped develop agriculture and industry in Kyrgyzstan . However, the Soviet government did not help develop agriculture .
 The Soviet government maintained strict control of all aspects of life until the late 1980’s .
 Kyrgyzstan declared that its laws overruled those of the Soviet Union in 1990 . In 1990, the country declared its laws over-rooted by Soviet Union .
 In August 1991, conservative Communist officials failed in an attempt to overthrow Soviet Union President Mikhail S Gorbachev . Conservatives failed in a bid to overthrow Mikhail S. Gorbama .
 During the upheaval, Kyrgyzstan and several other republics declared their independence . The country then declared its own independence from Russia .
 Kyrgyzstan joined other republics in December in a loose association called the Commonwealth of Independent States . In December, the republics joined other nations in the association .
 After declaring independence, Kyrgyzstan began moving toward creating a free enterprise economy . After declaring its independence, the country has been moving toward becoming a free market economy .
 The government introduced a new currency and began selling farmland and businesses to private owners . The government also introduced a nationalised currency and sold farmland .
 Problems facing the new nation included tensions between ethnic groups . Problems faced include tensions between the new nations .
 In 1990, conflicts between the Kyrgyz and the Uzbeks over territorial claims and other disputes led to violence . In the 1990s, the two countries fought over territorial disputes .
 Bishkek; Commonwealth of Independent States; Tian Shan . Tian Shan. Tian Shan: Tian Shan, Tian Shan; Bekekan, Tian Kong. Bekan: Tian Kong .
 Kyzylkum, kuh Z/HL KOOM, is a desert that lies in southern Kazakhstan and northern Uzbekistan in central Asia . The desert is known as the "Kazakhan desert"
 It covers about 88,000 square miles between the Syr Darya and Amu Darya rivers . The region is southeast of the Aral Sea . It covers 88,00 square miles .
 Other sections, such as the northern Syr Darya River plains and the eastern upland fringes, have been irrigated so that farmers can raise crops .