 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters on CNN iReport.com's Travel .com/Travel .com .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of life in the U.S. Rep. McCarthy McCarthy . McCarthy: "It's been a great week for McCarthy, a great year
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of the world's most beautiful landscapes . Submit your best photos of your favorite destinations to visit CNN.
 188 episodes of American Horror Horror Horror Stories are published on CNN.com's iReporter's weekly Newsquiz . Please submit your best photos of the week's top 10 most memorable moments in our Cartoon Network series, iReporters.com .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit http://www.dailymailonline.com/Travel to see more iRep
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Submit photos of your favorite destinations in the gallery of CNN iReport galleries .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit www.cnn.com/travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of the world's most beautiful landscapes .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters on CNN iReport.com/Travel .
 172,000 people live in 172 countries around the world each year . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in Washington, D.C. for the first time .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters on CNN iReport.com/Travel next week at 9 p.m.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of the world . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Submit photos of your favorite scenes from CNN iReport . Visit CNNimages.com/
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful landscapes .
 176 people died in 176 incidents in 176 countries in 2012 . 176 people were killed in 176 separate incidents, including one of the most violent incidents in history .
 168 people live in 168 countries around the world . 168 people were killed in Iraq during 9/11 attacks on the U.S. House of Representatives .
 204 people died in 204 U.S. cities in 2012, including Washington, D.C. and New York . 204 people were killed in Washington, DC, in 2012 . President Barack Obama was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 162 games are played in 162 countries, including Iraq and Afghanistan . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in the coming weeks .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day for next week's gallery of iReporters.com photos of your favorite destinations in the gallery.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of your favorite destinations in the U.S. galleries . Visit http://www.cnn.com/everywhere-you-have
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Visit http://www.cnn.com/travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 73 episodes of American Horror Horror Horror Stories aired on PBS.com's "American Horror Horror Story" Documentary "Screams of Horror Horror" was released in October 2013 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful beaches . Visit CNN.co.uk for more of the latest
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of CNN Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a look at the gallery next week .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots of
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful beaches . Visit CNN.uk for a gallery of beach shots .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters on CNN iReport.com/Travel next week .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 142,000 people live in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, D.C., on Capitol Hill, Washington, in 2012 . The U.C. Senate will convene a committee to address the issue of immigration in 2015 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of life in the U.S. Rep. Ted Kennedy Jr.
 190 people live in 190 countries around the world, including Germany . 190 people are in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, DC, D.C.
 194 people have been killed in 194 countries, including Iraq and Afghanistan . 194 people were killed in Afghanistan in 2003, including 9 men and women .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of life in the U.S. at CNN iReport.com/Travel .
 207 people died in 207 U.S. during World War II . 207 people were killed in Afghanistan . The U.N. killed more than 1,000 people in Afghanistan than Afghanistan .
 190 people live in 190 countries around the world, including Germany . 190 people are in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, DC, D.C.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit http://www.cnn.com/voyage/pictures/c
 172,000 people live in 172 countries around the world each year . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in Washington, D.C. for the first time .
 366 days ago, 366 people lived in 366 homes in 366 states. 366 people live in 366 countries. 366 were born in the U.S. state of origin. 366 days later, 366 days after the death of Abraham Lincoln .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of America's top 100 most recent destinations . Visit www.cnn.com/travel to see
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful beaches . Visit CNN.co.uk for more of the latest
 153 years old, 153 people live in 153 countries, including the U.S. House of Representatives . The U.N. is the world's most populous country, with more than 1,000,000 people living in the United States .
 159 people have been killed in 159 deaths in 159 U.S. history . 159 people died in 159-year-old Hiroshima Hiroshima, Japan, in 1966 .