 “The answers are all there, and they all make sense” — Chicago Tribune . “McMillan has done us the service of pointing out just how deeply the enemy lives within us.” “It’s all there and there are all the answers
 Oswald is a sociological victim like Oswald on every block, says author . Oswald was a victim of both sides of the political divide and the social divide in America . Oswald is the only person to have been a victim in America's history .
 Marina and Lee may be the closest we will ever get to understanding the mind of John F Kennedy’s assassin . “A fascinating and richly detailed portrait of the man involved in one of the most terrible moments in American history.” — Newsday .
 "The fruit of all devoted labor reads almost like a Dostoyevsky novel which treads the threshold of insanity" "One of the finest books yet written about a still painful subject," says SoHo Weekly News u Marina and Lee .
 "It is required reading for anyone interested in what went on in the mind of the man accused of murdering a president" "A compelling story told with a mature authority," says the Milwaukee Journal .
 Gallup poll found 52% of the American public believed that Lee Harvey Oswald was part of a conspiracy . Gallup poll: 52% believed that Oswald was the assassin .
 It’s painful to accept that an American president was cut down by one small, half-crazy guy with a mailorder rifle . The president could easily have been stopped in any of a dozen small ways, but wasn't .
 The enormity of the crime didn’t fit the insignificance of the criminal, says CNN.com’s John Sutter . Sutter: ‘The enormity’ of this crime ‘didn’ve been the worst of the worst in the
 Oswald as a ‘cat’s paw’ of a much larger scheme, engineered by invisible but all-powerful forces . Far easier to imagine Oswald as the “cat's paw” of a larger scheme than a cat”
 As a writer of suspense fiction for whom conspiracy is a stock in trade, I know the gratifications of a world in which everything means something . Everything adds up, everything adds up and everything is under the control of some grand human intention .
 "We like to think that things happen for a reason, and that large things happen to large reasons," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The Warren Commission was established by President Lyndon Johnson a week after the assassination . It was meant to set the record straight about the events .
 Its published report gave us such turgid bureaucratese as “The Commission does not believe that the relations between Oswald and his wife caused him to assassinate the President” and “Many factors were undoubtedly involved in Oswald’s motivation for the assassination,” the
 The Oswald who emerged from the Warren Commission report’s twentysix volumes was a blank slate . Oswald was the only person to emerge from the report's pages . Oswald emerged as a blank blank slate.
 Oswald was himself shot dead two days after the assassination, by a nightclub operator named Jack Ruby in the basement of Dallas police headquarters . Ruby shot Oswald in the head two days later .
 The shooting of the shooter made him loom all the larger in our imagination . The shooting was the first time the shooter had been killed in a mass shooting .
 Lee Harvey Oswald in prison for decades would have faded back down to size . As Thomas Powers pointed out, ‘Lee Harvey Oswald’s in prison would have been forgotten,’ he said .
 Marina and Lee was published by Priscilla Johnson McMillan in 1977 . The book was published in 1977, with the first being published in 1978 .
 It was two years after the ignominious end of the Vietnam War and three years after Watergate . The White House was in the throes of Watergate .
 Marina and Lee offered a deep, nuanced portrait of Oswald, as seen through the prism of the person who knew him best, his Russian wife, Marina . Lee and Marina gave a spellbinding portrait of the man who knew best .
 It gave us no sensational revelations, no grass-knoll conspiracy talk . But it gave us . No sensational revelations or conspiracy talk, but it gave .
 It wasn’t what the conspiracy-minded American public was in the mood to buy, it wasn't what they wanted .
 The film is no less suspenseful for all that, in part because of the breathtaking intimacy of its character studies . It’s no longer suspenseful, but it's no less exciting, because of its intimacy .
 She was extraordinarily fortunate in the access that she enjoyed . Yet she was also extraordinarily fortunate to have access to the information she received .
 Oswald’s Russian widow, Marina Prusakova Oswald, was offered a choice of collaborators to write a book about her life with Lee . A few months after the assassination, she was asked to write the book . Oswald's Russian widow is now in the process of writing a
 Isaac Don Levine was a Russian-born journalist who'd written biographies of Lenin and Stalin . He was one of the founders of the Soviet Union .
 Marina had no patience for politics, and she was not interested in talking about it . But he was mostly interested in talk about politics, she said .
 The one writer Marina was drawn to was a thirty-six-year-old woman named Priscilla Johnson . Johnson had a gentle, warm nature and an intriguing background .
 McMillan had been a friend of John F Kennedy’s . She had been an aide to him when he was in the Senate, and, pretty and socially connected, was a target of his attentions .
 She also spoke fluent Russian, which was crucial, since Marina’s facility with English was poor, she said . Marina also speaks fluent Russian .
 She understood the idiosyncrasies of Soviet life, having spent several years in Russia as a young reporter . She also spent time in Moscow as a reporter .
 In November, 1959, as a reporter in Moscow, she had interviewed a twenty-year-old ex-Marine at the Metropole Hotel in Moscow named Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald had announced he wanted to defect to the Soviet Union . Oswald was the son of a former Marine
 McMillan then signed a contract with Harper & Row for a book about Lee Oswald for which she received an advance of $60,000 . McMilan then received a contract for the book about Oswald .
 Marina signed a release giving McMillan a free hand to write whatever she wanted .
 From July 1964 until the end of the year, McMillan all but moved in with Oswald’s young widow and her two small children in her ranch house outside Dallas . Oswald's widow and small children were living in the house .
 The terrible event was less than a year old, and its details were still fresh . The tragedy was still fresh a year ago, and the details of it are still fresh.
 This was about as close as we could get to asking questions of Oswald himself . Oswald was the only person to ask questions about Oswald's assassination .
 Fearing deportation to the Soviet Union, she had given different versions of her life to the FBI, the Secret Service, and the Warren Commission . Fearing deported to the USSR, she gave different accounts to FBI, Secret Service and Secret Service . Fears deportation to Soviet Union .
 She vacillated between wanting to condemn her late husband and wanting to defend him . She vacills between condemning him and defending him .
 The result of McMillan's immersive reporting is a full, rounded sense of Oswald’s character . The result is the result of the immersive reporting .
 At times he regards himself as a world-historical figure destined to change the course of human events . At other times, he’s a cruelly neglected victim .
 He fancied himself a Marxist, lived in rooming houses under aliases and was a furtive, nasty man . He lived in a rooming house under aliases, lived under aliases .
 He was far too angry, unbalanced and delusional to consent to be the cat’s paw of some gleaming cadre of conspirators. He was too angry and unbalanced to consent .
 He was a liar, a manipulator, a wife-beater, an odious human being, and finally a pathetic one . He's a pathetic pathetic one, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The idea of assassination, McMillan believes, is highly contagious, like an influenza virus . Oswald was infected not once, but on multiple occasions, he says . Oswald's assassination was highly contagious .
 McMillan was the first to report that, in January of 1962, when Oswald was living in Minsk, there was an assassination attempt on Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, probably by one of his own bodyguards, at a nearby hunting lodge .
 Oswald heard about it from a relative of his new wife, Marina Prusakova, a relative . Oswald's wife Marina is the first woman to marry a Russian woman .
 McMillan’s book was published in Russia . The attempt was hushed up by the Kremlin, but no one outside Russia knew details .
 Oswald had missed by one inch, and he was emboldened by how easy it had been—and how no one had ever found out . Oswald missed by a fraction of an inch, but no one was ever caught . Oswald had been emboldened .
 McMillan’s book undermines all the conspiracy theories so successfully because it doesn’t set out to do so, he says . McMillans’ book undermines conspiracy theories, he writes .
 "It’s alive to the small crevices of character— and to the vast and irreducible role of chance," says author . "It's alive to ... the vast . irreduceible role . of chance"
 Even today, half a century after the assassination, the cascade of contingencies McMillan documents is painful to absorb . "Even today, 50-year-old remains haunted by the impact of the assassination," he says .
 Oswald had only learned of the route of the president’s motorcade a few days before, she establishes, when it was published in the Dallas newspapers . Oswald learned of route of motorcade days before the assassination, she says .
 President Obama's limousine passes right by the building where he works . The president's limo will be passing right by a building at the end of the day .
 Marina and Lee bodies forth in meticulous detail in meticulous, mesmerizing detail . The task of coming to terms with this reality is the challenge they face .
 The reissue of McMillan's classic book is the perfect occasion to surrender the salve of conspiracy, and take a good, long look .
 The young man sipping tea in his Moscow hotel room that November evening in 1959 seemed unlikely to become a Soviet citizen any time soon . He was drinking tea in a hotel room in the Soviet capital .
 If he succeeded in what he had set out to do, he would never see North Carolina, or wherever he was from, again . Yet if he succeeded, he'd never seen North Carolina or wherever North Carolina again .
 Like defectors I had heard of from the days of Stalin, he would find himself locked away in some frozen provincial town . I imagined, chained to a dreary mechanical job, eating heavy Russian dumplings, living among rough people .
 The oath of renunciation he hoped to take would keep him trapped here for the rest of his life . He had barely reached the age of twenty, and he had barely been able to reach that age . He hoped to renounce his life and take the oath .
 I had first heard of Oswald only a few hours before, when I stopped by the American Embassy to pick up my mail . I had been in the U.S. Embassy only hours before .
 The mail was located just outside the consular office on the ground floor of the building .
 He’s angry at everything American and wants to become a Soviet citizen . He wants to be a Russian citizen . CNN.com: "He wants to live in Russia and be a citizen of Russia"
 As a correspondent for the North American Newspaper Alliance and The Progressive Magazine stationed in Moscow at the time, I was as well equipped as any to bring a young man like this out of himself . I was stationed in Russia in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Oswald’s hotel room later that afternoon . Oswald's hotel room was the scene of the assassination . Oswald had been in the hotel room at the time of the shooting .
 Hotel owner says he will come to his hotel room for an interview at nine in the evening . But he gave a small smile and said he would come to the Metropole Hotel to interview .
 The Soviet Embassy was given a runaround by the U.S. Embassy, but it was more solicitude by Soviet officials than the American Embassy . The Soviet Union was the source of the runaround, the ambassador says .
 He had come to Moscow on a ten-day tourist visa . He immediately confronted his startled hosts with a demand that he be granted Soviet citizenship .
 Since then, he had been living in his hotel room, fearful that his request would be refused and he would be shipped back to the U.S. He feared that he'd be sent back to his homeland .
 After weeks of waiting, he was assured by Russian officials that, regardless of whether he was accepted as a citizen, he would not be forced to leave the country . He was assured that regardless of his status, he wouldn't be forced out of Russia .
 Knowing that he would not have to face charges of some kind at home, he now felt that it was “safe” to air his feelings about the U.S. embassy .
 He had served in California, the Philippines and Japan . He studied Russian at night during his final year in the Marine Corps and saved money to travel to Russia .
 He realized that racial discrimination simply provided a rationale for keeping their wages low . Now, however, he realized that race was not a problem .
 I was intrigued by Oswald’s old-fashioned jargon, such as “exploitation of the worker,” and his professions of belief in Communism . I had not met any Russians in Moscow who still believed in the cause, and the few defectors I had seen
 Oswald told me that he had never talked so much about himself to anyone before . Oswald said that he never talked about himself before . He said he was proud of his achievements .
 If so, I thought, he must have lived a lonely life, for I found him, in fact, rather reticent on any subject outside politics . He was reticent about any subject of interest outside politics, he said .
 He refused to say what his mother did for a living and admitted to having one brother . He said he had one brother and refused to give details of his mother's life .
 The man wanted to talk about his anger at the U.S. embassy . He was angry at the United States embassy in Washington, D.C.
 On a Saturday morning two weeks before, he presented himself at the U.S. Consular office and demanded that he be allowed to swear an oath on the spot, renouncing his American citizenship . On that Saturday morning, he had presented himself .
 Oswald says consul had tried to discourage him and warned him of difficulties he could be getting into . Richard Snyder, the consul on duty that weekend that weekend, was on duty at the time, Oswald says .
 Snyder said he needed time to get the proper papers in order and make sure that Oswald had acquired Soviet citizenship . Snyder told Oswald he would not be left without a country . Oswald said Snyder said that he needed more time to make sure he had the correct papers in place .
 Oswald threw his American passport onto Snyder's desk . Furious at being stalled, Oswald threw it onto Snyder’s desk . Oswald threw the passport on Snyder‘s desk.
 Snyder told Oswald to think it over and, if he still wanted to go through with it, come back and he would administer the oath . Snyder said Oswald should come back to give the oath and come back .
 Oswald wrote to U.S. Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson protesting Snyder’s behavior . Oswald next wrote to the United States Ambassador to write to him .
 He received a formal reply from the ambassador stating that it was every citizen’s right to renounce his citizenship . He could return at any time to take the oath, he said .
 Oswald's complaints about the embassy’s “illegal” actions ran through his conversation until I pointed out that he was letting something comparatively minor keep him from going back to the embassy and taking the oath renouncing his citizenship . Oswald: “I’m letting something
 In the fall of 1963 he was a visiting scholar at the Russian Research Center at Harvard . Three years later he returned to Russia to write a series for The Reporter .
 Ivinskaya was seized by the Soviet authorities and shipped to a prison area in the desolate Mordovian Autonomous Republic . She was going blind when she was shipped to the prison where she was blind .
 Her friends in Moscow were afraid that she was going to die from cold and lack of medical care . Friends in Moscow feared she would die from lack of treatment and cold .
 Ivinskaya should he meet with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at a summit conference the following spring . The meeting would be held in Moscow, Russia, at the end of the Soviet Union's first ever summit conference . The summit was scheduled for the spring of 1962 .
 The letter is addressed to the president in care of his private secretary, Mrs. Mrs. Borger .
 Evelyn Lincoln thought she would see to it that the letter got through to him . She had known her and thought she'd be able to help him, but he died .
 The next afternoon Harvard Square was in chaos with the news that President Kennedy had just been murdered in Dallas . The next day Harvard Square had to be evacuated from the scene .
 People wandered up the subway stairs looking dazed and dazed, with tears streaming down their faces . People wandered into the subway looking stunned, dazed .
 Men and women who had not seen one another in years fell into each other’s arms . Men and . women who hadn’t seen each other in years .
 "Like every other place in America, we were pulled together by shock," she says . "We were pulling together in shock. Like every other places in America," she said .
 "For a second we were, both of us, too stunned to think beyond our letter. For a second, we were stunned to see what we had written to the world," she says .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was himself dead, the victim of an assassin’s bullet . Two days later, on November 24, he was himself himself dead . Oswald was killed by an assassin's bullet in Texas .
 Lyndon Johnson created the president’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . For ten months the Warren Commission probed into the tragic events in Dallas .
 Oswald’s widow Marina, Marina, scarcely spoke any English and had to testify through an interpreter . Witness after witness was called, including Oswald's widow, Marina . Marina was the only witness to testify in the trial .
 It was unable to give a clear answer to the most intriguing question of all, the question that puzzles many people even today .
 I needed to reconcile the quiet, rather gentle “Lee,” the boy whom I had met in my hotel room, with the dangerous “Oswald” The man who shot the president. The quiet boy who told me he was “unemotional,
 Marina Oswald seemed to be the only person likely to be able to answer it . If there was an answer to my question, she was Marina Oswald, Marina Oswald . Oswald was Marina's only person who could have answered it .
 I arranged to meet her with a view to writing a book. And so, through the offices of my publisher and her lawyer, I arranged for her to meet me .
 As I came up the drive of her small ranch house in Richardson, Texas, outside Dallas, she ran over from a neighbor’s house to greet me .
 She was tiny, she looked like a child, and she had very large, light blue eyes . She looked like she was a child and had light blue blue eyes, she said .
 Lee’s assassination and death were the numbing events themselves, the assassination and Lee's death . First there were the events themselves themselves .
 Immediately afterward, she was placed in protective custody and sequestered in a hotel . She was placed immediately after the incident .
 The Secret Service was made responsible for Marina Kennedy's protection because it occurred to the attorney general, Robert Kennedy, and the new president, Lyndon Johnson, that Marina might meet the same fate as her husband .
 The Secret Service was kept on because it occurred to the newly created Warren Commission that Marina held a Soviet passport, might be a Soviet agent, and might try to flee the country .
 She enjoyed the company of the agents, who babysat and burped her baby . The agents also regaled her with stories about President and Mrs. Obama .
 Marina initially mistrusted the FBI, equating it with the secret police in Russia . Marina's husband, Vladimir Putin, says she mistook the FBI for Russia's secret police .
 Lee had hated and feared the FBI, and Marina had taken over his attitude . In addition to hating and fearing the FBI he also feared his wife, Marina, had taken his attitude, Marina .
 She encountered suspicion that she might be a Soviet agent and might have been Lee’s accomplice . On every side she encountered suspicion . She was accused of being an agent .
 Apart from the Secret Service men, no one treated her as if she had feelings, as a woman who had just lost her husband and had lately given birth to a child . The Secret Service said they did not believe she had any feelings .
 No one realized that as a Russian she was especially frightened of having government agents all around her . She was secretly terrified of being sent to some American equivalent of Siberia .
 Because of the language barrier, she had no one in whom she could confide with . She had to rely on her language skills to help her cope with her depression .
 From him, she was able to draw comfort from him, despite the fact that they could barely communicate, she said . She said: "From him, in spite of the . fact that we could barely . communicate, we were able to . draw comfort."
 From the very first days her greatest dilemma lay in her loyalty to Lee . From the first days she had to choose between loyalty to her and Lee, she was loyal to her former boss .
 Lee was dead, she could not help him, and in a way her instinct was to tell the truth . Lee was killed, she was not able to help him . Her instinct was that she should tell her truth .
 She was not to inculpate Lee, outside the bare fact of the assassination, any more than she could help . But she had another instinct, and that she did not want Lee to be charged .
 She resolved her dilemma imperfectly, telling the whole truth in response to some questions . Lee said she didn't know about her trip to Mexico and then later said that she did .
 The problem of loyalty to Lee that came up during her interrogations by day also came up in her dreams at night . She was interrogated by day by day and by night by night she thought Lee had betrayed her .
 She had a nightmare that she was rushing Lee away from an angry crowd, running, running from a mob that would kill him . Again and again she had nightmares that she had to run away from angry crowds .
 It was to be a long time before she could begin to come to terms with the fact that she had indeed loved Lee and yet at the same time accept what he had done . She had to accept what Lee had done to her and accept it .
 Marina was out of protective custody and living in the ranch house she had managed to buy . By the time I met her, she was living in a ranch house in the country .
 She had two tiny children to care for, along with business and legal headaches, and was still spending many hours a week answering the questions of a by now polite and rather charming FBI man who kept showing up in her dinette .
 With so much to worry about and hundreds of hours of questioning behind her already, I wondered why it was worth it to her to collaborate on a book that would dig more deeply into her private life .
 One night after we had been working late, she explained in a small, sad, tired voice that she was doing it to find the truth . She explained that she wanted to know the truth, and that she had to do it .
 I noticed that the word she was using for “truth” was not the everyday Russian word “pravda, “ but rather “istina, ” a word that has a holy ring to it, God’s truth, gospel truth . The
 Marina was speaking at that moment of the truth about Lee and the assassination . Marina said she was speaking about Lee's assassination .
 She had been asked thousands of questions about Lee, his maps, his guns, his movements . But she had surprisingly little about herself and nothing about her feelings . She was asked about herself .
 In spite of the hysterical bustle that surrounded her, Marina never once, to her credit, lost sight of the fact that the thing that meant most to her was the truth about herself .
 "She spoke to me with complete honesty about herself and demanded equal honesty of me. Throughout our collaboration she spoke to her complete honesty," she said .
 I tried, mistakenly, I now think, to appear neutral and neither approve nor disapprove of what she was saying . I was anxious, moreover, not to influence her recollections, and I tried to appear impartial, I think .
 Like many idealistic young people right after World War II, I was a World Federalist . I hoped that the Soviet Union could be persuaded to join a world government . I was an idealist in the early 1950s .
 In 1953, President Eisenhower received an MA in Russian studies from Harvard . "Because of this interest, I majored in Russian at Bryn Mawr," he says .
 First job was in Washington as a researcher for the newly elected senator from Massachusetts, John F Kennedy . His first job was to research for Kennedy .
 I saw him there occasionally during the winter of 1954-1955 when he was undergoing two operations on his spine . He said he saw him often in the winter, 1954-55 . He saw him regularly during that time .
 Doctors at the hospital said that the danger did not come from his back, but from a form of Addison’s disease . The disease is a disorder of the adrenal glands which produce hormones that enable the body to deal with stress .
 Kennedy could survive a major operation, and was one of the very first to do so, because of cortisone and other artificial substances used to combat shock and infection .
 One of the doctors I knew begged Kennedy not to go through with the first operation . One of Kennedy's doctors begged him not to have the first surgery .
 I went to see him, posing as one of his sisters, whenever he asked me to come or whenever he told me that he was better . I also posed as a member of his sister to pose as a part of his family .
 CNN's John Sutter says he would be laughing and incredulous at the scene in his hospital room . But within a few minutes he'd be laughing, incredulous, at his hospital bedside .
 One Saturday I found him with a Howdy Doody doll as tall as he was lying under the covers beside him . One Saturday he was found with a tall HowdyDoody Doll as tall .
 He had a tank of tropical fish at the foot of his bed and a life-size cutout of Marilyn Monroe tacked upside down on his door .
 On the floor at the head of his bed were three tall stacks of books . Many of them were about how this or that politician had become president, or how some politician had won his party’s nomination for the presidency .
 On this particular afternoon the room was also filled with a gaggle of gum-chewing bobby-soxers, “cousins from New Jersey,” Jack said .
 He threw it across the room, and it hit with a force that belied his weakened state . Once he hurled it across, it hit him with a strength that belies his weakened status . He threw the weapon at him as he lay down, but it hit .
 When he got out of the hospital, he came across my path once in a while, then disappeared, often for months at a time . "He lit it up briefly, then . then disappeared," she says .
 The characteristic of Jack’s that I saw most was his wide-ranging curiosity . Aside from his humor and Irish irascibility, Jack was the characteristic of his personality, he said .
 "I imagine that they, too, were as amused and flattered as I was. He treated everyone to an endless flow of questions, and I imagine that he treated everyone."
 Despite all the questions, Jack held his curiosity within limits, says Jack . "I noticed that Jack held himself within limits," he says .
 Even in the hospital, when he had plenty of time and no certain future, he did not allow his questions to roam freely, wherever they might lead, he said .
 He kept them on a fairly tight course, to those whose answers might prove useful .
 Eager as he was for information, then, he did not allow himself the luxury of genuine intellectual curiosity . He was not allowed himself to allow himself to indulge himself in genuine curiosity .
 Kennedy had a rebellious streak, and it showed through in many delightful and eccentric things he did . Kennedy's rebellious streak was evident in many of his eccentric things .
 He had accepted the ambition that had been thrust upon him, the ambition to become president of the United States. But he had on the whole accepted that he had .
 Only, I thought, he had done it at a cost to his capacity for empathy and imagination . Only, he said, he did it at the cost of his ability to empathise .
 He had a candor and a breathtaking detachment about himself, but wondered how well he understood other people, especially those who lacked his kind of ambition, or those who happened to be failures .
 Marina and Lee was an attempt to draw upon all I knew and learned of the personalities at the center of this most defining American tragedy . This is an attempt perhaps to put at least some of the most maddening questions to rest .
 Since the book first appeared in 1977, I have been asked many times whether I still believe that Lee Harvey Oswald alone killed President Kennedy . The book was first published in 1977 and has sold more than 1 million copies .
 No new evidence has surfaced, no conspiracy theory has appeared to fundamentally alter the picture of Oswald, his ideas and his last-minute actions that I have laid out here . Oswald's ideas, ideas and actions were all laid out in this article .
 JFK acted on his anger toward the United States by defecting to its archrival, the Soviet Union . He behaved increasingly violently toward the person closest to him, his wife . On April 10, 1963, seven months before he killed President Kennedy, shot at and narrowly missed killing an imagined
 After a decade of failed dreams with a target who could be seen as the embodiment of United States capitalism, this man chose to commit the world-changing deed he had dreamt of all his dreams .
 Lee Oswald wanted to destroy the symbol of American capitalism, but it was equally important to let the world know why he had done it . Lee Oswald was assassinated in September 1945 in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 John J Abt, whom he started calling immediately after Marina left, had read about in the left-wing newspapers he subscribed to, the Worker and the Militant . He started calling Abt immediately after she left, and he called him immediately afterwards .
 Abt defended ‘victims’ charged under the Smith Act, a 1940 law making it a crime to advocate violent overthrow of the U.S. government . Abt is accused of defending "victims" charged under Smith Act .
 John Abt and his wife Jessica had left the day before for their country house in Kent, Connecticut . Abt had left for most Fridays, as they did most Fridays .
 Lee tried to reach Abt, but he had already heard from him . Abt had already been told by Lee that he was in danger . Lee had been trying to reach him, but Abt was able to get to him .
 A reporter from CBS-TV woke him early that morning to ask whether he would be willing to represent Oswald . Abt replied that he would have to be asked by the defendant himself before he could consider it .
 Oswald was shot in front of millions of television viewers the very next day, as he was being transferred to the county jail . Abt never did speak to Oswald, however, for the man who wanted him to be his attorney was shot the next day .
 The president may have learned of the route the weekend before the president’s visit . The route was published in the Dallas Morning News on November 19 .
 There were signs, starting the next day, Wednesday, that something might be changing Oswald’s plans . Oswald's plans may be changing, but there were signs he was changing his plans, Oswald says .
 At the end of the day, he made an unscheduled trip to Irving, Texas, to the house where Marina and his two children were staying, to say goodbye perhaps . He never gave any hint as to what he might be up to .
 If the route of the presidential motorcade was the trigger, the target himself was another matter . The president's motorcade route was the target of the shooting .
 Oswald rather liked President Kennedy, or what he knew of him as a man . Oswald was a fan of President Kennedy . Oswald's father was also a friend of the president .
 JFK, like Oswald, was the father of two young children and excelled at the very endeavors Oswald wanted to excel at, too . Kennedy, like JFK, was a father who excelled in his own endeavors .
 Oswald approved President Kennedy’s record on civil rights, a cause on which he himself had taken a stand as early as the age of 14 . Oswald approved the president's record as a civil rights activist .
 Kennedy had signed a weapons treaty with the Russians as well . Kennedy had made a speech urging better relations with the USSR and signed a treaty .
 On the other hand, Kennedy’s forces had attacked Fidel Castro at the Bay of Pigs . On the contrary, Kennedy's forces were attacked by Fidel Castro in the attack .
 Oswald wanted to go to Cuba to show his soldiers how to handle firearms better . He was blocked only the month before by Cuban consular officials in Mexico City who refused him a visa . Castro was a hero to Oswald .
 Oswald’s feelings toward Castro at the end of November seem therefore to have been ambiguous . Oswald's feelings toward the Castro regime at the time of the assassination were ambiguous, according to the book .
 Lee Oswald had professed hatred for President Kennedy, but for Oswald, he was head of the U.S. capitalist system . Oswald's hatred for Kennedy was based on his hatred for the capitalist system, he says . Lee Oswald was a member of the Oswald family, but he was
 The opportunity that presented itself now, though, dwarfed anything he could have imagined, he says . The opportunity for him to succeed in the U.S. is beyond his imagination .
 His personal feelings toward Kennedy, even fear for his own life, could not enter in . And he said he would not be drawn to Kennedy's death .
 Lee Oswald, a lifelong Marxist, chose this way to bring justice, to remove inequality from U.S. life . It would have to know that Lee Oswald had chosen this way, Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald chose this method of bringing justice .
 Marina Lee took with him, when he was shot, all too many answers . Marina herself herself observed, Lee took . with him when he died, she said, "All too many questions" Lee was shot in the head with a gun .
 Lee Oswald met Oswald in Moscow in May 1996 . He was staying in the Metropole Hotel, where he had met Lee Oswald all those years before .
 The Soviet Union, which had seemed impregnable back then, had dissolved into the air in 1991 . The former Soviet Union had been the most powerful country in history .
 The Metropole was home to merchants and traders from the Russian provinces back in the nineteenth century . It was now a deluxe destination for businessmen from all over the world who hoped to make a killing in Boris Yeltsin’s newly capitalist Russia .
 Oleg Nechiporenko was a onetime KGB officer who dealt with Oswald at the Soviet consulate in Mexico City two months before the assassination . He was going to meet with a man he met with Oswald in the days before his assassination .
 Friends had told me that Nechiporenko had read my book about the Kennedy assassination and wanted to talk to me . Friends told me he had read the book and that he wanted to speak to me about it .
 Over the telephone he had told me to look for a gray-haired man with dark rimmed glasses and a moustache . Over the phone he had said he would be looking for a man with a gray hair, dark glasses .
 JFK met Oswald in Mexico back in 1963, and Oswald wrote a book about his encounters with him . JFK met with JFK's widow in the lobby of the White House in Washington, DC .
 On the third floor of the Metropole, the very floor where I had interviewed Lee Oswald in November, 1959, his KGB interlocutor and I sat comfortably on the landing, exchanging memories of Lee .
 Nechiporenko kept his dark glasses on, making him look spooky on a May afternoon which seemed made for sunshine and flowers .
 Oswald seemed amused, as if to say that in a lifetime of meeting people who were off the beaten track, he had never seen one like Oswald . And he seemed amused as if he'd never seen a like Oswald.
 Nechiporenko, viceconsul at the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City, died September 27, 1963 . His coconsul, Valery Kostikov, died in the arms of the Soviet Union in 1963 .
 Claims he's already lived in the Soviet Union, married one of our girls . Claims he’s already lived . in the . Soviet Union . Claims to have lived in . the Soviet . Union .
 The FBI is persecuting him and keeping him from getting a job . They live in the U.S. but they live in America, they say .
 Nechiporenko was leaning against a doorpost when he came toward him . He did not react as he approached him, leaning against the doorpost .
 He was wearing a light jacket, a sport shirt open at the collar, and rumpled slacks . He appeared in a state of mental and physical exhaustion .
 He became lively as he told his story of FBI persecution . But he became lively, even agitated, as he recounted his story .
 Asked why he had left the Soviet Union and returned to the United States, Oswald avoided answering . Nechiporenko was put on guard by Oswald's refusal to answer questions .
 The Soviet Embassy in Washington would still take at least four months to forward the papers to Moscow . The consulant said he could give him the papers he needed and the consulate would forward them to Moscow, as a favor .
 Nechiporenko admits he was disappointed at having had to waste an hour with yet another unpromising American . He was disappointed that he had wasted the hour with American .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin stopped for a beer with his friend Kostikov in Moscow . He says he's not afraid to go back to the embassy .
 Kostikov had had a call that afternoon from a woman named Sylvia Duran at the Cuban consulate . Duran had been at the consulate in Havana, Cuba, for a month earlier . The Cuban consulate is located in Havana .
 Duran told Duran that the Russians had promised him a visa . After leaving the Soviet consulate that day, he had gone to the Cubans and told them that he had been promised a visa by the Russians . Duran was killed by the Soviet Union in June 1968 .
 Pavel Yatskov, boss of the two men who had seen Oswald the day before, arrives for the game . Yatsov arrived at the scene of Oswald's murder in Moscow . Oswald was shot dead in the head in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Yatskov kept his sports clothes at the office and was preparing to change into them when the sentry showed in a visitor . The sentry was a visitor to the office in the Russian capital, Moscow .
 Nechiporenko spotted Yatskov and Kostikov seated at a desk, Oswald on the other side with his back to the window, documents strewn over the desk, and a pistol lying there . The two men were seated at the desk and documents were strewn
 Nechiporenko tiptoed into the office next to the room the men were in and put his ear to the keyhole . Worried about his comrades, the man in charge of the Soviet Union's most powerful unit .
 Oswald had repeated his story of the day before, pleading that he needed a visa quickly because he was under surveillance, even persecution, at home and was afraid for his life . As Kostikov described it to him later, Oswald had told him he needed to get a visa because
 He dreamed of returning to Minsk and living there quietly with his family . He said he dreamed of living in Minsk, Belarus .
 Suddenly he became hysterical, started to sob, and cried, “I am afraid.” He then became hysterical and started to cry, ‘I'm afraid. I am afraid”
 He reached into the left pocket of his jacket and pulled out a revolver . Repeating again and again that he was being persecuted, and was being followed even in Mexico, he pulled out the revolver .
 As Nechiporenko watched through the keyhole, Yatskov asked Oswald for the gun . Oswald had already been shot dead by the Soviet Union in June 1945 .
 Yatskov opened the chamber, shook the bullets into his hand, and placed them in the desk drawer . He then placed the bullets in his desk drawer, shaking them in his hand .
 Oswald asked that as an alternative to giving him a Soviet visa, they recommend to the Cuban consulate that it issue him a Cuban visa instead . Oswald explained that he also hoped to “help Cubans build a new life” and asked for a Cuban passport .
 Yatskov explained that as a sovereign nation, Cuba decided such questions for itself . Cuba is sovereign to decide its own sovereignty, he said .
 Yatskov leaned down, extracted the bullets from the drawer, and calmly handed them back to the visitor . He calmly handed the bullets back to him .
 Before leaving the Metropole, Nechiporenko and I compared conclusions as to why Oswald had killed President Kennedy . Oswald was killed by Oswald in November 1963 .
 I was not at all surprised that his interpretation was closer to mine than that of just about anyone I’d ever talked to . He stressed above all the importance of certain last-minute events in the film .
 Oswald told coworker who gave him a ride to work on the morning of November 22 that the long package he was carrying contained “curtain rods,” when in fact it contained a rifle concealed in brown wrapping paper . Oswald told the coworker the package contained ‘cur
 Without realizing it, Marina had had had a negative power, I wrote in the book . She had the power to veto the act Oswald was considering, she said .
 If she had said ‘yes,” and agreed to move back in with him, he might not have gone through with it, he said .
 Marina’s power to accept or refuse her husband that night had been more than a veto: It was decisive . From his long experience with unstable characters, he was convinced that Marina's power was more than that .
 Marina was attracted to Kennedy, who in her view closely resembled an old boyfriend back in Minsk . Her rejection of Kennedy could be seen to have triggered the assassination .
 The assassination of our thirty-fifth President was inextricably linked to the fortunes of the beleaguered marriage between these two lost souls . Marina and Lee had grown up clear across the globe from one another .
 The dive bombers of Adolf Hitler swept down savagely on the sleepy, unprepared Soviet fortress at Brest . Brest was on the border between Russia and Poland .
 Millions of men and women living in Russia at that time, as well as millions yet unborn, were at the center of the country's tragic suffering . So, abruptly, the war began, and for millions of men, women .
 Hitler's greedy divisions pounded across the plains and marshlands of western Russia . Countless thousands were swallowed up as Hitler’s greedy divisions marched across the countryside .
 Thousands more were caught at random, seized and spun in the cyclone of war . In the four cold, hungry, disease-wracked years that followed, thousands more died at random .
 A few months before the war began, Klavdia Prusakova, a twenty-year-old laboratory worker in Leningrad, found herself in a classic predicament . She was a lab assistant at the time of the war .
 She was pregnant and unable to marry the father of her child . She was unable, for reasons that are obscure to this day, to . this day .
 She packed up her bags that spring, said goodbye to the uncle whose apartment had sheltered her, and hurried home to her mother in Archangel .
 Klavdia gave birth to a girl weighing little over 2 pounds on July 17, 1941, two months prematurely . She found work in the nearby village of Molotovsk on the White Sea, and there she found work .
 Klavdia bundled the baby up and took her the 30 miles to her mother’s apartment in Archangel . Miraculously, the child survived .
 The apartment was to be the child’s home until she was almost six years old . She was almost 6 years old when she was taken into care of .
 The mistress of the apartment was the baby’s grandmother, Tatyana Yakovlevna Prusakova . She was steeped in the religious values of the Russian provinces . The baby's grandmother is a former landowning class member of the old school .
 The child herself never learned exactly the circumstances in which she happened to be conceived . The child was never told exactly how she was conceived .
 Russian life in the 1930s and early 1940s was a time when men frequently vanished into the night as victims of political disfavor . But perhaps, as the child herself hopes, it was perhaps one of the innumerable sad stories of Russian life .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna found it in her heart to forgive her favorite daughter . Whatever the circumstances of Klavdia’s pregnancy may have been, she forgave her daughter .
 Religious observances of any kind were frowned on, if not actually forbidden, by Stalin himself .
 At the age of two months the child was christened in the living room of her apartment by a priest of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 She was immersed in warm water in the family’s most treasured ornament, a bowl of green porcelain and mother-of-pearl . The bowl was the family's most cherished ornament .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna was apparently glad to have a child to take care of . She was apparently happy to have one of her own children .
 Her husband Vasily Prusakov, a lanky, mustachioed man, worked for a British shipping company .
 So valued were his services that his employers had offered to move the whole family to London to escape the Revolution . So valued his services were his employers offered to relocate the family to escape .
 Tatyana had flatly refused to leave Russia . Vasily was now the captain of a Soviet commercial vessel plying the northern seas and was seldom home . Tatya refused to move to Russia .
 One of their seven children, Nikolai, had gone straight to the army from school . Nikolai had been killed on the Leningrad front soon after the war broke out .
 For years Tatyana refused to admit that he was dead and expected him to return at any moment . For years she refused to accept that he had died . She still expects him to come back to her daughter's death .
 Klavdia went back to her job in Molotovsk, and Marina was left in her grandmother’s care . Marina is now in the care of her grandmother, who is staying with her grandmother .
 The only other member of the household was Klavdia’s sister Lyuba, a flirtatious young woman who worked for a restaurant trust . Lyuba worked for the restaurant trust and was a flirty young woman .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna disapproved of Lyuba, whom she considered too easily deceived by men . She considered Lyuba to be 'too easily deceived' by men.
 Tatyana Yakovlevna was determined that Marina would be a good girl . She was determined to devote her formidable energies to bringing up her granddaughter . Marina's grandmother is now a grandmother of four .
 Marina, her grandmother, and her Aunt Lyuba shared a three-room apartment with a kitchen and a bath . Marina's grandmother and her aunt Lyuba lived in the apartment with Marina's mother .
 Marina remembers it, even during Artie winter, as a place filled with warmth and sunshine, with rubber plants, geraniums, flowering tearoses, and mimosa .
 There was a row of copper pots in the kitchen and a heavy brass samovar, polished to shine like gold. There was also a row .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna was a commanding presence in the Soviet Union . She was awarded the Order of Remembrance of the Year in Russia .
 Tall and dark-haired still, clad in a long dress with flowers embroidered on the front, moved unhurriedly through the day’s tasks .
 Every morning, no matter how cold it was outside, she threw open the windows to air out the apartment . She threw open windows every morning, even if it was cold .
 Each day she scrubbed the floors, did the washing, and polished the copper, brass, and silver . She cleaned the floors and cleaned the copper and silver in her home .
 She pressed clothes the old-fashioned way, with hot coals inside a heavy iron . Hot coals were used to press clothes with hot iron .
 She made clothing and bed linen on an old Singer sewing machine . The machine was purchased before the 1917 Revolution when the company had a factory in Leningrad .
 If Tatyana Yakovlevna was scrupulous keeping the apartment clean, she was no less scrupulous about her grandchild . She was no more scrupulous than she was keeping it clean .
 Every night she heated water on the stove, bathed her, and then tucked her into the bed the two of them shared in the living room .
 Marina said her prayers, and the last sight she saw as she dropped off to sleep was her grandmother sitting by the samovar, stirring jam into her evening tea . Marina said: "The last sight I saw as I went to bed was my grandmother stirring jam in my evening tea
 Marina, for her part, admired her grandmother’s pale skin and her unvarying fragrance of kindling and soap and perfume . Marina said: ‘I admire her pale skin’
 Their apartment building, a sprawling L-shaped structure of whitewashed stucco close to the heart of Archangel, had a courtyard to play in . The family's apartment building is located in a sprawling, sprawling L.shaped structure . The apartment building was a sprawling building of whit
 Marina was also allowed to play in a little park across the street where there was a merry-go-round and a zoo with seals cavorting in a fountain, rabbits, foxes, a wolf and a big brown bear .
 She became aware of cobblestone streets and of sidewalks paved, after the fashion of the cities of the Russian north, with wood . She says the streets were paved with wood.
 She became familiar with the smell of birches in the park, the woods outside the city, and the birch smell the sidewalks gave off whenever they were wet with rain .
 Wooden houses so close to the edge of the sea that they had to be set on stilts . On the outskirts of the town there were wooden houses so far away from the sea they were forced to live on a stilt .
 Beyond the town lay frozen Arctic tundra and thick virgin forest where wolves and bears had their lairs . The town was also home to a village of wolves, bears and bears .
 Archangel was one of the principal cities in Russia where the Allies could land supplies . Archangel was a busy port for the Allies during World War II .
 Archangel was filled with sailors and foreigners from every nation . Unlike almost any other provincial Soviet city at the time, it was full of sailors and foreign nationals . The city is now a tourist destination .
 There were Englishmen, Chinese, and Americans, even Negroes, whom few Russians had ever seen . Few Russians were ever seen. Englishmen and Chinese, as well as Americans .
 Archangel had a muffled wartime lilt and, in its own gray, Soviet way, had a little of the feel of an icebound honky-tonk town . With so many foreigners, with foreign music and foreign cloth and foreign goods to buy and sell, it had a
 Marina's early recollections include eating American Spam, Spam and Spam .
 A gingerbread house in the forest, filled with good things to eat while Russia had almost nothing, is Russia's best . Or a gingerbread-filled house in a forest filled with things like gingerbread, while Russia has almost nothing .
 Marina's grandmother was an ingenious cook in the old Russian style, skilled at making the most of fresh fish, mushrooms and berries from the outlying forests .
 Marina did not have to wear the shabby, somber ready-made clothes that were all the stores of Archangel had to offer .
 Her grandmother sewed her full smock dresses and a dark blue coat with a white fur collar and cap . She also sewed dresses and dark blue coats with white fur collars .
 She also had a half-dozen bright, flowered dresses bought by her Aunt Taisya in America in America .
 One day she was playing alone in the park when a strange woman promised her a mechanical toy if she would come with her . The strange woman also promised to take her to the park with her if she was allowed to play with her.
 Marina trotted after her, but on the street she became frightened and burst into tears . Marina was frightened and broke into tears when she saw her friend .
 A passerby noticed her, managed to get her away from the woman, and took her home by the hand . The woman was attacked by a passerby, who managed to take her home .
 Marina told Tatyana Yakovlevna she must never listen to the stories strangers told to her . Marina's mother, Tatya, told Marina that she must not listen to strangers' stories . Marina is now in a relationship with Marina's friend, Marina, who is in a
 So difficult were conditions during the war that there were people who roamed the streets kidnapping children for their clothes . Children were kidnapped for their clothing .
 They would sell the clothing and leave the children to starve in the woods . The children would be left with nothing to eat, leaving them to starve .
 It's difficult to fix with precision the sequence in which hitherto unknown relatives appeared in the Archangel apartment . It is difficult to pinpoint the sequence of the events in the apartment .
 The sheltered life Marina had known with her grandmother became less tranquil, and the cast of characters whose lives touched her own grew larger . Marina's life in New York grew darker as she grew older .
 Alexander Medvedev, the man whom Marina’s mother had married during the war, appeared at the memorial service . Marina's mother's mother was also there at the time of the war .
 Alexander was a wounded soldier and Klavdia was a laboratory worker . The romance began when Marina was a baby in a hospital somewhere in western Russia .
 The couple were married in September 1942, when Marina was 14 months old .
 She was told, however, that he was her real father, who had been away at the front of the battle . She had been told he was the father of her .
 She met him for the first time in the early spring when she was not yet four years old . She is now four-years-old .
 Early one morning she was on her way to the park to ride on the merry-goround . She was on the way to a park to celebrate her birthday with her family .
 When she got there the gate was still locked, she reached up as far as she could, trying to undo the latch from inside . She reached for the gate to try and undo it from inside, but the gate still locked .
 He had dark hair and blue eyes, and she thought he was wonderfully handsome . She thought he'd be wonderfully handsome.
 He had been wounded in the leg by a bullet . He showed Marina the scar and the place where his toe was missing . He had a toe missing .
 She lifted her dress and showed him her scar that had been left by a childhood infection . She lifted up her dress to show him that she had been scarred by an infection she had suffered from .
 Marina’s mother was taken to Murmansk, Russia, a month after her disappearance . Marina's mother was also taken there by Marina's father, who disappeared in 2010 . Marina and her mother were both killed in Russia .
 Marina was left behind when her grandfather died of cancer of the throat . Her grandfather, Vasily Prusakov, came home from sea for the last time and died in Murmansk .
 Her recollection of this first visit alone with her mother and stepfather is a happy one . Her memory of this visit with her stepfather and her mother is of her happy ones .
 Marina thought that her mother, with her soft, brown hair and huge, sad green eyes, was the most beautiful person alive . Marina thought her mother was the best person alive, with soft brown hair, huge green eyes .
 She remembers the leather smell of Alexander Medvedev’s windbreaker as he took her, perched on his shoulders, coasting downhill on a toboggan . She remembers him as she sat in his shoulders as he rode down the slopes with her in his windbreaker .
 She remembers that he warmed her cot with an electric heater before she went to bed at night . He wrapped her up in a scarf whenever she went outdoors to shield her face from the wind . She remembers how he wrapped her in a blanket to protect her from the cold .
 On September 3, 1945, Klavdia gave birth to a son, Pyotr (called Petya) Medvedev . The couple married in 1945 and have a son together .
 Klavdia returned to her mother’s apartment in Archangel, bringing Marina and the new baby with her . Marina's husband remained in Murmansk, while her husband stayed in Murmank .
 Pyotr was christened, as Marina had been, in Tatyana Yakovlevna’s green porcelain bowl . The baby's mother was also christened in the same bowl .
 In December 1945, Yakovlevna’s oldest son, Ilya, came back from the war, his tour of duty with the Soviet army in Germany at an end . Tatyana Yakovievna's oldest son Ilya died in December 1945 .
 Tall, slender, about thirty-seven years old, with a tired smile and a face like a kindly eagle, he brought candy and toys and dresses from Germany . He brought candy, toys, dresses and dresses .
 He also brought his wife Valya, a jolly, good-looking woman in her early twenties, to his home .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna considered her son a paragon, and pretty and kindhearted as Valya was, she thought she was too simple, too poorly educated, not good enough for Ilya . She thought her son, Ilya, too simple and poorly educated .
 Marina always found time to sing to Marina, tell her stories, and help her draw pictures .
 Ilya was devoted to his wife, and they were destined to play an important role in Marina's life later on . Despite his mother’s attitude, Ilya and Marina's mother were devoted to each other .
 With so many of the family at home, the three-room apartment was very crowded . The three-bedroom apartment is very crowded with many people .
 Marina still slept with her grandmother in the living room . Aunt Lyuba was alone in the second room, while Aunt Lyubia was alone . Klavdia and Petya and Ilya and Valya were in one bed, while Ilya slept with Ilya in the
 When Valya read aloud to the family in the evenings, the only writers Tatyana Yakovlevna consented to hear were Pushkin, Lermontov, and Leo Tolstoy .
 What she really wanted was to have the same passages in War and Peace read aloud to her again and again, she said .
 She refused to have the names of Soviet writers even mentioned in her presence . The writer refused to be allowed to mention Soviet writers .
 She nursed a certain nostalgia for the czar and his family . She had a lofty contempt for her country’s Communist overlords .
 She called Stalin a “demon let loose on earth” and could never hear his name without giving a little spit of derision . With a majestic disdain for the all-powerful Stalin, she called him a ‘demon’
 Ilya alone knew what was best for him, she said . Still, she respected his convictions and his party membership, remarking that Ilya knew best .
 When it came to her own old-fashioned ideas and religious beliefs, she would yield no quarter, not even to her favorite son . But when it was her own religious beliefs and her own ideas, she wouldn't yield any quarter .
 Russian grandmothers kept her at home long past the age when most children were in kindergarten . She took her to church and kept her to stay at home .
 She did not want her granddaughter subjected to the influence of the Soviet system a single moment before she was seven, when it became legally imperative that she go to school .
 Many years later, her Aunt Valya told Marina that she had been ‘spoiled’ by her grandmother . Marina's aunt Valya said she was ‘sophisticated’ and that her grandmother was “spoiling” Marina .
 Marina's grandmother has always made her feel special . As early as Marina can remember, she was made special by her grandmother . Marina is now in a relationship with Marina's mother, Marina .
 As long as she, her grandmother, and her Aunt Lyuba were the only ones who lived there, she felt that she was the center of affection in the household and had no sense of deprivation .
 Marina used to go to bed early in the living room, and sometimes she would wake up and hear sounds of merriment in the kitchen, sounds from which she was excluded .
 The grown-ups were drinking tea from the samovar and listening to American records . "The grown-up was drinking tea," the author says .
 Marina heard music, songs like ‘Blue Moon’ and ‘Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?” and the tears would come streaming down her face. Marina heard . Marina heard her mother's story, "Blue Moon," and "Who�
 Marina was five-year-old Marina when she was separated from her family . She was left feeling alone for the first time in her life . Marina is now being cared for by her family at the centre of the world's most famous hospital .
 She hardly knew Alexander Medvedev, the man she supposed to be her father, and she saw little of her mother . She barely knew her father and her mother, she says .
 Marina loved her mother, whom she remembers as a wistful-looking woman and very loving . Marina remembers her mother as a loving and wisteful-looking mother .
 Klavdia was away all day at work, her health was frail, and much of her time at home was devoted to the new baby . But she was away from work and away from her health, she was frail .
 Marina's mother's behavior made her feel different from her mother, Marina says . Marina says she felt different even in her mother's actions .
 Alexander Medvedev appeared in Marina’s life again in the early spring of 1947 . “I’d have just let you die.” said Marina . ‘I'd have just given you a chance,” she replied .
 He left Murmansk, came to Archangel, and then he and Klavdia went away, evidently in search of a job . The couple was apparently in search for a new job in the Russian city .
 When they returned a few weeks later, they had found one in Moldavia, over a thousand miles from Archangel, they found one .
 They packed their belongings, got Marina and Petya ready for the long journey, and said their goodbyes . They packed up their belongings and said goodbye to their beloved pets .
 Moldavia was then a primitive agricultural area . Tucked between Rumania and the Ukraine, in the southwestern corner of the USSR, Moldavia . Moldavia is now known as the Moldavia region .
 Alexander, a skilled electrical technician, should have found a job in the tiny village of Zguritsa setting up an electric power station . It appeared quite natural and in the order of things, it was quite natural to Alexander to set up a power station in the village .
 Moldavia was one of the richest sections of the Soviet Union . With mild winters, long, hot summers and fertile black earth, Moldavia is one of Russia's richest sections .
 Taken over from Rumania on the eve of the war and quickly overrun by the Germans, it had not yet been organized into collective farms . The Germans had taken over the country from R.R. and had taken it over from the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 The peasants were free to buy up land, to till their own soil, and to hawk their produce to the highest bidder at the bazaar . The peasants are free to pay for their produce and to till the soil .
 Marina's mother used to say that they went to Moldavia “to eat our fill” after the rigors of war . Marina’s mother said they went there to eat their fill after the war .
 There may be another reason the Medvedevs went to such an out-of-the-way place as Moldavia . There may, however, have been another reason for the visit .
 Countless wives and children of political prisoners were in rural Moldavia, trying to blend in to the landscape and hoping the authorities would lose sight of them . Countless women and children were hiding in rural areas of Moldavia .
 Alexander, too, was in trouble and in need of a quiet spot where he could wait for the dust of disgrace to settle . Alexander was reportedly in trouble in the wake of the scandal .
 Marina recalls that her stepfather had snipped the officer’s insignia off his uniform and seldom spoke of his years in the army . Marina recalls how she was shocked when her father snipped off the uniform .
 When he did, it was to describe the terror he felt in shooting his first German and the psychological attacks that had caused his hair to go gray . He said he felt terror in shooting first German .
 She surmises that he committed some offense, such as a selfinflicted wound or refusal to obey an order, for which he had been broken in rank . She says he was sentenced to serve in a penal battalion in Murmansk, discharged in dishonor, and then required
 The family made the five-day journey by train to the Moldavian border, then by horse-drawn cart, to the tiny village of Zguritsa .
 They set up housekeeping in a single rented room in a thatched, one-story farmhouse . Housekeeping was set up in the thatched farmhouse in a rented room .
 Sweet-smelling grass covered the floor and, over it, a rug woven with the bright geometric designs favored by the Moldavians, was woven over it . The rug is woven over the floor of the house .
 The walls were covered with native rugs, too, and the room was heated by an old stove, fed with a rapidly burning peat made from sunflower seeds, too .
 In the yard there were an outhouse and a shed for corn and hay, which also sheltered an old sow and her litter . An outhouse was also used to house a sow and a litter .
 Marina rode the sow around the yard, her legs sticking straight out at the sides . Whenever Alexander wasn’t looking, Marina rode it around . Alexander wasn't looking, he said .
 She loved the fields of tall grass and wildflowers, dotted with white acacias and fruit trees of every variety . She also loved tall grass, wildflowing, and white fruit trees .
 She liked the pungent aroma of smoking fuel from outdoor stoves dug into the ground in nearly every yard to use when it was too hot to cook indoors .
 She loved going with her mother to the bazaar in the center of town . The Moldavians in colorful native costumes spread their rugs on the ground and sold live chickens, geese, goats, goats and sheep cheese .
 It was a noisy spectacle, loud with the sounds of pigs screeching and hawkers trying to outshout one another . It was loud . The pigs screeched, hawkers tried to outshine each other .
 Moldavia, unlike Archangel with its cold and rigorous climate, was a place where Marina spent most of her time out of doors .
 One of her favorite games was suggested by the Tarzan films that had been captured by the Russian armies in Germany and were being shown all over the Soviet Union .
 The Tarzan-boys, in noisy pursuit of the Jane-girls, would run from orchard to orchard, stealing apricots and cherries and apples . They would steal them whether they were ripe or green .
 The children tied ropes to the trees and spent whole days swinging back and forth like their hero . They spent days swinging around the trees like their heroes .
 Marina and her playmates spent hours splashing in the muddy, meandering Kainar River . Marina was born in July 2013 and is now a four-month-old .
 Children wore undershirts which had been resewn at the bottom by their mothers into the shape of modest one-piece bathing suits .
 In the river they would cover themselves with mud from head to toe to look like Negroes . They would look like an exotic race that they had heard about but never seen . They covered themselves in mud and pretended to be African Americans .
 Another pastime was exploring the meadow on the far side of the river where the gypsies had come to camp . The meadow is now a meadow in the river .
 There they found children dirtier than any they had ever seen before, and the music of drumbeats could be heard day and night .
 Of all the inhabitants of Zguritsa, the gypsies were the most notorious . Of all of the inhabitants, Zguritians, Moldavians, Russians, Jews, Jews . The gypsie was the most famous .
 They did not think Marx’s commandment—“He who does not work shall not eat”—applied to them . Plainly, they didn't think that Marx's commandment was true . They didn’t think it was .
 In an attempt to tame the gypsies, the militia descended upon them and took away the internal passports of the few who happened to possess them . The militia took the passports of those who had the passports taken .
 No longer were the gypsies free to steal anything they could lay their hands on, then slip away under cover of darkness to another campsite . Gypsies no longer were free to take advantage of their campsites, say police .
 In Zguritsa, not even pigs and horses were safe from the gypsy stealth .
 The gypsies were by no means the only ones whom the authorities attempted to chasten . In the postwar effort to clean up the loose ends of Soviet society, the authorities were also chasten. The authorities were in an effort to remove loose ends from society .
 A few months after the Medvedevs came to Moldavia, in December 1947, the government devalued the currency in a sudden move to combat inflation before wartime rationing was ended . During the war, the country's currency was devalued in a move to help combat inflation .
 They had been free during the war to produce all the food they could and sell it on the open market . But they had been able to produce and sell all their food on the free market .
 They had profited from the war and kept their bundles of rubles not in the banks but in their mattresses or some other spot at home where they thought they would be safe from confiscation .
 The peasants were forced to turn them in at the rate of ten old rubles for one new one . The peasants had to turn their old Soviet-era passports in exchange for a new Russian passport .
 Marina and her family were awakened by the sound of shrieking in the street in 1949 . The shrieking shrieking was heard by Marina's family in their home in the summer of 1949 . Marina was the first family to hear the shrieking of a woman in a public street .
 Soviet trucks full of Soviet soldiers had rumbled into the village during the night . Then they learned they had been attacked by Soviet troops in the night.
 Moving with unerring accuracy, the soldiers stalked into the houses of the richer peasants; arrested all the men; seized the pigs, cattle, and household chattels; and told the women that the houses were no longer theirs .
 Some of the soldiers found it hard to carry out their orders in the face of so much misery, for they were from peasant families themselves . The soldiers were from peasants themselves .
 The long-dreaded dispossession of the kulaks, or rich peasants, had begun . However the soldiers may have felt, it was a fact that the long-awaited dispossession had begun. However, soldiers may feel, it is a fact .
 By this time they had moved to a bigger and better place, a solid house of stone with a wooden floor . The family had moved into a new home, a stone house with wooden floor.
 Both he and his son, the miller of Zguritsa, had been arrested and carried off in the night . Both they had been taken into custody . The miller's son was also taken into the custody .
 Their house was converted into a health center for the district . Their lands were confiscated and turned over to a collective farm, or kholkhoz . The family was forced to leave their home to become a health care center .
 Marina had loved their landlord and was sure the charges against him were untrue . Marina said she had loved her landlord and thought he was innocent . Marina's landlord was charged with harassment and other charges against her .
 Marina remembers that there was no gaiety in the village any more, only sadness . The Medvedevs had to find another place to live, and Marina remembers how they lived there . Marina says the village was filled with sadness and sadness .
 The Russian residents of Moldavia, her own family among them, enjoyed privileges that were not granted to the natives . Her own family were among those who enjoyed privileges not granted by the natives, she said .
 When Moldavia belonged to Rumania, everyone remembered life as rich and happy . Life in Moldavia was rich and prosperous .
 Russia seized the area on the eve of World War II, the Russians were there as colonists . The area was seized by the Russians in the pre-World War II .
 Nostalgia for the old order was keen and resentment of the Russian overlord deep . Nostalgia was keen, resentment was deep and resentment was also deep .
 The position of the Russians was less enviable than that of the Moldavians in only one way . Russia's position in Moldova was less than the Moldovians' in one way, according to the Moldovan leader's position .
 They held most of the responsible jobs and therefore more exposed to political disaster . They are therefore much more exposed than any other politicians .
 The fate of a Russian who fell out of favor was even more swift and brutal than the arrest and deportation of the Moldavian kulaks . The fate was even even more brutal than those of those who were arrested and deported .
 A neighbor or a friend might suddenly disappear suddenly for no apparent reason . A friend or neighbor suddenly disappears suddenly . A neighbor may suddenly disappear for no reason .
 Some were exiled, some were shot in the rising tide of political purges of the late 1940s . They were just as the nightmare memories of the war were beginning to fade . Some of them were exiled or shot in rising tide .
 Marina learned at a very early age, and politics was something that was discussed only in whispers . It had to do with ‘politics,” she says .
 If a child ran into the room during talk with even the faintest political overtones, he was told to go out and play . The child would have been told to play if he ran into a room during the talk with any overtones .
 Marina had listened to angry words between her grandmother and her Uncle Ilya about politics . In Archangel Marina had watched angry words from her grandmother to her uncle Ilya . Marina had been in the middle of the conversation .
 There was something mysterious, something political, about her stepfather's past and the family’s move to Moldavia . The family's move to the Moldavia was the first of its kind in the country .
 She witnessed the unjust treatment of the Moldavians and saw Russian friends and neighbors sent to prison, all for politics, she says . Now she witnessed the injustice and saw friends and family members sent to jail, she said .
 In one respect only were the horrors of politics mitigated, and that was because they were living in a provincial backwater . The horrors were only mitigated by the fact that they were in a province backwater, but that was only one respect .
 When someone is caught in the cruel fate, the rest of the community, far from shunning the children and relatives of the victim, pitched in and did what they could to help .
 Marina’s mother was one of the kindest and most decent, she said . And whenever such misfortunes did occur, Marina's mother was always kind and decent .
 Marina was not yet six when she also became aware of injustice in her own home . Marina became aware that injustice was being dealt with in her home .
 Alexander Medvedev started to drink because of his troubles in the army . He found life difficult and found it hard to cope with . Medvedeva is now the leader of Russia .
 She was expected to take care of Petya while her parents were at work . She took him by the hand and led him to the kindergarten she was to attend that fall .
 Klavdia was frightened when she came home to find her children missing . The teacher allowed them to stay with her children . The children were taken to safety by the teacher .
 Alexander struck them both as punishment for their behavior . She traced them to the kindergarten, but that night he struck them as punishment .
 Marina remembers it as the first time Alexander ever hit her, and the last time he was to treat her equally with her brother . Marina remembers how Alexander hit her and how he stopped treating her as a child .
 Alexander was afraid she would infect Petya, who shared the bed with her, and Marina realized that her father was drawing a line between her and her father . Alexander feared she might infect him with her . Marina realized she had been infected by her father's fear of infecting P
 Alexander made no secret of his anger when Petya finally caught whooping cough . Alexander was angry when he learned he had caught the disease .
 Alexander clearly favored Petya whenever he and Marina had some childish dispute . Alexander was always happy with Marina and Alexander was happy with him .
 He began to strike Marina more often now, and once when she failed to weed a corn patch to his satisfaction, and lost his knife besides, he grew red with fury .
 He marched Marina home and beat her ten strokes over the backside with his leather belt . He marched her home . He beat her 10 strokes . Marina .
 Marina was expected to help with the household chores, washing dishes and laundry, grazing the pig, and drawing water from the village well . She was often sick in bed, and Marina, who was only seven, was often expected to do chores .
 If she neglected her chores to run outdoors and play games with her friends, Alexander was there to punish her when she returned . Alexander punished her for not doing her chores .
 Marina’s grandmother, Tatyana Yakovlevna, suddenly appeared . Marina was lying sick in bed when Klavdia was forced to take care of her grandmother . Marina's grandmother appeared at Marina's request to help her daughter .
 She had come from Archangel to spend the summer with her daughter and son-inlaw, Musya and Vanya Berlov, who had moved to Moldavia soon after the Medvedevs . She was in Moldavia for the summer .
 The others are all out playing, and I’m supposed to be pasturing the pig. "The others are out playing," he says . "I’s supposed to ... pasturing a pig," he adds .
 She took Marina by the hand and led her away, without so much as asking Klavdia . Marina was led away by Marina, who had been in the middle of a row with Klavda .
 Marina spent the rest of the summer with her grandmother and her Aunt Musya and Uncle Vanya . Marina's grandmother and aunt Musya spent the summer together .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna wanted to take Marina home, but she refused to take her home . Marina's mother wanted to keep her alive, but Tatya would not hear of it . Marina was taken to hospital with a broken leg, but survived .
 Marina was grateful to her grandmother for defending her, yet she wanted to be home with her mother . Marina was not happy with her grandmother's decision to protect her from harm .
 Tatyana Yakovlevna announced in August that she intended to take Marina back to Archangel with her . Marina is now in a relationship with the Russian president of Russia .
 Marina was eight years old when she visited her grandmother and her Uncle Ilya and Aunt Valya . The next year, when she was eight, Marina was again in Archangel with her grandmother .
 She was exposed to her grandmother’s old-fashioned views and her outspoken dislike for the Communist system . She was in the second grade and spent the greater part of each day in school .
 Tatyana still took her granddaughter to church, and there, one afternoon, they met Marina’s teacher, a graying woman in her fifties . Marina's teacher was a graging woman in a fifty-year-old woman .
 Tatyana remarked that she was glad to see a teacher in church . The three of them walked home together after the service . The children were happy to see their teacher at the end of the session .
 Marina's grandmother said she was taught nothing but lies in school . Marina said the encounter seemed to prove the truth of what she had been taught .
 At school she was taught that Stalin was a good, kind man who loved children . At school, she was told he was a kind man and a good man, she said .
 At home her grandmother told her, 'He was a demon let loose among men' But at home she was assured that he was a 'demon let loose' among men .
 Nearly every schoolchild belonged to the Pioneers, the Soviet organization for children . Nearly all schoolchildren in the Soviet Union were members of the group . The Pioneers were the largest Soviet children's organization .
 Marina hated everything about the Soviet system, Tatyana Prusakova told Marina not to join . But since she hated everything she hated the system, she joined the party . Marina's story is published in the book, "Marina's Story"
 Marina found an alibi; she would join when she returned home to Moldavia . Marina found a new alibi: She would join the party when she got back to Moldia .
 She kept on stalling until the end of her third-grade year . But there, too, she kept stalling .
 She felt that she had betrayed her grandmother . Even though she had hardly any choice by then, she felt betrayed . She felt betrayed by then .
 When Tatyana Yakovlevna came to Zguritsa that summer, Marina hid her red neckerchief, the badge of the Pioneers, in shame . Marina hid the badge in shame. Marina hid it in shame when she met the new leader .
 Marina found a new child in the family, a chubby little girl called Tanya . When she returned to Moldavia after the year in Archangel, Marina found her new child .
 From the outset Alexander was devoted to the baby, who strongly resembled Klavdia . Alexander was dedicated to the child .
 Petya was no longer the favorite and was now in the same boat as Marina when it came to punishment . The pair were no longer favorites and were now the same team as Marina .
 Petya and Tanya were at the public nursery at the end of the day . As always, she had to pick up Tanya at the nursery, too .
 She had to help with the ironing, the bed making and floor washing, help make pelmeny and peel potatoes, and draw heavy bucketfuls of water from the well .
 Marina made a startling discovery just before her tenth birthday . Marina's discovery came just before she turned 10 .
 Marina and a classmate called Emma were off to school for the celebration . Marina and Emma were celebrating at the end of the day .
 Emma went in to pick up something she had forgotten . Just then they came to Emma’s house, and she went in for something she'd forgotten .
 There was a meadow with bluebells and yellow dandelions on one side and a cornfield stretching into the forest on the other . A cornfield stretched into a forest on another side of the meadow .
 Marina thinks that her discovery changed her outlook forever . Even today she thinks that she has changed her life forever .
 She understood why Alexander treated her differently; he was not her father . Now she understood why he was treated differently . She understood now she understood her father's treatment .
 Marina Alexandravna Medvedeva bore his patronymic and surname . She could no longer feel affection for the man she had once been proud to call “Papa’s” She no longer feels affection for him, even though she bore the name and patronym
 'She continued to love her, but she became more critical of her with every passing day' 'She loved her,' she said, 'but she continued to be critical of herself,' she added .
 She blamed her mother for marrying Alexander and begged her to leave him . She said she had begged her mother to leave Alexander .
 Whenever Alexander was not looking, Marina kissed Marina and tried to reassure her . Alexander kissed Marina when she was not in danger .
 Marina avoided her caresses, much as she longed for them, because she was hurt that her mother dared kiss her only on the sly . She was hurt by her mother's actions, and she was afraid she would not kiss her .
 When she was punished by Alexander, she blamed her mother for failing to stand up for her . She blamed her . Alexander .
 Where she once thought her mother was the most beautiful person on earth, now she considered her sloppy, even dirty . She considered her mother's sloppy, or dirty, after she found her to be 'dirty'
 Marina knew that her mother loved her, perhaps even better than Petya and Tanya, but she wanted her to prove it again and again . She wanted her mother to prove that she loved her again .
 He treated her as if she had no feelings and were a servant who had to earn her every crust of bread, he said . He said: 'He treated her like a servant'
 The line he drew between her and the other two children became clearer with every passing day . He drew a line between them and his other children . The line became clear with each passing day.
 Marina took refuge in the nearby home of her Aunt Musya and Uncle Vanya . She tried to avoid him whenever she could, taking refuge in her aunt and uncle's home .
 The bookishness that she acquired from Uncle Vanya was to be her other escape, she says . And it was from uncle Vanya that she learned to read, read and write .
 She read Dreiser's Sister Carrie and Jules Verne’s Around the World in Eighty Days in Russian translation . She read the books in translation .
 Turgenev's novels were among her favorites, with their splendidly idealistic young women and their stories of life in the Russian countryside . But her favorites were the novels of the Russian author .
 These books stimulated her imagination and sharpened her perceptions, and that, in turn, increased her awareness that she was somehow different from her brother and sister, and somehow different .
 Anti-Semitic feeling was high in Moldavia, but Marina insisted she respected Beatya and preferred her over anybody else . Marina insisted that she preferred Beatya to anybody else.
 Marina deliberately chose outsiders for her friends, boys and girls who were different, as she considered herself to be different . That was no doubt true; yet as a child, and later as she was growing up, she deliberately chose outsider friends .
 Beatya informed Marina that she had witnessed lovemaking between her parents . Marina and Beatya were ten when they were told of their parents' lovemaking . Beatya and Marina have been together since 2010 .
 Marina found that she did not know her family had shared a room with her family . Marina was shocked to discover that she had never known her family in the same room .
 The thought of such a thing added to her dread of her stepfather and her scorn for her mother, she said . But the thought of a stepfather adding to her fear of her mother and dread of stepfather .
 By the late winter of 1952, when Marina was ten, Alexander Medvedev’s five-year term of exile, if that is what it was, was over . Marina was 10 when she was forced to leave the country in 1952 .
 The electric power station, whose construction he had come to supervise, was now a going concern and offered a job in Kishinev, the capital of Moldavia .
 He took Petya with him to Leningrad, the city of his birth, in search of a job . His mother was living in the city where he was born, and he took her to find a job there .
 Marina, Tanya, and Klavdia stayed behind in Zguritsa, waiting to join him . Marina and Tanya were waiting for him to join them . Klavsia and Klovsia were also waiting for their return to Russia .
 Marina's last memory of Zguritsa is a kind of neighborly solicitude that she had often seen in Moldavia . Marina’s last memory was a neighborly neighborly smile . Marina: ‘I’m glad that I’ve been able to
 Her mother, Tanya, and she were packed and ready to set off for Leningrad . Her mother Tanya was packing her up for the trip .
 The tiny houses of Zguritsa were smothered to the rooftops in snow . But there had been a heavy snowfall, the last of the winter, and there was no winter .
 It would be two or three days before they would be able to leave, and they had used up all their fuel . The crew was forced to spend the night in a hotel room in a room full of men .
 They sat on their suitcases and shivered, waiting for the morning to come . They sat in the dark and waited for the night to come.
 Leningrad was probably the hardest to get to live in . Klavdia dragged all the way from her home in the winter twilight . Behind her was a sled loaded with wood and coal .
 During the heroic nine hundred-day siege of 1941-1943, Nazi shells had razed whole districts . The siege lasted for nine hundred days . During the siege, whole districts were destroyed .
 Even when the Medvedevs came in 1952, seven years after the war’s end, the rebuilding was only getting under way . The rebuilding of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s was still under way when the war ended .
 A torrent of men and women streamed in from all over Russia, seeking to wrest permission from the militia to live in a city that was already unbearably overcrowded . Yet such was the boredom and lackluster quality of life in the provinces, so suffocating the absence of horizons,
 Alexander was offered a highly skilled job as an electric repair technician at the First Coke and Gas Plant . Alexander was immediately offered a high-paying job .
 The offer of a job, the possession of desperately needed skills, nor even the fact that he was a native of the city guaranteed that the militia would permit him to register . But neither the offer or the fact he was offered a job nor a job guaranteed that he would be allowed to
 His stepfather had died a few weeks before, and space was available in his mother’s apartment . He moved in after his stepfather died, and moved in with his mother .
 By resorting to the magic of bribery, Alexander was finally allowed to register . Alexander was forced to register with the help of the police .
 She had set aside for this purpose two woven rugs she had brought all the way from Moldavia and four new ladies’ furpieces .
 She carried her tribute to the housing office, where the woman responsible for passports took the booty to the district militia headquarters and somehow brought off the miracle .
 Alexander, his mother, his wife, and three children lived in a single room in what had once been a three-room apartment . Alexander's mother, her husband and their three children live in the single room . Alexander: "Alexander's life has changed dramatically since he moved into a
 A total of twelve people shared the front door and hallway and the communal toilet and kitchen . Each of the other rooms was also occupied by an entire family, making a total of 12 .
 Marina's new home was more cramped than any other she had lived in, but Marina did not give it a thought . Marina was happy to live in a cramped home but did not think it was cramped .
 She shared a bed, as she always had, with either Petya or Tanya, unaware that people could live in any other way . She was unaware that she could live with either Tanya or her family .
 She missed the meadows and low hills of Moldavia, but was overwhelmed by a feeling of privilege to be living in a city once again . She missed meadows, low hills, but felt it was a privilege to return to Moldavia .
 Leningrad is an island city of bridges and canals, with its cluster of magnificent baroque buildings at the center . The city is now the world's most beautiful place on earth, with the most beautiful buildings .
 Alexander went to work at the gas plant, and Klavdia found a job in the laboratory of a medical clinic for railway personnel . Alexander found work at gas plant . Klavsia found work not far from home in laboratory of medical clinic .
 Marina set off each morning for a nearby school of eight or nine hundred girls, where she was in the fourth grade . Tanya and Petya went to kindergarten, and Marina went to school with Tanya .
 The Medvedevs were squatters in the apartment of Alexander’s mother, Yevdokia Yakovlevna Medvedeva . In Moldavia, the family had at least had a place of their own; here, they were squatting .
 She was a diminutive woman, immensely fat, with a large hooked nose and tiny, shrewd black eyes . She was an immensely fat woman with a huge hooked nose . She had a small hooker nose, tiny black eyes and a large, fat nose .
 Marina noticed with the sharp eyes of a ten-year-old that her step-grandmother was taking every stick of good furniture she owned and shoving it into an adjoining room that belonged to her daughter-in-law Musya . Marina liked her well enough .
 Marina soon realized that while Yevdokia tried to appear generous and open-hearted, she was, in reality, greedy and hypocritical . Marina soon came to realize that while she tried to . appear generous, open heartless, she . was greedy .
 Her hypocrisy went so far that she insisted that she and all her family were of pure Russian stock . She insisted that all of her family was of pure Russia stock . Her hypocrisy would go so far as to insist that she was born in Russia .
 Alexander was partly Jewish, a distinction of great importance in Russia . Because the subject was not openly discussed, it is not clear that Alexander himself realized that he was Jewish . Alexander himself was not aware of his Jewish heritage, the author says .
 His mother judged others solely by appearances, by the scope of their money and possessions, not by what they were underneath . As for his mother, she was a woman who judged others by appearances only by appearances .
 Her qualities were carried to an extreme by her porcine and acquisitive daughter-in-law, Musya . Musya is the daughter of the late actress and singer of the same name . Her husband and daughter were married in 2007 .
 Marina calls Musya Musya, the widow of her stepfather’s brother, “bad Aunt Musya” to distinguish her from her mother's sister . She had been close to Musya in Archangel and Moldavia . Marina calls this Musya "bad aunt Mus
 Alexander's mother-in-law strongly disapproved of his marriage to Alexander's wife . Alexander was married to a woman he had fathered . Alexander married the woman Alexander had married .
 Alexander was at his worst when he was not there to protect his wife . Both he and his wife were at their worst when Alexander was not at their best .
 If Klavdia was tired and lay down to rest, they acted as if she were a criminal . If she was tired, she was treated as a criminal, she would have been treated like a criminal.
 Alexander came home drunk drunk, it was Klavdia who was to blame and not he . Alexander was not drunk when he came home . Klavadia was not responsible for Alexander's drunken drunkenness .
 Any gesture of tenderness between Alexander and his wife was ‘like a bomb” to his mother and sister . Marina describes it as ‘tender’ and ‘a bomb’ to his family . Alexander and Marina were married in 2011 .
 One morning the old lady went about her chores with an air of particular fury . The old lady was in particular fury when she went about about her job .
 Marina had never witnessed the act of which they were speaking, but she guessed from their tone that it was something dirty . Marina was not sure what it was .
 She took it all as her due, as though she were to blame for daring to exist at all . She took all her due as well as her own .
 The couple's love was the only cohesive and happy element in the household . But their love had its outcome in unhappiness for Marina instead . Marina was unhappy with the outcome of her marriage .
 Alexander hated to share Klavdia with Marina or anyone else, and no matter how Marina behaved, it only made the situation worse . Alexander hated the idea of sharing his home with anyone else . Marina's behavior only made it worse for Alexander .
 If she called her mother “mamasha,” after the French novels she read, and showed the love she truly felt for her, Alexander was enraged . Alexander was angry if she used her mother's name after the novels she had read .
 To her, Klavdia’s inability to stand up to Alexander when he was cruel to her could mean only one thing, that her mother did not love her . To her daughter, Klovdia's inability to speak out to Alexander could mean that she did not
 Klavdia showed her affection for her daughter Marina only on the sly . She was afraid to kiss Marina in front of her husband . The pair were married for more than a decade .
 Marina resented it so much that she became unable to allow her mother to kiss her at all . She was unable to let her mother kiss her again because of her rejection .
 Marina said, "My mama was happy in only one respect" Marina's mother was "happy in one respect," Marina said .
 'I had reached a difficult age, an age at which children begin to judge. I had reached the difficult age,' she said . 'I was a child who had reached an age when children began to judge,' she added .
 A child looks at her mother, hoping to find an ideal to make part of herself . A child hopes to find a ideal to find part of her mother's face .
 She remembers lying awake at night clutching her nose to keep it from growing long like her mother’s . She remembers waking up clutching it to stop it growing long .
 She was ashamed of her mother’s tall, angular build, even embarrassed to be seen with her on the street . She was embarrassed to see her mother on the streets . She said she was ashamed to be embarrassed of her build .
 At home, Marina behaved toward her mother with a sort of involuntary cruelty, she said . Marina was in a turmoil of love and resentment at home .
 Marina found her own torn-up emotions fitting neatly into the designs of Yevdokia and Musya, who used Marina as a ‘blind weapon’ to wound her mother . In that household, with its multiple possibilities for treachery, she found herself in that household .
 Marina felt unspeakable love and sorrow for her mother's suffering . Witnessing her mother’s suffering, Marina said, “Marina felt unspeakable love’ and sorrow .
 The conduct with her mother that had begun in Moldavia grew sharper in Leningrad, and in the highly charged atmosphere of that crowded apartment, Marina detected something new—she was her mother's Achilles’s heel .
 Marina felt that she was worse than other people, although she had no idea why . This, and Alexander’s harsh treatment, imbued Marina with a conviction of her own abasement, she said .
 Marina's mother’s many failures to stand up for her ricochet through her recollections of her childhood like a cruel and obstreperous echo . Marina's conviction, and the memory of her mother's many failures .
 A rotund and tiny woman, she had alert brown eyes and silver hair, gathered in a severe bun at the nape of the neck . She was a rotund, tiny rotund woman, with alert brown brown eyes .
 She always wore an old-fashioned dark dress with a single piece of jewelry . The round ornament of Estonian silver hung on a chain around her neck .
 Maria Yakovlevna's real adornment, Marina thought, was her air of openness and kindness, which contrasted sharply with the mean and suspicious manner of her sister Yevdokia .
 The children were overjoyed whenever Maria Yakovlevna came to the apartment . The children are now living in a new apartment in Moscow .
 She instilled in the children a love of the city that had been the capital of Imperial Russia . Together they saw the magnificent buildings of the czars, and she instilled .
 She taught them to venerate works of genius and to distinguish such works from the ugliness and mediocrity of the modern city . She said: “She taught them . She . taught them that works of . genius and . distinguish such . works from such works . from
 Maria Yakovlevna was born to the middle class, but was selected to attend the Smolny School for young ladies of noble birth in St. Peterburg .
 Maria Yakovlevna described to Marina the great occasions when Nicholas II—young and handsome he was, too —visited the school for lunch . She said: "He was young and handsome and handsome, too"
 Maria Yakovlevna was a devout believer in the tenets of the Russian Orthodox Church . She met and married a man whose faith in Communism was every bit as fervent as her own faith in God .
 He was a Communist in the best and most idealistic spirit of those Revolutionary times, and she, too, became an atheist and enthusiast of Communist power . He was an atheist .
 Only one of their four children survived . Their marriage was a happy one, although only one of them survived .
 He was an engineer and rose to become head of an institute in Leningrad . He rose to be head of a Russian institute and became head of the institute .
 Maria Yakovlevna’s husband was swept away . Like so many other true believers who had survived the early days, he died . Like many others, he had been swept away.
 The arresting officers came under cover of night, but one of them took pity on Maria Yakovlevna . She was arrested on suspicion of drug possession and drug possession .
 She salvaged some bracelets of pearl and some antique jewelry of rubies and gold . She was dispatched, with her little son, to cold and lonely exile in Russia .
 It was only by selling off the jewelry, piece by piece, that they were able to survive . The family was forced to sell off their jewelry piece-by-piece to help them survive . They sold the jewelry piece by selling it off piece by pieces .
 She knew only that he died, innocent of the charges against him, a victim of torture in a barren prison somewhere . She only knew that he was innocent .
 As a victim of political misfortune, she could find work only as a janitor in a large factory on the Neva River . She was forced to leave her home to work in a factory in a small town .
 Maria Yakovlevna was born into a family of aristocratic Russian aristocrats . She was born in Moscow, Russia, in 1926 and died at the age of 92 .
 Perhaps it was because her existence had been such a memorably difficult one that she met life with such candor and openness . Yakovlevna's life was such a difficult one, perhaps because of her struggle with life .
 She had touched bottom already, and nothing now could make any difference . She was already in trouble already .
 He had only to speak unkindly to the children for her to answer him in his own rough coin . The children were happy to hear him speak to her .
 Musya boasted, in one of her jealous asides, that she, unlike Kladvia, was perfectly able to get along without the love of a man . Musya was a single mother of two children .
 Maria Yakovlevna urged Marina to be more loving and thoughtful of her mother, and Marina promised to try . Marina said she would try to try and be more thoughtful and loving .
 It meant a great deal to her to feel that she had been weighed in the esteem of so just a woman and found worthy, she said .
 Marina believes she owes Maria Yakovlevna "nearly all the good" that is in her . It was not to Klavdia, not even to her beloved grandmother in Archangel, but to her grandmother . Marina believes that Maria Yakevlevna is one of the best
 Marina's growing distrust of politics and the ‘truths” of the Communist system . Maria Yakovlevna also added to Marina’s growing distrust in politics .
 Marina's thoughts, half-thoughts really, were tucked away so unobtrusively at the back of the mind that she was almost unaware that she had them .
 Over the somber midnight airwaves came tidings that the mighty ruler of all the Russians had been struck down, just as an ordinary man might be, by a hemorrhage of the brain .
 From the moment of the announcement, the men and women Marina knew behaved as though they, too, were stricken . Marina's friends and colleagues reacted as if they were stricken with grief .
 As young as she was, she knew that, as always, Maria Yakovlevna was speaking the truth . She knew that she was speaking truth, even though she was still young .
 She gobbled up stories by the great Russian writers— Gogol, Chekhov, and Pushkin . She ate a lot of the stories she read .
 She was engaged, as the innocently flirtatious Princess Mary, in an imaginary love affair with Pechorin, the fatalistic and self-pitying central figure of Mikhail Lermontov's story .
 "Vengeful and cold, Pechorin is forever spinning webs of intrigue that destroy all those whose lives touch his own," says the author .
 As the ideal man of her imagination, Pechorin was to cast a long shadow over Marina’s future .
 At home, Marina read Russian translations of Jack London, Mark Twain, and Thomas Hardy, and often forgot her homework .
 In spite of her lack of preparation and her mischievous behavior in class, she got good marks in school . She is still a good student despite her misbehaving .
 When the girls’ school she attended became coeducational, the boys quickly found a nickname for her . And when the boys at her school became co-edicated, they quickly found her nickname .
 It was ‘Spichka’ or ‘Matchstick’ because she was thin and would flare up in an explosion of words whenever anyone addressed her . It was 'Matchstick' or 'Spichk' because of her thinness and flare-up .
 Marina had an especially close friend at school, Nina Samilyuk, a girl with lucent hazel eyes and hair the color of a sheaf of wheat . Marina had a particularly close friend, Nina, who she says is a girl from Ukraine . Nina's hair was the
 She was ashamed of her own illegitimacy and of her mother’s poor reputation, she said . She said: “She was ashamed . of her . mother's poor reputation .
 Nina and Nina had common ground, but it was plain to her all the same that she and Nina shared common ground .
 In the summer of 1954, the Medvedevs moved from their apartment on the Obvodny Canal to a large new building on the outskirts of Leningrad .
 The authorities were opening their assault on the housing shortage by repairing the decrepit buildings in the heart of town . The occupants were emptied, like objects from a cornucopia, into a new, four-story apartment complex .
 The repair of the old building was completed two years later . Former residents were allowed a choice of moving back or remaining at Sosnovaya Polyana .
 Marina recalls the pipes leaked worse, the floors sloped more, and the place was darker than before . Marina recalls that after the “repair” and “redecoration,” Marina recalls, the pipes leak worse . Marina: "The place was dark than before
 Klavdia had always been frail, and for a woman with three young children and uncertain health, her existence was a taxing one . She was always frail, but she had always lived with her family and her children .
 She was up every morning by 7:30m. and left almost immediately for work . She was seen arriving at work at 7.30am and leaving almost immediately .
 After a ten-hour day, she went shopping every evening, never arrived home before seven . Then had to cook supper for her husband and children . She never arrived at home before 7pm, then had to prepare for her family .
 Marina began coming home at night white with exhaustion when she was 12 . Klavdia began coming back from work at the age of 12 .
 Alexander would turn down the sheets of their bed and beg her to lie down . Alexander would say 'I'm sorry' to her, 'I love you' Alexander says .
 Klavdia at first would demur. But fearful of what her motherin-law might say, she would say . Klavidia would say: "I'm not afraid of what your motherinlaw might think, Klavadia would tell you."
 Musya's husband refused to take no for no for an answer and listened to the taunts of Musya and his mother as he cooked supper . Musya was taunted by his mother and father-in-law as he prepared his meal .
 Marina had been ill for two years when Marina completed the seventh grade . Klavdia had to be ill two years before she completed the eighth grade . Marina completed her seventh grade at the age of 13 .
 Klavdia hoped that her eldest and cleverest child would finish the full ten-year course that comprises a Soviet high school education . It was the end of her compulsory schooling .
 Marina planned to study fashion design, which would require a ten-year diploma . Attracted by drawing and the arts, she planned to attend fashion design school .
 She came home, perched on her mother’s bed, and suggested another idea . She suggested another way to get her mother's attention .
 Marina was inspired by a friend at school, Nina Samilyuk, who was about to take examinations for pharmacy school . Nina wanted to try, and Marina wanted to go to pharmacy school, too . Marina is now studying in pharmacy school in Ukraine .
 All her life, she told her mother, she had admired the white coats pharmacists wore and the spotless cleanliness of apothecary shops . She said: 'All her life she told my mother, I had admired pharmacists'
 Klavdia was evidently anxious that her daughter be able to stand alone . Uncertain of her own health, she was worried about her daughter's health .
 Marina accompanied Marina to school to obtain documents she would need for her examinations . She got up from her bed and accompanied her to school .
 Too many of the more promising boys and girls were leaving for work or vocational schools after the seventh grade, they grumbled . They grumbled. Too many had to leave for work, they said .
 If this kept up, there would soon be hardly any of the better students left to go on to university . The University of Cambridge has been hit by a lack of good students .
 Marina entered the examination with a light heart and a total absence of preparation . Marina entered this year's exam with a total lack of preparation, she said .
 If she failed, she said to herself, she could always go back to school . She said: "If she fails, she would always be back in school"
 She was entering the competition, after all, mainly to keep her friend Nina company . She entered the competition to keep Nina company.
 She went to work in a chocolate factory and eventually studied to be a nurse . She went on to work at a nearby hospital and eventually became a nurse.
 Marina had another close friend, Tamara Kumilan, who lived with her aunt and uncle in the apartment on the Obvodny Canal . Tamara lived with Marina and her aunt in the same apartment .
 Marina was in her second year at pharmacy school . She and Tamara went to the public baths every week, as they did every week .
 They shivered a little as they hurried home, for a wintry wind was blowing along the canals .
 Marina's mother had been talking with Tamara’s aunt about the atmosphere at the Medvedevs’ apartment . Tamara's aunt said she was worried about the situation at the apartment .
 She was distressed by the way Alexander’s mother and sister were treating Marina . Marina was distressed at the way they were treating her daughter . Alexander's sister was also distressed by how they treated Marina .
 Tamara, anxious not to wound, spoke only allusively, in quick, shorn-off sentences, as she repeated Klavdia’s story . Tamara dared not ask any questions, and Tamara spoke only in quick and shorn off sentences .
 Marina learned virtually all she has ever found out about her father . From her mother, Marina learned almost all she had ever known about her dad .
 He had been an engineer, and in the course of his work, he had drawn up a blueprint for a bridge or some other public project . He was an engineer .
 In a mysterious effort to frame him, someone—nobody knew exactly who—tampered with the calculations on the blueprint and rendered it defective . Nobody knows exactly who altered the blueprint .
 Now she understands Alexander’s cruelty, the taunts of his mother and Musya, the guilt her own mother seemed to feel in loving her . Now she understood Alexander's cruelty and the guilt his mother must feel .
 Under circumstances by which she had come into being, she was of less value than other people . Under the circumstances by . which she . came into being she had less value . than others .
 Marina spent a good deal of time wondering who her father might have been . Marina spent the rest of her life wondering who she might have had a father .
 It was of crucial importance to her that their relationship had been a serious one, she said . She said: 'It was crucial that they had been serious'
 She even dared hope that her mother and he had actually been married, and that after his arrest Klavdia, fearful that she, too, might be arrested, had managed to destroy the marriage document .
 Marina looked to her stepfather for proof that her birth had not been a shameful accident . Marina's stepfather looked to him to prove that she was not an accident. Marina looked for proof of her birth as a result .
 Unlike his mother and sister, he never once reproached Klavdia for anything in her life before she met and married him . He treated her badly, but unlike his mother or sister he never reproached her .
 To Marina, that seemed to indicate that her mother and father had been in love . Marina's parents were in love, and Marina thought that was a sign of hope .
 She cast back for reassurance to her upright old grandmother in Archangel, Archangel . Finally, she cast back to the upright grandmother in her upright grandmother .
 Surely so straitlaced a lady would not have forgiven her daughter and consented to bring up a child who was merely the result of a short-lived attraction .
 Marina entered the room unexpectedly and caught a sudden change in her mother’s expression . Marina was lying sick in bed when she saw her mother's sudden change of expression .
 Her eyes and her mouth and the gesture she had just made, her mother replied . Her mother replied: "Her eyes and . her mouth" Her mother said: "I don't know why she made that gesture."
 Marina did not tell Klavdia that she had discovered the secret of her illegitimacy . Marina was not allowed to tell her husband that she was illegitimate .
 She had turned against her mother years before on learning that Alexander was not her real father, so she now found new reason to hate Klavdia . But just as she had turned her back on her mother, she now finds new reason for her hatred .
 She could not even sympathize with her mother’s illness, and although her feelings were in guilty turmoil, she could neither conceal her hardened attitude nor change it .
 Marina believes her mother saw the change in her and realized the secret was out . The fact of Marina’s illegitimacy was never made explicit between them .
 During Klavdia’s long illness, Alexander was more difficult to get along with than ever . Alexander was even more difficult than ever. Alexander was a difficult person to deal with .
 A good deal of the time he had his lips pressed tightly together, and he refused to speak to anyone at all . He refused to talk to anyone else at all.
 'Sometimes he came home from work silent and morose, only to slip into the toilet, take a nip of vodka, and come out singing. Sometimes he came out singing, he said, 'but he was always happy and cheerful'
 If Klavdia gave it back, he would look for it himself, or jog little Tanya on his knee, kiss her, and ask in a whisper where it was hidden . If she did not, he looked for it, she would give it back .
 Later, he would have second thoughts and beg to have some of the vodka back for vodka . Later he would ask for some of it back for a vodka .
 The family had to live the second half of each month on what it could manage to borrow . Klavdia invariably obliged, and the family would live on what they could .
 Marina resented her stepfather for “drinking up’s rubles he and her mother worked so hard to earn . Marina's stepfather drank up the rubles earned by her mother and stepmother .
 Klavdia became pregnant once more in the spring of 1956, and that summer she had an abortion . She became pregnant again in the summer of that year, but she had abortion .
 She was sure the abortion was a judgment of her mother’s relationship with Alexander . She said she was sure it was a judgement of Alexander .
 After the abortion, Klavdia went to the city of Kharkov, in the Ukraine, to spend her vacation with her sister Polina .
 When she returned to Leningrad, she was sent to the Academy of Military Medicine and spent the fall and early winter there . She spent the winter and winter at the Academy .
 She had a series of operations, the latest treatments, the most promising new drugs . She had the best care the city could provide. She was given the best treatment the city had .
 When she finally came home, she could get out of bed only with her husband at her elbow to support her . She could barely walk when she came home from the hospital .
 Marina knew her mother was dying, and so acutely painful were her emotions that she tried to pretend she was someone else, living in some other time . Marina's mother is dying and Marina knew she was dying .
 She began doing poorly in her heavy load of courses at pharmacy school, and endured the perpetual cruelty of her step-grandmother and step-aunt . She endured the perpetituous cruelty of the mother and grandmother .
 One day Yevdokia invited a radiant and handsome woman to the apartment . One day she invited the woman to her apartment . She invited him to see her again .
 Klavdia and her family sat together in the one room they all had to share . They sat in one room, with Klavda lying ill on the bed . The family was forced to share a room in the same room with the children .
 The moment Alexander came home, he held a whispered conference with his wife and quickly left the apartment . Alexander was shocked when he saw the caller . Alexander: "I don't know what happened to me. I don't think it's OK"
 Alexander ordered his children to leave the room while he tried to comfort their mother . Alexander ordered the children out of the room . Alexander was trying to comfort his mother .
 Anna was Anna, a woman Alexander had courted before he married Klavdia . Yevdokia had invited her to call with no other thought than to let Alexander see with his own eyes the contrast between the blooming and well-dressed visitor and the failing creature he
 Klavdia had been home only a fortnight when she started running a high fever . She had been with her family for just a fortnight before she began running a fever .
 At night she moaned pitifully so that none of the others could sleep, and it was decided that she would have to go back to the hospital . She moaned so that no one could sleep .
 Marina made a remark she has never been able to extinguish from her memory . Exhausted from lack of sleep and from the very odor of illness, Marina made the remark . Marina said, "I'm not going to be able to forget it"
 Marina was thinking of her mother’s trip to the hospital for an abortion the year before . Marina's mother had an abortion last year . Marina was pregnant with a baby girl .
 Klavdia was taken to a hospital in Leningrad on what is called the “Vyborg Side,” an island on the Neva River from the Obvodny Canal .
 The journey to the hospital was circuitous, requiring several bus and trolley changes and the better part of an hour . Because of the city’s web of bridges, rivers, and canals, the journey required several bus changes and a trolley change .
 Marina dreaded the long, cold pilgrimages to the hospital, but she tried to visit her mother as often as she could . Marina's mother died at the age of 60 in March 2013 .
 Klavdia reminded her daughter of what she had said during her first visit to the country . The mother-of-two is now living with her daughter in New Zealand .
 In tears Marina sat on her mother’s bed and protested that she did not want her to die . Marina sat in tears and said she didn't want her mother to die.
 Marina's attempt at gaiety was seen behind the sorrow and pain . But behind her effort at . gaiety, Marina could see only the sorrow .
 Musya asked Marina to inform her mother, untruthfully, that Alexander was seeing another woman . One day, Musya told Marina to tell her mother she was having an affair with another woman, but she lied to her .
 She had only thin shoes, her clothes were not warm enough to withstand the wind, and she did not have the heart for the trip . She had just thin shoes and was not warm .
 The following day she arrived home from school to find Petya sitting by the door with tears streaming down his cheeks . She arrived home to find him with tears in his eyes .
 Fifteen-year-old Marina gathered together the clothing for her mother’s burial and accompanied her stepfather to the hospital . Marina's stepfather died at the age of 15 .
 Marina believes her mother intended to tell her who her father had been . Marina believes that her mother planned to do so when she found out her father .
 Klavdia’s mother, Tatyana Yakovlevna, came to Leningrad all the way from Minsk for the burial . Marina's mother was the magnificent old matriarch who had given Marina her first home .
 It was she who insisted upon the two-hour funeral service in the Russian Orthodox Church .
 Musya was taken by a sudden and belated seizure of remorse, Musya said . Musya died at the age of 50 .
 She drew Musya away from the coffin, admonishing her family and quite audibly to everyone, “This is no place to put on an act," she said . Musya's sister, Musya, was also admonished by her family .
 She lay moaning in bed at home at home, summoned a doctor, and complained of how ill she was feeling herself . She summoned the doctor and complained that she was ill herself .
 Alexander wanted to escort his wife’s body home and hold the final leave taking there . She refused Alexander the thing he wanted most . Alexander was not allowed to escort the body home .
 She refused even to allow the coffin to be carried upstairs for a momentary gesture of farewell . She refused to allow her coffin to carry out the gesture .
 Before all of them, this veteran of Stalin’s wrath pronounced an epitaph for the woman who had died at the age of thirty-nine . “Before all of the . people, this . veteran of . Stalin's wrath, he said, “The woman who
 W ith Klavdia, the single bond between them, gone, relations between Marina and her stepfather took an immediate turn for the worse . “I could not have lived with you a single hour.” — Marina's stepfather .
 Marina ran from the apartment and spent the rest of the day pacing the wintry canals near home . Marina was stunned by the experience and ran from her apartment .
 This thought, this fear, grew louder and louder until it became a sort of ringing in her head like the insistent clanging of a bell . This fear, this thought, grew loud and louder . It became a ringing in the head like a bell, she said .
 Dazed by the sound, Marina looked up and was startled to see a streetcar screaming to a stop in front of her . Marina was struck by the noise, and was shocked to see the streetcar stop to her side of the street .
 Crossing the street like a sleepwalker, she narrowly escaped being hit by a passing trolley . She was crossing the street in a sleepwalk when she was hit by the trolley.
 Marina spent many hours walking along the canals as winter gave way to spring . The bare branches became filigreed with the first shoots of green that year . Marina spent time walking along canals with her husband .
 Rather than go home after school after school, she would make her way into one of the countless little parks with which the city is studded to sit by herself on a bench .
 She thought mostly of her mother, who now seemed to her an injured and blameless being, a Christian figure of forbearance . Her mother seemed to be an injured but blameless, blameless woman .
 Often she entered the flickering half-darkness of the Nikolsky Cathedral, lit a candle, and prayed, often in the half darkness .
 Nevsky Prospekt is the most crowded thoroughfares of the city, and above all, to the Nevsky Prospekt prospekt .
 She found herself lingering by the music counters of department stores, listening to the popular rhythms of the West, which were just beginning to be heard in Russia . She said she found herself listening to music counters in department stores .
 For a full year after the death of her mother, Marina could not bear to take a novel in her hand . Marina's mother died a year after her mother's death .
 Her feelings were too raw, and the contrast between her own sorrowful surroundings and the glittering world of her imagination was too abrasive . The contrast between the two worlds was too harsh for her to read .
 Marina visited her grandmother, Tatyana Yakovlevna, who was now an old lady in her sixties . When school was out that summer, Marina journeyed to Minsk to visit her grandmother .
 Marina’s Aunt Musya and Uncle Vanya Berlov, whose home had been her refuge in Moldavia, were also living in Minsk . Marina's aunt Musya also lived in the city .
 Marina was glad to be with them, especially her grandmother . They were the only family she had left, and Marina was happy to see them .
 Marina's mother insisted that she wear her hair long as in Russia nice girls, and little girls, did . She did not allow Marina to dress in slacks and insisted on wearing long hair .
 With her mother gone, she knew that her aged grandmother was probably the one person in the world who genuinely loved her . She knew that she knew she loved her grandmother .
 Marina met a young man who caught her fancy in the summer of her 19th birthday . That summer, Marina met the young man she'd never met .
 Vladimir played French love songs to her on the guitar, and taught her how to kiss . His name was Vladimir, and he took her to the movies and the park, she says . Vladimir was Vladimir's love for her, she writes .
 Marina was incredulous that the vision she beheld in the mirror was herself . Marina was shocked to discover that she was actually herself .
 He was gazing at her image in the mirror with approval, even admiration . He was looking at her in approval with approval .
 Marina soon suffered a cruel disappointment after marrying her stepfather . Marina's stepfather died in the arms of her stepmother .
 Tatyana wrote the registry office at Severodvinsk, Russia, while she was in Minsk, requesting copies of her birth certificate and other documents . At the time of her sixteenth birthday, she wrote to the registry . Tatyan asked for copies of Marina’
 She also wrote Alexander to ask for copies of the papers he had signed upon his formal adoption of Marina .
 Alexander adopted his wife’s oldest child, Klavdia . Alexander was known among his relatives that he had adopted the child . Alexander's wife's oldest child died in childbirth .
 She carried Alexander’s surname, Medvedev, with his first name as her patronymic, Alexandrovna . In fact, she carried Alexander's surname Medvedeva, with the first as his patrony .
 Neither in school nor anywhere else had she been known by any other name . Neither she nor anyone else had been known to anyone else in school .
 Marina could receive the internal passport for identification and travel within the country that is issued to every Soviet city dweller on reaching the age of 16 . But the formal documents, the birth certificate and the adoption papers, were needed now so that Marina could get the passport .
 Tatyana's relatives in Minsk, Belarus, were thunderstruck by the answers she received . Marina, Marina, her grandmother, and the rest of her relatives in the Minsk region, said they were shocked to hear the answers . Marina's grandmother said she was shocked to
 There was no birth certificate or other documents for a Marina Alexandrovna Medvedeva, only for Marina Nikolayevna Prusakova . And from the registry office at Severodvinsk came the reply . The registry office says there is no birth .
 Two replies converging from different corners of the country confirmed Marina’s worst fears . Together, the two replies confirmed Marina's worst fears.
 Not only had she been abandoned by her own father, she had also been repudiated by the man who had taken his place . She had been left by her father, not by his successor, but by his new father .
 Marina refuses to accept it fully, clinging still to the idea that she was, in fact, Alexander’s adopted child, that he was lying when he denied it, and that he had merely hidden documents of adoption .
 She had still to face the terrible fact of his rejection, she said . But whatever she made of his denial, she had still faced the terrible reality .
 Marina Nikolayevna Prusakova had to take the name inscribed on her birth certificate . Legally, she had to have her name inscribed in the name of her mother-in-law .
 Teachers and older friends of the family who had always addressed her as Marina Alexandrovna now had to call her Marina Nikolayevna . Her older friends had always called her Marina .
 She had to change her pharmacy school registration from “Medvedeva” to “Prusakova” and endure the teasing of the other girls . She was teased by other girls at the school .
 The space on her new passport for her father’s name was left blank . To any Soviet child, this is the ultimate token of illegitimacy, carrying a stigma .
 Marina returned to Leningrad that autumn for her third and final year at pharmacy school . When Marina returned she found matters in her stepfather’s household in no way improved .
 Not that Alexander interfered with her freedom or tried to dictate what she should do, he said . Not that he tried to interfere with her decision .
 Mourning for Klavdia, he spent hours at her grave, building a little monument and creating a flower bed there . He spent hours in her grave .
 Neither he nor his mother gave the slightest sign of caring at what hour Marina came home at night . Marina's mother and father did not care what time Marina was home .
 To a 16-year-old girl, living in a large and rather rough city, this indifference to the hours she kept could mean only one thing . To a girl living in such a rough city she could only mean something .
 Alexander told her through his mother that he would no longer tolerate her presence at meals with the rest of the family . He did not bother to tell her himself, but he did tell her he would not tolerate her at meals .
 Someone told her she was entitled to an orphan’s pension of 16 rubles a month . Luckily, someone told her that she was eligible for an orphan's pension .
 She was already receiving a student stipend of 18 rubles a month, plus small sums from her grandmother in Minsk was able to scrape together and send her, she says . She says she tried to feed and clothe herself on a combined sum of 34 rubles per month .
 Marina was exposed as never before to the temptations of the city of Leningrad . Marina was forced to leave her homeland to live in the shadow of the Soviet Union .
 She was exposed, moreover, at an age when she was exceptionally vulnerable and almost wholly inexperienced . She is exposed at a time when she is exceptionally vulnerable .
 Her distractions were innocent enough at first . She went to the movies or sat in a cafeteria by the hour, chatting with friends from pharmacy school . Her distractions included the movies, the movies and chatting with classmates .
 It was a struggle just feeding and clothing herself, to say nothing of paying for tickets to the movies . But it was just feeding, clothing and paying for movies .
 Marina found a job delivering telegrams through the wintry streets of the city during the New Year holiday .
 Cold and often hungry, she was made even more miserable by the sight of gaily ornamented New Year’s trees winking behind warm, curtained windows . She said: “Cold and hungry, often hungry. She was made more miserable .
 On other nights she went to mixers and get-acquainted dances at the Technological Institute and the Institute of Railway Transport .
 Even at these casual get-togethers, Marina was painfully self-conscious about her unbecoming hand-me-down dresses .
 On several poignant occasions she was passed over in favor of girls who were not as pretty as she but had blouses of nylon or shoes of Czechoslovak make to give them a look of prosperity .
 Of all the schools in the city, the university was the most prestigious. Of all of all the school's students, it was the best of the city .
 In the competitive scramble of Soviet student life, they were the elite . They were also the elite in the Soviet Student Union .
 The students' ingenuity proved equal to the occasion at the end of New Year's Eve .
 Every lightbulb that could be reached had been twisted from its socket . The rest of the lightbulbs had simply been smashed .
 The corridors and rooms were dark and crowded with couples, and phonographs played music of a sort Marina had never heard before . The corridors of the hospital were dark .
 There were strains of rock ’n’t roll, newly fashionable in the West but still virtually unknown in Russia . Rock 'n' roll was not fashionable in Russia but still unknown in the country .
 There was the “Lullaby of Broadway,” which Marina calls it the ‘theme song’ of her youth . Marina was later to hear so often that she calls it her "theme song" Marina calls the song the "theme" of her childhood .
 Eartha Kitt, Louis Armstrong, and Nat King Cole were banned under Stalin . They were recorded on the sly from broadcasts of the Voice of America . The voices of the banned Soviet Union banned under the regime .
 She considered it, and the young men who were its possessors, to be the last word in sophistication . "She considered it and the boys who were it possessors to be her last word"
 He got Marina alone in a bedroom, locked the door, switched off the light, and tried to force himself on her . He locked her in the room, switched the light off and locked himself in, police say . Marina says he locked her up in the bedroom and forced himself on
 Marina succeeded in wrenching herself free, but the incident was a revelation nonetheless . The incident was the first time Marina had been freed from the hospital .
 Later, she realized that it had been not fear of her mother, but fear of being like her, that had caused her panic .
 She must stop herself before it is too late, or she would end up doing the same terrible thing for which she had so long condemned her mother . She must also stop herself, she must .
 Marina’s late hours meant that she was already a fallen woman . As far as Yevdokia and Musya were concerned, Musya was concerned, Marina was already an alcoholic .
 He reminded her again and again that he did not want her living at home after she had finished school . He told her he didn't want her to live at home when she finished high school .
 Marina answered weakly that if he tried to make her leave, she would appeal to the police or to a court . Marina said she would be appealing to police or a court if she was threatened .
 Alexander spat out her father’s name—Nikolai, and a surname that Marina would not remember until years afterward . Alexander would not be able to remember Marina's father's name until years later . Marina would never remember her father's surname .
 Marina had no idea that there could be any family secrets left for her to discover . Marina had never been told about her family's secrets .
 Her stepfather's behavior was revealed in a new book about his stepfather . The book was published by the same publisher that published the book, "Phenomenon," in 2003 .
 Rummaging through an old suitcase of her mother’s, she found a set of legal documents about a court case for child support . The documents were found in a suitcase she found in her mother's .
 Alexander himself had had an illegitimate daughter in Moldavia before he and Klavdia were married . They showed that Alexander had had a daughter before he was married . Alexander's daughter was born in Moldova .
 The child’s name was Alla, and she was only a year younger than Marina . The child was only one of Alla's siblings .
 Klavdia filed papers with the Inquiry Bureau in Leningrad in what had almost certainly been an effort to find her real father . They were papers filed with the inquiry bureau in what was almost certainly an effort .
 Klavdia had apparently tried to find her daughter's mother, Marina, so that he could help Marina after she was dead . With her own life fading, she had little hope that her daughter would be treated gently by the Medvedevs when she was gone .
 The realization that Klavdia at the time of her death had been searching for her father only seemed to prove to Marina, probably erroneously, that what she had been dreading was true . Marina was the child of a casual liaison after all and her father had simply abandoned her
 The discovery deepened Marina’s curiosity about herself, while at the same time deepening her conviction that the further she tried to dig, the greater the likelihood that what she might find out about herself would be the truth she feared .
 Alexander had a daughter of his own who was nearly the same age as she, Marina says . Marina never thought it was not she, but that other girl who was at the heart of his anger .
 Both discoveries deepened Marina’s skepticism about the truth of things as they are presented on the surface .
 She had grown up in a household which was electric with lies, reticences, and outspoken brutality . She grew up in an electric household which had a reputation for its brutality .
 The outspokenness had failed to guarantee that what was being said was true . Yet the outspokenness did not guarantee that the truth was true.
 With barely enough money for food and clothing, and with no one to love or care for her, she became passive and apathetic . She became passive, apathetic, and became apathetic in her life .
 She started cutting classes, ignoring her homework, and embarked on a movie going orgy of movie going . She cut classes, ignored homework and went to the movies .
 By the middle of the school year, her marks had dropped so sharply that she lost her stipend . She had to get by on her orphan’s pension plus whatever her grandmother happened to send from Minsk .
 For a while she had only 18 rubles a month to live on, and with nothing to eat but rice kasha, she quickly contracted a disease of malnutrition that caused abscesses to erupt all over her body . She quickly contracted the disease, which left her unable to eat anything
 She went regularly to a medical clinic for shots of penicillin, glucose, and vitamins . She had treatments from an ultraviolet lamp .
 Marina was deeply embarrassed by the disapproving glances she received . Venereal diseases were also treated there, and Marina was embarrassed .
 Marina’s classmates did their best to cover for her absences . Marina's classmates covered for her absence .
 The elderly professor who was in charge of the students in the third and final year was especially kind . He was kind of a kind man who was kind to the students, the professor says .
 Boris Zakharovich, whose initials had been transformed by the girls into the nickname “Bizet,” bent all the rules for Marina . Marina's nickname was changed to ‘Bizat’ by the nickname of “Marina’s”
 He also gave her a B for recitations she had not given . He marked her “present” at classes she had cut, marking her ‘present’ at class she cut, she said .
 He took her on, she says, ‘like a nanny,” and tried to wheedle her through school . Gently, tactically, tactfully, with endless patience, he took her, she said .
 You’re having a hard time, I know, but keep trying just a little longer. You're still trying to find a way to get back on the phone .
 She knew she had to find a job, but she tried only lackadaisically to look for one, she says . She says she tried "lackadaisistically" looking for a job .
 Everyone at home knew that she was virtually penniless, and when some silver disappeared from the cupboard, Alexander, Musya, and Yevdokia accused her of taking it . Alexander and Musya accused each other of stealing it .
 They locked up their possessions and kept a careful watch on even the food, down to the last crust of bread . The residents locked up all of their possessions, including their possessions .
 The silver later reappeared, and this time Marina was accused of having pawned it . The silver was later returned to Marina's home in New York City .
 She suspected that it was Alexander who was guilty, but she had no way of proving her suspicions or of clearing herself . She suspected she was not clear of the truth .
 Marina stayed out later than ever and started to make friends quite different from her classmates . She was treated like a criminal at home, liberated by the casual atmosphere of summer .
 Marina was a girl named Lyuda, three years older than Marina and bold as brass . Lyuda was one of her sisters, Marina's sister, who was also three years old .
 It was thanks to her job in the commission shop that Lyuda could deck herself out, to the envy of all her friends, in Czechoslovak handbags and lipsticks .
 Marina created a home for herself, of sorts, at the commission shop, helping Lyuda fill out invoices and keep books, or fixing herself a new hairdo at the back of the shop .
 It was a headquarters for sailors of the Soviet commercial fleet, mainly Latvians and Estonians, who came in with foreign shoes, cigarettes, or cloth to sell at bloated prices .
 Most of them were mere boys, who asked nothing better than to take pretty girls like Lyuda and Marina to the best restaurants in town and spend stacks of rubles treating them to caviar, shish kebab and champagne .
 Marina remembers one twoweek period during which she never missed an evening in the restaurants of the Astoria or the Evropeiskaya hotel . Marina also remembers one of the most memorable moments of her life in Russia .
 "She had no respect for these young sailors because of their poor education," she says . "Because she went out with them just to get a free dinner, she began to lose respect for herself," she writes .
 She sometimes imagined that her father had been a foreigner . For one thing, she sometimes imagined he was a foreigner, she said .
 Foreigners behaved with politeness better than the rough and casual ways of Russian boys, she says . Besides, foreigners behaved with a politeness she liked much better than Russians .
 In addition, she acquired a collection of Georgians and Armenians, lean, dark-eyed young men from the southern republics of the USSR . Their Mediterranean looks gave them some of the exotic appeal of the foreigner .
 Most of these young men were in Leningrad on vacation, and Marina and her friends often met them on the beach by the Petropavlovsk Fortress . Marina's friends were often met by the young men in the summer .
 Marina did not swim; she was too conscious of her “bony, graceless” figure to do that . She was afraid to swim because of her "bony" figure .
 Marina was so emaciated that she aroused the protective instincts of everyone she met . The family went to the movies or a restaurant, where they made sure she had enough to eat .
 With the rest of the family at their dacha in the country, there was no one at home to let her in, and she spent many a night nodding on the staircase outside the apartment .
 A diplomat from Afghanistan lured her to his hotel room on the assumption that she was not a virgin and tried to make love to her . Then one evening, she had met a foreigner from Afghanistan, a diplomat from his country .
 Marina realized she was bored by the young men she was seeing . After the first excitement had worn off, Marina realized that she had no interest in seeing young men .
 She went out with them to avoid going home, and because they enabled her to eat . She went with them because she wanted to stay away from going home . She said: "I'm not going home. I'm going to eat."
 Most unmarried girls were either virgins or prostitutes; there was not much in between . Most virgins were virgins, or prostitutes, according to reports .
 Marina may have been trying to drive her into the appearance of prostitution . Leningrad by now had laws allowing the deportation of “parasites” as those who did not have jobs, including prostitutes, were called .
 He also wrote to Marina’s relatives in Kharkov, implying the worst about her . He also begged them to come and get her . Marina's relatives are still in Russia .
 She “went around in a fog,” trying not to think what she was doing, or what she could easily become, she says . She says she "went around" in a "fog of fog" as she was trying to figure out what she wanted to do
 She tried to avoid Maria Yakovlevna, her stepfather’s aunt and the beloved counselor of her earlier years . She had been trying to avoid her aunt and counselor of many years .
 She felt she “could no longer look Maria Yakovlevna in the eye” because she was “not so pure as before,” she said . She said she felt she couldn’t “no longer look” at her former Russian counterpart .
 Marina Yakovlevna's words meant that even Maria Yakovievna no longer cared about her . To Marina, Marina said: "To Marina, I'm sorry for what happened to me. To Marina the words mean that even she no longer cares about her."
 There was no depth to which she did not deserve to sink, she said . And if nobody cared, then she was past salvation, she would be past salvation .
 Marina spent the night at Lyuda’s when she was locked out at home . Sometimes Marina spent night with Lyuda's when she had to be locked out .
 It was what she had been waiting for —someone who cared enough about her to crack down on her . She was waiting for someone who would care enough for her, she said .
 Marina knew that she had to find work when summer was ending . Marina knew she needed to find a job in order to survive the summer .
 She was leaving a cheap cafeteria one day when she spotted a “Help Wanted” sign . She spotted a "Help Wanted" sign in a cheap, cheap cafeteria .
 The manager, a gray-haired man in his fifties, examined her documents and asked her a great many questions . The manager was a gray hair gray-eyed man in a fiftied fiftie .
 "They were soft, white hands, not the hands of a girl accustomed to heavy work," she said . "I was a girl who had to work hard. They were soft hands," she added .
 The boys were a rough lot, and they made no secret of their raucous delight at having a pretty new face .
 The supervisor, an officious woman, disliked Marina and soon lodged a formal complaint that she was too slow at scrubbing floors and ought to be fired . But the supervisor, a woman who disliked Marina, disliked her and soon complained she should be fired.
 Marina was transferred to a new school and a new cafeteria . A special commission arrived to investigate, and a special commission was called to investigate . Marina has been transferred to the new school .
 Marina's new supervisor was a compassionate woman who treated Marina like a daughter . She still had heavy work to do, but she still had a lot to do .
 After the first snowfall, she presented Marina with a pair of mittens she had knitted specially for her .
 The academic headmaster, Robert Neiman, gave Marina something she needed even more—encouragement to believe in herself . Marina was inspired by Neiman's academic headteacher .
 He was a gifted, outgoing man of twenty-eight or twenty-nine with dark hair and swarthy skin that were tokens of mixed Russian, Polish, Jewish, Jewish and gypsy ancestry .
 Robert spent hour after hour with Marina, cajoling her, teasing her, reasoning with her, and above all, reassuring her, in an effort to induce her to go back to pharmacy school . When he learned Marina’s story, Robert spent an hour after an hour with
 Marina agreed, but she was held back by fear . She feared she might be turned away, or else that she might not be readmitted, only to fail once again .
 He told her that when she was ready to reapply, he would see to it that she got in . He said she would be able to get back into the school .
 Robert made Marina feel that she could make something of herself if she would try, she said . Robert was Marina's inspiration for her life, Marina said .
 Marina decided she was ready in December after three months of work in cafeterias . She decided she wanted to be a model model .
 Without a word to Robert, she went to the Pharmacy Institute and asked to be taken back . With misgivings, and without a word, she asked for the medication to be removed .
 Leningrad Pharmacy on the Nevsky Prospekt, the main thoroughfare of the city . Instead of a job, they gave her a job at the Central Pharmacy . The pharmacy is located in the city's main shopping district .
 Marina knew she was being tested, but she was only too grateful to exchange the white coat of a cafeteria helper for a pharmacy worker . Marina knew it was a mistake, but was grateful to be a pharmacist .
 That autumn she had started seeing a good deal of Oleg Tarussin, a blond, curly-headed philology student . That autumn, she started seeing him again, and he was a good friend .
 Implying that she already had her degree, she told him she was working in a pharmacy . He was under that misconception when he took her to meet his parents .
 Oleg was the only son and, Marina suspected, the adopted son of Ekaterina Nikitichna Tarussina, a fine-boned woman with warm blue eyes, and a slender, retiring father . Marina suspected he was Oleg's adopted son . Oleg is
 The mother, Marina gathered, worked in a factory or a hotel, and the father was a highly skilled plumber . The mother and father were both skilled plumbers .
 Marina met the Tarussins when Oleg invited her to spend the November 7 holiday, the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, at their apartment . Marina met Oleg when she was invited to spend that holiday at the apartment .
 She quickly came to love the Tarussins’ airy apartment with its cozy, overstuffed Victorian furnishings . The Tarussin's apartment is located in a Victorian-style home .
 She even loved the sprawling, rundown old dwelling in which the apartment was situated, reachable, just as in a rabbit warren, only by a succession of inner courtyards and corridors .
 It was not long before it was comfortably taken for granted that she and Oleg would one day be man and wife . Oleg was married to her long-term partner .
 Marina still had not confessed that she was a cafeteria worker, not a pharmacy graduate . Marina was close to her friends and family, but she still hadn't confessed .
 Her fear of losing Oleg was one reason she decided to go back to the Pharmacy Institute and actually earn her diploma . She decided to return to the pharmacy institute to earn her Pharmacy diploma .
 Marina, unknown to her family, had started working in a pharmacy but had not yet been admitted to the institute . But in December, the truth came out when she was admitted to work at the pharmacy in December .
 She fell ill and lay for three days on the Tarussins’ sofa, shaking with fever . She lay on the sofa shaking with a fever. She lay in bed shaking as she fell ill .
 Ekaterina Nikitichna went to the Medvedevs’ to let them know where Marina was staying . Marina was due to spend the night in Moscow, Russia, before leaving the country .
 Oleg answered that she had been a “little goose” to think that he would break off with her because she worked in a cafeteria . Oleg told her that she was a "little goose"
 He had known all along, it turned out, and had merely been waiting to hear it from her . He had been waiting for her to tell him .
 His world was politics —already he was in trouble over a minor political incident at a student party . "He acted as if, compared with important things like politics, his personal life did not matter," he said .
 He seldom took Marina on a date, and such money as he had he spent on books for himself, not on her . Such money would have been spent on himself, he said .
 He had never even told her that he loved her, much less asked her to marry him . Yet he had never told her he was going to marry her, even though he'd never even asked for her to .
 The prospect of marrying Oleg Oleg and moving in with him and his family was an appealing one . Oleg said he wanted to move in with Oleg's family .
 She felt as if he had suffered an inner hurt of some kind and that she ought to take care of him . She felt like he was suffering from some kind of inner hurt . She thought that she should take him care .
 They gradually subsided into a sort of brother and sister relationship, with an occasional flare-up of romantic feeling on one side .
 Marina did not marry Oleg, but remembering him now, she is aware of similarities between him and Lee Harvey Oswald . She did marry two years later—Lee Harvey Oswald—two years later .
 By the end of January, Marina was back at the Pharmacy Institute, attending classes from nine in the morning until three in the afternoon and working at the pharmacy from four to eleven at night .
 Marina calls her colleagues at the pharmacy a "wonderful collective" Marina's colleagues were what Marina calls “a wonderful collective”
 Marina, unlike most of the other girls, had to work full time for a living . They were aware that Marina's job was to be a full time job .
 Marina's disfavor of the Medvedevs was muted a bit. Now that Marina was both working and going to school, the disf favor of the medvedevii was muted .
 Alexander locked her out at night, and his old mother, Yevdokia, got up and let her in . She was allowed to take meals with the family again, and Alexander allowed her back .
 Marina knew that Yevdokia was a hypocrite and a grasping woman, who contributed her share to the mean and miserly atmosphere of the household, but she came to feel sorry for her .
 There was even a momentary break in the hostility between Marina and Alexander . The pair had been engaged for more than a decade .
 Nine-year-old Tanya, Alexander's favorite child, was lying ill with a high fever, and after all his efforts to fill a prescription for her had failed, Alexander appealed to Marina for help .
 She immediately went to the pharmacy and made up the prescription herself . She immediately made up a prescription herself.
 Suddenly, to her astonishment, she felt her stepfather’s hand on her shoulder . She felt the hand of her stepdad on her shoulders . She was shocked to find out .
 She suspected that Alexander had a greater share of inner refinement than he was able to show in the squalid atmosphere of that apartment .
 She sensed in him somewhere a kindred spirit, a man who longed to rise higher and was forever held down by his surroundings, she said .
 She thought that he was a gentler, more chivalrous man than he would let her see . He, like she, had dreams of a more gallant and courtly life .
 He dressed up for her, took her to the best restaurants in town, and treated her with more respect than many men treat their wives . He took her out of the house and dressed her up for dinner, she said . He said, "He treated her more respect" than many
 His mother and sister taunted him for it, but Marina stood up for him . Marina stood in for him, and he was taunted by his family .
 The teacher who had helped her the year before had her stipend restored so that she could devote all her time to studying for the approaching examinations . Boris Zakharovich or “Boris’s or ‘Bizar” came to her rescue .
 Marina was able to answer only two of four questions in chemistry in chemistry . She all but ran from the room after the ordeal, convinced that she had failed again .
 She learned that she had passed everything but chemistry, and thanks to the compassion of one of the examiners, she was allowed to appear again .
 The Tarussins held a banquet in her honor, but by this time Marina had a new boyfriend .
 The White Nights had descended upon Leningrad, the period from late May to July when the city is cloaked in midnight sun and, scorning sleep, young and old alike stroll along the canals and embankments .
 Marina was supposed to be studying when she slipped out to a movie . She met a dark-haired stranger of about 30 who escorted her back to the trolley . Marina was escorted back to a trolley by a stranger of around 30 .
 Marina liked his sleek, self-satisfied good looks and his humorous and sophisticated conversation . Marina was impressed with his sleek looks and witty and witty conversation .
 Marina and Eddie were together constantly. Before long Oleg was forgotten, they were inseparable . Marina's relationship with Eddie was so strong that Eddie and Marina were able to live together .
 The White Nights began to wane early in July, with her diploma miraculously in hand . They went on half a dozen all-night boat trips around the city, dancing and talking until six in the morning .
 Eddie informed Marina that she did not know how to kiss, and he proceeded to teach her . Eddie told her that she needed to kiss and that she was taught how to do it .
 Eddie was very generous, and when Marina’s eighteenth birthday came around on July 17, he took her to a restaurant, treated her to dinner, and presented her with a ring .
 He lavished rubles upon her and presented her with nylon underclothing from East Germany . He presented her flowers and even nylon underwear from East German .
 Eddie, a documentary film operator associated with one of the big Leningrad studios, had an apartment to himself for the summer . Eddie had a summer apartment in his apartment .
 Eddie and Marina danced to the music of Lolita Thorez, an Argentine singer who was then the rage . Eddie's wife and Marina died in 2008 at the age of 50 .
 Later, Eddie would play Scheherazade softly on the Victrola, turn down the lights, and spread pillows on the floor . Eddie would turn down lights, play music softly on Victrolas, turn on pillows and spread them on floor .
 He and Marina would lie there by the hour, watching shadows from the fire . Marina would be watching shadows of the fire from the house .
 Marina says everything had happened between them except the final act of sexual intercourse . Soon, Marina says, everything had been done between the pair except the last act of intercourse .
 Marina likes to believe that he was so experienced, so ‘delicately depraved,” that he simply preferred hours and hours of “petting” to the sexual act itself . Marina believes that he preferred hours of "petting"
 Eddie explained that she was too young, that she had too many troubles already, and he did not want to add to them . Eddie said she was 'too young' and that he didn't want her to have any more troubles .
 Marina trusted Eddie, even when she pieced together from odd fact here and there that he was married and had a wife and small son at a dacha in the country . She trusted him, even though he had an odd fact about his marriage .
 Marina lost her shyness and shame for the first time, thanks to her husband . He made her feel wanted, and she lost her shame and shame . Marina said: "He made me feel wanted"
 She knew Eddie was not free to marry her, and she was afraid that she was capable of arousing only sexual desire, not love . She was afraid she was incapable of love .
 Marina gets one of the best job assignments available to a member of the graduating class . "Bizet" and the other teachers at the institute helped Marina get a job assignment .
 She started in on the usual two-week trial period at the Central Pharmaceutical Warehouse but soon began to skip work . She soon began skipping work and returned to work .
 She could go to a hostel in Leningrad for which her job had qualified her or to her mother’s family in Minsk . She could also go to hostel for which she had qualified, or to mother-in-law .
 She loved the wind and the falling snow, the smell of the trees, even the sound the trolleys made . She was a big fan of the wind, falling snow and the smell the trees made .
 She wondered sorrowfully how she could bear to go. Looking at the shadows of the willows in the Griboyedov Canal, at the maples and oak trees in the Summer Garden, she wondered how to bear to leave .
 Czar Alexander II had been murdered at the spot where he was killed . The red sky behind the Nikolsky Cathedral was the site of his murder .
 Eddie feared for Marina, and this Marina feared for herself . Eddie and Marina were in the middle of an argument . Eddie feared that Marina would not be able to live with Eddie .
 She and another girl were on their way home from a movie when they were picked up by a pair of young men . One of the men turned out to be a well-known soccer player .
 Marina’s friend went to one of the rooms with her young man, leaving Marina in the other room with the soccer star . They ended up in an apartment, and Marina's friend went into one room with her .
 He said it would be hers if she would have intercourse with him . He took off the bracelet he was wearing, a gold bracelet with a little watch inside that he had won in Finland .
 Marina refused, and in the struggle that followed, she hit him with all her might . Marina refused to be hit by him, and he hit her .
 The couple next door were roused by the scuffle and came to her rescue . The couple were able to save her from the attack .
 She still looked so disheveled and upset that a man who was seated nearby asked if there was anything wrong . She was so upset that he asked her if she had anything to do with it .
 Marina rose from her seat and moved to the other end of the trolley . She was certain the man was trying to take advantage of her, too .
 She packed everything she owned in a suitcase and sat down to await Alexander’s return from the midnight shift . Still trembling, she sat down and waited for him to return .
 The rest of the family was at the dacha in the country, and Marina left without saying goodbye to any of them, not even her beloved Petya and Tanya .
 Ekaterina Nikitichna refused to accept any money or accept any of the money she received . She refused to let her see her off at the station in Moscow . She was seen leaving the station at the time of her departure .
 Oleg's mother would not let her leave without a stack of sandwiches, a whole chicken, cheese, chocolate, and ajar of jam . Oleg’s mother said she had enough food to keep going for a fortnight .
 Only too happy to talk to strangers as a rule, she could not bear to speak to anybody now . She could no longer speak to anyone now, she said .
 Whatever the future might hold, she was sure that happiness would be no part of it . She was sure she would not be happy with happiness .
 Marina arrived in Minsk, at two o’clock in the morning, with sixty kopeks in her pocket . Not one of her relatives in the city even knew that she was on her way .
 The railway station was shrouded in darkness, the trolley stop dark and deserted . The station was covered in darkness and deserted by the time of darkness .
 Marina was taken to the apartment building where her uncle Vanya and aunt Musya Berlov lived . A pleasant-looking young man, a violinist, came to the rescue by lending Marina a few rubles and carrying a suitcase .
 Musya, her mother’s youngest sister, welcomed Marina joyfully . Although she was completely unexpected, Musya welcomed her joyfully. Musya is the youngest sister of Marina's mother .
 Musya explained that Alexander had written to Marina’s aunt in Kharkov, complaining of her late-night hours and suggesting that she had become a prostitute . Musya said Alexander wrote to her aunt complaining about her late night hours and suggested she was a prostitute. Musya
 If Marina was to stay in Minsk, it was Ilya, her mother’s eldest brother, who would have to take her in . Ilya's eldest brother is Marina's mother's eldest son, and Ilya is her sister's brother .
 Musya and Vanya had four children and Musya lived in a small apartment . Ilya and his wife Valya possessed a three-room apartment and had no children . Musya  had four children and Musya had no children. Ilya and his wife
 Musya telephoned Ilya the next day and received an ungracious response from Ilya . Musya said she was disappointed with Ilya's response . Ilya said Musya was not impressed with Musya's comments .
 Marina, dressed as demurely as she knew how, went with her aunt Musya to his apartment . Reluctantly, Ilya invited them to tea, and on a hot midsummer Sunday, Marina went to tea .
 She had no job, and her uncle told her, without one she would be unable to obtain a residence permit . Without one she could not obtain a permit, she was told she had to get a job .
 Marina spent the next two or three weeks with Musya and Vanya . Musya: "It's no use our staying here/”
 Marina would have stayed on, but August was coming to a close and their children were due back from camp . Marina would happily have stayed there, but their children had returned from camp.
 Only the very privileged had as much space as he did, but until recently he had been forced to share it . Until recently, he had to share his space with the very wealthy .
 Marina’s grandmother, Tatyana Prusakova, had lived with him and Valya until her death the year before . His sister Lyuba and her husband had only just moved out of the house .
 Ilya was still savoring his privacy, and he had no desire to be overrun by another relative, above all not a marriageable girl who might soon acquire a husband and, with a new family, gain the right to live with him indefinitely .
 Marina believes that he supervised the use of convict labor in the timber industry of the area . Marina believes he supervised use of convicts in timber industry . He was an engineer .
 Ilya had to be careful, even if it meant closing his heart to a relative in need . Ilya's family was in need of help, but Ilya was careful to keep his heart open .
 Ilya and Valya lived in a neighborhood charged with political vibrations . The neighborhood in which Ilya lived was also charged with politics . Ilya, Valya, Ilya's neighborhood was charged with social unrest .
 If Marina was the kind of girl her stepfather said she was, she could jeopardize the career to which Ilya had dedicated his life . It was an area that must have been carefully watched, and Marina's stepfather was worried about her .
 Ilya exploded when two young men who happened to be her only friends in Minsk dropped by to take her out . Ilya: "You're not to give people your address. You’re not to ... give them your address" Ilya says .
 Like many other members of the Soviet elite, he was afraid of losing his privileges if outsiders saw the way he lived . Like many others, he feared losing his privilege if outsiders .
 Marina found Minsk a polite enough place, but she was lonely and so homesick that night after night she went to the terminal to wave off the 9:30 bus for Leningrad . Marina found the city a polite but lonely place, and she was homesick . Marina was
 Valya woke to a stirring in the living room, where Marina was supposed to be asleep . Ilya was out of town when Ilya's wife was away, Valya says .
 Marina told her of the way she had been treated by her stepfather, and Valya wept . Valya told Marina how she was treated by Marina's stepfather . Marina told Valya of the treatment she received from Marina .
 Ilya was still stern and aloof, but for Valya having a niece in the house was the next best thing to having a daughter of her own . Ilya and Ilya were still stern but Valya was happy to have a daughter in the family .
 Marina trusted her aunt and confided in her as she had in no one before . She confided to her aunt as well as her aunt . Marina confided with her aunt for the first time in years .
 She had tried to pry the story from Ilya, but he had declined to tell her anything . Ilya had been married for more than a decade .
 Marina set out to obtain a residence permit to remain in Minsk, she had to show proof that she already had a job . Marina was required to prove that she was working in order to get a permit to stay in the city .
 He was what Russians call poryadochny, a person who prefers to go through regular channels or do without rather than use his official position to seek privilege, even so minuscule a one, in his case, as obtaining firewood .
 Marina went to the city and district militia headquarters to fill out countless questionnaires . Armed with Ilya’s document and a written statement from the manager of the apartment building that her uncle had room for her, Marina filled out countless questionsnaires .
 Without knowing it, Marina had vaulted from the middle to the upper class . Without knowing she'd vaulted to the top class, she'd become a socialite .
 She had left Leningrad without the proper documents from the Pharmacy Institute . Even though trained pharmacists were in great demand in Minsk, she could not be hired . She was not able to be hired because of her lack of documents .
 A friend of her Aunt Lyuba’s, she was given a job at the Third Clinical Hospital . Finally, luck came to her rescue .
 She became one of four pharmaceutical assistants, all girls, who filled prescriptions for doctors and nurses in the hospital . She was one of the first four girls to fill prescriptions .
 She loved mixing powders and pills, and she enjoyed the easygoing spirit of the place . She also loved mixing powder and pills and enjoyed the 'easygoing spirit' of the hospital .
 She especially liked the head of the pharmacy, Evgenia, a radiant, handsome, magnificently garbed woman, whose special genius lay in wheedling and politicking scarce supplies .
 Evgenia was lenient in the extreme, and even Marina’s habitual lateness failed to get her in trouble .
 If she fell behind in her work, the other girls pitched in to help her catch up . If she was behind in work, she was helped catch up by other girls .
 Marina wanted to be liked by her coworkers, but most of all she wanted their attention . Marina wanted the attention of her coworkers . She wanted them to like her, but also wanted their approval .
 Marina would entertain them by recounting some of her escapades in Leningrad, usually those that involved smoking, wearing slacks, and going to restaurants with men . "Nice girls" did not do things that "nice girls" didn't do, she says .
 Her coworkers decided that she was “fast,” she was judging them as provincial . She was judged as provincial, and that she judged them as a provincial .
 Marina did think they were provincial, and she was at war with the hypocritical ‘brother’s keeper’ mentality that she found on every side . She was also at war, too, with the hypocrisy “brother” mentality . Marina thought they were .
 She realized that the other girls considered her a snob . But before long she realized that she was considered a 'snob'
 Marina says colleagues “looked on me, ironically, askance, like a creature from another planet.” Nevertheless, as Marina describes it, not without a certain pride, she says . “I’m proud of my work, but it’s not
 In theory, at least, the Komsomol was the flower of the Soviet younger generation . It was a Soviet state of mind .
 Marina doubted that the description fitted her, and joining would not alter that fact . Marina doubted she would fit the description . But she would join her husband's army .
 Marina joined after pressure from her peers and a good deal of passive resistance . Eventually, Marina joined, but only after pressure . Marina joined with her peers .
 As a first step, she had to memorize the Komsomol Charter and answer a number of questions about the organization, Soviet policies, and herself .
 The formalities over, she was told to fill out a questionnaire and return a week later, bringing a photograph for her membership card . She was then told to return to bring a photograph to prove her membership credentials .
 She put it off from week to week and as a result never received a membership card . Rather, she put it on from week-to-week and never received it .
 She paid the monthly dues of thirty kopeks . She also attended meetings of the Komsomol aktiv , or cell, of the hospital .
 The meeting were usually devoted to disciplinary matters or boring lectures on foreign affairs . The meeting was often devoted to boring lectures or boring discussions .
 Marina considered picnics or dances dull and avoided them whenever she could . Marina considered them dull . She avoided them as much as possible .
 "Because of them, and because of her uncle and aunt, it was the happiest time of her life," she said . Because of them they were there, she said, "It was the happy time of my life"
 She soon had an assortment of admirers, one of them a goodlooking young man by the name of Sasha Peskaryov . Sasha is a Russian national known for his looks .
 Sasha came from what was considered a “good family,” and Ilya made him an exception to the rule that his niece was not to bring young men to the house . Sasha is now a medical student and a student at the University of San Francisco .
 Sasha put Marina on a pedestal, where she felt distinctly out of place . Sasha put her on pedestal. Marina felt out-of-place. Sasha put herself on the pedestal .
 Sasha assured her that he would cheerfully marry her anyway . To cool his ardor she told him that she had a lover and a child back in Leningrad, but he said she would marry anyway . Sasha told her she had lover and child but told her to cool him down
 Marina was Marina’s faithful standby, the doormat she trampled on and broke dates with whenever someone more interesting came along . He was Marina's faithful standby .
 Marina had met Misha Smolsky on one of her summer visits to Minsk years before, and it was through him that she was introduced to a new group of friends . Marina had been introduced to Misha through a friendship with him .
 Misha was not Russian at all, but half-Tartar and half-Pole, a tall, heavy-set, red-haired young man who was the scion of a distinguished father and grandfather both and somewhat oppressed by his heritage .
 He was a flashy dresser, and one day he stopped by the pharmacy to pick up Marina wearing a hip-length overcoat, a pair of pointed English shoes, and a towering karakul cap . He was also known for his flashy dress .
 As he led Marina off, he draped his arm casually over her shoulder as if he had proprietary rights . He was smoking a pipe as he led her off .
 The other girls were horrified and were bristling with questions the next day . They were shocked and bristled with questions about the incident .
 Misha was the presiding genius of a circle of young people who were both unconventional and irreverent toward the values of their elders . Misha died at the age of 50 .
 They were well educated and took a serious interest in music and literature . And yet they were also well educated . They also took an interest in literature and music and music .
 Misha's group read the book after it was awarded a Nobel Prize for the book that had been forbidden in Russia . Zhivago became the scandal of the day because the author, Boris Pasternak, was awarded the book .
 The group’s “all for one, one for all” camaraderie was rather like the spirit of the characters in Ernest Hemingway's The Sun Also Rises . The group of men preferred the novelist most of them preferred over all others .
 Hemingway’s staccato style had an enormous appeal compared with the wooden dialogue and the long-winded, moralistic tales of Soviet writers . His books were just beginning to appear in superlative Russian translation .
 Marina's favorite novel, as it happened, was not by Hemingway but was Erich Maria Remarque’s All Quiet on the Western Front . Her favorite novel was the novel All Quiet On The Western Front, by Erich .
 The ‘tomorrow we die’ outlook of Remarque’s characters, the antiwar spirit and the anti-war spirit, the author’�s sympathy for the common soldier whose fate is determined by the forces of history and the self-deluded leaders
 Marina has another explanation for the rage that swept the Soviet Union for Remarque and Hemingway . But Marina says it's not the only explanation for why they were swept by Soviet Union .
 The level of sexual morality among her contemporaries was “not very high,” she says, and in the novels of these writers they found the moral sanction they were seeking, she says .
 Hemingway and Remarque gave sex an explicit quality the younger generation was longing for and pointed the way toward reconciling reality with romance . The pair's work was published in France in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Foreign words crept into the slang of Misha Smolsky and his friends . Foreign writers and foreign ways meant so much to them, and since all of them knew foreign languages, it was hardly surprising that foreign words crept in the slang .
 The girls would huddle over a French fashion magazine, and dance to the music of Elvis, Eartha Kitt, or Louis Armstrong . The girls huddled over French fashion magazines, and they would dance .
 Lonya was an architect, and to Marina, everything about him was darkly appealing, from his dark lashes and hair to his black eyes and swarthy skin . Marina was drawn to the architect's dark looks and dark skin .
 As the winter of 1960 faded into spring, she was often in Lonya’s company, and in June he asked her to live with him . In June, she moved in with him and he proposed to her .
 When a man and a woman wanted to live together, she pointed out in an injured tone, they usually talked about getting married, she said .
 Marina faced another threat to her peace of mind that summer that summer, and it came from inside her own family . Marina faced the threat of Lonya’s appeal was exotic, exotic, but it was also a threat to Marina's life .
 He was the son of Klavdia's younger sister Polina and her husband Georgy Alexandrovi, who was head of the building trust in Kharkov .
 The legend of Valentin’s noble looks had preceded him, and Marina found that the handsome reality very nearly lived up to the legend . Marina found Valentin's looks were the most impressive of all the time .
 Marina and Valentin were soon deep in a clandestine and, to Marina, sinful romance, of which one of the chief delights was being seen with Valentin on the street . They were soon engaged .
 Valya, who could be a zealous chaperone when the occasion, or her husband, required it, had not the slightest suspicion of the flirtation that was blossoming under her very roof .
 Valentin slept in the living room, which was also Marina’s bedroom . Valentin even let Valentin sleep in the house .
 Marina for once was in a quandary that she dared not share with her aunt . Marina was in the midst of a dilemma that Marina had to decide whether to tell her aunt what she wanted to do . Marina's aunt was not happy with her decision .
 She enjoyed Valentin’s kisses by day, but at night she curled up in her bed like a frightened rabbit and refused to allow him near her . Valentin's kisses were by day but she refused to be near her.
 Valentin left after his two-week visit, he swore he would never forget her and asked her to wait for him . Valentin said he would not forget her, but he would always remember her .
 She even had a passionate love letter from him from him, which she hid at the pharmacy . She hid the love letter at her pharmacy .
 She considered Valentin's feelings for him incestuous, and she was frightened by them . But she made herself forget Valentin, for she considered her feelings incestuous .
 Marina went to Leningrad on vacation in October and stayed at a government Rest House . Marina stayed at the Rest House during her visit to the Russian capital .
 She had been there a week before she even dared to venture back to the Medvedevs’ apartment . She was there for a week .
 When she did go, laden with gifts for everyone, Petya and Tanya were overjoyed .
 Even Alexander seemed glad to see her, although he behaved in his usual gruff manner . Alexander excused himself and went to bed .
 Marina promised to come again, but somehow she failed to get around to it . She promised to go back and visit again . Marina was a great friend of the author .
 She spent part of her vacation in Leningrad with the Tarussins, the parents of her old suitor, Oleg. Oleg . She spent the rest of her trip with the family of her former suitor .
 Marina had written to them regularly from Minsk, and Oleg’s mother still treated her as a prospective daughter-in-law . Marina's parents still treat her as their daughter in a loving way .
 When she and Oleg were reunited, it was clear that his feelings had changed . Oleg's feelings for Oleg have changed since they were reunited .
 The day before her return to Minsk, Marina told his mother that the romance was over . Oleg did not love Marina any more, Marina said . Marina returned to her native Belarus, where she lived with Oleg .
 The faithful Sasha was there to console her on her return from Leningrad . Sasha was also there to give her a hug .
 Sasha consented to be his date for New Year’s, but promised herself that she would dance with anyone who came along, to torment the hapless Sasha and seek revenge on the entire male species . Sasha was humiliated by the humiliation of his date, but vowed to dance with
 That evening she found herself in the arms of Anatoly Shpanko, a lanky fellow with unruly, dark blond hair and a wide, appealing smile .
 Toyla, as she soon called him, was a twenty-six-year-old medical student who had already served his term in the army . Toyla was a medical student and a former soldier who had served in the military .
 From the moment of their first kiss, Marina was deliriously in love with him . He was whimsical, yet deferential, to Marina, and from the moment they kissed, she was in love . Marina: "From the moment she kissed him, she felt delirably
 He simply did not fit the image she had created for herself of a girl who goes out only with handsome men . He simply didn't fit her image of a woman who went out with him .
 She steered Anatoly along back streets when they were together surreptitiously as if they were engaged in a clandestine affair . Not wanting to be made fun of, fearful that her friends might think less .
 Anatoly had two or three more years in medical school, no money, and, even more important, no apartment . Anatoly was studying medicine in Russia, but had no money and no apartment in Russia .
 He would not consent to her marrying anyone, no matter how superior a human being, who did not have a place of his own, he said . He said .
 Anatoly’s broad grin and unruly hair would return to haunt Marina . In later years Anatoly would be remembered for his broad grin .
 She admired him, she was attracted to him sexually, he had a fine future as a doctor, and he loved her . He loved her, she admired him and he was looking forward to her .
 He came, moreover, with a pair of adoring parents who would have been good to her . He came with her parents, who would be good to him, she says .
 Marina was having a good time, and as yet she did not feel quite ready to settle down . But Marina was enjoying the experience, and she was not quite ready for settling down .
 Anatoly Anatoly’s wife did not feel ready for someone who treated her with decency . Or perhaps she didn't feel ready to be treated with Anatoly's decency .
 She and Anatoly kept on seeing each other, and kept on proposing . Anatoly proposed to her, and she accepted his proposal .
 Marina went to a medical students’ dance at the Palace of Culture, a huge building in the center of Minsk, in 1961 . Marina was a medical student at the time . Marina's mother, Marina, was hospitalized in Minsk in 1961 after suffering from a heart attack .
 Both Sasha and Anatoly had asked her to go with them and Marina could not make up her mind . Marina was not sure whether she would go with the boys .
 Marina, as she often did, decided to let fate take a hand . She preferred Anatoly, of course, but he was the star of the show .
 That evening she spent a long time in front of the mirror doing and redoing her hair . She spent the evening redoing it .
 Wearing her best, a dress of red Chinese brocade with a tiny bodice and a bell-shaped skirt, she did not arrive at the Palace of Culture until ten o’clock .
 Palace of Culture contained within it was a vast, impersonal hall with immense white columns and several glittering chandeliers . The palace of Culture contains within it a vast white columns with immense columns .
 Marina was approached by another medical student, an acquaintance of hers and Sasha’s by the name of Yury . Yury was a medical student of Marina and Sasha's by the time she met him .
 He was wearing a gray suit, a white shirt, and a white tie of some funny foreign material . He was dressed in a gray shirt and white tie .
 "I was trying to figure out how to meet you, but you had a crowd around you. I was just trying to find you," he says . "I'm trying to get to you. You had a lot of people around you."
 Alik danced with her again and again, as if he could not bear to lose her for a moment or let her dance with anyone else . Alik could not be bearable to lose his wife for any reason .
 The second the music stopped, he asked for the next dance, and Sasha barely had a chance . Sasha barely got a chance.
 She suggested to a group of young men, all standing around waiting to dance with her, that they go to the bar . To teach him a real lesson, she suggested to him that they should go to a bar . She said: "To teach him, she told him to go
 She felt like a princess, resplendendendent in her red brocade and her elaborate hairdo .
 Marina finally saw Anatoly when she finally saw him . They all drank champagne and were on their way back to the dance floor when they got back together .
 She returned to Sasha and her admirers, and when the dance was over, she brushed past Anatoly, who was waiting for her at the door .
 Alik was a witness to the scene; Alik, the stranger with the funny accent, is a witness . Alik is a stranger with a funny accent. Alik has a history of being a witness.
 The group of young people went to Yury’s apartment, where his mother, who was a professor of microbiology, was waiting up for them . Yury's mother was a microbiology professor and a professor .
 That night, before the dance, she had given a lecture on America, which she had just visited as part of a delegation . That night she gave a lecture about America .
 Yury had asked him to the lecture, hence the dance, to hear his mother talk about America . Yury was asked to attend the lecture by his mother, Yury .
 They all sat together in the living room asking Yury’s mother questions . Yury's mother was also there to talk about her daughter's life .
 Yury's mother wanted to know what was right and what was wrong in Yury’s description of America . They wanted to find out what the right and wrong in the description of the U.S. Yury .
 Yury's mother had been struck by the absence of lines in American stores . Yury’s mother was struck by lack of American stores in the country .
 She attributed unemployment, unemployment and overproduction to overproduction . She concluded that Americans were too poor to buy .
 The stores seem empty, he said, because there is plenty for everyone at a price each can afford . The stores are empty because there are plenty of things for everyone to buy, he says .
 He disliked unemployment and racial discrimination . Education and medical care cost far too much, he said .
 Housing in Russia is better than in Russia, but housing is better, he says . He says the ordinary apartment is bigger and bigger in Russia .
 Of the two countries, Russia and the United States, he thought America was more democratic . America is more democratic because everyone can say what he thinks, he said .
 Sasha offered to drop Alik off after Sasha took her home . Alik was dropped off by Sasha at the end of Sasha's visit to see Sasha .
 Marina rang the doorbell and called out excitedly, “I’m not alone, Aunt Valya.” When she reached home, Marina rang home, she called out, ‘I'm not alone.’ Marina said .
 Properly warned, Valya unlatched the door in her nightgown and quickly scuttled back to bed . Valya unrolled her bedside door and quickly returned to bed.
 He begged her to name the time and place, adding that he seldom missed a dance at the Palace of Culture . He said: "I'm not going to miss a dance. I'm going to dance with you. I love you"
 Marina tried to remember Alik’s name as she closed the door behind them . With that the young man said good-night, Marina said goodbye to Alik .
 When he was 15 and was looking for what he later called “a key to my environment,” he borrowed books by Marx, Engels, and American Communist writers from the New Orleans Public Library . Next, when he was fifteen and was . looking for . “A key
 Only a few days after reaching the eligible age of 17, he joined the United States Marine Corps . Only a year later he was able to enlist in the Marine Corps.
 Lee Oswald enlisted to get out of under the “yoke of oppression” of his mother, Marguerite, who sought to control the lives of all her sons in every way . His half brother, John Pic, had chosen the Coast Guard for a career, and his
 The older boys had entered the armed services to get away from her, and that was largely Lee's motive as well . Lee’s motive was to protect his older boys from her . Lee's older boys joined the military to escape her, police say .
 Marguerite had raised Lee almost single-handedly, raising him almost one-handed . Lee’s father died before Lee was born, his second husband had died before his birth .
 Lee desperately wanted to be a man, to learn a man’s skills and be part of the world of men . Lee wanted to become a man and be a member of a man .
 He idolized his older brother Robert, and he knew no better way than to follow where Robert had led . Robert idolized him and he idolized Robert .
 Lee’s three-year term of enlistment began on October 26, 1956, in San Diego, California . Lee served in the U.S. Army in the early '60s .
 Marine Corps basic training includes use of the M-l rifle . He underwent basic training at San Diego and Camp Pendleton, California .
 At the Naval Air Station in Jacksonville, Florida, and then at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Mississippi, he was trained in aircraft surveillance .
 Six months after joining the service, he was granted low-level clearance to deal with material up to the “confidential’s” level .
 He kept to himself, preferred reading to the company of others, and spent weekends alone . He preferred to spend his weekends alone, preferring to spend time reading .
 Lee was next assigned to the Marine Corps Air Station at El Toro, California, and in the late summer of 1957, he shipped out to Japan, where he joined an air control squadron at Atsugi, outside Tokyo, as a radar operator . Lee was then assigned to an air
 The squadron’s job was to direct American aircraft to their targets by radar . It was to scout for such Chinese or Soviet planes as might stray into the area .
 Lee may first have become aware of what was perhaps the most highly prized secret in all of U.S. aerial reconnaissance, the U-2 aircraft . Lee may have been at Atsugi at the time, when he first became aware of the U.2 .
 He lost the meekness that had caused the men to christen him “Ozzie Rabbit” and became more assertive in standing up for his rights . He became more manly and assertive .
 He had his first experience with women and, like many of the men, was said to be keeping a mistress .
 He told one friend that he did not care if he ever went back to the United States. Feeling free in a way he had not felt at home, he said he felt free . He told a friend he didn't want to go back to America .
 Lee arrived in Japan in October 1957, six weeks after his arrival in Japan . Lee was just a few days after his 18th birthday . Lee died in Japan on October 27, 1957, just six weeks before his birth .
 One of his buddies, Paul Edward Murphy, heard a shot in the cubicle next to him . Murphy heard the shooting in a cubicle . Murphy: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was an accident"
 He rushed in to find Lee sitting on his footlocker, looking in a bewildered way at his left arm . He rushed into the room and found Lee looking bewilderedly at his arm .
 Lee was not a novice when it came to handling guns, according to CNN.com's John Sutter . Lee was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head in a car crash in 2009 .
 Lee's unit was sent off on maneuvers to the Philippines after he was released from the hospital . Lee was in the hospital when he was taken into custody .
 It remained at Subic Bay, on Bataan, across Manila Bay from Manila, for three months . Lee was to say later, that he learned to sympathize with local Communists . Lee conceived a hatred for United States “militarist imperialism”
 Lee was stationed in the Philippines when he was stationed there . Lee was in charge of a military unit stationed in Manila, Philippines . Lee is now in the U.S.
 Private First Class Martin E Schrand was found shot to death one night while on guard duty outside a hangar that could have been sheltering a U-2 . Schrand's body was found in the hangar where he was found by a guard .
 They had been part of a small group of men who started radar training in Jacksonville the year before and had been together most of the time since .
 A Marine Corps investigation in 1958 established that Schrand’s death was accidental and self-inflicted . Yet a rumor arose among the men that Lee Oswald was responsible for the death .
 At Subic Bay he had become sympathetic to what he called “Communist elements” among the Filipinos . He had also been sympathetic to ‘Communists’ among Filipinos, he said . He said he was sympathetic to the Filipino people at Subic .
 Afterward, speculation arose that Lee wanted to break into the hangar and learn something about the U-2 so that he could use the information later on . Lee is believed to have broken in to the hangar .
 The rumor is still notable as a measure of Lee’s unpopularity among his fellow Marines . Although the speculation appears to be groundless, the rumor remains notable .
 Lee returned with his squadron to Japan in the spring of 1958, he was court-martialed for the offense that had led to the wound in his elbow . Lee returned to the U.S. in 1958, but was later found guilty .
 The court decided that the wound was accidental, but for unauthorized possession of the pistol Lee was reduced in rank to private . Lee was sentenced to a forfeiture of pay and confinement at hard labor for twenty days .
 While drunk in a cafe, he had spilled a drink on a sergeant and abusively challenged him to a fight . While drunk, he spilled drink on sergeant and challenged him for a fight.
 The sergeant brought charges, another measure of Lee’s unpopularity . Such episodes often occurred in after-hours drinking places, but the sergeant brought them .
 This time he drew a second forfeiture of pay and a twenty-eight-day sentence of confinement at hard labor . This time, he was sentenced to two weeks of hard labor at a time .
 During the summer of 1958 Lee spent seven weeks in the brig . Lee was sentenced to seven weeks behind bars . Lee's sentence was also invoked as well .
 Lee's two courts-martial, his being broken in rank, his time in the brig, and now the refusal of his request for extended duty overseas— all were keen disappointments . Lee’s two court-martials and his time at the brig were all keen disappoint
 In Japan he was exposed to Communist propaganda, this time to Soviet magazines and to individuals who were fanatically pro-Soviet . In Japan, he exposed himself to people who were pro-Russian .
 In November 1958, he was assigned to the Marine Air Control Squadron at El Toro, California, another base at which U-2 aircraft were stationed . After a brief tour in the South China Sea, he returned with his unit to the United States .
 Lee was part of an aircraft surveillance crew, and one of his superior officers, Lieutenant John E Donovan, has said that Lee was “competent, very competent,” on the job . Lee was also part of a surveillance crew .
 He took orders willingly and was cool in assessing emergency situations . He was cool to take orders willingly . He took his orders willingly. He took control of the situation .
 He acquired a Berlitz phrase book and started to study Russian ostentatiously in the barracks . He started studying Russian at the age of 18 .
 He played Russian songs so loudly that they could be heard outside barracks . He played them so loud that they were heard outside the barracks .
 He asked to be called “Oswaldskovich,” used words such as “da” and “nyet, ” called some of the men “Comrade” in return . He was pleased when they called him ‘Comrade
 It was the behavior, one would guess, not of a spy but of a slightly egregious schoolboy hungry for attention .
 Some of the men did call him, jokingly, a “spy”—and Lee loved it . Nonetheless, some of the . men did . call him . Lee .
 Lee learned Spanish from a lieutenant named Nelson Delgado . Lee also learned a few words of Spanish from Delgado, a lieutenant .
 Lee followed the ups and downs of Fidel Castro, who came to power in Cuba on January 1, 1959, while Lee was at El Toro . With Delgado and some of the other men he followed Castro's rise in Cuba . Lee was in Cuba at the time .
 His talk about Castro had nothing like the shock value of his talk about Russia . Castro had not declared himself a Communist yet, and the United States had not made up its mind whether he was an enemy or not .
 Lee had other characteristics, besides his interest in Russia, that set him apart from his fellow Marines . Lee's interest in the Russian language is one of many reasons for his military career . Lee is a Marine Corps veteran who served in Afghanistan .
 He listened to classical music, read books like George Orwell’s 1984 and Animal Farm, and tried to appear more intellectual than the other men . He had completed only the ninth grade, but he had read George Orwell's 1984 .
 He loved to lure his officers into discussions of foreign affairs to show off his superior knowledge . When he had outshone them, he treated them as if they were unfit to be in command over him .
 With less than a year left of his enlistment, Lee was promoted, for a second time, to private first class . Lee took and passed a series of high school equivalency tests to pass the tests . Lee is now in the Army in Afghanistan .
 Lee applied for an immediate hardship discharge on the grounds that he was his mother’s sole source of support . Marguerite had sustained a slight injury to her nose while working in a candy store the previous Christmas . Lee had four months left to go in the Marine Corps .
 In the past, the mother supplied her sons with false documents so that they could enter the service before they were of eligible age . Now she has supplied documents to prove she is disabled and unable to support herself .
 Lee was released from active duty and transferred into the Marine Corps reserve . Less than a month after his release, Lee was transferred to the reserve . Lee is the first Marine to be released from the active duty .
 In a letter just before his departure, he wrote to her that “my values are very different from Robert’s or yours.” In the letter, he said that he was “very different’ from Robert or Robert,” she wrote .
 The following day he flew to Helsinki, applied for and was granted a tourist visa to the Soviet Union . He crossed into Russia by train by train on October 15, and arrived in Moscow on October 16, 2013 .
 Rimma reported Lee’s desire to be granted citizenship to her superiors . Rimma helped him draft a letter to the Supreme Soviet requesting citizenship. Rimma: "I want to be in Russia again. I want to live in Russia"
 She was uneasy about the strange fish she had on the hook, but she befriended Lee . She gave him a copy of Dostoyevsky’s The Idiot, perhaps as a warning, on his birthday .
 On October 19 Lee was interviewed in his room at the Hotel Berlin by a correspondent for Radio Moscow . Lev Setyayev was ostensibly seeking his impressions as a tourist to use in propaganda broadcasts overseas .
 Whatever Lee may have said, his remarks were not used on the air . Part of Setyayev’s job almost certainly was to gather impressions of Oswald for the KGB .
 Lee was told that his visa had expired and he had to leave Russia that night . Lee's visa was revoked and he was forced to leave the country . Lee was not allowed to stay in Russia for the next two weeks .
 Rimma found him locked in his hotel room, bleeding badly . Rimma was found by Rimma in her hotel room hours after she found him .
 He was rushed to the Botkin Hospital, where foreigners are frequently treated, and placed in the psychiatric ward .
 He had recovered enough by the next day to complain about the poor food and about being in a ward for the insane . The next day, he complained about the lack of food and being in the hospital .
 A psychiatrist examined him, decided he was not dangerous, and transferred him into a new ward . He enjoyed a more or less happy, attention-filled week .
 Lee was released on October 28 and moved from the Hotel Berlin to the Hotel Metropole, two blocks away . Lee was moved to the hotel two blocks from where he was arrested .
 That afternoon he was driven to OVIR, the Soviet visa office, and interviewed by a new set of officials, who appeared to know nothing about him or his earlier interview . The next day he was interviewed again by a different set of Soviet visa officials .
 He decided that a ‘showdown’ might convince the Russians of his earnestness, so he took a taxi to the American Embassy . Rimma was briefly absent, but she was watching him closely .
 She summoned Richard E Snyder, the United States consul, and he took Lee into his office, where his assistant, John A McVickar, was also present .
 Lee repeated his desire to renounce his citizenship, affirmed his allegiance to the USSR, and announced that he had applied to become a Soviet citizen . Lee said he has applied for the Soviet citizenship . Lee also said he had renounced his citizenship and said he would renounce it .
 He slapped his passport down on Snyder’s desk and demanded to take the oath renouncing his American citizenship that very moment .
 He added that he had been a radar technician in the Marine Corps . He said he would make available to the Soviet government such knowledge .
 Richard Snyder was in a dilemma, for Lee Oswald appeared to be sane and he was within his rights . Lee Oswald appears to have been sane, but he was not in danger, Snyder says .
 Snyder was newly stung from handling the cases of two would-be defectors, one of whom had quickly changed his mind . Snyder: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it. It's a good start"
 If only from a humanitarian point of view, Snyder said, the boy should have time to think it over . Snyder looked at Oswald’s passport and noted that he was still a minor .
 The step he was proposing was irrevocable, for if he were granted Soviet citizenship, he would never be allowed to leave Russia . The step was irreinvable, as he was granted the right to leave the country .
 Snyder decided to put Oswald off, telling him that he could not administer the oath because it was a Saturday and he needed time to prepare the papers . Snyder said he needed more time to get ready for the oath .
 Oswald was free to appear two days later, he said, and take the oath then if he chose . Oswald is free to take oath on Monday or Tuesday, Oswald said .
 Snyder suggested that Oswald wait until he was assured of Soviet citizenship, or he would have no citizenship at all . Snyder suggested, however, that Oswald should wait for his Soviet citizenship .
 The exchange lasted less than an hour, but it had so nasty a tone that it was remembered long afterward . Three Americans, besides Snyder and Oswald, who were present during parts of it, were present at the time .
 Lee returned to his hotel greatly pleased with himself and confident the Russians would accept him after his bravura display of good faith . Lee returned from his hotel in Moscow to say he was pleased with his actions .
 He was besieged by members of the American press corps in Moscow, who had been told by the embassy about his attempt to defect . That day and the next he was besieged .
 He turned every one of them away from him, fearing lest he would prejudice his case, he turned them away .
 Lee wrote Llewellyn Thompson, the American ambassador in Moscow, again asking that his citizenship be revoked and complaining about his treatment by Snyder . On November 3, Lee wrote Thompson to the U.S. ambassador to Moscow, complaining about Snyder's treatment .
 Snyder replied by mail that he had only to appear at the embassy to renounce his citizenship . Snyder replied that he was only required to turn up to the embassy . Snyder said he would have to appear in the embassy at the end of his term .
 On November 16, Soviet official came to his room and informed him that he could remain until a decision was made as to what to do with him . A decision had to be made on whether to keep him in the Soviet Union .
 It was virtually a promise that he could stay, and Lee was vastly relieved . Lee was almost assured that he would stay .
 CNN's John Sutter visited the American Embassy in the U.S. to pick up his mail from a visit to the United States . He says the embassy's consular office picked up the mail, as did the American reporters .
 Oswald’s room was on the second floor of the Hotel Metropole, a floor below his own . Oswald's room was the floor below the floor of his hotel .
 "Instead of inviting me in, he came into the corridor and stood there, holding the door open with his foot," she says . "He came into a corridor and held his foot open with a foot," the woman says .
 I peeked into his room and saw that it was exactly like mine, right down to its shade of hotel blue . "I peeked in his room," he said. "I can't wait to see if it's the same color as my own."
 He readily agreed to be interviewed and said that he would come to my room at eight or nine o’clock that evening . To my surprise, he readily agreed and said he would be interviewed .
 Good as his word, he appeared, wearing a dark gray suit, a white shirt with a dark tie, and a sweater-vest of tan cashmere .
 "He looked familiar to me, like a lot of college boys in the East during the 1950s," he says . He says he was a college boy in the '50s and '60s .
 He settled into an armchair, I brought him tea from a little burner I kept on the floor, and he started talking fairly easily . He settled in a armchair and started talking again easily .
 He spoke quietly and unemphatically and only rarely betrayed by a gesture or a slight change of tone that what he was saying at that moment meant anything special to him . He was a quiet man with a low-key voice who spoke quietly .
 Richard Snyder refused to accept on the spot his oath of renunciation . He began by complaining about Richard Snyder's refusal to renounce .
 I had no idea what he was talking about, since I had not discussed him with Snyder or McVickar, nor heard about the stormy scene at the embassy two weeks before . I had been there two weeks ago, but I had heard about it .
 Once he becomes a Soviet citizen, he would allow ‘my government,” the Soviet government, to handle it for him . He said he would let it happen for him once he became a Soviet-born citizen .
 Lee’s tone was level, almost expressionless, and while I realized that his words were bitter, somehow I did not feel that he was angry . Somehow I felt that Lee was angry, but somehow he was not angry . Lee's tone was . level, and somehow I
 He did not seem like a fully grown man to me, for the blinding fact, the one that obliterated nearly every other fact about him, was his youth . Moreover, he didn't seem like an entirely grown man, even though he was a child .
 Proudly, as a boy might, he told me about his only expedition into Moscow alone . Proudly he said: "I've never been to Moscow alone. I've been in Moscow alone"
 He had walked four blocks to Detsky Mir, a children’s department store, and bought himself an ice cream cone .
 He had so far dared venture into only four blocks of it . Here he was, coming to live in this country forever, and he had only ventured into four blocks .
 "I was astounded by his lack of curiosity and the utter absence of any joy or spirit of adventure in him," she says .
 "Here was this lonely, frightened boy taking on the bureaucracy of the second most powerful nation on earth, and doing it single-handedly," he said .
 I wondered if he had any idea what he was doing, for it could be brutal to try to stay if the Russians did not want you—futile and dangerous . The Russian president's actions could be fatal and dangerous to try and stay in Russia .
 "I had to admire Lee, ignorant, young, and even tender as he appeared, for persisting in spite of so many discouragements," he said .
 He told me that he had been informed that morning that he did not have to leave the country . He said he was told that he was not required to do so .
 So I supposed that he would soon be granted citizenship, vanish into some remote corner of Russia, and never be heard from again . So I expected that he . would soon . vanish into . some remote . corner of . Russia, he said .
 He would not be allowed to see any Americans, much less reporters, and he would be unable to signal his distress . He would be able to signal distress to reporters .
 Like every Westerner in Moscow, I had heard innumerable tragic stories about foreigners who had crossed the Rubicon of Soviet citizenship, and never been allowed to leave . Like every other Westerner, there were countless tragic stories of foreigners who crossed the Soviet border .
 "I assumed that Lee would regret his choice and that he, like the others, would be trapped," he said . Lee's decision to leave the country was a mistake, but he said he would not regret his decision .
 "Exploitation" in the U.S. is the subject of a series of stories from the Arab world . President Obama spoke of "exploitation in the United States. But occasionally our purposes coincided .
 His mother, he said, had been “a worker all her life, having to produce profit for capitalists,” and I thought I heard his voice tighten . His mother had been a "worker" for her entire life .
 He supposed it was “safe” to speak out, since he was informed he did not have to leave Russia . Now that he had been informed that he did . He would not be endangering his chances of remaining .
 He told me repeatedly that his decision was “unemotional,” and that this seemed important to him . He said he was not emotional about his decision, and that it was important to know .
 He added that he did not recommend defection for everyone . But he said he felt he was unusual, perhaps, that he felt unusual .
 "But at least he would never have to go home, and that was the big thing to him," he said . "I would never go home. But at least I would never be going home. That's what I would say."
 "Before he left, at two o’clock in the morning, he told me that he had never talked so long about himself to anyone," he said . Before he left he said that he hadn't talked so much to anyone about himself .
 I felt another twinge of pity, for if this was his idea of openness, then he must never have talked about himself to anyone at all . I felt pity for him, but I thought that he must have never spoken about himself .
 I made him promise that before he left the Metropole to be swallowed up in Soviet life forever, he would at least come up to say goodbye to him . He promised that before leaving he would say goodbye .
 McVickar told me a little about the angry scene at the embassy . He also talked about Oswald, of course .
 As vice-consul, McVickar daily saw former Americans who were fruitlessly trying to go home . As a vice-convoy, he saw many former Americans trying to return to the U.S.
 He thought that if someone at the embassy had had time to listen to Oswald, it might have helped defuse him . He thought if someone had listened to him, he might have defused him . Oswald was a member of the British Embassy staff .
 He was afraid that the encounter had pushed him further toward the tragic step -- Soviet citizenship -- that would make it impossible for him ever to go home . He feared that, instead, instead of going home, he'd become a Soviet citizen .
 Years later I asked McVickar if he had told me about Oswald in the hope that I would try to talk him out of defecting, he said . Years later he asked him if he'd told me that Oswald had been killed .
 In a bugged hotel room and with own visa hanging by a thread, would have been risky indeed . That, in a bugging hotel room . That would have left him with no choice but to go to the UK .
 The dezhumaya is a tiny woman in white who sat on the landing and presided over a huge desk filled with keys . The tiny woman was a tiny white woman in a white dress .
 The question was a crucial one, and the answer Soviet officials seem to have reached may have determined the outcome of his case . The answer may have helped determine the fate of the case .
 Oswald’s suicide attempt was proof that in order to get what he wanted he would stop at nothing—he would even try to take his own life . Oswald's suicide attempt is proof that he would even stop at anything to achieve his goals .
 Putin's willingness to talk to reporters showed that he would not hesitate to embarrass either the Russians or the Americans publicly . And his willingness to speak to reporters shows that he is willing to embarrass both Russia and the United States .
 After Khrushchev’s return to Moscow, even minor questions affecting Americans in the USSR began to be decided, to a greater degree than before, according to whether they would help or hurt Soviet-American relations .
 The speculation appears poorly founded unless one of these organizations was fronting for another that was politically more powerful, either the KGB at a very high level, or some special party body . Khrushchev entrusted with overseeing implementation of the Spirit of Camp David .
 First, it came at a moment, late in October, when the new policy began to be effected . The new policy is being implemented .
 Second, it appears to have altered the Russians’ estimate of Oswald’s character and of the damage he could do . Second, the Russians believed Oswald would be able to do so much damage, he said. Third, it appeared to have changed the Russians' view of Oswald
 They decided it would be less harmful to their image abroad to accept this young American who claimed to be motivated by Marxist ideals than to reject him with the risk that he might embarrass them with a very public suicide . Evidently, they decided to accept him, rather than reject him .
 They no doubt hoped that he would become disenchanted and would quietly go away . During the long weeks he was kept in limbo, until after the first of the year, they hoped he would .
 Lee, by his self-imposed sequestration in the Metropole, avoided any confrontation with reality that might conceivably have caused him to change his mind . But Lee avoided that confrontation by avoiding confrontation .
 He spent most of his life writing angry letters to his brother Robert . Instead of angry letters, he spent his emotions writing letters to Robert's brother .
 In December, Robert wrote to Robert that he chose to break all ties with his past and would not be writing to him or to their mother again . And in December, even before he had been told what his future would be, he wrote .
 He was to be sent to Minsk, capital of Belorussia, where he would be a metalworker . He would work at the Belorussian Radio and Television Plant .
 Through the Soviet Red Cross he was given 5,000 old rubles, or $500, with which he was able to pay his hotel bill and his train fare to Minsk and still have some .
 Lee started his job in Minsk on January 13, 2013 . Lee was awarded a pleasant one-room apartment with a view overlooking the river .
 He earned $70 to $90 a month at work at work and received an additional $70 a month in the form of a Red Cross subsidy . He earned an extra $70 per month in Red Cross subsidies .
 It was mere manual labor, while he had hoped for a place in an institute and a chance to study full time . It was merely manual work, he said .
 "Like every foreigner, he was at first reasonably content. But as the object of much attention and the recipient of many favors," he was initially reasonably content . "He was at least reasonably content, but as a foreigner, like every foreigner," he said .
 Lee studied Russian and went to the opera with Rosa Kuznetsova, an Intourist interpreter . Lee made friends at the factory, and in his free time studied Russian .
 He bought a 16-gauge single barrel shotgun that summer, joined a hunting club, and went on hunting trips in the countryside . He bought the shotgun and went hunting with friends .
 His fellow workers called him “Alik’ because “Lee” sounded Chinese . Lee liked that, and he liked that. He was peppered with questions about America and America .
 Some girls cared passionately about him because he was an American, the only one in Minsk, and he had an apartment . He soon discovered that some of the girls cared about him .
 She was Ella Germann, a dark-haired Jewish girl whom he had met at the factory . Ella had met him at a time when he was working in the factory in New York City . She was the daughter of a Jewish woman who he had never met .
 Lee celebrated the New Year of 1961 with Ella and her family at their apartment . They saw each other for a few months, and Lee celebrated New Year's 1961 .
 He decided that he was in love with her and, more or less on impulse, proposed to her the following evening . The following evening, he proposed .
 Ella’s refusal helped crystallize the many criticisms that Lee had been quietly taking shape in Minsk . Ella's refusal helped to crystallize many criticisms, including the provincial drabness, the cold climate, the officiousness of the party secretary in his workshop .
 On January 4, two days after Ella’s refusal, the visa authorities in Minsk inquired whether he still wanted Soviet citizenship . Ella was assigned to Minsk and given his documents as a ‘stateless person’
 Lee replied that he did not and asked merely to have his documents extended for another year . Lee said he was merely asking for extension of his documents to be extended . Lee asked to extend documents to another year, but said he didn't want extension .
 In February he wrote the American embassy in Moscow asking to have his passport back . He wrote the embassy in February asking for his passport to be returned .
 He rudely reminded the embassy that he was still an American citizen and said he would like to go home . The man is still a citizen of the U.S.
 Lee Harvey Oswald met Marina Prusakova in a mood of disappointment in love and with Russia . Oswald was in such a mood that he met her at the time of his assassination .
 Marina and a girlfriend from the pharmacy went to another dance at the Palace of Culture . Marina and her girlfriend Marina were engaged for the first time in 1961 .
 Marina was walking down the stairway to the dance floor when she met Alik coming up . Marina was wearing a simple gray dress and her best Czechoslovak shoes .
 He was wearing black trousers, blue button-down shirt without a tie, and a charcoal gray V-neck sweater .
 Ilya and Valya had their apartment in the broad thoroughfare on Ulitsa Kalinina . Alik pointed out the building in which he lived . Ilya's wife Ilya was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 Three days later, Valya informed her that a young man had called, not once but twice, and said he would call again the next day . The young man called Marina's home on Tuesday, three days after she returned from work .
 He had a “nice, polite voice,” Valya Valya said, “but I couldn’t understand him very well”
 Marina appeared at the Fourth Clinical Hospital, unannounced, bearing a jar of apricots . Marina appeared unannounced at the hospital on Friday . Marina says the apricot is the best fruit in the world .
 He was wearing hospital pajamas and flushed with embarrassment when Marina arrived . Marina said he was wearing a hospital gown when she arrived .
 Both were uneasy as they sat talking in the corridor for about an hour . Both sat talking for an hour before they left the room .
 Alik was to have an operation on his adenoids the next day, and the prospect made him so nervous that he was scarcely able to speak of anything else . Alik had to have the operation on the day after the operation .
 In her pharmacist’s coat, she explained, she could pass for a nurse any time . She explained that in the pharmacist's coat she could easily pass as a nurse .
 Alik complained of pain and the absence of anesthetic . The operation was over, his adenoids were out, but he complained of the pain . Alik said he was disappointed by the lack of anesthesia .
 Marina felt sorry for him and started coming to see him nearly every day . Marina started seeing him almost every day and started visiting him again . Marina said she was sorry to him and went to visit him almost daily .
 She noticed that as a foreigner he got a good many favors from the hospital staff . She said he got many favors as a foreign citizen .
 Had she been seeing anyone but a foreigner, she would, she knew, have been shooed away . She knew she would have been sent packing if she had been seeing a foreigner .
 The whole thing—Alik, his asking for the kiss, the fetid hospital air—repelled her . She said: "The whole thing, Alik's asking for a kiss, was the whole thing ...repelling her"
 She had liked Alik at first, and when her coworkers at the pharmacy learned that she had an American boyfriend, they were intrigued and envious . She had been envious of Alik's American boyfriend .
 Marina reluctantly consented to come back to see her husband at the end of the night . Marina was in the hospital when he called from the hospital asking her to see him again .
 As long as he’s sick, I’ll go, she said to herself, but the moment he”s out of the hospital, she will refuse to see him again . She said she’d refuse to visit him again.
 She promised him that she would think it over, promising herself that she'd go serenely on seeing her other boyfriends, especially Anatoly, whose kisses were still making her head spin .
 Aunt Valya was overflowing with sympathy for Marina’s new American friend . Easter was approaching, and aunt Valya had sympathy for her new friend .
 Marina turned up at the hospital bearing an Easter egg dyed specially by Valya and candies and kulich, a sweet Russian Easter bread .
 Marina returned home, she told Aunt Lyuba that Alik had loved the egg . Alik's egg was the first egg to be eaten by Marina .
 In Valya’s eyes that means he was an honorable young man, she urged Marina to bring him to supper as soon as he left the hospital .
 Marina felt shy about the ‘fiancee’ business and asked Valya not to bring it up . Valya asked Marina not to mention the fact that Marina had a fiancee .
 At dinner Ilya quizzed their guest about how he happened to be in Russia and whether he was happy there . Ilya also quizzed his guest about whether he's happy there. Ilya: "Ilya is happy in Russia"
 Alik said he had come as a tourist and had found it difficult to get permission to stay . Alik answered that he had been asked to stay in the country .
 The Russian president had been eager to live and work in Russia and learn the truth about it, not just the ‘truth” that is shown to tourists . But he was eager to learn the "truth about it," he said .
 Ilya told Ilya that he worked at the Minsk Radio Plant and had his own apartment . Ilya said he had a job at the radio plant and had own apartment in Minsk, Belarus .
 As he rose from the table, Alik stood up, too, a polite gesture that endeared him to Valya and made an impression on Marina . Marina: "Alik is a good man, and he's a good guy, and I love him"
 When Valya and Marina got up to do the dishes, Alik followed them into the kitchen to help . Alik, in another welcome and unfamiliar gesture, followed them in to help with the dishes .
 Marina agreed to go out with him two evenings later . Then he and Marina went for a walk, and she agreed to date him again .
 Marina felt the aversion she had felt in the hospital was gone . When Alik kissed her that night for the second time, it seemed to Marina that the aversion had been gone . Marina's aversion to Alik was gone when she kissed her again .
 Alik had invited Marina to his apartment, and they asked Marina to come along . Alik invited Marina and Alik to a party at his apartment . Marina was invited to the party .
 She insisted on taking Lyalya Petrusevich, a close friend who lived in her apartment building, to her apartment . But she insisted she took her friend to see her in the same way .
 She and Lyalya had strolled past Alik’s building a year or so before, admiring the balconies that overlooked the river . Alik's building is one of Russia's most famous buildings .
 She wanted Lyalya to see the building, and meet her new American acquisition . Now she wanted to meet the new owner of the building in Moscow .
 Alik was surprised to find not only Yury and Sasha but Marina and Lyalya at the door of his new home . Alik and Marina were surprised to see Yury, Sasha and Marina arrive at their new home in Moscow .
 Marina noticed that Alik’s collection of classical records was poorer and reflected a good deal less musical knowledge than the collections of other boys she knew . Marina noticed how Alik's collection was poorer than those other boys' .
 Marina's Aunt Valya’s approval, and now Lyalya's, raised Alik in her esteem . Alik's aunt Valya's approval has raised her esteem in Marina's esteem .
 Not everyone could have an American boyfriend; he was the only American in Minsk . Minsk was the city's only American city .
 He could probably have any girl in town, and it occurred to her that if she wanted to keep him, even as a curiosity, she had better watch out .
 Marina's feelings had undergone a full revolution from what they had been in the hospital . When he came for their date the next evening, Marina’s feelings had changed dramatically . Marina's feelings had undergone a complete revolution .
 Alik cleared the snow off a bench so that Marina could sit down . Marina and Alik strolled along the frozen river . Alik politely cleared a bench off for Marina .
 He played a record, the theme song from the film Around the World in Eighty Days, and they danced . He played it to the audience, who danced .
 All she wanted was to go to Alik’s apartment and dance, to kiss and drink tea and talk . She wanted to kiss Alik, drink tea, talk and dance with him .
 He was more gentle, tender, and affectionate than anyone she had known . She had known him more tender, tenderly, than anyone else .
 His caresses seemed different somehow somehow, because they were the caresses of a foreigner . The man's caresses were different somehow, as he was a foreigner.
 She had enjoyed the luxury of a man’s kisses without the fear of interruption . Furthermore, it was the first time she had enjoyed a man's kisses without interruption . She was not afraid of interruption.
 She had never before known a man with an apartment of his own . With the brief exception to Eddie in Leningrad, she had never been with a man .
 There were other things that attracted her to Alik, such as his accent and his voice on the telephone, she says .
 One evening as they walked near the opera house, she asked about his family in America . She asked him about his American family, and he replied .
 Later, he said that his mother was dead and that he had been raised by an aunt . He said that he was raised by his aunt, who died .
 Marina and Marina were both orphaned and lost their mothers . The pair had a significant bond, Marina said .
 She told Alik that her parents were dead, too, but said nothing about being illegitimate . Alik said she was illegitimate, but didn't say anything about it .
 Alik told Marina that he was twenty-four, almost as old as Anatoly . Marina found that attractive, too, and Alik said he was also a young man .
 He also told her that he had renounced his American citizenship and could never go back to the U.S. He told her he renounced American citizenship . He also said he could never return to the United States .
 It was flattery enough that he was an American and that, for the moment at least, his choice seemed to have fallen on her . For the moment, he seemed to be choosing her .
 Marina says she was forced to go home by Alik when he said she must go home or he would compel her to stay with him until the next morning . Marina says he kissed her until he reached such a point of desire that he said, with “madness in his eyes
 The next time they saw each other was April 18, only a month and a day after they had first met, April 18 . The next day they met was April 17 .
 Alik took her hands, looked gravely into her eyes, and said to her quietly, “Marina, I’d like you to be my wife.” Marina . Alik then said to Marina: “I'd like to be your wife. I
 Marina went home that night and told Valya that the American had asked her to marry him . Valya was shocked to discover that Marina had been asked to marry the American .
 Ilya stopped at nearly every step as he and Marina climbed the three narrow flights to Ilya and Valya's apartment .
 He was pale, and his knees were shaking as he waited on the landing, summoning courage to ring the bell . He waited for the bell to ring, and was pale and shaking when he arrived .
 Ilya met Alik in the living room, and Marina went apprehensively into the kitchen with her aunt . Alik met Ilya and Marina in the kitchen . Ilya's aunt Ilya also met her daughter, Marina, and Alik was in the house .
 Ilya was an official of the MVD, but he overlooked a fact that might have been critical in giving his consent . Ilya: "Ilya, Ilya, as he examined Alik’s documents, as well as the documents, should have pointed out that
 Alik did not have a regular Soviet passport, but a special document for the so-called stateless person . Alik is a foreigner who does not have Soviet citizenship and may not have retained citizenship of another country .
 Had he had any other impression, he said, he would have withheld his consent to the marriage . Had he been told otherwise, he'd withheld consent to marriage .
 I told him what kind of little bird you are, and he has promised to reform you. He said: "I told him . He has promised him that he will reform you."
 The four of them went into the kitchen and sat at the table, drinking cognac . The four men sat together and drank cognac, the first time they had been together since 2004 .
 Marina and Alik went to ZAGS, the bureau where Soviet citizens go to register birth and death, marriage and divorce . Alik and Marina visited the bureau the next day, April 20, where they registered births and deaths . Marina was the first Soviet citizen to register a birth
 Alik announced they had come to be married and produced his residence permit . Alik said they were married and Alik produced a residence permit to marry .
 When Alik told them that he was a foreigner, they instructed him to proceed to another ZAGS office and painstakingly wrote out the address . Alik was told to go to the address and the address was painstakingly written out . When he arrived at the address, Alik
 Marina and Alik were greeted by a gray-haired gentleman at the second ZAGS . Alik and Marina were taken to a chair by a man who asked them to sit in a chair .
 There they made out separate applications, and the old man promised to relay the papers higher up .
 He suggested that they come back in a week but was unable, in response to their questions, to reassure them or give them any notion whether their application would be approved .
 Marina knew the name from a novel by Theodore Dreiser, and she liked it . Marina knew her name from the novel, and liked it. Marina knew that she was going to be called Marina .
 The next evening they went window-shopping for furniture and had supper with Ilya and Valya . Ilya, Valya and Ilya also went window shopping for furniture . The next night they had supper at Ilya's home .
 Later, as they sat in a little park near her apartment house, Alik was rather downcast . Later, she said, "I don't want to go to see her again" Alik later said she was "rather downcast"
 If he wanted her that badly, he would have to ask to be forgiven and marry her . He would have had to ask forgiveness and ask her to marry her.
 "In the morning when she woke up, she felt that she did, in fact, love him," she says . But in the morning, she says, she feels that she does, indeed, loves him .
 Each evening when he arrived at the Prusakovs’ for dinner, Alik scanned Marina’s face anxiously . Alik scans Marina's face when he arrives at dinner for dinner .
 Marina told Marina to come back with Alik on Sunday, April 30, at eleven o’clock in the morning for the wedding ceremony . Alik and Marina will wed on April 30 at 11:30am .
 News spread like a brush fire that Marina had been given permission to marry “her American,” and by no means was everyone pleased . Marina was married to "her American," but not everyone was pleased .
 The girls at the pharmacy were in high excitement, but Tamara, a slightly older woman in whom Marina confided, had doubts . Tamara had doubts about Marina's story .
 She was convinced that of the two men Marina had been seeing, it was Anatoly whom she loved . Anatoly is Anatoly, she was convinced .
 He asked Marina to meet him in a cafe, and there he wished her the best of luck . He asked her to meet up with her and wished her best luck .
 Marina was stung, partly because it was Anatoly who was accusing her and partly because there was truth in what he said . Marina was left stung by Anatoly's accusation, partly due to the truth in his words .
 It was almost as if, being the only American in Minsk, he had the right to pick anyone he pleased, he said .
 She also concedes that his apartment played a role in her decision to marry him . She says she might not have married him without it .
 She had seen many a marriage turned into a nightmare for lack of a decent place to live . For many girls, as for many girls she knew, the great lottery of Soviet life was to find a man you loved—who had an apartment . She knew many a married life turned into
 The apartment also played a role in guaranteeing the consent of her Uncle Ilya . Ilya's uncle Ilya was also in the apartment .
 He may have wanted Marina married so that he could once again enjoy the full-time attention of his wife . He may, moreover, have wanted her to marry him .
 Ilya himself called Marina “flighty,” and he knew that he could influence her choice . Ilya called Marina "flighty" and he called her "flizzy"
 He never bothered to meet Anatoly and see with his own eyes who was the better man and who would give Marina a better life . Yet he never met Anatoly to see who was better man, Marina said .
 The difference lay not in the qualities the two men possessed, but in the apartment one of them possessed . The apartment is one of the most expensive apartments in the world .
 Marina chose the role of Marina DiCaprio to play in the film . The film is based on the story of her life in New York City .
 Because of her illegitimate birth, she had felt like an outsider all her life . She felt like she was born an illegitimate child and felt like a victim of discrimination .
 From her earliest years she showed the way she felt in her choice of friends, in her reluctance to join the Pioneers and the Komsomol, and in her long string of alien and exotic beaux . From her early years, she showed how she felt .
 Marrying Alik, for her, was the culmination of a lifelong flirtation with the outsider . Married Alik for the first time, she says .
 Marina felt impelled to marry ‘out, just as far out as she could go,’ she says . For all these reasons, and possibly because of what she considered ‘incestuous’ attractions to her first cousin Valentin and, perhaps less consciously, to
 There was something else about Alik that attracted her, a kinship they shared . There was also something else that attracted Alik to her, she said .
 He, too, obviously felt “outside” and alone in Minsk, but it went further back . He also felt ‘outside’ and ‘alone’ in the Minsk area .
 Marina believed that he was an orphan, and that made her feel enormously sympathetic toward him, as if they were brother and sister . Marina believed he was orphaned, and she felt enormously sympathetic towards him .
 Both rejected their past so completely that they did not tell each other anything about it—ever . Both rejected it completely and never spoke to each other again .
 They had only walked down the street hand in hand for heads to swivel and eyes to pop . They had to walk down the streets hand-in-hand for the first time .
 At a deeper level, Alik’s choice of her and the attention it brought, confirmed the feeling she had always had that she was different and special .
 The mere fact of being married to him would mean that for the rest of her life she was going to be singled out as someone special, she said . She said: "The mere fact that she was marrying him would be a very special thing."
 "Such outer recognition was in profound correspondence with the inner feeling she had had all along," she said . Such outer recognition is in direct correspondence with her inner feeling .
 In spite of his other attractions as a foreigner, she did not marry Alik for his passport . Alik was married to Alik in 2007 .
 She believed him when he said that he did not want to go back to America; that, in fact, he could not go back . "She believed him," she said .
 She did not know that, even before they met, he had written to the American embassy in Moscow to request his passport and help in returning to the U.S.
 She made her decision with few regrets, surprisingly few backward glances . And perhaps she did, for she made it with few regret and surprisingly few back-gensens .
 She had an instinct that she was doing what was right for her, the thing ordained by her destiny to be special, she said . She had been doing what she believed was the right thing for her .
 The step she was taking was in harmony with so many of her needs, both inner and outer, as to have been almost inevitable . She said: "She was taking ... as well as being in harmony ... as to having to be almost inevitable"
 He acted for a variety of reasons, of which he himself appears to have been aware of only one . He acted on behalf of a group of people, including himself himself, according to reports .
 He confided to his diary that he was still in love with Ella Germann, the dark-haired Jewish girl at the factory who had rejected his proposal of marriage three months before .
 From the outset, she showed just the right blend of eagerness and hesitation . From the start of the campaign she showed an eagerness to get involved .
 She made him feel jealous with her many boyfriends, she made him make him feel wanted with her sympathetic visits to the hospital, she said . She also made him think she was jealous of him with many of her boyfriends . She was sympathetic with the hospital visits .
 Alik's aunt reminded him of his own aunt in New Orleans, a female relative whom he genuinely cared about . Then, too, she came as part of a package, a family who made Alik feel welcome, and especially an aunt .
 Marina teased him sexually, exactly as an American girl of her age might have done . Finally, Marina teasing him sexually - exactly as a young American girl might do .
 She led him on, made him desire her, then refused herself unless they were married . She refused herself herself unless she was married to him .
 Marina was found to be a girl as American in her sexual behavior as Marina . Alik could have searched the length of Russia and not found her in the country .
 For the first time in his life, Alik Alik thought about marriage at all . But there were other, deeper reasons that enabled Alik to think about marriage .
 Emotionally, he was freer than he had ever been before; free, that is, of his mother and the inner conflicts she incited in him . He was free of all his mother's inner conflicts .
 Thousands of miles from home, he had not written her in more than a year . He had not been able to write her in over a year and she had not seen him since .
 Apparently, it was only at such enormous distance from Marguerite, emotionally as well as geographically, that he was able to summon up the strength to marry .
 Alik’s distance from his mother may have been the principal key to his emotional wholeness at this time, it was not the only one . Alik's distance from her mother may be the principal .
 He was, in Russia, receiving tremendous support from his environment; he could not be fired, an apartment, his “Red Cross” subsidy . He was in Russia for a job from which he couldn't be fired .
 In addition to the government’s munificence, he was on the receiving end of a great deal of generosity from the men and women he met .
 Left to themselves and unafraid, Russians are extraordinarily hospitable . Russians are not afraid to be left alone and left to themselves .
 Alik was liberated from the American myth of independence, the idea that it is a sin to be weak and in need . In Russia, he was liberated a little from the idea of independence .
 Their history has been far too studded with catastrophe, each family has suffered far too many random disasters, for people to cherish such illusions . The history of this family has far too much to bear in mind .
 The weak simply accept succor from the strong. Dependence is a reality of life. Dependency is a fact of life, and the strong simply accept it .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of corruption in the past . He has denied it, but in Russia he hardly had to bother to bother . Putin was accused of emigrating to Russia in the 1990s .
 There, this quality of giving and taking received protective coloration, from his special needs as a foreigner, and from the generosity of nearly everyone around him . This quality of his generosity received protection coloration .
 Alik's need is being camouflaged on the outside, his need was very nearly masked from Alik himself . Alik is being hunted down by the government, but his need is almost completely concealed .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is now on more gracious terms with himself than he had ever been before . Putin's son was born in Moscow, Russia, and died in 2008 .
 Marina says that Alik was happy in her country, happier than he had ever been before and was ever to be again . Marina says she was happy when Alik returned to her country .
 "He was receiving an enormous emotional subsidy from everything and everyone around him," he said . He said: "I'm not going to be able to go back and forth in the next few days"
 Vladimir Putin's dependence on Russia was bottomless, he says . But for all that Mother Russia was giving him, it was not enough, for his dependence .
 He disliked his job as a manual laborer, he disliked the dull provincial city of Minsk . He disliked working in the Russian capital .
 He was no longer interested in Soviet citizenship and had already made the opening moves in his campaign to return to the U.S. He was already campaigning for the United States .
 It is paradoxical that just as he was courting Marina, preparing to accept her as his future wife, he was also planning to reject her homeland . The country that had given him the energy and inner coherence to marry in the first place, he says .
 For more than a year, no one at the American embassy in Moscow had known the whereabouts of Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald's whereabouts, or the fate, of Oswald, was unknown for more than one year .
 In February 1961, the embassy received a letter from Minsk postmarked Minsk . The embassy received the letter in February of 1961, 1961 .
 Oswald accused the embassy first of ignoring an earlier letter, which he had in fact not written . Then he stated his desire to return to the United States, “that is if we could come to some agreement concerning the dropping of any legal proceeding’s against me” Oswald
 Despite his attempt to renounce his citizenship, he acted as if he expected the very best from the embassy and the U.S. government .
 Oswald also stated that he was applying by letter rather than in person because he could not leave Minsk without permission . Oswald also said he would apply by letter instead of in person .
 Authorities would have been alerted that he intended to visit the American embassy . That permission might easily have been obtained, but the authorities would have to be alerted .
 Oswald preferred not to tip his hand to the Russians until he was certain of his reception by the Americans . Oswald preferred to wait for the Russians to see how they would react to him .
 Oswald's subsidy from the Red Cross was stopped immediately . Oswald's letter did alert police officials in Moscow of his intention, and his subsidy was stopped .
 It was many months before the authorities in Minsk became aware that their American wanted to go home . But it was only months before they became aware of their American request .
 The embassy’s reply, dated February 28, 1961, asked Oswald to appear in person for an interview . Oswald was asked by the embassy in Washington, DC, to appear at the request .
 If it became clear that Oswald had committed no expatriating act, Snyder added, he would be inclined to return the boy’s American passport to him through the open mails . Snyder: If it becomes clear that the boy's American passport had been expatriated, he
 The department had no way of knowing whether Oswald might have violated some state or federal law . It was in no position to issue guarantees . The answer, when it came, was that the department couldn't guarantee .
 Oswald’s passport was never returned to him through the Soviet mails . Nor was the embassy under any circumstances to return Oswald's passport to him .
 Oswald was overjoyed by the embassy’s reply, and on March 12, five days before his first meeting with his future wife, he wrote a new letter . The embassy replied, and Oswald wrote a second letter five days later .
 Requesting instead that the embassy send him a questionnaire, he ended the letter petulantly . Requested instead that he was sent a questionnaire by the embassy .
 Snyder’s reply, dated March 24, was carefully drafted to enable Oswald to use it to obtain the necessary permission to travel to Moscow . Oswald again requested that he appear in person. Snyder replied, saying he was traveling in person .
 Alik Oswald was caught up in his courtship and forthcoming marriage . The marriage appears to have been incompatible with any firm desire to leave Russia . Oswald is married to a Russian woman who is believed to be in the middle of an affair .
 The Wedding S unday, April 30, was sunny and clear . Perhaps he was wavering in his plan, but he had not forgotten .
 The drip of thawing icicles was forgotten, but the wind was icy and a lingering hint of winter hovered in the air . The drip, drip and drip of icicles were forgotten .
 Marina rose early in the morning to find that her aunt had been up nearly all night putting the finishing touches on her wedding dress . The short white gown with a tiny green pattern, like miniature blades of grass, was a short white dress .
 He urged Aunt Valya to come to the registry office, but she, in high spirits, declined . She had a wedding feast to prepare, he said .
 Lyalya Petrusevich, who lived across the hall, and her current boyfriend, Valentin, set off in a taxi . The pair were accompanied by their witnesses, who live in the same building .
 At ZAGS they were received by the same old man who had handled their request to be married . The couple were married at the end of the day .
 Seated behind a large desk he greeted them gravely, with fatherly familiarity . Seated in front of them, he sat gravely behind a desk with a smile .
 Alik emitted a nervous “Yes,” and with a bit of a flourish, the old man placed the marriage stamp in Alik’s passport . Alik emits a nervous "Yes" and the man places the stamp in his passport . The marriage stamp was placed
 Marina peered over Alik’s shoulder to inspect his marriage stamp . They departed in a lighthearted mood, and as they went out the door .
 The pang of learning that her bridegroom had lied to her was buried in the excitement of her wedding day . He was, after all, only two years older than she, was only two .
 There were peals of laughter from the wedding party as they reached the Svisloch River . The wedding party was joined by a group of friends and family .
 Bride and groom stood hand in hand on the bridge staring down at the water below . The bride and groom were married at the end of the day .
 Alik picked a few narcissi from Marina’s bouquet and dropped the petals, one by one, into the sun-streaked river . Alik dropped the narcissi petals into the river, a few by dropping them out .
 By the time they returned to the Prusakovs’’s, the early guests had arrived . The couple were in the early hours of the day .
 The bride and her belongings had to be moved to her new home . But before the celebration could begin in earnest, there was a job to be done .
 Lyalya and Valentin gathered up Marina's clothing, pillows and the homemade feather mattress which was Valya’s wedding gift to the couple, and bundled the whole lot, with the bride and groom, into a taxi .
 The mattress and pillows, to say nothing of her entire wardrobe, tumbled out of the cab, proclaiming to all the world that this was to be her wedding night . The mattress, pillows and even her wardrobe also tumbled from the cab .
 Lyalya and Valentin placed flowers all around the bed in Alik’s apartment and, with a final loving pat, laid her nightgown on the pillow . She was embarrassed, too .
 Valya and her sisters-in-law had outdone themselves . The Prusakovs’s' visit to Valya's sister's home was the first time they had been there .
 It was made at the bidding of Aunt Lyuba in the kitchen of the Belorussian Council of Ministers where she worked .
 Marina Prusakovs' aunts, aunts and their families were among the guests . The couple's neighbors also attended the party in New York .
 Marina invited several colleagues from the pharmacy, but they all found an excuse not to come, apparently because the groom was a foreigner . Marina had invited several of her colleagues to the wedding, but none of them came .
 Erich Titovyets, whom Marina had already met, and Pavel Golovachev, whom she was meeting for the first time . The two men met at the end of the day in Moscow, Russia .
 The other guests took up the chorus, “Gorko, gorko” in keeping with the Russian custom that the wedding wine is bitter until sweetened by the kisses of the bride and groom .
 At length, after much shrinking on her part and much shouting by the others, she relented . She relented, saying: 'At length after much shrank, she finally relented'
 She and Alik stood in full view of the company, and he kissed her firmly on the lips . Alik was the first woman to kiss her in public with her husband .
 The chorus would grow louder, the bride and groom kissed, and the guests once again fell to feasting . The wedding would be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Uncle Ilya danced with all the ladies and gaily kissed every one . "Uncle Ilya, as always on such occasions, danced with the ladies," he said .
 She succumbed to some nameless confusion while dancing with Ilya and left him standing on the dance floor . Ilya left Ilya standing standing alone on the floor .
 The Russian bride wanted to flirt with the men at her wedding . She told her husband it was the Russian custom for the bride to dance with everyone .
 Alik spent most of his wedding party standing by himself in a corner . Marina danced with all of them, while Alik stood by himself .
 Feeling pity for her new nephew, Valya took him in hand and taught him how to waltz . The kind-hearted Valya taught her nephew how to dance .
 The wedding guests then raised a chorus for Alik to dance with his bride . Alik then danced with his new bride .
 With his cheeks pink and his eyes glowing, he did a few turns with Marina as if he had been waltzing all his life . He did a couple of turns with her and Marina .
 When guests asked him to sing an American song, Alik obliged with a Russian song instead, the popular “Moscow Evenings” of which he had memorized every verse . When asked to sing a song from the U.S., Alik sang the popular "Moscow Even
 You have brought me so much happiness life I sing to you and share with you my life . I sing with you, I sing and share my life with you . I love you so much, I say 'I love you'
 Marina then vanished into the bathroom to dress, and when she emerged, she and Alik said their good-byes . Marina then went back to the bathroom and left the scene .
 As they reached the door of his building, he swept her up in his arms, told her to hang on for dear life, and carried her the four flights upstairs .
 Alik opened it, to his utter bewilderment, and there, stood Aunt Valya holding a white plate in her hand . The plate was placed on Alik's plate, and he opened it .
 Ilya was on duty in Stalin Square checking passes for the big parade on May Day . Ilya: "Ilya's job is to make sure everyone has the right to participate in the May Day parade"
 They were going to pay a call across town, and maybe he would let them by without a pass . They were hoping he would allow them to pass . But he didn't .
 "To their great disappointment, he was abrupt with them and refused to allow them into the square," he said .
 Marina’s friends, an older woman and her husband, welcomed the couple to their home . Marina's friends, Marina's husband and Marina's friend, Marina said, are Marina's best friends . Marina and her family were greeted by a warm welcome .
 Newlyweds were plied with vodka by the newlyweds . The husband ran out several times for reinforcements .
 All day the four of them talked politics, an unlikely pastime for the bride . The bride and her family were in the middle of the day .
 The hosts asked many questions about America, and Alik was happy to oblige . Alik: "America is the best country in the world"
 The older couple recalled the hardships of the German occupation of Minsk, and the terror and injustice of the Stalin years . The couple's trip to Minsk was the first time they had been to the Soviet Union .
 They were critical of their country’s faults, but were utterly loyal to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was one of the most successful statesmen in the world .
 Marina was pleased by this first day of her married life, grateful for her friends’ welcome and their open-hearted cordiality .
 Alik steered the conversation toward politics and his rapt attention to everything that was said, she said . She said she saw nothing surprising in that .
 Politics were in the masculine sphere, and it was to be a long time before she woke up to the fact that her husband’s interest in politics was anything out of the ordinary . Politics were a long way from her husband's interest into politics, she says .
 The next evening, the evening of May 2, they paid a call on friends of Alik’s . The next night, the next evening they met Alik's friends again .
 Alexander Ziger, his wife, and two daughters, Eleonora and Anita, had been like family to Alik from his earliest days in Minsk . They were Alexander and his family, who had lived with Alik since his early days in the city . Alik's wife
 Ziger was deputy chief engineer at the Minsk Radio Plant . Ziger, a black-haired, bushy-browed man of somewhat spherical shape, was deputy engineer .
 Ziger met Alik nearly a year and half before, during his first visit to the plant on January 12, 1960 . Ziger and Alik had seen each other frequently ever since, both at the plant and in Ziger’s home .
 As the weeks and months went by, Alik had courted both daughters, especially the younger and livelier, Anita .
 The newlyweds were greeted warmly by their new husband and wife . They sat down and plied them with coffee . They were the first couple to be married in a British wedding .
 Marina took an immediate liking to Anita, a spirited girl who was constantly erupting into peals of laughter .
 Eleonora had wanted to marry Alik, but he said she had wanted it . Alik later admitted he did not want to marry Eleonor, but she wanted him .
 Ziger warned him against her elder daughter on the grounds that she might try to use him . Ziger also warned him not to use his daughter . The elder daughter was also warned against using her father .
 Ziger, a short, plump woman, greeted Marina with great warmth and kissed her tenderly . Ziger was a short-haired woman, a plump plump girl with a long, thin nose .
 Marina's marriage was only the second evening of her marriage, and politics again intrude on Marina's life .
 Neither of them was Russian; he was a Pole and a Jew, she was a Belorussian and a Catholic . Neither of the two were Russian; they were a Pole, a Jew and a Christian . Neither was Russian .
 Both had grown up in eastern Poland, a territory annexed by the Soviet Union in 1939 . By that time the Zigers had abandoned their native land and settled in Argentina . The Zigers' native land was invaded by the Soviets in 1939, but by that time they had abandoned it and
 Mr Ziger won an engineering degree and went to work in a factory in Buenos Aires . He won his engineering degree at the end of his career in Argentina .
 There, too, his daughters grew up, proved talented, and acquired musical educations .
 She was homesick for her native land, longed to hear the sighing of the birch trees . Longed to be laid to rest in the Polish earth .
 Khrushchev, with aggressive acumen, launched a campaign to persuade people like the Zigers to return to Russia . The Zigers are now living in America .
 Everyone in Khrushchev’s country was watched, they discovered, and none more closely than those who had chosen to live abroad . ‘The world was watching,’ they said, ‘and none of them more closely .
 Both passed examinations for the renowned Music Conservatory in Moscow . Both passed the examinations at the renowned music conservatory .
 A ceiling had been set on the Zigers’ lives, and whatever their talents, they could have no hope of going higher . A ceiling was set on their lives, but they could not go higher .
 To Marina his remarks, and indeed the entire evening, were a revelation . To Marina, he said: 'To Marina his comments, and his remarks were a . revelation'
 The family had lived in the West and concluded that life there was incomparably better than anything Russia had to offer . It was a family who decided to move to the West to live in Russia .
 Oswald’s diary confirmed that Mr Ziger had had a hand in shaping it . Oswald's diary confirmed not only that the Zigers were aware of his intention, but that he had also had a part in shaping .
 Each day, six days a week, the alarm clock went off and Alik rose at seven a day . The alarm clock goes off at seven every day .
 Marina struggled out of bed, sipped the coffee he had left her, pulled on her clothes, and dragged herself off to work . Marina struggled to wake up to work, sipping the coffee and pulling on clothes .
 They would stroll for a bit, nod to friends on the street, window-shop, then repair to the cafeteria opposite their apartment house for dinner . They would go to dinner with friends and window-shoppers, then head to the restaurant .
 By the time they reached home, sunset would be flooding the apartment with a reddish glow . By the end of the day, sunset had already been reaching its peak .
 Sometimes he used binoculars to scan the horizon and the main street of Minsk to his left, to see what was playing at the movies .
 Alik tuned in to the Voice of America at ten to listen to the Englishlanguage news . The evening was over when, in the concluding phase of his ritual, Alik listened to the American news .
 Money burned a hole in Marina's pocket, so she was only too happy to turn over to Alik what she earned and allow him to take charge .
 He paid for everything, from groceries they shopped for together to the ice cream and halvah they carried home every night as a concession to his sweet tooth . He paid everything, including everything, to the groceries they bought together .
 Marina was proud of their apartment, of the spare, modern, uncluttered look they had given it, and of her own sprightly touches of color . Marina said she had added a spray of birch leaves here and a bouquet of flowers .
 She quickly discovered that her husband had a domestic streak, too . But she soon discovered that she quickly discovered he also had domestic issues, too.
 The table was decorated with a bunch of spring flowers he had stolen in a public park . He had bought the table and set it, and decorated it with flowers he'd stolen from the park .
 It was not a hint that he would like to start taking his evening meal at home . But it was not, as some brides might suppose, a hint .
 When he got them home, they were the wrong length; his solution was manly and straightforward . The solution was simple: They were wrong length, but he was right .
 He made legs for their bed and fashioned a rod to hang their clothes on in the closet . He made little legs for the bed and made a rod for their clothes to hang on .
 The first thing he did when he arrived home was wash the breakfast dishes and mop the floor . If he did not meet Marina at the pharmacy, he would go to the pharmacy .
 When Marina came in the downstairs door, she could hear her husband, four flights up, singing the Volga Boatmen’s Song or some other Slavic melody . Marina's husband was four flights away from her when she came in .
 If Marina for any reason came home late, she would find Alik waiting at the top of the stairs with an angry, mistrustful look that she was soon to know very well . Alik would be waiting for Marina at the bottom of her stairs .
 Even if she was only a few minutes late, he demanded a full explanation of where she'd been, with whom, and what she had been doing . He demanded an explanation .
 Marina and Alik spent most of their first few weeks of their marriage by themselves . The couple has been married for more than a decade .
 On weekends they often went to one of the two large lakes outside Minsk for a picnic .
 Both lakes were in marshy areas surrounded by birch groves, clumps of aspen, and clearings with tiny daisies in bloom . Both lakes are in marshal areas .
 Alik would take a boat and row Marina out to an island in the middle of the lake . He would row Marina to the island . Marina would then take her to a lake island .
 He lay in the sunshine by the hour trying to get a tan, usually ending up with a sunburn instead . There they picnicked, he sat in the sun for hours .
 Marina liked to lie on her stomach in the grass, watching the minnows and the baby frogs darting in the shallow water . Marina's favorite place was to lie down in the water to watch the minnowows and baby frogs .
 Once, using his T-shirt as a net, they spent a long time splashing in the water in a futile effort to snare some fish . Once, they used his shirt to catch fish .
 A week after their wedding, they spent an evening with Marina’s uncle Vasya and aunt Lyuba Axyonov . Marina and Vasya spent the night with Marina's aunt and uncle, Lyuba .
 In an attempt to keep up with Uncle Vasya, Alik downed four shots of vodka . Alik: "Uncle Vasya's vodka is not a joke. It's a joke"
 They brewed some coffee to sober him up, and he fell asleep on the sofa . He fell asleep in the middle of the night .
 Another night they went to a movie, a Polish thriller about a stealthy Nazi spy who got off scot-free, unlike Soviet movies in which the enemy spy always got caught . Another night, they watched a movie about a Polish spy who was caught .
 Alik took Marina to see his friend Pavel Golovachev, with whom he worked at the factory . Marina was Marina's partner in the Soviet Union . Alik was married to Marina, who later died of a heart attack .
 Pavel was easy to write off as a hick from the country, and Marina had done so when she met him at her wedding . Marina had written him off as an hick .
 When she saw his apartment, she realized that she could not have been more mistaken . She said she was mistaken when she found his apartment .
 Pavel occupied three rooms with the most sophisticated decor she had ever seen . Pavel occupied the most . sophisticated decor . Pavel's mother was shocked to discover that he had been taken seriously seriously seriously . Pavel was taken seriously by the authorities .
 He had fashioned a tape recorder and a television set of his own, and he had a vast collection of foreign tapes . He had made his own TV set and a large collection of tapes .
 The general was allowed to keep apartments in various parts of the country, and Pavel occupied one of them . Pavel occupied the apartment .
 By virtue of his father’s position, he qualified as a member of the Soviet aristocracy . He was born into a family of aristocrats in Russia .
 Pavel had grown up open and unafraid. Because of his father’s virtually invulnerable position, Pavel grew up open . Pavel had never been afraid of violence .
 He was not afraid, for example, to make a friend of the only American in Minsk, Lee Oswald . He was also not afraid to make friends with Lee Oswald, who was only American citizen of Minsk .
 President Obama spoke to CNN's John Sutter about his country's virtues and shortcomings . He was not afraid to talk to him frankly about the country’s shortcomings, he said .
 Marina's husband's liking for Pavel went well beyond the fact that he was one of the few people who could talk to him intelligently about politics, Marina says . But it soon became clear to Marina that her husband’s liking for him went beyond that .
 There was a small gadget on the wall of Alik's and Marina’s apartment that had no apparent use . Alik and Marina lived in the same apartment in New York .
 They supposed it to be a listening device, which led them to speculate about their friends and who might be informing on them . They were supposed to be listening devices .
 Alik looked at her for a long, meaningful second and delivered a devastating answer . Alik said, "I don't know what I really want to do with my life"
 Pavel had many faults, but he was incapable of calculation . He was, as the Oswalds were to learn, an utterly disinterested friend . The Oswalds had to learn from their friend's disinterest .
 Marina believes that Pavel was far and away her husband’s closest friend in Russia, and probably the closest friend he ever had . In fact, Marina believes Pavel was her husband's closest friend and probably his closest friend .
 Marina found herself alone with her husband’s friend, in the bathroom hunting for a towel . Either on this first visit to Pavel's apartment or another very shortly thereafter, Marina was alone .
 A special outing was planned, a weekend excursion by chartered bus to Riga and Leningrad . The trip was planned to be a weekend trip to the Russian capital and Latvia .
 Alik Alik knew his bride’s love of Leningrad and wanted to give her a surprise . Alik wanted to surprise his bride by giving her a trip to the city .
 A day or so later he was given his money back and told that the trip was off . A day later, he was told that he had been told that his money had been returned .
 Alik thought no more about it until one Saturday when he went to work and noticed that a couple of his friends were missing . Alik was shocked to discover that his friends had been missing .
 He asked the party organizer at the plant if he had been denied permission to go because he was a foreigner . Still angry, he asked the organizer if he hadn't been allowed to go . "I'm not going to go," he said .
 He never forgave the party organizer and refused to have any more to do with him . The party organizer was a major party organizer in the 1980s .
 Marina also had an unpleasant experience, and it, too, had to do with Alik’s being a foreigner . Marina had a similar unpleasant experience with a stranger in the film .
 A rumor swept the hospital and the pharmacy that she had been a prostitute . A week or two after she was married, she was a prostitute, she says . The hospital and pharmacy were shocked by the rumors .
 The rumor was traced back to her old beau, Sasha, now an intern in one of the wards . Sasha is a former intern in the wards. Sasha is now a student at the hospital .
 The rumor would not have taken hold had Marina not married a foreigner . Sasha is known to be a disappointed suitor, but Marina married a foreign citizen . Sasha has a reputation for being a disappointed lover .
 They declined to come to the wedding because Alik was a foreigner, but this was another matter . Alik's parents had declined to attend the wedding, but Alik is a foreigner .
 Sasha was issued a "warning" that he had behaved in a manner unworthy of the Komsomol . Sasha was, in fact, issued a ‘warning’ that he was issued .
 The early weeks of their marriage were happy ones . Despite these ripples on the surface of their tranquility, the early weeks had been happy .
 Marina noticed that an enveloping thoughtfulness settled over him, as if he were unhappy or uncertain in some way . But sometimes when he was sitting by himself she noticed that he was enveloped in thoughtfulness .
 Alik had told her that his mother was dead, and she had no reason to doubt him . Alik's mother is dead, Alik said .
 She saw him reading a letter from home with such a thoughtful expression that she asked if it contained bad news . She later asked if he was going to give her the news .
 Marina noticed that the arrival of a letter from his mother never seemed to raise her husband’s spirits . After that she noticed that . Marina noticed . that the . arrival of the letter from . his mother did not seem to raise his wife's spirits .
 The pain of learning for a second time that her husband had lied to her was blunted by the discovery that she was pregnant . Marina’s discovery of the pregnancy was also a relief for her .
 When the first weeks went by with no sign, he suggested that he might have something wrong with him . He suggested that there might have been a problem with his health .
 It was a luminous day in June, cloudless and hot, with daisies and wildflowers in bloom .
 Marina crumpled to the floor in a faint at the Cafe-Avtomat . Marina had been standing at one of the marble-topped tables in the cafe . Marina suffered a heart attack a week earlier .
 When they got back to their apartment building, he carried her tenderly upstairs and lowered her gently onto the bed . He carried her gently on the bed.
 Sitting beside her, the tears streaming from his eyes, he told her for the first time that he loved her . He told her, "I love you. I love you"
 Marina’s menstrual period was overdue, Alik took her in his arms and danced gleefully around the room . Shortly afterward, however, when he learned that Marina had her menstrual period, he took her to bed .
 Marina did not know it, but her husband had been twice treated in the Marine Corps for gonorrhea . Marina's husband was twice treated for the disease .
 He suggested it might be his fault when she showed no sign of pregnancy in the early weeks of their marriage . Perhaps that is why he suggested it was his fault .
 The fear that he might be unable to have a child played a part in his elation . Perhaps, too, the fear of having a child may have played a role in his excitement .
 When Alik approached her for a kiss, she had to summon up strength not to push him away . Alik had a crush on her when she kissed him, but she was overcome by the kiss .
 By this time she had learned about the existence of Ella, and all her confused emotions burst out in the first serious quarrel . She had learned that Ella had been born .
 Marina and Alik were strolling through the park in June . Marina's husband, Alik, says she and Marina were enjoying a walk .
 She was only crying out of jealousy, because someone took her little American away . "Someone took her American away," she said. "I'm not surprised that she was taken away."
 Marina sat on a bench, shaking with sobs, while Alik went off by himself and paced among the trees . Marina was shaking sobs as she tried to comfort her daughter . Alik was also shaking his head as Marina was shaken by sobs . Marina and Alik were
 Lee Harvey Oswald wrote for the third time to the American embassy in Moscow . He reassured her, and the two of them made up . Oswald was married in 1961 . Oswald wrote to the embassy three weeks after his marriage .
 Unless you think this condition can be met, I see no reason for a continuance of our correspondence . Unless this condition is met, there will be no further correspondence between us .
 I shall endeavour to use my relatives in the United States, to see about getting something done in Washington . Instead, I shall use my family in the U.S. to try and get something done .
 He said he would not leave Russia unless arrangements were made for his wife to leave at the same time . He said, moreover, that he wouldn't leave unless his wife was in Russia at the time .
 Oswald's return to the U.S. may have crystallized his resolve to return . Oswald was killed in September 1945 in the Philippines . Oswald had been in the United States since November 1945 .
 Oswald was denied access to a higher education in Russia . Oswald was forced to leave Russia to study in a Russian university . Oswald says he was disappointed that he could not study in Russia because of his father's death .
 It spelled the end of his hopes of escape from the dreary, provincial town of Minsk .
 Oswald’s disappointment that he did not tell Marina about the rejection until months later . When he did tell her, he was still so disappointed that she got the impression that the wound was fresh . Oswald's disappointment was so keen he didn't tell Marina until months after .
 He announced matter-of-factly that he had married but said nothing about wanting to come home . He said nothing of wanting to return to his homeland .
 Robert rightly took the letter as a signal that his brother had tired of life in Russia . Nevertheless, Robert took it as a sign that he was tired of living in Russia, Robert said .
 Oswald confided that he wanted to return to the U.S. but doubted that it would be possible . Oswald wrote in a later letter that he hoped to return home to the United States . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in the Soviet Union .
 Oswald was excluded from the bus excursion to Leningrad two weeks after his marriage . Oswald was also excluded from a trip to the Soviet capital two weeks later .
 He often complained to friends about the lack of freedom in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was ruled by the government of Soviet republic republics .
 Only a day or so later, he resumed his correspondence with the American embassy . Apparently, he now felt that the many privileges he received as a foreigner were outweighed by the restrictions .
 As in the case of Ella Germann, a rejection seemed to demand an act of rejection in return . Ella's rejection seems to have been the result of a rejection from the public .
 Alik still had said nothing to Marina about his desire to return to the United States, despite the statement in his letter to the embassy that she was willing to leave Russia with him . Alik had said he wanted to return home to the U.S. Marina had said she was
 It was, under the circumstances, he was irresponsible for him to make such a statement . It was an irresponsible statement, he said, but it was not the first time he had made it .
 Fearful of what the Soviet and the American reactions to his request might mean for him, he was unconcerned about what such a declaration, made through the open mails where it could be seen by Soviet officials, might mean pressure on her and perhaps even danger for her family .
 In fact, he did not tell Marina of his intentions until five or six weeks after he wrote to the embassy . He told her he wanted to marry her, Marina, but she was too scared to tell her .
 Marina and Alik were taking a walk after dinner in June . Marina was in the middle of a walk with Alik . Alik and Marina were enjoying a walk in the countryside .
 They passed several lighted storefronts and saw nothing they wanted to buy . They saw no reason to buy anything else in the light .
 He made her sit down at once and write a letter to the American embassy asking to go to the U.S. She was forced to write it to the embassy in the United States . She was then made to write to the president of the country .
 His motive in making her write it is obscure, unless he was trying to commit her so that she would not change her mind . But he never did, and his motive is obscure . He never did .
 Or perhaps he wanted to keep it in reserve, to send it to the embassy if it became necessary . Perhaps he wanted it to send the embassy .
 Marina and Alik received a reply inviting them to pay a visit to the embassy . Alik told Marina that he had received a “reply” inviting the two of them to visit .
 In fact, he had not yet received a reply to the letter he had written more than a month earlier . He had written a letter to the White House, but had not received any reply .
 Owald’s threat to invoke his relatives “to see about getting something done in Washington” led the embassy to seek advice from the Department of State . The embassy sought advice from State Department .
 Oswald’s situation was a tricky one. But there were other causes for delay, for technically, Oswald's situation was tricky one . Oswald's case was the subject of much of the nation's biggest unsolved mysteries .
 The embassy first had to ascertain whether or not he was still an American citizen . The embassy had to find out if he had been a citizen of the United States .
 Oswald had not taken any action in the USSR, such as assuming Soviet citizenship, to forfeit his standing as an American . His citizenship had not been revoked in 1959, embassy officials knew, but they had to make sure he hadn't .
 The embassy sympathized with Oswald’s desire to leave Russia, and with the difficulties he might have in obtaining permission from the Minsk authorities to travel to Moscow . Despite the fractious tone of his letters, the embassy sympathizes with his desire .
 After that, he would be free to apply for a Soviet exit visa, and as an American citizen he had at least a chance of receiving it . He would be able to receive it if he applied for it .
 Oswald would be able to get one for himself, and for his Russian wife . Oswald's Soviet authorities would decide whether or not he could get one . Oswald died in the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 During the Stalin era, defectors to the Soviet Union who desired to return to their homelands invited, at best, refusal and, at worst, imprisonment or even death, whatever the status of their citizenship . In the 1950s and 1960s, defector to the USSR was
 This was the Khrushchev era, and no new policies had yet taken shape . But this was the time when no new policy was in place . This was a time for a new government to take shape .
 There were no precedents, although there was a fair possibility that someone who had not assumed Soviet citizenship, was not needed in the USSR, and was not in a position to know secrets or possess particularly sensitive information about Soviet life might well be permitted to leave .
 Oswald’s concern at the moment was not with the Soviet reaction to his request, but with the American . Oswald's concern was with the U.S. rather than the Soviet response to the request, he said .
 The embassy’s delay in responding to his application and its insistence on a personal interview meant only one thing, he says . The embassy's refusal to respond to the application means that it will not accept the job, he adds .
 A trap was being laid for him, and he would be arrested the moment he passed through the embassy gates . He would pass through the gates of the US Embassy in Saudi Arabia .
 He insisted in all his letters that the embassy guarantee he would not be ‘persecuted”; i.e., prosecuted . Hence his insistence in all letters that he would . not be . prosecuted; . Hence he . insisted in letters that . the embassy . guarantee he
 Oswald defected to Russia from the U.S. before his defection . Officials knew nothing of Oswald’s history in Russia or, for that matter, of his history in the United States . Oswald's defection to Russia was a major success for the CIA .
 State required to resolve doubts about reentry in favor of U.S. citizen . But they were required by rules of the Department of State to resolve any doubts . They were required to do so by resolving any doubts on reentry .
 U.S. embassies abroad have no procedure for arresting anyone, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Oswald, who, a year and a half before, had known in detail the procedures for swearing an oath renouncing his citizenship, was ignorant of the facts that now concerned him most . Oswald was unaware of the fact that he had to renounce his citizenship .
 The tone of letters was also full of bravado, as if he expected the embassy to give him everything he asked . Thus he was fearful and suspicious, but the tone of his letters was filled with bravado .
 Alik still had no word from the embassy, and his fears gave way to impatience . Marina's pregnancy was the first time he learned of her pregnancy . Alik is still waiting for the embassy to respond .
 Alik told Marina that he would telephone her to let her know if she was needed . Alik said he would phone Marina to tell her if she is needed .
 Ilya was not allowed to say a word to Ilya or Valya about his absence . But on no account was she to say anything about the absence of him .
 Marina was baffled by her husband’s desire for secrecy since she supposed they had nothing to hide . Marina was shocked by the secrecy of her husband .
 Her uncle was wary lest her uncle forbid her to go to the American embassy . Later, she realized that he was wary of her going to the embassy .
 He told Marina that the embassy was “entitled” to arrest him and might do so . He said the embassy might arrest him if they want to .
 An anxious trip to the airport in the dawn hours of Saturday, July 8, was an anxious one for the family . It was the first time they had left their home in the United States .
 They ordered breakfast while waiting for his flight to be announced, but both were too nervous to eat . Both were too anxious to eat because of the anxiety .
 He led her to the gate, kissed her, to her great embarrassment, in full view of the woman dispatcher . He then begged Marina to wait so that he could see her from the plane . He kissed her then begged her to wait for him to see her again .
 He glanced back several times as he strode to the waiting aircraft, and Marina saw tears in his eyes . Marina saw his eyes as he left the plane .
 At two o’clock that afternoon Richard Snyder was eating lunch in his apartment in the American embassy in the U.S. Snyder was in the embassy .
 A forty-one-year-old, bespectacled Foreign Service officer with sharp, pointed features . Snyder had spent most of his career overseas .
 Like most members of the embassy staff, he lived in a tight little compound on the Sadovoye Ring, Moscow’s biggest thoroughfare, which was forever reverberating with heavy trucks .
 His apartment was on the second floor, directly over the consular office .
 Dick and Anne Snyder were at the end of their two-year tour of duty . They were in the military for two years, but were soon gone .
 In three days, the Russians would be sailing from Leningrad for home . The ship was set to sail from Lenedrad on July 11, 2013 .
 Snyder remembered him immediately; he was one of the most obnoxious young men he had ever met . Snyder remembers him immediately as an obnoxious young man he had met .
 The embassy is awaiting an opinion on Oswald's case from Washington . Snyder was not surprised that Oswald had tired of life in his adopted country, he said .
 Oswald refused to set foot in the embassy again after Snyder put him off renouncing his citizenship . Snyder had put Oswald off during their stormy interview in November 1959, and Oswald was furious at the delay .
 Oswald had never officially renounced his citizenship, and that he owed whatever chance he still had of returning to America . Now he was back, and ironically, it was due to Snyder’s tactics, and the fact that Oswald had . never formally renounced .
 Snyder had hoped, if he thought about it, that this particular ‘bad penny’ would not turn up again until after the eleventh . Yet Snyder had rather hoped that the incident would not happen again .
 With a vague feeling of annoyance, Snyder stepped into the elevator and rode the single flight down to the lobby . Snyder said, "I don't like it. I don't think it's a bad joke"
 He greeted Oswald with precisely calibrated coolness and led him directly to his office . Oswald was the only person Oswald had ever seen .
 There they chatted for a few minutes, Snyder noticed that the young man seemed chastened compared to his behavior during their earlier encounter . The young man was chastened by his behavior, Snyder said .
 Oswald had chosen to appear unannounced on a Saturday, when the consular office was closed for business . Once again, Oswald chose to show up unannounced, unannounced .
 Although she had been married more than two months, some of her old beaux continued to call her at work, and she permitted it . She permitted it, even though she had only been married two months .
 Sasha, who had branded her a prostitute, had the nerve to telephone her there . Sasha had the courage to phone her there. Sasha called her there and said she was a prostitute . Sasha was the first person to call her a 'prostitute'
 She felt that Anatoly had given her up too easily . With a pang of disappointment she felt that she had been given up .
 Since her pregnancy she had felt a strange sexual aversion to her husband . She wondered if she had made a mistake . She had felt like she was having an affair with her husband.
 During the third month of her marriage it was not Anatoly on whom her doubts converged but Leonid, her Jewish suitor of the summer before . Leonid was Anatoly Anatoly's summer before, and Anatoly was her Jewish lover of the year before .
 On the morning of July 8, she went straight to the pharmacy after seeing her husband off . The pharmacy was the last thing she had to do after seeing him off .
 There she received a phone call from, of all people, Leonid, asking if he might see her . She received a call from Leonid asking if she might see him .
 She went home after work and washed her hair . Halfhoping something might come of it, she went home and washed it .
 Perhaps the evening would show whether she had made a mistake getting married or not . Perhaps the night would show if she'd made a decision to get married, she said .
 He had an empty apartment at his disposal; he even had a bottle of French aperitifif .
 Once they were in bed, however, his sophistication proved to be a matter of appearances only . Once they got to bed, he said: "Once they were there, they were going to have sex"
 The following evening, Sunday, she went to the central post office to receive a long-distance telephone call . She received the call the following evening .
 She was to call him at his hotel the moment her plane touched the ground . She had been due to call her husband at the moment she landed on the plane .
 She would have to get out of work for several days and explain the reason for her absence, or she would be fired . Under the regulations, the woman would be required to explain why she was absent from her job .
 From Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow she took a bus to Sverdlov Square, in the heart of the city .
 Their room was filled with blue cornflowers, which he had bought to welcome her . He had bought them a blue cornflowerflower .
 There was a mirror at the foot of the bed, and he liked that very much indeed . There was also a mirror in the bed .
 Later he often said that he wanted a bedroom with mirrors on every side . He often said he wanted to have mirrors on all sides .
 Marina had cause to be nervous, too, for without being aware of it, as a Soviet citizen, she was forbidden to enter a foreign embassy without permission from her country’s authorities, which was practically unobtainable . Marina was not allowed to enter the embassy without the permission
 Even though she was unaware that what she was doing might be dangerous, she was nonetheless apprehensive as they approached the building .
 Uniformed militiamen snapped to a stiff salute as they sauntered through the embassy gates .
 Marina thought it was like going to a palace to be decorated, Marina thought, when you had done nothing to deserve it . Marina said: 'It was like . going to . a palace for decoration, Marina said . Marina thought .
 Marina was wearing her best cotton dress and her wedding shoes, made in England, and the militiamen apparently took her for American . Marina's wedding shoes were made in English, and they were made of American-made cotton .
 Marina’s eyes traveled as if magnetized to the feet of anyone in the U.S. embassy that afternoon . Whenever she saw anyone, Marina's eyes traveled through the corridors of the embassy .
 For no matter how clever a Soviet girl might be at procuring things from abroad, her shoes, her heavy Russian clodhoppers, seldom failed to give her away . The shoes, for example, were the heavy ones from the Soviet Union .
 The first person she saw was the pretty young receptionist who greeted them as they walked in the front door . She was greeted by a pretty young woman who greeted her with a smile .
 The girl was so poised in manner and her hair so neatly done that Marina was thoroughly awed . Marina was awed by the girl's poised manner .
 As they were walking down the hallway to the consular offices, she saw a whole row of glassed-in cubicles with Russian girls seated at the desks inside . The girls were seated at desks inside, she said .
 If anything went wrong here, if she was kidnapped or forced to sign some paper she did not understand, one of these girls would help her . If anything goes wrong, one girl would be able to help her, says CNN.com correspondent .
 Russians and Americans working together in this fashion . Besides, it was good to see Americans and Russians working together, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Disgusting as it was for a man to be a spy, it seemed even worse for a girl . It was even more disgusting for a woman to have been a spy .
 Marina sat in the waiting room while Alik went inside the consul and viceconsul's office . When they reached the large office, Marina sat on the floor and Alik sat in a waiting room .
 He was gone a long time, and Marina was able to compose herself and look around . Marina was finally able to look around and say goodbye to her husband .
 It was filled with gadgets, for one thing, and all of them seemed to work . All of the gadgets seemed to be working, but not all seemed to .
 Out on the street it was hot, but there was something whirring in the window, a fan or a ventilator or something, and inside it was practically cold . Inside the house, the air was almost freezing, but it was actually cold .
 On the way she paused at the water cooler and had only to press a knob and cold water came cascading out . She had only pressed a knob to release cold water from the cooler .
 Marina had only seen that, instead of small squares of newspaper, only once in her life before, at the Hotel Metropole in Leningrad . Marina had seen that only once, at a hotel in the city, only one of her life .
 She was one of the Soviet girls who worked at the embassy . She was all dressed up like an American and might not be taken for Russian at all .
 Marina was fearful that the girl would be suspicious of her motives or reproach her for wanting to leave Russia . Marina had been fearful that she would be reproached by the girl .
 The girl chatted pleasantly with her and never once alluded to the touchy subject . But the girl never once mentioned the touching subject .
 Marina returned from toilet in much better spirits, reassured that nothing bad would happen to her .
 Alik emerged from the consul’s office chewing gum and well pleased with himself . The consul's office is located in the U.S. state of Columbia .
 The interview was conducted by Snyder, the senior consular officer . The State Department had to decide whether he had forfeited his American citizenship .
 Alik and Marina sat in the waiting room, and Alik began to fill out a long questionnaire . Once it was over, Alik filled out the questionnaire . Alik was the first couple to meet Marina in the U.S.
 Alexander Ziger wrote a letter to the embassy of Argentina to bring pressure on the Russians to grant him an exit visa . He had carried with him to Moscow a letter from Ziger to the Argentine government .
 Ziger was afraid to write to the Argentine embassy through the open mails, or he had already done so and because he had dual citizenship . Soviet citizens are forbidden even to have contact by mail with a foreign embassy .
 In a day or so it would be picked up by a United States embassy chauffeur and delivered to the embassy of Argentina . It would be delivered to Argentina's embassy in Buenos Aires .
 Marina remembers when Alik did a favor for somebody else . It was one of the few occasions Marina remembers . Marina remembers Alik doing a favor when he did something for Marina .
 Alik asked about the fate of a young man named Webster who had come to the Soviet Union shortly before he did . Webster had fallen in love with a Russian waitress, married, and gone to work in Leningrad in a glassworks or plastics factory . Alik was elated
 He, too, was trying to go back to America and was having a difficult time, he said . He said: "He was having difficulty trying to get back to the country"
 Alik's American passport was still due to expire on September 10 . He handed it to an embassy typist, one of the Russian girls Marina had noticed earlier in the afternoon, so she could fill out an application .
 He then returned to Snyder’s office with the questionnaire and the renewal forms .
 Oswald had done nothing to forfeit his citizenship, Snyder says . The two had already had a long talk, and it appeared to Snyder that Oswald had nothing to do with it .
 His Soviet passport, for one thing, was of the type issued to ‘stateless” persons . His passport was issued to "stateless" persons .
 "That, on the face of it, was evidence that he was not a Soviet citizen," he said . "That was ... evidence that [Putin] was not Soviet citizen. That was evidence," he added .
 Oswald’s letters from Minsk had been delivered to the embassy; had he become a Soviet citizen, the letters would not have gone through . Oswald's letters were delivered to Minsk by the embassy, but he had not become a citizen .
 Oswald had also responded to Snyder’s queries with an air of frankness . Oswald was also responding to Snyder's queries with a frankness.
 Oswald was concerned about the safety of his family members . Oswald's wife was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 He confessed to Snyder that he was worried that he might face several years in prison in the U.S. for having chosen to live in Russia . Snyder: He was worried he might be imprisoned in the United States for living in Russia.
 Oswald answered that he realized that Snyder could make no promises, but he was reluctant to return home if it might mean going to jail . Oswald: "I'm not going to go to jail. I'm going to be in jail"
 His fear was probably the reason he had appeared, unannounced, on a Saturday and why he had today taken the precaution of bringing Marina . The embassy had not suggested it, nor was it essential for her to appear so early in the proceedings .
 Oswald was reassured by his reception at the embassy . Oswald was still afraid that he would be arrested when he returned to the U.S. Oswald was arrested in the Philippines .
 From January 1960 until his desire to return to the United States became known to the Soviet authorities, he had received a subsidy from the Soviet Red Cross, which he believed had been arranged by the secret police as payment for an interview denouncing his country .
 "Up to this point every one of his fears was groundless, since they were based on acts he had either not committed or that were not crimes under U.S. law," he said .
 As of lunchtime on July 10, he had done nothing for which he could reasonably expect to face prosecution on his return to the United States, much less arrest in the American embassy .
 The fears that haunted him haunted him, motivated by feelings of guilt and perhaps by his attributing to the government of the U.S. the anger toward him that he had felt toward it, were altogether unrealistic .
 Oswald altered his condition of juridical innocence on this very day . Oswald's innocence was altered by the discovery of Oswald's murder conviction . Oswald was acquitted of any crime in the assassination .
 For the first time, he did, in fact, commit what could have been construed as a crime . The first time he did actually commit a crime, he committed a crime in the first place .
 He claimed that he had at no time applied for citizenship of the USSR, yet he had done so on October 16, 1959 . He claimed he had no time at all time applying for citizenship .
 He stated that he did not belong to the trade union at his factory, when at that very moment he was carrying a membership card in his pocket . He said that he didn't want to be employed without one, but he could not have been employed without a card .
 He claimed that Soviet officials had never questioned him about his life before his arrival in the USSR . That was probably false, but he also claimed that he had never been questioned about his past life .
 Even if he told the truth on every point, he would not have been subject to prosecution . Even had he told truth on all points, he wouldn't have been charged with perjury .
 There is not a shred of evidence that he ever realized that these were crimes—and the only ones he had committed, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Snyder did not know that the young man sitting opposite him was lying . Snyder, of course, did know that he had been lying .
 Snyder had no sympathy for Communism or the Soviet Union and very little sympathy for those who were taken in by either . Snyder was a staunch opponent of Communism and Communism .
 On the first meeting almost two years before, he had taken a harsh line, some said too harsh, toward this very same young man . He had even poked fun at his Marxist convictions, he said .
 Snyder’s record was replete with evidence that he had compassion for anyone unfortunate enough to be trapped in this inhospitable land . Still, Snyder's record shows that he was compassionate and compassionate .
 Oswald's life in the Soviet Union has clearly had a maturing effect on him . Oswald has been in the country for 20 months and is now in the process of completing his studies .
 He stated frankly that he had learned a hard lesson the hard way . He had been relieved of his illusions about the Soviet Union at the same time that he acquired a new understanding .
 Much of the arrogance and bravado which characterized him on his first visit to the Embassy appears to have left him . Much of his bravado and arrogance is now gone from him, says CNN.com .
 Snyder reread the answers to the completed questionnaire that Oswald brought in to him . Snyder rereads the answers from Oswald's completed questionnaire . Snyder: "I don't know why Oswald wanted me to do so"
 Oswald’s passport application is being renewed by the U.S. State Department . Oswald's passport application was filed in New York City, New York .
 Oswald had left with him nearly two years before . Carefully, he signed both copies and placed a stamp, “valid only for direct travel to the United States” in the document .
 Richard Snyder leaned across his desk and handed back his American passport to Lee Harvey Oswald . Then, in what must have been almost the last official act of his two long years in Moscow, he handed it back to Oswald .
 Marina could see that Alik was elated by their visit to the embassy . As he led her through the embassy gate back to the street, she could see him elated .
 He was overjoyed that Snyder had received him, welcomed him back to the fold, and even returned his passport . Snyder said he was "overjoyed" that he had been welcomed back into the fold .
 Alik was so reassured by his visits to the embassy that the next day he and Marina returned . The following day, Tuesday, July 11, they returned to initiate the steps that might enable Marina to enter the U.S. Alik and Marina were so reassured they returned .
 He coached Marina on what not to say as they approached the building . Nevertheless, he was nervous as they walked through the building again .
 "Above all, on no account was she to admit that she belonged to the Komsomol. Above all, she was not allowed to admit to being a member of the Communist Party."
 They walked through the embassy gates without hindrance and headed for the consular office . The embassy is located in Washington, DC .
 Marina was received by John McVickar, the vice-consul, whose job it was to handle applications by foreigners seeking to enter the U.S. Marina was greeted by John .
 He sat very straight in his chair, she noticed, and offered her chewing gum . He sat straight in her chair, and she noticed that he was very straight .
 If she had one thing on her mind, apart from her extraordinary surroundings, it was the fact that she was pregnant .
 Marina is a member of a trade union, Marina says . She says she belongs to the trade union . Marina says she does, and the union is a union member .
 Lying, she told him that she was not, trying to comfort herself, meanwhile, with the thought that she had, after all, never bothered to pick up her membership card .
 If there was one thing she did not like, it was Alik’s forcing her to lie, she said . Alik was forced to lie to get her to admit she lied .
 You have to support a husband and back him up, she knew, and Alik wanted to go home . She knew she had to support her husband and support him, she said .
 Marina would have preferred to tell the truth and take her chances . But Marina would've preferred to take her own chances, she says .
 McVickar was having trouble understanding her, for she spoke rapidly, out of one corner of her mouth . The ends of words and even sentences to trail away .
 He went to the waiting room door and asked her husband to come in to translate . He asked her to speak to him in the hospital room .
 It not only helps to have a relative in America, the authorities practically require it . The authorities in the U.S. practically require that a relative is in America .
 McVickar filled out a visa petition for her to be allowed to enter the United States . Alik signed it, and Mcvickar said she would be allowed into the U.S. Alik is now in the country .
 The pair returned to the Hotel Berlin and spent the day enjoying Moscow . Afterwards, happy and hopeful, they returned to their hotel room .
 O n her first day back at the pharmacy, Marina was greeted by icy silence . On Wednesday night or Thursday, they returned to Minsk by air by air . Marina's Ordeal .
 Word had spread that she had visited the American embassy in Moscow with her husband . She had been visiting the embassy in Russia with her American husband .
 The girls parted like a wave as she walked in, leaving her face to face with her superior . That could mean only one thing, and the girls parted as she left the room . She walked in and said goodbye to her boss .
 Marina was called to the office of the head of the hospital where she was taken to hospital . The next day Marina was asked to meet the hospital's head of hospital . Marina was later taken to the hospital in hospital in a bid to save her life .
 Marina's inquisitors suggested that she think it over, and Marina agreed . Urging her to do nothing hasty, Marina agreed to think it out again . Marina's daughter was born in New York City .
 Next, a Komsomol organizer appeared at the pharmacy and told her that she would be summoned to headquarters . Next, she was told that she was summoned to the headquarters of the Russian state-run organization .
 There’s a big corridor in the embassy and nothing but Russian girls on one side . The embassy is full of Russian girls, says CNN.com correspondent .
 I didn't sign a single piece of paper that isn't legal. I didn’t do a thing, he says . I’m not doing anything illegal. I'm not signing anything illegal, I'm just saying it’s legal,’he says .
 The only note of sympathy and understanding came from two elderly cleaning women . Two elderly cleaning workers offered their condolences .
 Two or three days after their return, he wrote the embassy about the pressures to which she was being subjected . He wrote to the embassy complaining about the pressure .
 They gave a cross-examination to my wife on the first day we came back from Moscow, they knew everything because they spy, and read the mails, but we shall continue to try and get out of the country . They gave the cross-examined to his wife on
 I hope someday I’ll see you and Vada, but if and when I come, I'll come with my wife . I'll be happy to see you, Vada . I hope you and your wife will see you again .
 Marina had to apply for a Soviet foreign passport, good for travel abroad, and an exit visa . Marina was able to travel abroad with a passport and exit visa from the Soviet Union .
 Alik needed only an exit visa, but every form had to be filled out at least in triplicate, each with photographs attached . Alik: "Alik is not a terrorist. Alik is a human rights activist. He is a terrorist."
 Without knowing it, he suffered from a reading disability called strephosymbolia . But he had great difficulty with the forms because he had no idea it was a disability .
 A person suffering from this condition is not predominantly left or right-handed, but for genetic reasons displays the characteristics of both . A person with this condition can be left and right handed .
 Alik read not only from left to right but also, part of the time, from right to left, and when he wrote he often reversed letters and punctuation marks .
 Marina recalls that he had to bring five or six blanks home for every form he managed to complete successfully . Filling out forms was laborious for him, and Marina recalls having to bring blanks back for each form completed successfully .
 Marina's husband Alik wanted to go with her to a full-scale meeting of the Komsomol aktiv of the hospital . When they were faced with Marina’s biggest ordeal, Alik went with her . Alik said he wanted to help Marina cope with
 The chairman of the meeting was a leader of the citywide Komsomol organization .
 Representatives of every department of the hospital appeared as witnesses, as did two girls from the pharmacy . Representatives of all department of hospital appeared in court .
 Looking very solemn, they were seated around a long table draped in red, with a red flag furled to one side and an attentive-looking portrait of Lenin peering down from the wall .
 The Komsomol had not cared about her in the least, she said, until she went to the U.S. embassy . She said she was not worried about her plight until she got to the American embassy .
 She knew she was being rude, but she was bitterly offended by their questions . "I'm not going to let them ask me anything," she said .
 This was her private life, and she hated having it raked over the coals . This was the private life of her and her family, she said .
 The chairman told her that the Komsomol knew everything about her and her husband . “We knew each time you had a date,” he told her .
 Its members were assigned to report on the activities of their friends . Members were often assigned to reports on the friends of their own .
 Meeting with representatives from every hospital in Minsk to decide whether to expel her from the Komsomol . When the meeting ended she was told that another meeting would be called with representatives of every hospital .
 The chairman drew Marina aside and warned her that she had behaved so badly it might now be necessary to make a public example of her . The chairman said Marina's behaviour was so egregious it might be necessary .
 Marina knew a threat when she heard one—a full-scale attack in the press . Marina knew she was going to be attacked in a press conference . Marina said she knew she would be attacked by the media if she heard a threat .
 A week or so later, the girls at the pharmacy went off to the meeting on Marina’s case . A week later, they went to the pharmacy to discuss the case . Marina's case was the first of its kind .
 Marina had gone to Marina's old boyfriends, but he accused her of using them as a pretext to slip out with them . The few times she'd gone to them, Marina accused them of having an affair with her ex-boyfriend .
 Marina's expulsion was, in reality, a blow to Marina, as if the Komsomol were a mother who had pushed her out in anger . Marina was expelled from her home in Moscow, Russia, in 2010 .
 It was the sort of thing that often happens to a girl before she marries a foreigner, not after . "It was the kind of thing I often happen to me before I married a foreigner," she said .
 Marina was spared before her marriage because everyone, even the Komsomol, assumed Alik was a Soviet citizen and could not go back to America even if he wanted to . Marina had been spared before she marriage .
 Marina was marrying Alik for a foreign passport . Few people had seriously supposed that Marina would marry Alik . Marina had been married for more than a decade .
 Alik visited the Prusakovs on Sunday, a few days after their return from Moscow . Alik and his wife went to Moscow to visit the family .
 Alik was crushed, and he begged Marina to find out why he had been turned away . Alik is crushed and asked Marina to explain why he was turned away from Marina .
 He repaid the Prusakovs’ kindness by taking a step in secret that was bound to affect them all, perhaps disastrously . He had repaid them with a secret move that would affect them, perhaps badly .
 At stake was the pension he had earned by a lifetime of labor, his friends, his apartment, his position of dignity, his way of life . At stake for him in Marina’s application to go abroad, he never said so .
 Marina and her aunt withdrew as usual to the kitchen, and Valya, too, began to scold her . Marina's aunt was also scolding her .
 Marina knew that her criticisms were just, but she wanted them all to make up . Marina knew she was wrong, but that she wanted to make it up .
 Marina and Alik came together, and this time it was Alik whom Ilya subjected to cross-examination . Alik was Ilya's partner in the trial .
 "Once again he went through every step, every nuance of the visit to the embassy," he said . "I'm not going to be surprised. Once again, I'm not surprised," he added .
 He added that he would never have consented to the marriage if he had known that Alik was not a Soviet citizen .
 He conceded that he asked for his American passport back, omitting to mention that he had received it . He conceded he had asked for the passport back .
 Marina's family and friends have more questions to come from Marina herself . There are more questions from Marina's friends and family members .
 A few days after their return from Moscow, she observed Alik, for the first time, writing on a yellow pad at home, seemingly lost in thought .
 She noticed that he had photographs and a ground plan of the radio plant . Then she noticed he had photos of the plant and ground plan .
 She raced upstairs and ransacked the apartment, looking for what he was writing . Yet one day when she returned home from work before Alik, she raced upstairs to find him .
 All she found was a litter of unsuspicious-looking papers covered with her husband’s scrawl .
 Alik had a shocking sum of money saved up, the small fortune of five hundred rubles . He said it was from the Soviet Red Cross . Alik said he got the money from the Red Cross when he was alive .
 It is vital to keep secrets, your own and those of others, merely to have a quiet life . It is important to keep your own secrets and your own .
 Marina soon realized that her husband’s secretiveness was of another kind entirely . Marina's husband's secretiveness led her to believe that he was a secret .
 He told lies without purpose or point, lies that were bound to be found out, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "He was bound to find out. He lied without purpose, point, he said."
 Marina knew her husband's lies as a matter of character rather than of necessity . For Marina to perceive, at the youthful age of 19, that her husband told lies was a feat of mature intuition .
 She felt she had a right to be with her husband, to go where he went, and that she was not doing anything wrong . But she felt from the outset that she had been doing nothing wrong, she said .
 She was sustained by his patience and understanding and by the certain knowledge that he was proud of her . She was committed to Alik now .
 Marina’s pregnancy progressed without incident, but in early August she underwent a special medical examination at the hospital because of “unpleasant sensations in the heart region ,” 3 probably the result of the pressures she had been under . Marina underwent a medical examination in August because of
 There was nothing seriously wrong, however, and she was not hospitalized . She was not seriously hurt, and there was nothing serious .
 They went on picnics in the woods, sometimes with Erich Titovyets and sometimes with Marina’s friends Misha Smolsky and his crowd .
 Pavil Golovachev came, Anita Ziger came, and so did Marina’s old friends . Pavil and Anita came to see Marina's old friends. Pavil, Anita and Marina were among those who attended .
 Oswalds' bed was also the Oswalds’ bed . It occupied a place of honor on the wall above the sofa, which was also a bed . The Oswalds slept in the bed .
 Each week Alik took the gun down and oiled and polished it with the utmost care . Alik's gun was oiled down and polished each week .
 He oiled, polished, squinted, then oiled and polished, before squinting some more . He then polished, polished and squintted some more. He then oil-polished some more, then polished and polished .
 From the devotion he lavished on this ritual, Marina said her husband was like a mother with a little child . Marina's husband was 'like a mother' with his devotion to this ritual .
 He had fewer hobbies, fewer diversions he really enjoyed, than anyone she knew . He had few hobbies than anyone else she knew, she said .
 So seeing him happy with his gun, she did her best to leave him in peace . She did not want to see him in trouble again .
 They urged him to bring it with him with him next time they all went to the country, and he did . He did .
 Although it was not yet the end of August, there was a hint of autumn in the air . The day was dull and overcast, and although it wasn't yet the month's end, the air was on its way .
 The birches and aspen were turning yellow; the pine trees whispered overhead . The pine trees were whispering overhead .
 The girls picked mushrooms and hazelnuts and built a fire under a canopy of pines . The girls built the fire under the canopy of pine trees in the fall .
 When they returned they were empty-handed, but joking and in obvious good spirits . There was a crack of rifles, and when they returned there were joking .
 Halfway through the shoot they had given up doves and looked for squirrels and rabbits . Halfway into the shoot, the team gave up looking for doves, rabbits and squirrels .
 They claimed to have hit a few, but no one had been able to locate his prey . No one was able to find his prey, though .
 He complained that the club held more meetings than outings . But he complained that after their marriage their expedition to the country was the only time he used his gun .
 Marina thought little about her husband’s having a gun; she supposed merely that it was one of those things men do . She thought little of her husband's gun: "It's just a gun"
 When Alik and Marina were alone in the apartment, he spent a good deal of time on his writing . Alik spent most of the time working on a novel .
 When Marina first noticed that he was writing, in mid-July soon after their return from the American embassy, Alik was furtive and uncomfortable about it . Alik's wife Marina noticed that she was writing . Marina said she was uncomfortable with his writing, and he was f
 The moment she came in the door, he snapped his folder shut and put the writing away . He waited for her to come home .
 As time went on he grew accustomed to writing with Marina in the room . But he continued to show the old uneasiness if any of their friends came by . The couple's relationship grew closer to each other in time .
 Marina sensed that he was shifting uneasily in his chair, waiting for the visitor to go . He would close his folder and quickly hide it, and Marina sensed he would close it and hide it again .
 The pad was in a yellow folder, which he kept on the topmost shelf of the kitchen, at the very back, behind a stack of suitcases and well out of Marina's reach .
 She suggested that he keep it in a place that was easier to get at . Once she suggested that she kept it in place of easy access to it .
 She did not know English, but she was familiar with Latin script . She had spotted her name and the names of other girls in the Diary .
 Alik was not enthusiastic about the idea and refused to help her learn . Alik refused to teach her how to use the language of Arabic .
 It is not well organized, and the analogy between country and factory on which it depends breaks down . The analogy between countries and factories on which they depend breaks down, he says .
 It is biased by a rather special insight, the kind that is born of hostility, it says . It is also biased by the kind of insight, it is also .
 Although the handwriting is almost illegible and the spelling and punctuation is erratic, it is thorough and thoughtful . It reflects a good deal of work—by no means the work of someone stupid, the author says .
 He also wanted to know the salary and rank of her Uncle Ilya, both, since Ilya held a sensitive post, were something of a secret to her . He also asked the salary of Ilya and the rank of his uncle Ilya .
 Ilya Prusakovs was a full colonel of the MVD, to which rank he had only recently been elevated . His salary was nearly three hundred rubles per month, though Valya claimed it was only two hundred .
 She knew that her husband hoped to publish what he was writing, and she was afraid of the repercussions on her family . She knew he hoped to do so, but she feared the repercussions would have been devastating .
 She asked Alik not to write about her or her relatives, and he complied . She asked him not to do so .
 In spite of his difficulties in expressing himself in his own language, Alik’s spoken Russian was good . In part due to his lack of education and in part to his reading disability, he was good at speaking Russian .
 Before he came to the Soviet Union, he had studied the language by himself for two years with the help of a Berlitz grammar, and he was still at a loss . Before he arrived in the USSR, he'd studied by himself in the language .
 By the time he met Marina, his Russian was colloquial and idiomatic . He met Marina a year and a half later, his language had changed dramatically . But by the time Marina met him, he was fluent in Russian .
 He used, more or less correctly and with apparent ease, words she herself avoided because she thought they were obscure . She herself avoided using obscure words because of their obscure nature . He used the words in his speech .
 Marina, who is something of a language snob herself, inferred that he was better educated and from a higher social class than in fact he was .
 Marina learned that her husband’s mastery of the language was largely due to the help of his coworkers at the radio plant . Marina says she learned to speak English from her husband's coworkers .
 From the day he first appeared among them in January 1960, they took him into the courtyard after lunch and started in on his Russian . They took him in the courtyard and started to talk to him after lunch .
 Seated in the sun in their shirtsleeves, they would pick up an insect and point it to it . Seated with an insect, they picked up insects and would point them out .
 They laughed and joked with him and asked him questions about America . Meanwhile, they also asked him about America.
 He came home at night after that, took up his grammar books again, and really began making headway . "He came home after that," he said, "and really began to make headway"
 He had other help, too, from his friend Erich and a girl at the Foreign Languages Institute who helped him in Russian in return for her English .
 Both of them spoke in shorn-off, staccato phrases . Alik spoke English the same way, suggesting ideas rather than completing them . Both men spoke in the same manner .
 His English sounded abrupt and unschooled, perhaps, such speech in Russian was the fashion among the young . And perhaps, perhaps such speech is the fashion for the young, perhaps .
 Marina was proud of the way her husband spoke, but she noticed weaknesses . Marina noticed weaknesses in her husband's speaking style, too .
 She observed that he never read Russian for pleasure, and when he went to the public library, with the whole of Russian literature before him, he never took out a volume .
 He said they were boring —“They always say one and the same thing”—and most of the time he merely glanced at them . But he said he said most of them were boring .
 The only thing he claimed to read were the speeches of Nikita Khrushchev, which were colorful, frequent, and entertaining, he said .
 Alik’s favorite enemy was the Soviet bureaucracy . They were a great source of knowledge about the country and were given to him .
 Neither he nor she knew that he had a reading disability that must have made it tedious and frustrating to wrestle with the strange Cyrillic symbols .
 He struggled to improve his Russian, and his efforts represent an attempt to compensate, even overcompensate, for the difficulty with his own language he at most only sensed that he had .
 Marina used short, simple phrases to make sure he understood . When they were at home, she used short phrases to ensure he understood them .
 Marina expressed herself in abstruse words and long drawn-out sentences . When she was angry, she expressed her anger, Marina said, "when she is angry, on the other hand"
 Unmarried friends of Marina’s often dropped by to seek advice in some matter of the heart . Marina's best friends were often married friends of the couple .
 They purposely spoke in synonyms, difficult, unfamiliar words so that he would not understand . They purposely used difficult words to make him understand them .
 They peered at his sheet of paper trying to decipher what they had said . They looked at his paper to try and decipher what had been said .
 The words he had written down bore only a coincidental resemblance to the words they had actually spoken . The words were only a coincidence resemblance to each other's .
 Because of his language difficulty, he was unable to reduce to written symbols what his ear had heard . But because of language difficulty he could not reduce to writing symbols .
 Alik owed more to the other men at the factory than his proficiency in Russian . Alik's Russian accent was more important to him than his Russian .
 So open were they, so easy and frank in his presence, that he felt like one of them . He felt like a man who was open to the world's most open leaders .
 He soon came to share their attitudes about the party organizer and the deputy director of the factory . He despised the hypocrisy and favoritism on every side, he said .
 Marina knew she was not really a part of the things at the plant, and Marina knew it . But while he liked his fellow workers, he didn't really part of it, Marina knew .
 At lunchtime he nearly always sat by himself, or at a table of men he did not know, rather than with the men he worked with . He said: 'At lunchtime, he often sat alone or sat at a different table, not with others'
 He did not join the other men on drinking sprees, or go to see them at their homes . He didn't join them on drinking trips or visit them at home .
 He was considered antisocial, and with some of them he was actually unpopular because he had been given an apartment of his own without doing anything to deserve it . He was unpopular with many of them because of his lack of respect .
 They would have forgiven him quickly if he had been either a congenial fellow or a good worker . But they would have forgave him quickly had he been a good man or congenial colleague .
 Alik grew to dislike the Soviet system, in part, because of the restrictions it placed upon him, while his colleagues disliked him because of his privileges he received . It is ironic that Alik disliked the system because of its restrictions and privileges .
 Alik was as well liked in Russia as he had ever been before or was ever to be again . Yet he was still popular in Russia even though he had never been in the country .
 At the plant he was the object of a good deal of teasing, much of it with sexual overtones . He was the subject of a lot of teasing at the plant .
 Marina felt acutely self-conscious at the plant . Marina felt so personal that she was acutely aware of the topics discussed .
 Her husband would come home with the most intimate details of the others’ sex lives, together with suggestions that they try some new sexual technique he had heard about .
 Marina enjoyed his tales about the sex lives of others but had no wish for Alik to reveal their own . Marina enjoyed the tales but did not want him to reveal his own .
 The truth was that the Oswalds were having difficulty in sex, and they were worried about it . The Oswalds had difficulty sex, says the author .
 'Marina failed to have an orgasm at all. They could not reach a climax together,' she says .
 Whether it was three, five, or ten minutes after they started making love, Alik ejaculated too soon, before Marina was ready . Marina was not ready to give Alik an orgasm .
 There were moments, nonetheless, when she thought there was nothing so hateful as the sight of a man who had been satisfied .
 They tried all sorts of distractions, including talking about something else, while they were making love, hoping that he could go on longer, until she was ready for him . The couple tried all kinds of distractions while making love .
 He suggested a variation he had heard about at the factory . Then one day he suggested something new, he said it was a new variation .
 Alik assured her that “between husband and wife everything is good and pure,” and she consented to try it . Alik: “Everything is good, pure, and everything is in the spirit of marriage .
 It became a frequent way of making love, although Marina never felt right about it, and Lee evidently preferred normal intercourse most of the time .
 All through the sexual act she would be thinking how sinful she was, how thin she was and wondering what Alik must think of her . Alik would think she was sinful and thin .
 He said that she was “the best woman in the world for him, sexually and in every other way . Again and again he said she was the best woman’s in every way .
 He made love to her at all times of the month, even when she was menstruating . This signified to Marina that he accepted her just as she was .
 The scar on her lower back is the remnant of a childhood operation . Another sign of his acceptance is that she has a scar in her back, a scar from childhood surgery .
 Never in all their married life did Alik mention the scar or ask Marina how she got it . Alik and Marina never discussed the scar until they were married .
 Marina grew to realize that her husband was not critical of her body in any way . Marina eventually came to feel freer with him .
 She was overcome with joy when, after they married, she caught the first glimpse of Alik naked below the waist .
 She considered his legs, his back, and his thighs objects of real beauty . She was gratified to think that her children might inherit such features .
 He would sit with one leg draped over the arm of a chair, displaying his most perfect features . He was soon aware of her admiration, and she would sit in front of him with him .
 She would not have gone near the handsomest man on earth were he not also immaculate, she said . She said: 'She wouldn't go near him even if he was handsome'
 He bathed, shaved, and brushed his teeth before they made love, singing or whistling and looking forward happily to what was ahead of him . Invariably, no matter how late at night it might be, he bathed and shaved, before making love .
 When he was through he would call out, “I’m ready, Mama,” and after sex he washed again . After sex he would wash again, he would say, "I'm ready"
 It pleased that while she demanded perfect cleanliness from him, he liked her and accepted her however she happened to be . It pleased her that he accepted her .
 Her feelings had changed a good deal since the days when she had been repelled by her husband . She spent a brief, unhappy night with someone else in a forlorn effort to discover whether her marriage had been a mistake .
 Marina came to consider her husband a tender and accomplished lover . But as time went on, their sexual relationship grew more harmonious .
 All through their marriage, sex, despite its discontents, made for much greater closeness between them . The couple's closeness remained strong throughout their marriage .
 Marina allowed no former boyfriend of Marina’s ever to set foot in the apartment unless he was now married . He allowed no ex-boyfriend to visit the apartment even though he was no longer married .
 He hated divorce, and he hated infidelity, especially on the part of a woman . "He hated divorce and infidelity," he said. "And he hated divorce," he added .
 He never sought out anybody else, and neither, after that one night, did Marina . Marina says he never sought to seek anybody else . Marina: "He never sought anybody else. Neither did Marina."
 Marina blamed herself for her inability to reach climax other than through a form of sex of which she felt ashamed . He blamed himself for reaching climax too soon, while Marina blamed her for not climaxing . Marina felt ashamed of having sex with a man other than a sexual form she felt shameful
 It made up many a battle between them and was one of the best things in their life together . The couple's relationship has been described as one of their best things together .
 Alik thought that he was less than he should be as a man, and Marina thought she was less as a woman . But because of the form it took, Alik and Marina were less than they should be, they thought differently .
 A lik loved to sing. Even though their sexual relationship got better as the months went on, each felt that he or she had something still to prove .
 He sang in the bathtub, Rimski-Korsakov while mopping the floor, Rachmaninoff while washing dishes . He sang Harry Belafonte in the tub and sang in other places .
 He whistled or sang Russian folk tunes, and when he played opera on the phonograph, he sang and pantomimed as if he were on stage . When playing opera, he played and played it on a phonograph .
 His favorite singer was the incomparable Russian bass, Chaliapin, and he would turn red as a beet trying to hit the low notes . When he sang along with a recording, he would sing along with the bassist .
 Marina and Alik were sitting together in the apartment in early September, when the leaves were turning yellow out of doors . Marina was sewing, Alik bending over his diary, and Marina bending over him .
 English words were English words, but she understood them and hoped they might refer to her . She hoped that they might be referring to her, but they were English .
 Marina was to hear the song often, and always, it seemed, when Alik was working on his diary . Marina heard it often when she was writing a diary .
 High Noon is the title song of the movie High Noon, the story of a sheriff of a small Western town who stands up to a band of outlaws who are out to take over town .
 Alik saw the movie in Fort Worth in 1956 on the urging of his brother, Robert, and they loved to sing the song together . Alik and Robert would sing together in the song .
 He may also have seen it again while he was in the Marine Corps, and it is apparent that the theme of the movie and its title song, the conflict between love and duty, made a deep impression on him .
 Alik's favorite opera was Tchaikovsky’s The Queen of Spades, based on a short story by Pushkin . Alik: "The Queen of the Spades" is based on Pushkin's short story .
 He saw the movie of the opera countless times and played it on the phonograph again and again . He saw it countless times . He said he saw it many more times .
 Alik began to play the record only when she was out and changed it quickly the moment he heard her footstep on the stair . She must have shown it, for Alik started playing the record again .
 Alik says postcards were from an Intourist interpreter who had helped him when he first arrived in the Soviet Union . They had received postcards from someone vacationing in the south, and Alik explained that they had been from an interpreter .
 Rimma Rimma, about twenty-seven, was blonde and tastefully dressed, and was plainly a person of education . Rimma was clearly a well-educated person .
 Alik and Rimma began to talk in English until Rimma suggested that they speak Russian so Marina could understand . Rimma tactfully suggested that she and Alik speak Russian . Alik is married to Marina, who is in a relationship with Alik .
 Marina noticed that the visitor addressed her husband as “Lee,” a name she had rarely heard him called before . Marina noticed the visitor called her husband "Lee," a name that she'd rarely heard before .
 Rimma laughed and joked a good deal as Rimma and Rimma sipped coffee and talked over acquaintances they had in common in Moscow . Rimma said Rimma had a lot of things in common with Rimma, including her friends and family members .
 He assured Marina that she was every bit as good for him as Rimma, and a good deal younger besides . He assured her that she's every bit of good for herself .
 In spite of his reassurance, Marina continued to feel inferior to Rimma . Rimma was prettier and better educated than she was, Marina thought .
 Rimma Rimma had gone out of her way to help him when he was trying desperately to stay in Russia two years before . Rimma helped him to get back to Russia in order to keep his job in Russia .
 He must have felt that he would cut a ridiculous figure if she learned that he was now trying, almost equally equally hard, to get out of the house . He felt it would be a huge mistake if she found out he was trying to escape .
 She supposed that it was because of their former relationship . At the time she supposed that . She said that she was upset by her ex-boyfriend .
 Rimma discovered him in 1959 when he slashed his wrist in his hotel room in Moscow . Rimma must have been afraid that Rimma would mention his suicide attempt, she said .
 Marina would have been very shocked had she known of the episode . Marina would be very shocked if she knew of the incident .
 A few weeks after she was married, she noticed a small scar on Alik’s left wrist . She noticed the scar on her husband's left wrist after she married him . The scar is a scar that has been left on her wrist since the wedding .
 She asked if he got it in a fight over a girl and was surprised when he at first refused to answer . She asked him if it was in a girl fight and he refused to say yes .
 Marina noticed, out of a corner of her mind, that Alik kept the scar hidden . After that Marina noticed that she noticed that her friend kept it hidden . Marina noticed the scar had been removed from her face .
 He wore a watch on his left wrist and once, when it broke, it was months before he would take it to be fixed . He wore it for months before taking it to repair .
 Marina, too, hated jewelry of any kind on a man . Later, when he broke it again, and again had to take it to be fixed, he covered his wrist with an identification bracelet even though he hated jewelry and knew that Marina hated jewelry .
 Rimma's suicide was the result of a suicide attempt, but her thoughts again fastened on Rimma . Rimma was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 She believes that her husband attempted suicide not only to put pressure on the Soviet authorities to permit him to stay in Russia, but to impress Rimma Rimma . Rimma believes that his suicide attempt was intended to impress her husband .
 She stepped off to buy a glass of carbonated water and crumpled to the street in a faint . She was buying a bottle of water when she fell ill .
 A passerby rushed her to the Third Clinical Hospital, right above the pharmacy where she worked . She was rushed to the hospital by a passerby .
 When Alik returned to the apartment that evening, he found a message and rushed to the pharmacy . Alik: "When I got home from work, I was greeted by a message from the pharmacy"
 He told her to do anything, have an abortion even, but be sure no harm came to her, she says . "He told her she could have a abortion even if she wanted it," she says. "But he told her no harm would come to her," she adds .
 Her blood type was Rh-negative and she was kept in the hospital for five days . She was worried about complications in the pregnancy, fearing complications .
 Marina was with him during the test, and she had never in her life seen anyone so afraid of pain and the sight of blood . Marina had never seen anyone more afraid than she had seen .
 When it was over, it turned out that his blood type was Rh-negative, too, too . When it ended up, he had to be tested for Rh-Negative .
 Throughout her marriage she felt certain that no other husband could have given her a child . No one else would have had the same blood type, she said . No other husband would have been able to give her a baby .
 Marina felt the same way about the scars both of them had on their arms . Marina said she and Marina had the same amount of scars as they did on the arms .
 Skin had been removed from her right arm during an eye operation in childhood . Skin had to be removed from the arm during a childhood eye operation . Skin was removed during the operation .
 Alik had the scar on his left elbow from the accidental discharge of a pistol while he was in the Marine Corps in Japan . Alik told Marina, falsely, that he had been wounded in action in Indonesia .
 Marina believes she and Alik were destined for each other by fate . Marina says the similarity was another sign that they were destined to each other . Alik is now married to Marina's sister, Marina says .
 Marina's illness was not serious, and she had a good time in the hospital . Marina’s illness wasn’t serious .
 Nurses came from all over to have a look at the ‘marvel’ who had married an American . Nurses from around the world came to visit the "marvel" Nurses also came from across the world to see the new wife .
 She had visits from two or three old beaux, but since husbands were not permitted, she had to steal downstairs to the pharmacy at night to see Alik . She had been with Alik for several years .
 Alik came home just after she left the hospital, Alik returned home in a special hurry . Alik is now raising money to raise money for charity .
 He closed the balcony doors to shut out noises from the street, or perhaps to keep the neighbors from hearing . He closed them to keep quiet from the neighbors, or to keep out noises .
 A series of announcements came over the radio, the first in a Baltic tongue, then Russian, then Ukrainian . The announcements were made in the first language, then in the second language, Ukrainian .
 The Oswalds met and married in 1961, the year the new young president of the United States took the oath of office . At the beginning of the year 1961, President Kennedy had stood in icy sunshine half a world away and taken office .
 Less than three months later, a band of Cuban exiles armed by the United States landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba . The U.S. armed exiles landed in Cuba three months after the invasion .
 At the end of August, Russia announced that it was resuming atmospheric nuclear testing . Russia has announced it will resume atmospheric nuclear tests .
 Three H-bombs of unprecedented megatonnage were detonated in Central Asia . The H-bomb detonations were detonated by Central Asia in the 1980s . Three of the H-Bombs were detonated at the time .
 The cold war entered a dangerous new phase as Khrushchev tested the mettle of the new president . The Cold War began in the early 1950s as the Soviet Union began to crack down on Russia .
 He had apparently heard Kennedy before while he was in Russia . Scores of speeches or excerpts were broadcast by the Voice of America and Radio Liberty .
 Kennedy’s address of September 25, 1961, given at the United Nations General Assembly, announced the end of the Berlin crisis . Kennedy's address was announced at the U.N. General Assembly .
 The voice was wavy and distorted, and now, sometimes, a word was lost by jamming . "Now and then, now and then a word of jamming is lost," she said .
 When Marina made a slight sound, he waved her into the kitchen . He waved her in irritation . Marina was in the kitchen at the time of the incident .
 The moment the speech ended, Alik bounded into the kitchen to make tea . Alik was the first person to attend the speech in New York .
 Alik defended the president’s speech in a discussion with Uncle Ilya . A day or so later, the president defended the speech .
 He thought the Soviet government was “sneaky,” since it had attacked the speech without publishing it or printing a fair account . The Soviet government did not publish the speech, he said .
 Marina heard her husband speak up stoutly for the United States. Marina heard him speak stoutly . Marina was in the kitchen with Aunt Valya when he spoke .
 Marina did not know it, but her husband had long been enthusiastic about Castro . Marina's husband was enthusiastic about the Castro family .
 That autumn he took her to see a movie about the Cuban leader by the illustrious Soviet film director, Roman Carmen .
 At about this same time, he began to seek out the Cuban students in Minsk, three hundred or so strong, to learn what he could of Castro’s revolution .
 Cuban students were a lively lot who found Soviet Communism a drab disappointment . The Cuban students found Soviet communism a disappointment . They found it to be a dull disappointment .
 They loved singing, dancing, and playing the guitar, but no matter what amusement they thought up, the militia quickly forbade it . The militia was quick to banish it, but the militia would not tolerate it .
 They were discouraged from going out with Soviet girls, and they hated the cold weather . They were even discouraged from dating Soviet girls .
 Cubans were in dread that the Americans would invade their country and overthrow Castro, lest they be doomed to stay in Russia forever . The Cubans feared they would never be able to leave Russia if they were overthrown .
 Alik shared their disappointment in Russia, but he had believed in Communism for six years now . Alik: "It's hard to give up the dream that somewhere a perfect society was coming into being"
 Alik was certain Communism would be of a gaudier feather altogether than the drab thing Russia had created . And so, perhaps seeking a cushion against his disenchantment, Alik turned again to Castro, who might truly achieve an egalitarian society . Castro's Communism, Al
 Marina and Alik still had no word from the Soviet authorities on their application for permission to leave Russia . In October, three months after their visit to the U.S. embassy, they still had to wait three months to get permission .
 It had to be assumed that such an application would be considered at a very high level, adding weeks, or even months, to the bureaucratic process .
 Alik sought to speed things up by putting pressure on the American embassy . Alik: "I want to make sure that this is not a repeat of what happened to me"
 He had written to the embassy at least once a month since his trip to Moscow, complaining of the difficulty he was having in obtaining Soviet exit visas and harassment he and Marina were being subjected to .
 Marina’s recent illness was an opportunity to enlist sympathy for his cause . He wrote Ambassador Llewellyn E Thompson, asking him to make inquiries on his behalf at the Soviet Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 He said that his wife was still under pressure to withdraw her visa application . She had been hospitalized for nervous exhaustion, he said .
 Oswald’s passport renewal had been approved, but the embassy had been instructed to validate it only when his travel plans to return to the U.S. had been made, and when he reappeared in person at the embassy . Oswald's passport renewal was approved .
 Marina’s status with the U.S. government was still pending, the embassy wrote . Oswald was informed that the embassy had no way of influencing Soviet authorities to act upon applications for exit visas .
 Alik, who had had his vacation, urged her to get away for a change of scene . She decided to go to Kharkov, nearly five hundred miles to the southeast, to stay with her mother’s sister and her husband .
 Marina discovered that none of her relatives in Kharkov, Russia, knew that she had married an American . Marina's aunt, Taisya, also lived in the city, but none of them knew she was American .
 She said she had applied for permission to go to America with her husband . They were shocked when she told them that she was planning to move to the U.S.
 He stopped laughing and joking and abruptly ceased being the uncle she had known . He was suddenly no longer laughing, joking and suddenly stopped being her uncle .
 Georgy Alexandrov was head of the Kharkov Building Trust, one of the most important jobs in the city . He had every reason to suppose that Marina’s decision to go abroad could affect him .
 They told her horror stories about poverty and unemployment in the U.S. They also told her stories about the state of the United States .
 She went back to Minsk a day sooner than planned, and with new doubts about leaving Russia . She left Minsk with a new set of questions about her future .
 The anxious wait for word on their visas and her advancing pregnancy made her nervous and depressed . The pregnant mother-of-one says she was depressed by the situation .
 Night after night, in tears, she would seek reassurance from her husband . In the mornings she would play Peer Gynt on the phonograph, sob a little, eat breakfast by herself, stare out the windows .
 His friends were eager to have a look at her, and he could not refuse any longer . His friends wanted to see her and he couldn't refuse them .
 All evening long Alik twirled Marina purposefully on the dance floor, grinned at her as contentedly as a Cheshire cat and generally played the part of the blissfully married man . Alik is married to Marina, who he says is his wife of the night .
 It was a performance for the benefit of Ella Germann, the girl who had turned him down . Ella was the girl he had turned down . She was the reason for the performance .
 The subject of obesity was to come up constantly in their conversations . The subject was to be discussed constantly in the couple's conversations .
 If Alik said of a woman, “Oh, she’s so thin,” it meant that he liked her, he said . Alik: "I like her. She's so thin" Alik says he likes thin women .
 Marina, always self-conscious about her own thin body, came to realize that it was one of the reasons Alik had married her . Marina was always self conscious about her thin body .
 Alik’s aversion to plump women had something to do with his feelings for his mother . Only later she had met Marguerite Oswald, she realised he had a problem with women .
 Marina and Alik continued to spend a good deal of time at Ilya and Valya’s. Ilya, Valya and Marina spent most of their lives together .
 Ilya was hospitable, for he had long ago concluded that they would never be allowed to leave the Soviet Union . Ilya's wife was also hospitable. Ilya had long concluded that he was not going to leave .
 Ilya Ilya nearly always won, and Alik took his losses hard . Ilya was an experienced player, and Ilya almost always always won . Alik's losses were hard .
 Ilya would pat him encouragingly on the back and say that his game was getting better . Ilya's game would be getting better, but he would say that he was still struggling .
 Alik was misleading Ilya by allowing him to suppose that he had abandoned his efforts to return to America, so he was misleading him about chess, he said . But just as Alik said he had given Ilya a false impression, he also lied to him about his plans to
 Valya made Alik a special favorite, and in ways that were telling to one who knew him, he returned her affection . Ilya was the kindest woman in the world, and she made him a favorite .
 He was obsessed by cleanliness, refusing to kiss any woman wearing lipstick or eat food that had been touched by anyone else . He refused to kiss anyone wearing lipstick .
 He allowed her and no one else, not even Marina, to pick up tidbits in her fingers and pop them into his mouth . No one else else, including Marina, allowed her to pick them up .
 Once, before Marina's unbelieving eyes, he went so far as to take a morsel from Valya’s plate and eat it . Once, he even ate a piece of Valya's food from her plate .
 He tried to get Marina, a chain-smoker, to stop, claiming that it was bad for the baby . He also tried to stop Marina from smoking, claiming it was too bad for her baby .
 "She had cigarettes hidden all over the apartment, and she smoked on the sly, even in the bathtub," she says . "She smoked in the bathroom, and in the back of the bathroom," she said .
 When they were first married, he was free with their money, buying records and furniture . He bought records, furniture and furniture for his wife's sake .
 When he thought of returning to America but had not yet said anything to Marina, he put her off . Then, when he said he was thinking of returning, Marina put him off . He said he had not said anything about returning to the U.S.
 He pored through copies of Time magazine that began to arrive in bundles from his mother in Texas . Issues were full of stories and pictures of the Kennedys, and of another public figure who was to become important in Alik's life .
 His complaints were designed not so much to impress Robert as the Soviet officials whom he presumed to be reading his mail . Robert's complaints were intended to impress the Soviets .
 There were signs of uncertainty and hints in his letters that Alik was aware that life would not be so easy when he got back home . Alik's letters show he was aware of the challenges he faced .
 Stalin’s body was removed from its marble mausoleum on Red Square . Khrushchev began to move away from the alliance with China and toward better relations with the U.S.
 Alik's visa for his wife Marina was revoked after she and Marina were denied visas . Alik and Marina's visa was a hopeful omen, says Marina's friends .
 A space the size of a city block had been roped off around Stalin Square, a vast, cobblestoned area in the center of Minsk . Marina was trudging home from work one night through Stalin Square when she noticed with mild surprise that a space had been blocked off
 Houses shook and shook to the heavy tread of tanks and trucks as they rolled through the city streets and took up position around the statue . Later that night, houses trembled and shook in the streets of the city .
 The next night Marina was wakened out of a sound sleep by a series of loud explosions . Marina's next night she was woken up by loud explosions in her sleep .
 In Minsk, it appeared, Stalin still had sympathizers who would be offended by the removal of his monument . Stalin's monument will be removed from Minsk .
 The demolition crew was in a hurry to complete the work before the November 7 parade . The demolition was under orders to complete before the parade .
 Not even with chains, tanks, and dynamite could be brought down . The statue was erected in the 1930s in New York City .
 The head and upper part of the torso had to be dismantled first and the rest demolished piecemeal . The rest of the body was dismantled piecemeal and the head was removed from the torso .
 It took longer than anyone anticipated, and the work of demolition was still going on when the marchers paraded through Stalin Square on November 7 .
 Alik was cross with her at first on the baby’s account, then anxious, then tender . The baby's mother was anxious, anxious, and tender . Alik is now a proud mother and father .
 Marina consulted her friends, and they concocted various remedies at the pharmacy .
 Alik dreaded brushing his hair because it seemed to be coming out in clumps . Nothing helped, and soon he dreaded brushing it out of his hair . Alik is now hoping to find a solution to the problem .
 Finally, he stopped worrying about it—and his hair stopped falling out . He stopped worrying, and his hair started falling out again .
 Marina's husband mumbled in his sleep both in English and in Russian . Marina did not know what he was saying, and Marina was confused .
 Alik kept a weather eye on the de-Stalinization campaign in both the Soviet press and the back issues of Time that his mother continued to send him .
 His letters to his brother Robert make clear that he rested his hopes of obtaining exit visas for himself and Marina, above all Marina, on the scope of that campaign .
 The relaxation of cold war tensions between America and Russia may have reinforced his decision to go home . Family, friends, and future employers might not, after all, be so very critical of a young man who had chosen to spend a few years in Russia .
 Alik says the mechanics of getting to America were most of his attention . On the whole, it was the mechanics that claimed most of Alik's attention .
 He was increasingly impatient for a decision from the Soviet authorities . He was impatient for the decision to take action .
 Marina was inclined to push, complain, and go ‘to the top” when he could . Marina’s attitude was, ‘What will be, will be.’
 It was either in the hands of fate, or in those of a temporal power higher than any she could summon, she said . She said: 'It was either fate or in the hand of fate - or in any temporal power'
 She was his wife, under his protection, and ought to have more confidence, she said . She was under protection, she should have had more confidence .
 He had right to leave the country any time he wanted, and she had the right to come, too, she said . He had the rights to come and leave the U.S. and she did, too. He said .
 Marina would rewrite the letter, part imperious to please him, part deferential, even supplicating, to please herself and the officials of her country . And so Marina would write the letter to her husband .
 MVD’s Office of Visas and Registration had one of its staff members . Colonel Nikolai Axyonov is the head of OVIR, head of the MVD's Office of Visitors and Registration .
 During his youth Tolka’s father had served with Colonel Axyonov in the army or the MVD, and because of their friendship, Tolka now resided in the AxyOnov apartment .
 During the colonel’s endless hours at the office, his wife received guests in the apartment whom she was anxious that her husband not know about . The colonel's wife was anxious she didn't know about the guests .
 She gleaned bits and pieces of information about Tolka’s friends the Oswalds . The Oswalds were Tolka's friends and Tolka was a friend of the Oswald family .
 Oswalds learned between Tuesday, December 12, and Friday, December 15, that permission for their exit visas had been granted . The Oswalds are still in the U.S. State Department of Immigration Control .
 Alik wanted to know exactly when the official word would be coming through . Alik was delighted with the good news, but was not sure when it would be announced .
 He went to the MVD building and tried to see Colonel Axyonov . Just after the middle of December, he went to MVD . He said: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it's a very serious mistake"
 He was intercepted by an assistant who promised to pass along his request . He was stopped by a staff member at the hospital .
 Marina explained, and she was shown directly into Axyonov’s sparsely furnished office . Marina explained that she had been invited by the Russian president .
 Marina sat quietly by herself for half an hour or so, anxiously expecting a person in the shape of a dark, angry cloud to materialize . Marina sat in the dark and angry cloud .
 A rather small man came in, his attire civilian, his appearance indeterminate, his hair mousecolored and fine . Instead, he came in with a mouse-colored hair and fine hair .
 The moment he started speaking, Marina felt that he was kind—too kind for the work he was doing, she said . Marina felt he was too kind for his work, and he was always kind .
 She had nothing against the USSR, nor did she care what country she was going to be going to . She had no idea why she wanted to go to Russia .
 Marina told Colonel Axyonov that she had come to see him because her husband was anxious . After a series of other questions and answers that Marina does not recall, she said she was worried about her husband's health .
 Marina's encounter with Colonel Axyonov later gave rise to many questions . The encounter between Marina and Colonel Axyonova later led to a series of questions .
 She is niece of Ilya Prusakov, the niece of the former Russian prime minister . She has applied for a passport and a visa, but was denied it .
 Axyonov received Marina not in a reception room, as he would a total stranger, but in his private office . Both men were full colonels, both worked in the same building, and both worked at the same .
 Ilya had the highest reputation for discretion, and this may well have played a part, not only in Axyonov’s receiving Marina, but in the recommendations that must have been made as to whether she should be granted a visa to go abroad .
 Ilya was famous for his utter correctness and his hands-off attitude . But Ilya also had a hand-in-the-hand attitude . He was also known for his correctness and hands-on attitude .
 Ilya was desperately opposed to Marina’s decision to leave Russia, viewing it as a threat to himself and the entire family . Besides, Ilya feared the decision would be the death of his entire family, according to a report .
 Colonel Axyonov made his recommendation in Marina's case months before their interview, and the interview had nothing to do with the outcome . Marina's interview was not the result of the interview, says Marina .
 The case had already been decided, and as a matter of politeness to a colleague’s relative, he agreed to see Marina . Marina's case was already decided, but she said she was going to see her colleague .
 Whatever recommendation Axyonov had made, it may have carried some weight or it may not have . The recommendation may have been made, or not, but it may carry some weight .
 Axyonov himself may not have known what agency was handling the case, and at what level, for each case is treated individually, in accordance with its own special features .
 The same week that the Oswalds heard informally that Marina would be getting a visa, an identical decision was handed down in another case . The Oswalds were told informally they would be able to get a visa .
 The two cases together were not harbingers of a new policy, for they were not identical . No two cases ever are—and there is not, even today, a predictable Soviet policy on emigration . The two emigrants' cases were not the same, but the two cases
 The same case, considered on two successive days, might well be decided differently . So great is the role of chance that it is possible that the same case could be considered twice in a row .
 For the bodies that make these decisions are isolated and arbitrary, they operate by rules of their own that are known to no one on the outside, and they are strangely impervious to influence from other government agencies and sometimes even from above . For the reasons, these bodies operate by their own
 There were several major factors that may have been in Marina’s favor . There were, however, several factors that could be in her favor .
 Had she fallen into any of these categories, she would not have been allowed to leave Russia . She would have been banned from leaving the country .
 Marina had always stayed as far away from politics as she could. Moreover, she had always avoided politics as well as politics .
 This was probably an advantage, since it meant that she had no political record . This was likely to be an advantage because she has no political experience .
 Officials considering her case, probably KGB officials in Moscow and Minsk, concluded that, should she be permitted to go abroad, she was unlikely to do anything to bring the Soviet Union into disrepute, either by her conduct or political remarks .
 He had offered radar secrets in return for an opportunity to remain . It had been decided that he did not have secrets worth knowing .
 KGB had formed a low opinion of his intelligence and emotional stability . Intourist and KGB personnel working at the hotels where he stayed on his arrival in 1959 had formed low opinion .
 On being told that he would not be allowed to remain in the USSR, he had slashed his wrist, in what was reported to the KGB as a genuine suicide attempt that nearly succeeded . The attempt nearly succeeded, but was reported by the KGB .
 The KGB learned about Oswald in October of 1959 was that he was a desperate character . Oswald was willing to do anything, including the use of violence against his own person, to get what he wanted .
 His scene at the U.S. embassy was probably strengthened by his willingness to go public by talking to American reporters . His story was likely strengthened by the fact he spoke to reporters at the embassy .
 All these episodes embarrassed the Soviet government into allowing Oswald to remain, and he was helped by the political atmosphere . Oswald was allowed to remain in the Soviet Union despite the embarrassing events .
 Khrushchev had just launched the “Spirit of Camp David” and wanted nothing to impede better relations with the U.S. Khrushchevsky wanted nothing, including better relations between the two countries .
 The effects of the policy had trickled down and helped even a small fish like Oswald . Oswald. Oswald. "The effects of this policy have trickled . down," he said .
 The “Spirit of Camp David” was later shattered briefly in 1960 by Francis Gary Powers and the U-2 episode . Relations between Russia and the United States were now again on the mend, but relations between the U.S. and Russia are back on track .
 Oswald was announcing that he wanted to leave Russia and that he would not leave without his Russian wife . Oswald was in Moscow at the time of the assassination . Oswald's wife was in Russia when he was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Experts believe that nothing happens in Russia quite by chance and that the authorities were so anxious to have Oswald leave that they encouraged his friendships with Ziger and with Pavel Golovachev in the knowledge that they would counsel him to go .
 Oswald saw them daily at the factory, and they were also his best personal friends . Oswald saw the factory workers daily, and saw them as his best friends . He said they were the best friends of his life .
 Oswald doubtless heard facts about Soviet life that led him to decide to leave the country sooner than he might otherwise have done . From everyone he knew, Oswald probably heard about the realities of Soviet life .
 Both may have given him advice on how to return home, on visa tactics . He should move while Khrushchev was riding high, since in Russia things could revert at any moment to the way they had been in Stalin’s time .
 Ziger and Pavel did, in fact, coach Oswald on how to leave the country . But apart from a brief snippet in Oswald’s diary, there is no evidence, from Marina or from anybody else, that Ziger or Pavel Ziger did .
 The two men, one perhaps a father figure, the other an older brother, were very likely the best and the truest friends he ever had . Their friendships with him appear to have been genuine and spontaneous, and the two men were perhaps the best friends .
 The Russians could have kept Oswald if they had wanted to, by granting him citizenship, by denying his request for an exit visa, or by simply ignoring his request . Oswald could have been kept in Russia if they wanted to .
 Until a few months before, he had been receiving a financial subsidy . But he was an “unatisfactory” worker of belowaverage skill, he was occupying an apartment that would otherwise have gone to a factory official .
 She stopped by on her way home from work and was informed that both she and her husband had been granted exit visas . M arina and Alik were in splendid spirits .
 She kissed them and confessed that she had prayed for this every night . She told them that she was praying for this night .
 If life was hard in America, if they suffered disappointments there, go to Argentina, she said . "If life in America is hard in the U.S., if they suffer disappointments in Argentina," she said. "Go to Argentina"
 Oswalds told none of the other guests of their good fortune . That night the Oswalds kept their fortune a secret . The Oswalds were the only guests in the Oswald family .
 The Russians were Russians, after all, and it might be an affront to their sensibilities . They were Russians . It might be a mistake, but it might not be an insult to them .
 Pavel Golovachev was the only other friend with whom they shared their good news . The couple's best friends were also friends at the time of the birth .
 To him it meant that things were easing up, and that life might soon be better, not only for those who were allowed to go but also for those left behind .
 Once their visas were granted, Alik began a flurry of correspondence with the U.S. embassy . Alik and his wife are now in the process of getting their visas .
 The embassy needed several documents to back up her application for an immigrant’s visa to enter the United States . Among them was an affidavit of support or some other proof that she would not become a public charge .
 Alik had no job waiting for him, and no proof that he could support a wife . He had no proof of his ability to support a family . Alik was left with no job and no money to support his wife .
 Twice in the first half of January, the embassy suggested to Oswald, who was touchy enough at the best of times, that he precede his wife to the U.S. The embassy suggested twice in the early months of January that Oswald should accompany his wife . Oswald was touch
 She thought the embassy did not want her in the U.S. and she was not going to be allowed in, she said . She thought she was being denied entry to the United States . She said she was worried she would not be allowed into the country .
 She stomped into the kitchen, stood on a chair, plucked her husband’s suitcase off its shelf, and proceeded to pack it for him . She stormed in to the kitchen to pack the suitcase .
 Alik turned the suitcase upside down, dumped the contents on the sofa and the floor, put it back on the shelf in the kitchen . Alik then placed an arm around his wife and placed his hand around her .
 It all ended rather nicely, so both found occasion to repeat the scene . The pair were reunited at the end of the episode .
 Your Aunt Polina and Aunt Valya and Uncle Ilya will keep you here, never let you go. Your Aunt and Aunt Polinny will keep me here and never let me go. You will never be able to see your aunt and uncle again .
 Marina believes that he had another reason for refusing to go without her . Marina believes he had a reason for not leaving her .
 'It was a matter of principle with him that he had a right to do anything he pleased. He had to do what he pleased,' he said . 'He was a very proud man,' he added .
 The Russian president wanted to show the Russians he could get the better of them, he said . He added that he wanted to make sure they got the better .
 Swaldald’s letters to the American embassy during this period were peremptory and impatient . It was the American government that was causing the delay; and besides being unusually frequent, they were unusually frequent .
 Oswald’s reasons may not have been “obvious” at all, the embassy says . Oswald's reasons may have been "obvious" at the time, but to the embassy, they say .
 He wanted his son born at home, and not in Russia, so that he could be president of the U.S. President of the United States. He wanted to be born in Russia so he could become president . President Barack Obama wanted him to be president .
 Alik wanted an English, not a Russian, name, and remembering one of her favorite English novels, The Forsythe Saga . Marina proposed Fleur and Irene and then, finally, June .
 He counted back and pointed out that the child had been conceived in June . He pointed back to the fact that the baby was conceived in just June .
 Politics scarcely intruded on the couple's lives that winter, so taken up were they with waiting for the baby and with thoughts of leaving Russia . The couple's first child was born in September 2012, but she was still pregnant .
 In January an event occurred that, even though it was a carefully guarded secret, rocked the whole of Russia . But in January, the event occurred in Russia .
 An attempt was made on the life of Nikita Khrushchev, and it took place in Minsk, Belarus . An attempt on the assassination of the Soviet Union leader was made in the 1960s .
 In czarist Russia terrorism and assassination had been a way of life, a familiar form of political struggle . In czar Russia terrorists and assassinations were a common form of struggle .
 Lenin taught that individual terror was not acceptable, and because Stalin deported or slaughtered thousands for nonexistent plots against his life, the assassination of political leaders had faded out .
 If leaders disappeared from the face of the earth, it was done at the hands of other leaders and not of the led . Ordinary men and women were murdered, but if leaders disappeared, it would have been done at hands of others .
 Perhaps no longer believed any longer that by taking violent action he could alter the course of history . Perhaps no one believed any more that by . taking violent actions he could . alter . history . He said: "Perhaps no one . believed any now believed any . longer that . by taking
 Russians felt that they were so small, and the state so large, there was nothing anyone could do . Or perhaps individual Russians felt they were too small to take action .
 Besides, if one leader died, there was always another, just as oppressive, to step into his shoes . Besides, there were always another oppressive leader to step in his shoes, he says .
 Nikita Khrushchev came to Minsk to do some shooting in the Belovezhskoye Pushche, one of his favorite hunting preserves, in January of 1962 .
 He was staying in a government dacha outside Minsk and hunting in the winter forests when he was killed . He was hunting in winter forests in the Belarusian capital when he died .
 Rumors of the assassination attempt swept the length and breadth of Russia, but no one knows exactly what happened . The assassination attempt is believed to have taken place at the time of the attempt .
 Some say that Khrushchev’s entire bodyguard turned against him . Others say that a row of young men formed a roadblock and fired a single, dramatic volley into the air .
 Khrushchev’s bodyguard tried to shoot him, but the account that seems least fanciful was that a young man tried to kill him . The account of the incident is not fanciful, but it's not the most fanciful .
 Marina's Aunt Lyuba Axyonova was not a witness but had been present at the dacha in her capacity as bookkeeper of the Council of Ministers dining room . The Oswalds heard about the incident in frightened colorful undertones from Marina’s Aunt .
 Lyuba says only one member of Khrushchev’s bodyguard was responsible . Lyuba: 'Only one of the bodyguards was responsible for the incident' Lyuba said .
 Lyuba was afraid to speak of the shooting in detail in front of Alik, a foreigner, since the incident was not made public . For spreading “anti-Soviet propaganda,” or information the government does not want known, a citizen could receive seven to fifteen years .
 The would-be murderer had been a member of Khrushchev’s entourage, and Lyuba was afraid that in a single, Stalinesque stroke all other employees who had been anywhere nearby would be summarily dismissed .
 It was in this atmosphere of subdued hysteria that Alik first heard of the assassination attempt . Alik was in the midst of a subdued hysteria when he heard the news .
 He doubtless heard a great deal more talk about it from the men at the factory . He said: 'I'm sure there will be lots more talk of it'
 Such a thing was unprecedented at that time, and because it had happened right there, it must have created a tremendous stir in Minsk . The incident was unprecedented, but it was not the first time such a thing happened in the country .
 Lyuba's account may have been imprinted even more indelibly on Alik’s mind . Lyuba was so obviously terrified that she was obviously terrified, Alik says .
 Marina had left her job at the pharmacy on maternity leave just after the first of the year . She had left the pharmacy at the time of the pregnancy .
 The last month of her pregnancy was a privileged time, and she enjoyed it to the full, she said . She said: 'The last month was a privilege time for her and her family.'
 He curled up into a tiny ball in one corner of the bed so that she could have the rest of the rest for herself . She curled up in the bed to get the rest from herself .
 Soon she got used to sleeping with her feet on his back for warmth, as well as for the relief it gave her aching legs . Soon she was used to sleep with him for warmth .
 He thought that an expectant mother produces milk from the beginning of pregnancy . The milk is thought to be produced from the start of pregnancy, he said .
 Marina had too much milk and ran a fever after the baby was born . Later, after the birth, Marina had a fever . Marina had to run a fever and suffered from a milk fever .
 By then, they ate their meals at home and made use of a communal trash can in the courtyard . By then they had to eat their meals and make use of the trash can .
 One night Alik saw some stray dogs and cats bolting food from the trash can . Alik says he saw some cats and dogs bolting out food from a trash can. Alik: "I don't think it's a good thing for me to see some stray cats and
 He put out a special meal for the strays each time he emptied the garbage . After that, he put out special meals for the stray animals . He says he has never seen a stray in his life .
 The couple bought a secondhand crib for the baby, and Alik lovingly gave it three coats of white paint .
 Their friends came, as always, in the evenings, only now they brought sheets, diapers, and toys . They brought sheets and diapers, which they had sewn for the baby, and also diapers .
 On February 14 Marina woke in the middle of the night and told him the water had burst . Marina woke up to tell her husband that the water was going to burst in the night .
 "Wild with anxiety, he insisted that they start for the hospital. Finally, at seven in the morning, they started for the bedside car," he said .
 Everyone was hurrying to work, and there was an early morning crowd at the taxi stand . The taxi stand was the scene of a morning rush to work .
 Pale as a ghost, Alik tried to get to the head of the line by shouting that he was rushing his wife to the hospital . Alik's wife was rushed to a hospital .
 Marina was in labor as they walked the last block or so to the hospital . They took a bus, and Marina gave birth to a baby girl in labor .
 Alik wanted to carry her, but she insisted that she could make it on her own . Alik insisted she could carry herself, but Alik said she could not .
 Each time she felt a thrust of pain, however, it was as if it were stabbing him, too . She felt like he was being stabbed by the pain of the knife .
 Alik, meanwhile, had gone to work, since he was not allowed in the maternity section of the hospital . Alik is not allowed to work at the hospital in maternity section .
 Someone had telephoned from the hospital and left word that his wife had given birth to a baby girl . The couple had been married for more than 20 years .
 Alik Alik had never told the men at the factory that he was expecting a child . Alik never told them he was pregnant at the time .
 The next day at lunch at lunch, they held a special ceremony for the new father . But somehow they had found out about it, and the next day, they found out .
 Inside were a blanket, a tiny sweater, overalls, little shirts, yellow bonnet, swaddling cloth—everything a newborn baby would need . Inside the baby's box were blanketed with overalls and overalls . Inside were blanket, baby clothes, blanket, overall,
 He was very touched, but he was so reticent that he did not know how to thank them . He said he was 'very touched' by the touching gesture .
 Alik did not see the baby until it was eight days old, when he arrived to take mother and daughter home . Because of hospital regulations, he was not allowed to see baby until he arrived home .
 He was, he confessed later, shocked by the sight of the child . Like any new father, he expected her to be partly grown and already quite good-looking .
 In Marina’s absence he had washed the floors, cleaned the apartment from stem to stern, and washed and ironed all the laundry . He had washed, cleaned, ironed the laundry and cleaned the floors .
 Ushering the two of them in, his wife and child, he was filled with happiness . "We are filled with joy," he said .
 Marina felt that if they could have made love on that day, it would have been a kind of completion . Marina herself felt that . if they . could have . made love, Marina said, 'If they could . have made . love on this day, Marina felt . that day
 She felt that her husband truly loved her and that, for the first time, he was aware of it . She said that she felt that she was truly loved by her husband .
 Marina’s friends came by to teach her to swaddle and feed the baby . Marina's friends also taught her how to feed and swaddle her baby . The baby was born in September .
 Marina objected when he said he wanted to pick her up . The baby was asleep, and Marina objected to him .
 That night, and every night thereafter, he dragged the crib over to the bed and insisted on sleeping on the side closest to it . That night he dragged it over to bed and instead of sleeping in the crib, he slept in the middle of it .
 The young couple were more or less on their own when it came to tending the baby . The baby was born in September .
 Alik objected to the casual way she handled the baby, as matter-of-factly as if she were a doll . Aunt Musya came to show Marina how to bathe her, but Alik didn't like it .
 Aunt Valya, too, dropped by whenever she dared, but she quickly learned to come during her nephew’s working hours . She learned to drop by when her nephew was working hours, so she dropped by .
 Valya loved holding his "little jewel" so much, that it seemed best to come when the anxious father was out . His face grew so menacing and pale each time she picked up the baby, she said .
 Marina, of Minsk, preferred Russian ways of swaddling the baby . Alik said they had no choice, since there were no diapers, no rubber pants, no little shirts or baby pins to be bought in Minsk . Marina said she and Alik were forced to sw
 Marina had to teach her son how to do it . But his first attempt ended in hopeless confusion, and he was hopelessly confused .
 Alik had wanted the baby called June Marina . He got into a hassle at ZAGS, the registry office, because it was the Russian custom for a child to bear a form of his father’s first name as its middle name, or patronymic .
 The registry officials (“those burerecrats,” he called them) won out, and the baby was named June Lee . The baby was born June Lee.
 When they were alone or with friends, Alik called her Junka or Marinka . Alik and his friends were thrilled at having in their midst a baby with a foreign name .
 Marina shuddered each time she heard the baby called by her own name . She called her June or Junka. But Marina shocked when she heard her daughter's name being called by herself .
 To the older generation, however, it would have been a scandal for the child to bear any but a Russian name . The child's name is still a popular name in Russia .
 When they were with Marina’s uncles and aunts, therefore, everyone, even her parents, called the baby Marina . Marina's parents, Marina, also called her aunt and uncle Marina .
 Alik forgot and got a warning look or a punch from Marina or one of her friends . He would not, in the presence of her relatives, give the baby’s true name away .
 The birth of June brought with it a sudden diminution of Alik’s desire to go home . Alik is now in a stable condition in the hospital .
 He wrote only one letter to the U.S. embassy in February and one in March . He wrote two letters to the American embassy .
 Perhaps, as with the lull following his marriage the year before, it was the change of focus, the increase of private happiness, that was responsible .
 His anxieties about returning to America were never wholly quiescent . But at the same time he was anxious about his return to America .
 In letters written before and after his daughter’s birth, he was still anxious about what might happen to him when he set foot on American soil . In letters to his daughter, he still wrote about what he feared for his life .
 In a letter to the American embassy on January 16, he wrote that he believed his passport might be confiscated on his arrival home . In the letter, he said he feared his passport would be confiscated .
 In fact, it was only changed to ‘undesirable,” and it had all happened years before when Alik defected to Russia . Alik's defection to Russia was years before .
 He asked Connally to look into the matter . Under the impression that he was still Secretary of the Navy, he asked him to investigate .
 He claimed that he was a “boni-fied” American citizen and had “always had the full sanction” of the U.S. embassy and government .
 He went so far as to compare his sojourn in Russia with that of Ernest Hemingway in Paris during the 1920s . He compared the experience to that of Hemingwy in Paris .
 It was the first round of a prolonged and ultimately futile, battle with the Department of the Navy to change the status of his discharge . It was an ultimately futile attempt to get his discharge changed .
 On the same day he wrote Connally, Alik also wrote his brother Robert, who was a Fort Worth resident of Fort Worth, asking him to get in touch with Connally about the discharge . Alik's brother, Robert, was a resident of the Fort Worth area .
 Robert requested Robert to “ask around again” to see if the government might have charges against him . He also requested Robert be asked to ‘ask around’ again, see if there are charges .
 Francis Gary Powers was released from a Russian prison and returned to the U.S. Powers has been released from prison in Russia . Powers was convicted of attempted murder and attempted murder in Russia in 2007 .
 In a letter to his brother written the same day his baby was born, he expressed anxiety about Powers’s return, as if his treatment was a harbinger of how he himself would be treated on his return to the United States .
 Oswald’s interest in Powers is striking, for the two men appeared to have nothing in common . The two men had nothing to do with each other .
 Powers was shot down on a high-altitude reconnaissance flight over Russia in 1960 . Powers was captured, branded a “spy,” convicted in a show trial in Moscow in 1960, and spent nearly two years in a Soviet prison . Powers spent nearly 2 years in prison
 Eisenhower-Khrushchev summit conference was canceled because of the incident . Powers became an international celebrity, and Powers became a celebrity .
 Oswald and Powers worked together in the U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance plane . The two men were both involved in World War II . Powers and Powers flew U.2 reconnaissance planes during their careers .
 Oswald, as a Marine, had been stationed at three bases where U-2 aircraft were kept . Oswald was stationed at Atsugi, Japan; Cubi Point in the Philippines; and El Toro, California, California .
 At each base the planes were kept in a classified, tightly guarded area that no one could enter without a very high security clearance . The planes are kept in the classified area .
 Oswald had only a low security clearance, but it is likely that he saw the U-2 and heard a good deal of gossip about its mission . Oswald was likely to see the U.2 and hear a lot of the gossip about it's mission .
 If he glimpsed the plane, it was unlikely that he ever forgot the breathtaking sight . And if he saw it, it would be unlikely he ever forget it .
 With its fragile fuselage and its slender, incredibly elongated wings, the U-2 looked like a giant bird of beauty and menace . The U.2 was the first U.S. Air Force to carry out a mission to the U.N. mission .
 Oswald may have felt that he had had, for the first time, a brush with history . Oswald's U-2 was shot down over Sverdlovsk six months after his arrival in Russia .
 Powers was much bigger than he was, but both men had dark hair and slightly receding hairlines . Powers and Powers were both much larger than Powers was . Powers was a much larger man than Powers, Powers said .
 Powers was a highly skilled ‘spy in the sky,” a man at the center of world attention who had had to defend himself in a klieg-lit trial . Powers was the man at center of the world attention .
 Oswald would have liked to be a spy, and he might have enjoyed the spotlight as well . Oswald would like to have been a spy and enjoy the spotlight, he says .
 No Russian would have allowed himself or his super-secret aircraft to fall into unfriendly hands . No Russian aircraft would have been captured by the Russian state .
 He believed that he, too, had betrayed his country by defecting and denouncing it . He believed he had betrayed the country by defrauding it, too .
 In addition to other demands, Alik had informed the embassy that he could not afford the fare to the U.S. Alik told the embassy he was not able to pay the fare .
 He could contribute $200, and he expected the embassy to give, not loan, him the rest of the money . The embassy should give him $800 or $900, enough to travel by air by air .
 The Department of State attempted, unsuccessfully, to raise the money from private relief agencies and asked Marguerite Oswald to help . The State Department was unable to find a way to pay .
 He had written his mother that he did not want her to contribute, and now he told her to ignore the State Department .
 The State Department loaned Oswald the amount necessary to cover the costs of the least expensive means of travel back to the United States . Oswald was authorized by the State Department to loan Oswald the money to cover his travel .
 The State Department bent over backward to help Oswald . As they did for many others whom they considered trapped in Russia, the embassy and the State Department helped . Oswald was the only person to be freed from Russia .
 For proof that she would not become a public charge, embassy officials accepted an affidavit of support from Oswald himself . For proof of her innocence, officials accepted the affidavit from Oswald's father .
 They did so on the grounds that he had a place to live, with his mother, and that in the Marine Corps he had been trained in a trade that made him readily employable, they said .
 Marina Oswald's employer later filed an affidavit of support for Marina . The embassy was taken off the hook when Marguerite Oswald’s employer later provided an affidavit . Marina's employer filed a statement of support .
 As the wife of an American citizen, Marina was entitled to an entrance visa, if other conditions had been met . Marina is entitled to a visa, but other conditions have been met before .
 Immigration and Naturalization Service of the Justice Department did not say yes . The immigration and naturalization Service is responsible for some of the most recent deportations .
 Marina Marina was denied a visa because there was doubt as to Oswald’s loyalty to the U.S. Marina was a member of the Oswald family . Oswald's wife, Marina, was killed in the July 4, 1918, assassination of President Kennedy .
 State Department was not acting solely for humanitarian reasons, it says . State Department says it was acting on behalf of the U.S. military .
 Marina was granted an exit visa partly to be rid of Oswald, but it was partly to get him back and out of harm’s way . If Soviet authorities had granted her exit visa to get her out of the Soviet Union, they were prepared to give her an entrance visa partly
 The State Department made its position clear by its handling of the one legal technicality that remained . The State Dept. made it clear by handling the issue of the State Department .
 Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, U.S. consuls abroad are forbidden to issue immigrants’ visas inside any country that resists the return of nationals whom the United States wants to deport . The act prevents consuls from issuing immigrants' visas in any countries that resist the return
 Marina could obtain a visa from the U.S. consular office in another country . The embassy in Moscow had already made arrangements with the embassy in Brussels . Marina's visa was a technicality that was easily surmounted .
 By mid-March of 1962, Alik was informed that Marina had been granted a visa to enter the United States . Alik and his family would be able to leave Russia soon after .
 Ilya or Valya were still convinced that the young couple had not received permission to leave from the Soviet side . As late as April, neither he nor Marina had said a word to Ilya and Valya, who were convinced they would never receive it .
 Marina quit her job at the pharmacy and now spent part of each day with the baby at Ilya and Valya’s apartment . The deception was the more remarkable since Marina had quit her .
 Marina told Valya Valya she had no news of her exit visa . Valya asked Marina if she had news of an exit visa, and Marina answered falsely that she had not . Marina said she did not have news of a visa, Valya said .
 Ilya had often pointed out that Marina’s going might mean trouble for Ilya . Valya had often said that Marina might have caused trouble for her daughter .
 Marina’s Aunt Polina in Kharkov had been withholding a letter from her aunt from Marina . The letter was kept from Marina during her pregnancy . She added something new, adding that she had been keeping it from Marina's aunt .
 "I’ll light a great big candle and pray that her soul may rest in peace. I’m light a big candle," she writes .
 Marina knew that Polina's letter reflected cowardice over her husband's job and position . Polina’s letter reflects cowardice, Marina said . Marina knew her husband was in the top job, but she said he was not .
 To her it was as if her aunt’s prayer for the dead, her wish that she were dead, truly had the power to kill her . To her aunt's prayer, she thought it was her wish she was dead .
 Marina picked up the baby, grabbed some swaddling cloth, and ran out the door . Marina was hurt by the incident . Marina: "I don't know what happened to me and I don't like it"
 She went to Ilya and Valya’s in tears, announced that she had had a fight with Alka and had left him . She then announced she was leaving Ilya .
 Ilya was not; he told Marina she could spend the night, but she was not to come to him any more when she and her husband had a fight . Marina was not allowed to come back to Ilya when her husband argued with her husband . Ilya told Marina to stay
 Polina’s letter, the fight with Alka, and now it seemed that Ilya did not love her either . Ilya's letter and fight with Polina's letter were the reasons for her decision to kill her .
 In the morning she changed her mind, for she felt that underneath her other emotions, she did love Alka after all . But in the morning, she changed .
 Marina's Aunt Musya is Marina's aunt and aunt-in-law, Musya . The family was reunited at Valya’s house .
 She scolded him for being cruel to Marina and trying to take her to America . She said he was cruel to her and tried to bring her to the U.S.
 Alik went into the next room and stood there, crying quietly by the window . Alik then went to the next door and stood quietly by a window .
 Alik’s tears softened her heart, and she urged Marina to go back to him . Marina's tears soften her heart and she urges Marina to return to him.
 She had no more right to take the baby away from him than to hurt her relatives, she said . And she had no right to do so, even if she hurt her family, she did .
 The tears were still streaming down his cheeks as Valya led him into the room . The tears still remained in his eyes as she led him back to the room.
 Alik unswaddled the baby when they returned home together . They returned to the apartment together, and when they reached the apartment, Alik unwaddled his baby .
 Oswald wrote his brother that he expected to be able to leave Russia within a month or two . On April 12 Oswald wrote that he expects to be released within a few weeks . Oswald's brother says he expects his brother to be freed within the next few months .
 He complained in his letters home that the American embassy was as slow with its formalities as the Russians had been with theirs . But that spring he still complained that the U.S. embassy was slow with his formalities .
 He made several telephone calls to the embassy, and a secretary in the consular office who spoke with him grew to dislike him indelibly . The secretary of consular officers who spoke to him when he was in the office grew to hate him .
 Oswald was very impatient about the delays and complained, especially about travel arrangements . Oswald was impatient about his travel arrangements and was impatient with delays .
 He had been authorized a loan only large enough to cover the cost of the least expensive means of transportation back to the United States . He behaved as if it was his birthright to be wafted home by jet aircraft or, as a veteran, to be flown home on a government
 Oswald corresponded regularly with both his mother and his brother . His letters to the two members of his family who were closest to him are revealing in their contrast .
 He shared a few of his problems, his small adventures in Minsk, and his political ideas . He also shared his political problems with CNN.com .
 Oswald’s letters to his mother are empty of concern or affection, they are filled with requests . The striking thing about Oswald's letters is that they are full of requests, not concern, but of concern . Oswald wrote that he wanted his mother to know what he wanted to do
 Of the seventeen letters he wrote to Marguerite between the resumption of their correspondence in June 1961 and his departure from the Soviet Union nearly a year later, 14 contained a request or a reminder of some earlier request .
 Time magazine and books for himself, books for Marina, fashion magazines for Marina and pennies for friends who collected American souvenirs .
 It was not long before the errands he asked of his mother, an older woman with a job, were substantial . But it was not soon long before he asked her for help .
 It fell to Marguerite to do some of the paperwork for her son’s return, including obtaining an affidavit of support for Marina from her own employer . The mother-of-one was able to obtain an affidavit from her employer .
 Marguerite even suggested that she raise money for her son's return through a public appeal . She even suggested she raise funds for his return through an appeal to raise money .
 Oswald vetoed the idea; at that moment the very last thing he wanted was publicity . The idea was vetoed by the President of the United States . The president of the U.S. House of Representatives is believed to have been assassinated .
 He instructed her to try to get money from the Red Cross or the International Rescue Committee . But he also told her to seek help from the International Relief Committee . The Red Cross is the only way to get help in Haiti .
 Oswald asked his mother for his Marine Corps discharge and old newspaper clippings about his defection to Russia . Oswald also asked for his discharge from the Marine Corps . Oswald was concerned about both his military status and the reception he would receive in America .
 Oswald asked Robert for favors, too, but they were direct requests, as his criticisms of some of Robert’s actions were also direct . Oswald also requested favors from Robert, as well as criticism of Robert's actions .
 He praised, cajoled and condescended, he condescended to let her help him . He made it plain that it was not for her to offer him advice. He praised and cajoked .
 Oswald respected his brother, but he seemed to fear his mother and the prospect of any closeness between them . Oswald feared his mother's presence in the family .
 He manipulated Marguerite, always with the twin purposes of exploiting her, yet at the same time keeping her at a distance, he said . He manipulated her, he manipulated her and kept her away from him .
 Oswald dangled the prize in front of his mother, Oswald quickly snatched it away . Oswald had dangled it to his mother in the hope of winning the prize .
 His correspondence with the U.S. embassy reflected this same attitude . Not surprisingly, he wrote to the embassy .
 He had walked out on his country, just as he had done on his mother . He had left his country just as well as his own mother .
 He expected embassy to forgive, forget, and go to extraordinary lengths to bring him back, without any thought of a return . Now he expected the embassy, like an indulgent mother, to forgive and forget .
 On May 10 an official of the embassy wrote Alik to inform him that it was ready to issue Marina’s visa in Moscow . Alik: “Marina's visa is ready to be issued in Moscow. Marina's visa was issued on May 10, 2013 .
 The Oswalds could come to the embassy as soon as they got their affairs in Minsk in order . The final impediment had been removed, and the Oswalds were able to come .
 It was the word Alik had been waiting for, but by this time it was as if he no longer cared . Alik was waiting for the word he was waiting to hear .
 He had a right to leave Russia if he chose, and to take a Soviet citizen with him . He was allowed to take Soviet citizens with him, according to Russian law .
 It was now the bureaucratic momentum on both sides that carried him forward, rather than any very positive desire to go home . It is now the bureaucracy that carried out the process .
 Knowing that they would soon be leaving, one or another of their friends came by for a visit every night . Knowing, or suspecting, that they . would soon leave, they . well-wishers came by every night to see them .
 With the thrill of vicarious adventure, they rejoiced over Marina’s miraculous good fortune . Marina's family were delighted with her miraculous fortune .
 Every one of them longed to see America, to travel freely back and forth across frontiers . "Every one of these men longed for America," the author says .
 In a shop down the street from the apartment, she ran into Anatoly Shpanko, who she met in the street . She said, "I don't know what happened to him. He's a good man"
 Such was Marina’s farewell to the man who had wanted her to be his wife . Such was her farewell to him, Marina said .
 Alik had told almost no one that he was going, only Alexander Ziger and Pavel Golovachev . As for Alik, he had told no one else that he would be going . Alik was not the only person to know about the trip .
 On May 16, he handed in a statement to the director of the Minsk Radio Plant . The statement was made by the head of Minsk's radio plant .
 He had conquered two great bureaucracies, and as with so many of his other achievements, he accomplished it alone . "He had conquered it alone," he said. "I had to do it alone."
 He was carried forward on the momentum of his double triumph . While it was the victory over the Soviet bureaucracy that yielded the sweeter satisfaction, the victory was sweeter .
 There’s nothing wrong with making a mistake and thinking better of it later . There's nothing wrong in making a decision to make a mistake .
 The hardest part was telling Ilya and Valya, Marina put off until a week before they were to leave Minsk for Moscow . Marina put the ordeal off until the end of the month .
 It was painful to be with them after that, painful to speak of parting, yet impossible to talk of anything else . "It was painful for them to say goodbye, but it was impossible to say anything else"
 Ilya’s last utterance about his nephew-in-law, delivered shortly before the Oswalds’ departure, had the tone of prophecy . Ilya: “Iya's last utterment about my nephew in-law was that of prophecy. Ilya
 Marina knew that Alik would never allow it, but trying to make amends for leaving, she promised to try . Marina knew she would never be allowed to leave Alik .
 Carrying the baby with her, she stopped by the laboratory where Aunt Musya worked . The baby was born in December .
 She took the baby and quickly left. Then, fearful lest she burst into tears, she took it and left . The baby's mother cried, too, but quickly left .
 Colonel Axyonov and Lyalya Petrusevich tried to hand over their apartment to Tolka Tolka, the friend who lived in the apartment . Tolka was the friend of the Colonel and his bride-to-be, and his wedding to Lyalysa Pet
 Minsk Radio Plant officials rebuffed Alik's request for apartments in their building . Alik says they were rebuffed by the officials of the Minsk radio plant .
 Tolka would move in when the Oswalds left when they left . The Oswalds succeeded in registering the apartment in Tolka’s name, but he would move there .
 Before leaving their apartment, they had another piece of unfinished business . The couple left their apartment in New York .
 Oswalds assumed that it was a bugging device and had long promised themselves that they would set aside an hour or so for absolute forthrightness . If they ever left the apartment for good, if they did, they would have a moment to be forthright .
 Before they left, they told the faintly ticking, scarcely visible companion of their married life their true opinions about everyone they knew . And so, before they leave, they .
 Alik went to visit Erich Titovyets the day before their departure . The day before they left, Alik visited Titovyet to meet with him .
 He did not learn of his friend’s departure until after the Oswalds had actually left . The Oswalds were killed by a bomb blast in September 1963 .
 Alik's final duties were to visit OVIR, the Office of Visas and Registration, to have the exit visa stamped in his passport . One of Alik’s final duties was to visit his final destination to have his passport stamped .
 Russianfashion, their closest friends, including Pavel and all the Zigers, came to the station to see them off . Russianfashion.com .
 A man was standing, half-hidden, behind a pillar in the centre of the action . He was watching the action from behind the pillar, but he was not being watched .
 Marina kept glancing anxiously around the station looking for Ilya and Valya . Ilya kept looking for Valya and Ilya in the hope of finding them .
 They were huddled together, desolate, looking as if their world had fallen apart . They looked like they had fallen out of the world .
 The last sight Marina saw was their friends Olga, Inessa, and Pavel running along the platform, reaching out to touch the train . Marina saw the last sight she saw was the children reaching out and touching the train. Marina said: "The last sight I saw was Olga
 For a few minutes, in the compartment, both Alik and Marina were silent . Marina was silent as she and Alik waited for the last few minutes .
 For three days they stayed at the Hotel Ostankino, on the outskirts of town; then they moved to the Hotel Berlin in the center of Moscow . The couple stayed in the hotel for three days .
 Alik showed no fear of being arrested, Alik says . They went to the American embassy several times, and Alik shows no fear .
 Marina's girlfriend of Marina’s, now living in Moscow, was living in Russia . They smuggled her into the embassy, past a pair of bewildered militiamen . They felt so relieved that they smuggled her in for fun .
 She sat delightedly inside, in the very citadel of capitalism, poring over the shiny magazines while the Oswalds went about their tasks . The Oswalds' daughter was delighted to sit delighted inside the citadel in the capital .
 Alik Alik had his passport renewed, and the baby had her photograph taken and attached to her father’s passport . Alik's passport was renewed .
 The embassy loaned Oswald the entire cost of the tickets, $418, and arranged for him to pick them up in Rotterdam . Oswald was able to pay for the tickets to be delivered by the embassy . Oswald is now in the Netherlands .
 Oswald and the embassy also suggested a cheap hotel, or "pension, where they could spend a clean and comfortable night in Rotterdam .
 Oswald helped Oswald pay the railway fare from Moscow to Rotterdam . The embassy helped him pay the train fare . Oswald was taken to the Netherlands by the Dutchmen .
 Oswald paid for the train trip from Minsk to Moscow, and he was paying for their hotel room, about 8 rubles a day, and meals in Moscow . Oswald had paid for a train trip to Minsk, and a room at the hotel . Oswald was also paying for the
 He would also buy food during the railway journey to Holland and pay $7 or $8 for the pension in Rotterdam . He would buy food and pay for a pension in Holland .
 His out-ofpocket expenses for the journey home would come to between $200 and $300 . So he would have to pay up to $300 for his journey home .
 Oswald left the Soviet Union owing the U.S. government $435.71 . He left the country owing the United States government a total of $435,000 .
 Davison was the son of a Russian woman and a distinguished physician from Atlanta, Georgia . Davison had a style that was as breezy and American as his strawberry blond crewcut .
 He treated her with exactly the right combination of seriousness and levity, reassuring her that life in America was far better than in Russia . Life in America is far better in America than Russia, he said .
 He urged Marina to look up his mother in America—Natasha Davison, now a widow, a grande dame in the Russian manner and one of the reigning spirits of Atlanta . Marina's mother is now a widowed widow and a granddame .
 He enjoyed the navy doctor's jokes and was grateful to him for cheering up Marina at a moment when his own hands were full and his wife's anxieties substantial .
 In the summer of 1963, the Soviet government accused him of being the go-between for Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, a highly placed Soviet official . He was tried and shot as a spy for the United States .
 Alik changed most of the rubles he had saved into dollars at Gosbank, Gosbank . The pair went to OVIR and Gosbank to change most of their savings into dollars .
 Passengers had to visit embassies of Poland, East Germany, West Germany, and the Netherlands to obtain transit visas . They had to also visit the embassies of the countries to obtain visas .
 Marina sometimes stayed behind at the hotel to run errands . The errands required much sitting and waiting in anterooms .
 Late one afternoon he burst into their hotel room exhausted but elated . He burst into the room exhausted and elated with his wife . Later that evening he burst back into the hotel room .
 Marina and Yury Belyankina spent the last night at a friend's apartment in Minsk . The party ended with many farewell toasts and many farewells .
 When the Oswalds pulled out of Moscow’s green-tiled Belorussian Station late the following afternoon, June 1, it was Galka Belyankina who saw them off . The Oswalds were seen off at the station .
 Their route lay through Minsk, where they were due to arrive early the next morning . Their route was to arrive in Minsk early the morning .
 Marina had wired Valya, begging her to come to the station, and she was in high excitement as the train pulled in, hoping for another glimpse of her aunt .
 She and Alik bounded onto the familiar platform, raced up and down, and searched everywhere . Alik and Alika were able to find each other on the platform .
 He had no intention of giving up his precious papers to a customs officer . He said he was not going to give them up to customs officers .
 The pair presented a homely tableau as their train drew puffing into Brest .
 They were sitting in their myaqky compartment, the husband and baby surrounded by swaddling cloths that she had rinsed out and hung up to dry . The husband and the wife were filling out customs declarations, the wife and the baby surrounded .
 Marina, who had expected to be questioned and perhaps searched, was astonished at how simple it turned out to be . Marina had been worried that she would have been questioned and searched .
 One of them opened a suitcase and snapped it shut again without even looking inside . One of the men opened the suitcase without looking inside without looking at it . Another opened it up and snapped the suitcase shut shut again .
 At this the officer broke into a broad grin, saluted, and wished them a happy journey .
 Oswalds hugged each other as the train carried them over the bridge into Poland . The Oswalds hug each other and hold hands as they cross the bridge .
 There they got out, changed a few dollars into zlotys, and bought beer . They got out of the car and got back to the pub .
 The Polish countryside was flat, like Belorussia, and the people, too, looked poor, except for a stylish lilt to the way the women wore their cotton dresses . The people also looked poor except for the way they wore their clothes .
 She noticed that there were two Berlins, the "democratic" one, which was dark, and the other was brightly lit . But that night, waking briefly in Germany, she noticed that she was in the dark . She said that night she woke briefly to find out that she had
 They rattled through village after village, each one prettier than the last and so clean that they looked as if they must be inhabited by dolls . Each village was so pretty that it looked like it was inhabited by doll dolls .
 When they arrived in Rotterdam, they went straight to the pension the embassy had recommended .
 It was the only thing he bought her, for it was Sunday and all the shops were closed . It was Sunday, and it was the last thing he had bought her with her .
 In the pension that night, the sheets were so clean that Marina was afraid to lie down . In the night, she said: 'In the pension, the bed was so much cleaner that she couldn't lie down'
 The voyage marked the beginning of a change in Alik’s behavior, and in his relationship with his wife . Alik: "I’m going to be very happy with my wife. I’ll be happy with her, but I'm not happy with it
 On the first day out, the two of them went on deck, struck up a conversation with a Rumanian girl, laughed, and had a fine time .
 Alik would vanish upstairs to the library and remain there for hours . Taking several sheets of writing paper with him with him, he would disappear into the library .
 Often, at night, he went alone to the movies, leaving Marina and the baby behind . Marina and her baby were often left behind by the baby .
 The other passengers were staring and laughing at Marina, Marina said . He came to fetch her for meals, and it seemed to Marina that the other passengers had been staring at her .
 She became self-conscious about her appearance and her clothes, unaware that it was the baby, swaddled from her waist to her toes, that was the object of so much attention . She was unaware that she was the subject of so many attention .
 They had a charming waiter, Pieter, a handsome young man whose name was Pieter . Pieter is Pieter's charming waiter . The couple were delighted to discover that Pieter was a good waiter .
 Half Russian and half Dutch, he knew a few words of Russian and wanted to know all about Marina . Half-Russian and half-Dutch, he was half-Russian, half Dutch .
 She chatted openly with Pieter, who she discovered was "Didenko" or something close to it . Pieter's last name was “Didenko,” or something similar to Didenko .
 It was the name of her own, natural father—at least the name her stepfather had shouted at her once in a terrible moment of wrath . Her stepfather shouted the name at her in a moment of anger .
 Whenever he took her anywhere, it was plain from his expression that he was doing it only out of duty . He was always smiling when she was taken anywhere .
 Everything she knew and loved lay behind her; ahead, everything was unknown . Her life was in the end of the day . She was left with nothing to know .
 He had changed all of it into dollars, and she knew that he still had it . She knew he still has it, and he had changed it back .
 Boatmen rowed up to Maasdam off the Irish coast with heavy wool sweaters to sell . Yet he had refused to buy her anything when some boatmen roamed up with them to sell them .
 There were shops on the ship, but he did not buy her anything there either . He didn't buy anything from the shops, but did buy her some .
 Sitting by herself in the cabin, she sewed the heels of her wedding shoes . She sewed them up in a bid to keep her wedding dress .
 Marina’s unhappiness boiled over at a party they attended their last evening at sea . Marina was unhappy at the party she attended at the end of the trip .
 In spite of her attire, she felt morose, and looked it . The red brocade she had worn the night she met Alik was wearing .
 It was rainy and cold on the deck, and below, the water was gray and forbidding . CNN.com will feature iReporters in a new series of travel photos .
 She thought of the baby, who was lying asleep in the cabin . She walked around the deck, and finally, thought of her baby .
 He escorted her to the bar, bought her a liqueur and himself a Coca-Cola . He also bought himself a bottle of himself a Coke . The couple was married for more than 20 years .
 She thought that she was somehow responsible for Alik’s strange behavior . Alik thought she was responsible for her strange behavior.
 Oswald thought he would be met at the dock by newspaper reporters . Oswald thought that he would have been met by reporters at the docks .
 He expected to be asked a series of questions designed to incriminate him with the FBI . He covered page after page of Holland-America Line stationery with a list of questions and answers .
 "He was still afraid that by one or more of his acts he had broken laws of the United States," he said . "He still feared that by . one of the acts he . had broken the law of the U.S.
 The questions he sketched out are accusatory, the answers are defensive, he says . Indeed, he sketches out the questions with the answers to them . The answers to the questions were accusatory .
 Although I hate the USSR and socialist system, I still think Marxism can work under different circumstances . I hate Marxism but still think it can work in different circumstances, he says .
 I have never even known a Communist outside the ones in the USSR, but you can’t help that. You can't help that, he says . He says: "I have never been a Communist. But you can help that."
 Oswald wrote two long pages explaining why he took money from a source he believed to be the Soviet secret police . Oswald also wrote two sets of questions and answers, which were scripts for the anticipated press conference .
 I do so in order to state that I shall never sell myself intentionally or unintentionally to anyone again. I do . I do this in order . I shall . state that he shall . never sell himself intentionally . or unintentionally again. He does not sell himself to anyone intentionally .
 Oswald covered with handwriting, only to toss them into a wastebasket on the Maasdam . There is no way of knowing how many sheets of Holland-America Line paper Oswald covered up with handwriting .
 But it is clear from what has survived that he spent part of the voyage working up this imaginary colloquy with the press . He also spent a longer time drafting a statement of his political beliefs .
 He apparently thought that he would be questioned on these matters . "I thought that I would be asked about these matters," he said .
 The communist, capitalist, and even the fascist and anarchist elements in America always profess patriotism toward the land and the people, if not the government . Although their movements must surely lead to the bitter destruction of all and everything, they must surely be led to the destruction of everything .
 The biggest and key fault ... of our era is of course the fight for markets between the imperialist powers ... which lead to the wars, crises and oppressive friction which you have all come to regard as part of your lives .
 Oswald next considered what he called the “mistakes’ of Engels and Marx, 13 . Oswald considered the notion that the abolition of classes would lead to a withering away of the state . Oswald next discussed the idea of abolishing classes and the state of classes .
 Four other long sheets of Holland-America Line stationery have survived, covered with Oswald’s scrawl . Oswald's scrawl is mutilated and nearly illegible because of scratched-out phrases and words . Oswald scrawled on the stationery .
 It would be very easy to dupe myself into believing one system is better than the other, I know they are not . I have sought the answers and, although it would be hard to say, I've sought answers and I know it's not better .
 For an American who was only twenty-three, Oswald’s experience was unique . Oswald”s experience is unique, says historian John Sutter . Oswald was only 23 at the time of his assassination .
 He had, as he had written, lived in each of the opposing world camps, more or less as an ordinary citizen . He had lived as a citizen of each camp, more than less a citizen .
 He was looking at both, weighing both, trying to puzzle out a system that would combine the merits of each . Now, suspended between the two on the voyage home, he was weighing both and weighing both .
 As he had done so often in his life before, he was doing it, once again, alone . And as he did so often, he had to do it alone .
 He had not been to college, nor had been part of any political or intellectual milieu in the U.S. He had no college or political experience, nor was part of a political milieu .
 In Russia he had been cut off completely from such currents as might be stirring young people back home . In Russia, he had to be cut off from those currents .
 Oswald was a pioneer, if you will, or a lonely American antihero a few years ahead of his time . Oswald was not a lonely antihero, but a pioneer of his own time . He was a lonely and lonely American .
 Oswald had been disappointed by Russia, which he had thought to be a Marxist society where each person’s needs were met . Oswald had thought that Russia was a socialist society .
 His disappointment, and above all the anxiety he felt on returning to the country of his birth, are evident in the confused style of his shipboard writings .
 It had been inflicted long before he went to Russia, and it stemmed from his relationship with his mother . "It had to be a long process of healing," he says of his mother's death .
 Not only was his need unmet, he had been unable to extricate himself from it . He was unable to escape from it. Not only had to deal with it, but he had to cope with it .
 He remained enmeshed with his mother, needing her, yet resenting her and hating himself for his dependence . He remained in love with her, but hated himself for her dependence .
 "Once in order to convince himself that he was free and a man, he had to pull himself together and act. For his need was an enormous threat to him, and once in a while, he needed to act."
 He was able to transform even that institution into a kind of mother, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Marine Corps member defected to Russia in a single gesture to reject his real mother, the Marine Corps, and his mother country all at once . Then he defected, contriving to Russia, he said, "I'm not a Marine. I'm a Russian. Marine Corps
 He transformed an unresolved personal conflict into a political act . So doing, he transformed it into an act of defiance .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has rejected Russia, once more re-enacting the central drama of his life . Now he had rejected Russia once more .
 While rejecting his mother symbolically yet again, he was returning to her physically for the first time . But this rejection was the most portentous one so far, for . He was rejecting her symbolically .
 Marina had no idea of the danger her husband was running in going home . Marina's husband was killed in a car crash at the end of the day .
 She was committed to Alik and June, and to the decision she had made in leaving Russia, she said . She said: "I'm committed to my children, and I'm not afraid to leave Russia"
 She was looking forward with the eagerness of a child to a great adventure that lay ahead . And she was eager to go on a new adventure .
 She was young and forgiving, fully capable of laying aside Alik’s cruelty and the warning signals he had given her, she says . Besides, she was also forgiving, and she was young, forgiving .
 She saw in Alik’s suddenly altered behavior only his fear of being punished in America, she said . Alik's fear of punishment in America is only what she saw in his behavior .
 'As he approached the emotional orbit of his mother, he started to behave like a compass approaching its magnetic pole,' he said .
 The needle of his emotions began to swing, wildly and more wildly still, until eventually he was to forfeit his control . He was in the Irving, Texas, home of Ruth Paine, a woman who befriended Lee and Marina Oswald in 1963 and with whom Marina was staying at the
 Ruth and Ruth were talking about Lee Oswald and about the last evening he spent with Marina at the Paines’ house, the evening before the assassination . Ruth was talking about Oswald's last evening with Marina .
 Ruth broke into our conversation with a warning that an uninvited visitor was walking up the drive . Suddenly, Ruth broke up the conversation and said she was going for a walk-in-drive .
 The visitor entered, a small, plump woman, immaculately groomed, with her hair upswept in a bun and a white blouse neatly tucked inside her skirt . The visitor was a small-plump woman with a small plump plump and a small
 I had read that she was a mixed-up, contentious woman, who believed the world was against her and was very much concerned with money . She was a 'mixed-up and contentious woman' who thought the world had been against her .
 Oswald’s conversation appeared to be just as well put together as her costume . Oswald's conversation with Oswald was just as good as his costume .
 Oswald spent the night of November 22, 1963, at the Paines’ house; one of what she called the “famous” garage where Lee kept his rifle . The Paines' house was also home to Lee, Lee's wife, who died in November 1963 .
 Oswald explained that she wanted the photographs to add to a scrapbook for Lee’s children . Oswald said she wanted to scrapbook her daughter's children .
 She mentioned that she wanted Marina to give Lee’s baby book back to her . Apparently she was compiling a photographic record of her son's life, for she mentioned .
 Oswald did all the talking, oblivious to Ruth and me, and she was obviously preoccupied with two topics -- money and Lee’s innocence . Oswald was oblivious to the fact that Ruth and Ruth and Lee were in the same room together .
 She was suing one national magazine, she said, for a false statement about the amount of money she had received "for one lousy speech" about her son . She said she was suing for the false statement .
 She told us that she frequently went to her son’s grave to tidy up, and that ninety thousand visitors had been to see it already . Proudly, she said that she often visited her son's grave to clean up and tidy up . She also said that 90,000
 Oswald was falling apart in front of my eyes, just as surely as if her blouse had come untucked and her tidy bun come tumbling to her waist . Oswald was about to fall apart, but he was still smiling and smiling .
 "Marguerite Oswald had been in the house seven and a half minutes. I looked at my watch and saw that Marguerite had been there seven and . half minutes" "I looked at her watch, saw that she had been inside the house."
 She was born Marguerite Claverie in 1907 in New Orleans, New Orleans . She was the fifth of six children of a streetcar conductor .
 Marguerite's mother died when she was four years old . She was raised by her father, her older brothers and sisters and, she says, by housekeepers . Her mother died at four .
 She quit school after the ninth grade, falsified her school documents, and got a job . She faked school documents to get a job and get a school job .
 At the age of twenty-two, she married Edward John Pic Jr. Pic Jr., a shipping company clerk . She was married at the time of her first marriage to a shipping clerk .
 The couple separated when Marguerite was three months pregnant . They separated a year or so later, when they were separated .
 She claimed that Pic did not want the child and refused to support her . She claimed she was not supported by Pic Pic .
 The child was a boy, John Edward Pic, and his father contributed to his support until he reached the age of eighteen . He was supported by his father until he was 18 .
 Marguerite told the boy that his father contributed nothing to his support and that his birth had been the cause of her divorce . But she said his birth was the cause for her divorce and that she had no support .
 Pic. Marguerite met Robert Edward Lee Oswald during her separation from Pic.Marguerite . She met him when she was separated from her husband .
 Marguerite objected when Oswald wanted to adopt John; it might mean the end of support payments from John’s father . Oswald wanted John's father to adopt him .
 Lee Harvey was born on October 18, 1939, two months after his father’s sudden death of a heart attack . Lee Harvey's second son, Lee Harvey, was born in October 1939 . The second son was born two months later .
 Marguerite’s sister, Lillian Murret, says that he was mowing the lawn when he felt a pain in his arm . Murret's sister says he felt the pain when he mowed the lawn in New Orleans .
 He told his wife to rub his arm and give him aspirin, which she did, but while she was telephoning the doctor, he keeled over dead . He told her to give aspirin, then she gave him aspirin .
 Oswald gave her what she wanted -- a car, a house, financial security, a car -- a family member says . Oswald's family says he gave her a car and financial security .
 She had support payments from John’s father and, according to a friend, a $10,000 insurance policy from Oswald . A friend says Oswald also had an insurance policy with Oswald .
 She put her older boys in a strict Catholic boarding school, and then in a New Orleans orphanage, despite the fact that neither was an orphan and John had two parents living . So that she could go to work, she put the boys in the Bethlehem Children's Home .
 He had a shifting babyhood, both in terms of where he lived and who took care of him . He had to be taken care of by his mother and father . He was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 He stayed part of the time with Marguerite’s easygoing sister Lillian, who was married to Charles Murret and had five children of her own .
 Murret remembers Lee as beautiful, friendly, and affectionate, and she kept him on and off for two years . Murret: "She was beautiful and friendly" Murret says Lee was a "beautiful, friendly person"
 The arrangement was occasionally interrupted either by one of Marguerite’s squabbles with her sister or by little Lee himself .
 As soon as he was big enough, Lee acquired the habit of running away in his nightclothes and slipping through the Murrets’ iron gates, only to surface a while later, clad in pajamas, sitting cheerfully in some neighbor’s kitchen . Lee acquired
 Marguerite took him back and had a succession of babysitters . Neighbors and the milkman, Bud, and his wife were among the babysitters for the boy .
 After two months she noticed that two-year-old Lee had big red welts on his legs . She hired a live-in couple for $15 a month, but after two months, she noticed the bruises on her legs .
 He had thrown a toy gun at the wife, and they were whipping him to keep him in line . He threw it at her, she said, and she was whipped .
 Marguerite tried to put Lee in the Bethlehem Home with his brothers when he was two, but she was turned down because, as she knew very well, the minimum age was three . Lee's mother says she was too scared to put him in the home at the age of two
 Lee joined his brothers at the orphanage on December 26, 1942, the day after Christmas . Lee was aged three years and two months old when he was finally released . Lee's brothers were orphaned in 1942 .
 Lee seemed happy there, but he still did not have a steady environment because his mother would take him out for two or three weeks at a time . She would either keep him herself or farm him out to the Murrets . The Murrets are now living with the Murretes .
 Lee had been at the orphanage just over a year when Marguerite moved to Dallas, taking Lee, but not his brothers, with her . Lee was taken to Dallas by his mother, who left him orphaned at the age of 12 .
 She was engaged in an on-again, off-again courtship with an older man, a "Yankee" named Edwin A Ekdahl . She was planning, on balance, to marry him, but was engaged to him .
 She hesitated, however, and married Ekdahl only a year later, in May of 1945 . She hesitated to marry him .
 Five-year-old Lee saw a good deal of Ekdahl and became attached to him . Meanwhile, Lee, five, saw a lot of the footage . Lee is now in a relationship with the father-of-one .
 Ekdahl was an electrical engineer earning $1,000 a month . Tall, white-haired, and “very nice,” with a history of heart trouble, he was a senior electrical engineer .
 Lee's older boys were sent to the ChamberlainHunt Military Academy in Port Gibson, Mississippi . Lee went by car with his mother and stepfather to such exotic places as Boston and the Arizona desert . Lee was sent by car to Boston and Arizona .
 They settled in Benbrook, Texas, outside Fort Worth, in a big stone house with plenty of trees around it .
 Ekdahl treated the boys “real swell ... like his own children,” John says . John says he was treated "real swell" and treated like his "own children"
 One Christmas he showered them with candies and Cokes while their mother voiced loud opposition . He showered the boys with Cokes and candies while his mother voiced opposition .
 His spirits rose and fell with the ups and downs of his mother’s marriage . His life was unsteady, too, and his life was unstable, too . His mother's marriage ended in a divorce, but his spirits rose .
 He entered the first grade in Benbrook, Texas . Marguerite left Ekdahl for a few months; settled in Covington, Louisiana, then returned to Fort Worth . He entered first grade .
 Lee touched down in three schools and took two years to finish first grade . Lee's grades were all A's and B's, although he had all A and B grades .
 One summer evening John brought home the good news that they had made up after one of their fights . John returned home with the news that he'd made up with John .
 The couple was divorced in June of 1948 . Marguerite resumed the name of Oswald in 1948 .
 They thought it was Marguerite’s preference for her youngest child, Lee, that precipitated the divorce . The couple split up after a year .
 Lee's wife says Marguerite “dumped all her love on Lee’s father died” after his father died . Lee's father died, his wife says . Marguerie “dropped all love’ on Lee, she says, after her father
 The first thing Marguerite did was drive to Port Gibson, Mississippi, and drag John and Robert out of the Chamberlain-Hunt Military Academy . "Marguerite's first job was to drag John out of school and drag Robert out," she says .
 It was downhill all the way after that -- a succession of grubby houses in Fort Worth . "It was downhill after that," says author .
 Lee shared a double bed with his mother from the age of eight to ten and a half, literally moving into Ekdahl’s place . Lee, who was eight to 10 years old, was so cramped was the family for space that he shared a bed . Lee moved into
 Lee came hurtling through the kitchen door, chasing John and brandishing a long butcher knife . Lee was chasing John when he found him with a butcher knife in the kitchen . Lee's wife was killed by Lee's actions .
 He hurled the knife at his brother; it missed and hit the living room wall . He hurled it at him and it hit the wall, hitting his brother .
 Lee was only eight years old when he was involved in a fight with John, John's father . Lee was not charged with John's murder, but he was allowed to take part in the fight . Lee's actions were sanctioned by Lee, who was only 8 years old at the time
 Marguerite was a saleslady in a department store; Robert, aged 14 and in the ninth grade, worked in a grocery store on Saturdays and on weekdays after school . Robert, who was about to enter the eleventh grade, demanded that John, 16, give up
 John complied and got a job as a stock boy in a department store . Burning with resentment, John complied . John complied with his father's wishes .
 It was at this moment of rebellion that John began to turn against his mother .
 He saw that part of the family's joyless struggle against poverty had its existence only in his mother’s head . He saw it only in the head of his mother's .
 The boys would be having a ‘friendly time” when their mother came in late from work, their mother said . The boys were having a "friendly time" with their mother when she was in the house .
 When it came to clothing, Marguerite dressed her boys so shabbily that they were taunted by the neighborhood children . The boys' clothing was so shabby that the neighborhood kids taunted them .
 A neighbor who was a witness of their life is harsh in his judgment of Marguerite . A neighbor was harsh in their judgment, Marguerie's neighbor says . The neighbor says he was not a witness to their deaths .
 They missed Captain Herbert D Farrell, the head of their military school, whom they looked up to and whose discipline they had readily accepted . They missed him, they said, but he was a good teacher .
 They left home at the ages of six and eight, and apart from one interruption, they had been away for eight years . They had left home when they were six, eight and eight years old .
 Exposed to values vastly different from hers, they had adopted them and acquired a detachment that was to protect them from her and her claims . They were exposed to values that were vastly different to hers, she said .
 Robert saw parents of other children come to visit at his boarding school . Robert saw that they enjoyed their children. When parents came to visit, Robert saw their children enjoying their children .
 The idea even crossed Robert’s mind that his mother might want to put him and John up for adoption; anything to be rid of her burden . Robert's mother even considered putting the two boys together for adoption . The idea crossed Robert's mind .
 No decision had ever been made on the basis of the children’s well-being, but only on the . basis of what was cheapest and best for Marguerite, the mother-of-one said .
 Instead of the more common sight of a mother making sacrifices to feed and clothe her children and give them an education, he and Robert were sacrificed to give their mother the feeling of financial security she would not have had if they had all been millionaires .
 Marguerite's exploitiveness caused her to lose the one thing that might have given her a better life, her children’s love . Her exploitiveness led to her losing her children's love .
 She was not content to pocket their money and treat her older sons as men . Nor was she content with pocketing their money, she treated them as men, she said .
 She once locked Robert out for going to a movie, shrieked at him that he was “on dope” when she found cigarettes in his pocket . She forbade them friends, once locked him out for a movie .
 She destroyed a romance of Robert’s because the girl was Italian and crippled . And when he was at an age to feel it most poignantly, she destroyed the romance . Robert was at the age he felt it most .
 Both left home early to enter the service . John graduated from high school with his mother . Both left school early .
 John at eighteen joined the Coast Guard, and Robert at eighteen the Marine Corps. John joined the Marines at eighteen . Robert joined the U.S. Coast Guard at eighteen and joined the Navy at 18 .
 Both felt that by leaving home they would be relieving their mother of a burden . Both genuinely felt that leaving home would relieve them of the burden .
 The real reason Robert and John left was that Marguerite had given them no choice . But the real reason is that she had no choice, he says .
 If they were to salvage anything of themselves, they simply had to get away . They had to be able to get out of the way .
 His mother’s ire did not fall on him often, but when it did, he was unable to shrug her off as his brothers had . His mother's ire fell on him when he faced her wrath, but he was able to shrug it off .
 He would “sulk or pout,” “get upset,’ brood, or go off by himself to watch television or play with the dog’s dog . Instead, he would ‘sulk’ or ‘get upset’ with
 Robert’s departure for the service in July of 1952 left Lee face-to-face with his mother . Lee's mother was also left face to face with her son .
 He was still in the Coast Guard, he had an eighteen-year-old bride and a baby, and Marguerite moved right in . He had a daughter and a son with him .
 On the first day Marguerite came out of her room crying because Lee had slapped her, John immediately saw that Lee was no longer the docile child he had known . On the second day they were there, Margueritte came out crying .
 John’s wife, Marge, spoke to Lee about his rudeness to Marguerite . Lee's wife said he was rude to John's wife . Lee was angry at John's rudeness, but he was never rude to Lee .
 He gave her a sharp reply and after that he treated her as rudely as he treated his mother . He said: 'I'm not going to apologise to you. I'm not sorry'
 A few days later he was watching television and Marge asked him to turn down the volume . "Marge" was asked to turn off the volume of his television .
 He took out a knife, opened the blade, and moved menacingly toward her . He took a knife out of her mouth, opening the blade and moving menacingly towards her .
 "When John came home that night, he listened to both sides of the story. When John came . He listened . John listened . Both sides of story .
 Lee had been whittling, she said, and Marge, seeing the knife in his hand, thought he was threatening her . Lee's wife said she thought he threatened her with a knife .
 Lee was intelligent, but without knowing it he suffered from the reading disability that must have caused him to feel frustrated from his earliest days in school, as if something impalpable was holding him back and keeping him from doing as well as others less intelligent than he .
 By the time he was 13 and in the Bronx, Lee had largely compensated for the disability, but his years of undiagnosed struggle had left him with a legacy of low self-esteem and disruptive behavior that might have plagued him even had his home life been a happy one .
 Lee had been in school less than four months when he was in school . Lee had played truant two days out of three times a week . Lee was in high school in 1953, when he had been playing truant .
 With his mother working full time and coming home late, he spent some days at the Bronx Zoo, which he loved, and other days riding the subway as far as he could on a single fare . He also rode the subway to the zoo as far he could ride as far on a
 At home he sat glued to the television set watching dramas of mystery and violence . At home, he watched dramas of murder and murder with his family .
 One of his favorites was I Led Three Lives, the story of Herbert Philbrick, an FBI agent who posed as a Communist spy .
 Lee was remanded to Youth House, a detention home on the Lower East Side, where he was sent for psychiatric observation . Truant officers caught up with him, and in the spring of 1953, he was arrested . Lee was sent into a psychiatric observation facility .
 He was found to be “seriously withdrawn, detached, and very hard to reach,” the court found . The troubled relationship with his mother was apparently the core of his problems, the court heard .
 Miss Strickman found that Lee did have some ability to relate to others . She found this surprising in view of his solitary existence and his emotional starvation at home .
 She told him to go to school, but she did not make him do so, and he wished she would . He wished she had made him go . She said she would make him go back to school .
 Lee added that he had to “be my own father” and that he and his mother were “very much” alike, since neither of them talked very much . Lee said he and mother were "very much" alike .
 He admitted to having fantasies of being powerful and killing people but declined to talk about them . He said he had fantasies of killing people .
 Miss Strickman concluded that Lee had “suffered serious personality damage,” which might be partially repaired if he could get help soon .
 Marguerite was exceedingly reluctant to talk to a social worker at all . She was extremely reluctant to speak to the social worker .
 She complained to Miss Strickman that truant officers were making a “criminal out of’ Lee’s life . Lee was charged with truant offenses in March 2013 .
 She saw nothing wrong in his seclusiveness, saying she had never felt the need to make friends . She said she was not gregarious herself and had never made friends .
 She was more interested in Lee’s physical than his psychiatric examination . Lee's physical exam was more important than a psychiatric examination, she said .
 Lee told the psychiatrist that he was “very poor” in school, a remark that impressed Hartogs, since Lee’s performance, despite his truancy, was not poor . Lee told Hartogs that he had been truancy .
 She said she saw nothing wrong with it and that in Texas children stay out of school for months at a time . Instead, she condoned Lee’s truancy .
 She preferred to keep Lee intact, rather than afford him a chance either to grow or change . On this as on other occasions she was to prove that she preferred Lee intact . She preferred him to keep him as he was rather than allow him to grow and change .
 "Marguerite reached for the unhealthy. Again and again, faced by a choice between what was unhealthy and what was healthy for her son emotionally," Marguerite says . Margueritte reached for what she believed to be unhealthy .
 Time was to show that Lee did not have a single antisocial impulse to which she did not, in one way or another, lend her sanction and support . Lee was not an antisocial person, but she was a good person, says the author .
 Lee was scheduled to report at intervals to the Juvenile Court, but Marguerite repeatedly telephoned his probation officer that she and Lee could not be there . Lee's probation officer said she and her son couldn't be there because they were not in court .
 In school the following fall, Lee was disruptive and belligerent, and his probation officer tried unsuccessfully to place him in a children’s home . Lee's probation officer had concluded that he had nothing whatsoever going for him in his home environment . Lee was placed in the children's home
 Judge referred Lee’s case to a social agency called the Big Brothers . Lee's case has been referred to the social agency .
 On January 4, 1954, a representative of the Big Brothers called on the Oswalds. The Big Brothers' visit to Oswald's home was the first time they had been there since 1954 .
 Marguerite informed him that her boy did not need counseling, and besides, they were going to New Orleans . Marguerie informed him she was not going to need counseling .
 Lee is not free to leave the city without permission of the court . Lee is still on probation . The visitor reminded her that she was not free .
 On January 10, 1954, mother and son arrived in New Orleans . Less than a week later, they arrived in the city of New York .
 Marguerite rented an apartment from Myrtle and Julian Evans, whom she had known while she was married to Ekdahl . She had known the Evans while she had been married .
 The Evanses observed that 14-year-old Lee was even more “spoiled,” more ‘arrogant,’ and more difficult to control than he had been as a little boy . Lee was more difficult than he was when he was a little
 Lee left school after the ninth grade . Like his mother, and unlike his brothers, Lee went straight through the school system . Lee's mother left school .
 With his mother’s connivance, he tried to enlist in the Marine Corps at 16 . He tried to join the Marines at 16, but was denied by his mother .
 The attempt failed, and for a year after that, he held jobs as office boys or messenger boys . The attempt to become an office boy or messenger boy was unsuccessful, he says .
 Lee enlisted in the Marines on October 24, 1956, six days after his seventeenth birthday . Lee briefly attended the tenth grade but dropped out to join the Marines in 1956 .
 Lee’s decision to enter the Marine Corps was a dress rehearsal for every other major turning point in his life, and it contained the same elements—rejection of Marguerite and those aspects of her character that he perceived to exist within himself . Lee: "His decision to
 The impact of her rigid and unyielding personality upon his emerging one had been undiluted . The impact had not been undilluted .
 He had no one else else, especially no man, on whom he could pattern himself . He said: "He had no other man, especially himself, to pattern himself"
 By joining the Marine Corps, he would not only get away from her but would find a sheltering substitute that would also make up for his lack of a father . The Marine Corps is a military force in the U.S. Marine Corps .
 Lee defected to Russia after his Marine Corps failed him as a parent . Lee is now married to a married Russian woman . Lee says he is proud of his daughter's success .
 Marina once commented that Lee must have been rejected as a child or he would not have become a Marxist . Marina once said that Lee had to be rejected or he wouldn't have become Marxist .
 In Russia, Lee was looking for an impersonal mother, a society that would give to him “according to his needs,” without subjecting him to the angry vagaries of his real mother . Lee was in Russia, in what he conceived to be a perfect Marxist society
 Russia was supposed to have ended “exploitation,” such as he and Robert and John had known at the hands of Marguerite . Russia was, moreover, a society that was supposed . to have end ‘exploiting,’ such as Marguer
 Lee rejected Russia and came back to his mother country and the real mother who was at the heart of it all . Lee returned to Russia for the first time .
 Each of Lee’s decisions, including his suicidal gestures, was in part a reenactment of his original attempt to reject his mother and that aspect of himself that was like her . Lee: "By then each of Lee's actions, including suicide gestures, were in part
 Each time, a new layer of experience had been added to the story . The attempt was a compound of the old and the new; the emotional fallout was heavier; and the debris was heavier .
 After he was 17, Lee never did anything new. But underneath it was the same decision, and there is a sense of which, after he was seventeen, he never did something new .
 Marguerite’s upbringing; the combination of neglect, resentment, exploitation, exploitation; the surfeit of some things and starvation of others that is known as spoiling; a spoliation of the emotions—all this had done its work . “Marguerite
 John Pic once said that from the moment Lee was born he had the feeling that ‘some great tragedy” was going to strike him . John Pic said he had a feeling he had that "great tragedy" was coming to strike Lee .
 He had conquered her again by winning the battle for her affections . And he had won the battle with her again . He had already conquered her .
 His chances of achieving maturity rested on perceiving that it was one thing to be special to Marguerite, quite another to be . special in the world outside, he says .
 The fact that he had unlimited prerogatives with is mother did not mean he had . He had 'unlimited prerogatory prerogative' with everybody else .
 If Lee was ever to grow up, he had to relinquish the feeling he was special, that he was at the center of the universe, and trade it for another and better incentive system . Lee: "I'm not a kid, but I'm a kid. I want to
 He was to spend the rest of his life proving that he meant it . But far from giving up that feeling, he was to prove it .
 Lee’s conquest of his mother made it hard for him to grow away from her in another way as well . Lee's conquest of mother made him grow up in a different way .
 As long as he was the light of her eyes, he had a stake in her view of things . He had to stay with her as long as she saw him as she did .
 Lee's mother’s view was monstrously misshapen. And here lay a fresh side of Lee's tragedy, for his mother's view . Lee's father, Lee, is a father of a daughter of a woman who died of a heart attack .
 As she grew up, half an orphan, in New Orleans, Marguerite too had acquired the notion that she was special . Somehow, as well as as as she grows up, she grew .
 She felt entitled to what she wanted and to a better life than she had, she said . She said: 'She was entitled to the things she wanted. She wanted to do so'
 "Life could not meet her expectations. And this feeling alone made her life a hardship," she said . She said. "This feeling alone led her life to a hardship"
 Everyday vicissitudes, burdens others manage to accept, were to her a gratuitous imposition, she said . Everyday vicisitudes were not to be accepted by her, but were to be an imposition .
 She felt, and felt strongly, that she had a right to do anything she could to even up the score and bring a little perverse justice into the world .
 "She acquired a bias against society, and she transmitted that bias to Lee," Lee says . Lee says Lee inherited a "bias against society" and "transmitted that bias"
 Marguerite’s feeling that she and Lee were both special, was to emerge later when she testified before the Warren Commission, she said . Marguerita’�s feelings that she was special, and that Lee was, in fact, the physical and spiritual extension of
 Marguerite acknowledged that she had certain “gifts,” a gift for singing and sewing, she said . The queen said she had a "gift" for sewing .
 They were alike in a linguistic overreaching, a use, and misuse, of words that were too big for them . The pair were both in a language overreaching and overreaching .
 The two share an uncanny constellation of emotions that had its outcropping in an extraordinary congruity of behavior . The two also shared an uncanny constabulary of emotions .
 "The world owed them a living,” they said, feeling that ‘the world owed [the world] a living . They carried around with them a prickliness, a miraculous capacity for ingratitude, they said .
 Marguerite’s relatives, the Murrets, saw her only occasionally, between marriages, when she showed up needing help . The Murrets' relatives saw her between marriages when she needed help .
 She was even able to accept what they gave in such a way as to deny that they had given her anything at all . She was able to even deny that she had received anything from them .
 "He was forever accepting favors and failing either to reciprocate or to thank anyone," he said . But he also failed to either reciprocate nor thank anyone, he added .
 He gave the game away by standing on his hind legs and roaring for them . And every now a now or now a . now, he gave the . game away .
 Both felt that they were at the center of the universe, they assumed that others were thinking about them, and even plotting against them . Since both felt that . they assumed . others were planning against them.
 Both loved mystery and intrigue, both suspected others of carrying on secret activities . Both men were known for their love of secrecy .
 Neither Lee nor his mother could open up or allow themselves to be vulnerable to anyone . Lee and his mother would not be open to anyone else .
 They spent a great deal of energy tuning out signals that did not fit . And since they were holding together a view of the world that was not in accord with reality, they tuned out signals .
 By the age of four, Robert knew that his mother was deaf to anything she did not want to hear . Robert knew his mother would not be able to talk to him .
 "Since the truth was weightless and elusive, they felt entitled to play fast and loose with it. Since the truth is weightless, they were entitled to do it," she said .
 Marguerite apparently had enough contact with reality to control her abuse of it . But in this they differed from one another, she apparently controlled herself .
 His sense of reality appears to have been so badly impaired that the line between truth and falsehood was wavy . "He was often truer than truth," he said. "Truth was often wavy, and falsehoods were often true"
 He lied pointlessly, to no purpose and all the time, even when he had nothing to hide, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "He lies pointlessly. He lied . Pointlessly" Sutter said .
 One was vranyo, a wild, Russian, cock-and-bull lying that has a certain imaginative joy to it . Another was lying out of secretiveness; and still another was lying because he had something to hide . One was lying for calculation, one was for secret
 Lying claimed much of Lee’s energy and complicated his life a great deal, he says . Lying was a constant source of tension in his life, but he says it was never his fault .
 "Some desperate, animal-like sixth sense told him that he had at all costs to keep outside reality from breaking in and shattering his precarious inner equilibrium," he says .
 Mother and son assumed that other people were thinking about them, and publicity was essential to them . Since mother and son both assumed that others would be thinking of them, they were essential to their success .
 It did not matter if the publicity was negative, as it had been after Lee’s defection, for it confirmed what they had known all along, that the world was against them . The world is against them, they said, and it confirmed that .
 Mother and son were, indeed, in a state of symbiotic nourishment and support . Mother and . son were indeed in a symbiotic state of support .
 During Lee’s time in Russia, his mother decided that he must be a spy, very likely an American one . Lee's mother believes he must have been a spy in Russia .
 He, too, loved to imagine that he was spy, and on balance an American one . He was a spy, but on balance he was an American .
 Each had the same fantasy, yet not as a result of any communication that had actually passed between them . Each fantasy was based on a fantasy, but not on any real communication .
 It was a case of two minds with but a single thought, and that thought was the congruous product of two very similar personalities . It was the case of 'two minds' with but one thought, the author says .
 Lee would willingly have gone further, would have become a spy and acted out his mother’s fantasy for her . Lee would have acted as a spy for his mother . Lee's mother would have wanted him to act out her dream .
 The same was true of his notorious acts, those that put his mother in the limelight, beginning with his defection to Russia . His mother was also put in the spotlight after he defected to Russia and his mother was in the same way .
 Marguerite never knew what Lee had done, exactly, since he did not tell her, but she always knew within seconds of the first call from a reporter how to make the most of it . Lee never told her exactly what he had done .
 Lee was not only acting out his own fantasies and imaginings, he was also acting out hers as well . Lee was acting out her own fantasies as well as her own .
 In the end he was to act on a really grand scale, a scale Marguerite had not dreamed of . The end of the story was to be revealed to the public, and Marguerita had never dreamed of.
 Marguerite had not known what was coming, but she reacted as if to the manner born . She reacted to the moment she was born, and she reacted to it .
 The Maasdam slid into its pier in Hoboken, New Jersey, June 13, 1962 . Texas, 1962-1963 — 13 Family Reunion . Part three of the Texas family reunion .
 Tense and nervous throughout the voyage, Lee literally jumped when they heard a knock at the door of their cabin . Lee jumped when the door was opened . Lee and Lee were both nervous and anxious throughout the journey .
 When he left and the door had closed behind him, Marina sensed the tension seeping out of her husband’s body . Marina sensed that tension was seeping into her husband's body .
 Marina and Marina Oswalds made their way up to the deck of the ship . Marina was carrying the baby when she gave birth to the baby .
 Lee’s tension returned, and he peered anxiously from side to side, looking for policemen . Lee's tension returned as he looked for policemen in the crowd . Lee: "I’m looking for police. I’ll be looking for them again."
 Spas T Raikin, Russian-born representative of the Travelers’ Aid Society, alerted by the Department of State .
 By the time Mr Raikin got on board, he found that the Oswalds had cleared Immigration . The Oswalds have cleared Immigration.
 Lee Oswald paged by loudspeaker several times, but no one answered . Lee Oswald had been paged several times by the loudspeaker . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast in Dallas, Texas, in November, 1945 .
 Marina did not like the way customs officers tore open the luggage of rich and poor alike . She said they exposed possession, and poverty, to view .
 Marina noticed her husband was no longer nervous, only a bit depressed . Marina noticed he no longer seemed nervous, but only a little depressed .
 In Russia he boasted that reporters would meet them when they arrived in America . In Russia, he had boasted that they would be met by reporters when they landed in the U.S.
 He guided them through customs and out to a Travelers’ Aid limousine, asking questions .
 He added that he had $63 in his pocket and was headed for his brother’s home in Texas .
 They were greeted by a Polish-speaking woman, who gave them coffee and apologized to Marina that the worker who spoke Russian was not in that day . Marina was greeted by the woman who gave her coffee .
 The Special Services office was the scene of a confrontation between Lee and members of the Department of Welfare . Lee and the department of Welfare were involved in a confrontation .
 She promised to contact her husband and have the money sent immediately . She said she would contact him and he would send the money .
 By law, the department was required to ask friends or relatives to meet such expenses if they could . The members of the department stood firm; by law, they were required to do so .
 Unable to understand English, she missed most of the scene, but she surmised that Lee was misleading the department about how much money he had . She surmished that Lee had lied to police about his wealth .
 She knew that he had had nearly $200 when he left Moscow and had spent hardly any of it since . She also knew he had $200 he had left Moscow when he arrived .
 He had warned her on shipboard not to answer any questions about how much money they had, she said . He had also warned her not to ask about their finances .
 He said he wanted them, he said, to pay for everything, although he did not say who "they" were . He wanted them to pay, but didn't say who ‘they’ were .
 The Oswalds were taken to the Times Square Hotel, a large, dingy building located at Eighth Avenue and 43rd Street . The hotel is located in a dingy, rundown building .
 He deposited Marina and the baby in their room and quickly vanished . He quickly vanished, promising to bring them something to eat . Marina and baby Marina were taken to a hotel room by the couple .
 The letters on the faucets, “H” and “C,” were unfamiliar to her, and she decided to wait for her husband after all . But the letters were unfamiliar, she decided not to wait .
 Venetian blinds are black with soot, and they were black with smoke . The blinds were between her and the view, which she had never seen before, and were black .
 He brought hamburgers and French fries, another new experience for Marina . Marina was impressed by the hamburger experience .
 Marina's first words of English were "hot" and "cold" Lee explained about the faucets, and “hot” and ‘cold” became Marina’s first words . Afterward Lee explained to Marina, Marina said, “Hot”
 Marina was enraptured by the sights of New York City . It was ten o’clock at night, the city was just waking up, and Marina had never seen it .
 The stores were brilliantly lit, and Marina had never seen so much to buy . Marina was amazed by the light of the stores . The stores are brilliantly lit .
 She was riveted by the window displays and stopped to “oh” and “ah” in front of every one .
 To purchase these things, she supposed, you had to know somebody, had to have special connections . She said, "You must know somebody" to buy these things .
 He steered her into a Japanese shop and bought her a pair of sandals . Grinning at her enjoyment, he steered her out of the shop .
 Marina was stunned by the sight of a flock of Russian tourists . The tourists were stunned to see the Russian tourists in their native Russia . Marina was shocked to discover the tourists were Russian tourists.
 Marina was certain that she had seen her last Russian for all time, Marina was more incredulous still . At the sight and sound of them, she was sure she'd never seen another Russian .
 They went to a food counter to eat, then back to the hotel, tired and happy . They went back to their hotel room, then went to the restaurant, happy and tired .
 The next morning, June 14, Lee returned to the Franklin Street office of the Department of Welfare . Lee went to a nearby Western Union office to collect the $200 sent by Robert. Lee .
 At the West Side Air Terminal, on Tenth Avenue and 42nd Street, he bought two tickets for Delta Flight 821 .
 Marina was delighted by the smooth flight, even by the uniforms the stewardesses wore . Marina was pleased with the uniforms, even though they were not uniformed .
 She was troubled by the stares of her fellow passengers, who were intrigued by the sight of a swaddled baby . But again, the mother-of-two was troubled .
 She was aware only that the people around her were better dressed than she and that they were staring at her . She didn't notice that people were staring her and she was aware of the stares .
 Robert and Vada, their four-year-old daughter Cathy, and their baby son Robert Lee met them when their plane touched down at Love Field . Robert's wife, Vada and their son, Robert Lee, were greeted by their family at the airport .
 The two brothers had last seen each other not quite three years before .
 Robert had two or three calls from reporters after that, he said, but following Lee’s firm instructions from Minsk, he had told them nothing . Robert had been told by Lee that he would not reveal anything to reporters .
 Robert had the impression that his brother was “disappointed” by the absence of the press . Robert had an impression that Robert was ‘disappointed by’s brother, Robert said .
 Marina's embarrassment deepened on the drive from Love Field to Fort Worth . Vada, with Lee translating, offered to fix Marina's hair .
 She did not realize that Vada, a beautician, was simply offering the best she had to give . Vada did not know that she was just offering her best she could .
 Robert’s small, one-story house looked like paradise on earth, Marina says . Marina: "Robert's small house was paradise on Earth. And to Marina, indeed, it was paradise"
 She had never in all her life supposed that one man, his wife, and children could fill up a whole house by themselves . She never thought one man and his wife would fill up the whole house alone .
 She took an immediate liking to Robert and Vada, and she liked the cleanliness of the house . She took a liking to the couple and liked the house's cleanliness .
 It was frustrating to be unable to speak to them directly without asking Lee to translate . Lee was able to speak with them without having to ask for translation .
 Despite the language barrier, she soon learned why she had attracted so much attention on the plane . She soon learned that she was attracted to attention .
 The baby wore diapers by day and swaddling by night, when Vada did not see her . After that, she wore diapers and slept by night . Vada says the baby was never seen again .
 Robert Oswald, a salesman for the Acme Brick Company of Fort Worth, thought that his brother had changed . Robert Oswald was twenty-eight, five years older than Lee, when Lee's brother died . Lee Oswald's brother, Lee, was five years younger than Lee .
 It was kinky now, contrast to the natural curl it had had before, and it had thinned out badly on top . It was now kinky and it was thinning out badly .
 Robert wondered if Lee had been subjected to shock treatments in Russia that changed his thinking as well as his hair .
 The only other change he noticed was that Lee seemed more “outgoing” than he had been before . Lee seemed to be more outgoing than he'd been before, he said .
 The day after their arrival, Marguerite Oswald materialized, the boys’ mother . The boys were reunited with their mother on Friday, June 15, in New York .
 She was working as a practical nurse in nearby Crowell, Texas . She came to spend the weekend with her husband .
 Marguerite was a small woman, short legged and a little top-heavy looking . She was a little short-legged and a lot of the time she was in the shape of a small girl .
 Her clothes gave the impression of having been carefully selected and put together, the choice of a coherent personality . Her clothes were the impression that she had chosen carefully to be carefully selected .
 Marguerite told Lee that she was planning to write a book about his defection . Lee told her she plans to write about the defection in a book .
 The year before, she had been to Washington and had asked to see President Kennedy as part of the background . She had asked for the background of Kennedy to be seen .
 Both criticized the United States Department of State for the “red tape” that had delayed Lee’s return . Lee and Lee criticized the U.S. for the delay .
 Spontaneously, both made the same complaints, both used identical expressions, and both used the same errors of fact . Both made the very same complaints and made the most mistakes .
 Robert took no part in the airing of complaints by his mother and Lee and did not seem to look at things the same way . Robert did not appear to look the same as Lee .
 Vada Oswald and her sister, Gloria Jean, were busy transforming Marina into a new woman . Marina was born in 1961 in New York City, New York .
 Marina emerged into the backyard wearing shorts for the first time in her life, and with short, wavy hair . Marina emerged wearing shorts .
 Lee asked Robert whether Robert was sorry that his brother had married a Russian . She asked him if he was sorry for his brother's marriage to a Russian woman .
 Robert asked Marina to please call him “Lee, not “Alka,” or Robert would think she did not know his name . He said Marina should call him Lee, not "Alka," or Robert will think she does not know him .
 “Alka” was the name she used when she was thinking of their happier, Russian days . She eventually came to use both names; later, looking back on their life together, she realized that "Alka" was her name .
 Those mean, spiteful moods, when it seemed as if there was no wound he was incapable of inflicting, came upon him at Robert’s . Those mean moods came on him at the end of his life .
 They began when he started looking for a job, Marina says . Marina: "They began, it seemed to seem to be an affair" Marina: 'They started when he got a job. They began later'
 Being in his old environment again simply got Lee down, and as being in an old environment simply got him down . They got worse as time when on, and it got worse .
 She loved looking at things in a humorous way and was not above clowning now and then . She was not afraid to take her own life in a funny way, she said .
 Lee often laughed at Marina, but he did not always laugh with her . Lee often joked with Marina, Marina, he said . Lee was not always laughing with Marina .
 He seemed edgy in the presence of her laughter, wary that it might be directed at him and might belittle him somehow . He was wary that her laughter might be aimed at him .
 He answered that she should have studied English anyway and would have if she really cared . He said that she would have done it anyway .
 Lee was out on the streets of Fort Worth after a long weekend talking and getting reacquainted with Robert and Vada . Lee was back in Fort Worth this week after a weekend away from his home .
 Miss Pauline Virginia Bates looked up from her typewriter to see a young man walk in . The first thing he did was check the Yellow Pages for a public stenographer, and he did it .
 Out of a large manila folder, he took a sheaf of notes and explained that they had been smuggled out of Russia under his clothes . He explained that the notes were smuggled into his clothes from Russia .
 Lee sat next to her, deciphering his own handwriting, translating Russian phrases here and there, answering her questions about Russia . Miss Bates typed, and Lee sat beside her, translating his own writing .
 Each afternoon, when he left, he grabbed up everything and took it with him, even the carbon paper . And each afternoon, he took everything with him - including carbon paper - with him .
 Instead of sitting by her desk, he paced up and down, peered over her shoulder, and kept asking how far she had gotten . He paced around her desk and asked her if she was going to get more .
 The moment she finished the tenth page, a third of the manuscript by her reckoning, he stopped her . He stopped her at the end of the book .
 He took a $10 bill from his pocket, handed it to her, and walked out of the store . He then handed her the money .
 Lee told Miss Bates that he had met a Russian-speaking engineer in Fort Worth, Texas . Lee told her he met the engineer on his second afternoon of work together .
 This man, he said, had read all the notes and offered to help get them published . He said he had read them and offered them to help publish them online .
 Lee had met a Russian-born engineer, but it was not true, except for the fact that he had met the engineer . Lee's story was true, only for the central fact that the engineer had met Lee .
 Lee visited the Texas Employment Commission in Fort Worth on June 18 . Lee also visited the state's employment commission on the same day .
 There, he scouted job opportunities and asked whether there was anyone in town who spoke Russian . He asked if there were any Russians in the city who spoke English .
 Peter Paul Gregory is a consulting petroleum engineer in Fort Worth, Texas . He was killed by a plane crash on June 19 . Gregory: "It's not a good thing to say goodbye to the world"
 Gregory, then approaching the age of sixty, had fled Russia in 1919, and lived for a while in Japan . Gregory had been born in Chita, Siberia, fled Russia and lived in Japan in 1919 . Gregory was born in Siberia in 1919 and fled Russia .
 He went to Berkeley, California, where he received a degree in petroleum engineering . Eventually, he made his way to Texas, and then to Berkeley .
 Gregory received a letter attesting that he was qualified for a job as a Russian-English translator . Gregory's letter was sent to a young man who was looking for a new job in Russia .
 The young man added that he had been given Gregory’s name at the Fort Worth Public Library, where Gregory taught a class, rather than by the employment commission . Falsely and for no apparent reason, the young man said he'd been given his name by the library, rather
 Gregory had never met the young man and, since they were both speaking English, had no idea of his language qualifications . Gregory was shocked to discover that he had never spoken to the man in English .
 He suggested, therefore, that the caller come by the office to be tested . He suggested that he should be tested by the phone .
 Gregory Gregory, a graying man with spectacles and mustache, had a grave and courteous air . Gregory was a popular actor in the 1980s and '90s .
 Without saying a word or asking a question, he simply reached for the bookshelf and pulled down a standard Soviet secondary school history text .
 He selected a passage at random and asked a visitor to read it aloud in Russian . The visitor was asked to read the passage in Russian at random . He selected the passage from a book at random at the request .
 Gregory wrote out a letter saying Lee Harvey Oswald was qualified to be a translator or interpreter in the Russian and English languages . Gregory wrote it to Oswald, addressed “To Whom It May Concern,” and gave it to the man .
 He had lived in Russia nearly three years and brought back a wife and a baby . He had grown up in Fort Worth, Texas, but he had lived there for three years . He returned to Fort Worth after returning to Russia .
 Gregory told Lee that he knew of no job openings but would like to give him an address where he might reach him . Lee said he would like an address to help him find a job . Gregory said he knew there were no jobs openings but wanted to give Lee an address for help .
 Gregory was intensely curious about conditions in his homeland . Like every Russian who lives in exile, Gregory was keen to learn more about his country . Gregory was fascinated by the situation in Russia .
 Over lunch he asked Lee about wages and prices, about the job he had held, and how people in the Soviet Union were getting on . Lee was asked about wages, prices and how he had been getting on in the USSR .
 Gregory delicately shrank from asking more, sensing the question to be a touchy one . Gregory: "I don't know what I really want to say, but I want to know"
 He reflected that it was extraordinary that the young man had managed to get his wife out of the country . He said he had heard of countless cases in which exit visas had been refused .
 When Lee showed up at Miss Bates’s that afternoon, it was Gregory's “To Whom It May Concern” letter that he waved before her and Gregory . He told her falsely, he told her that he had read his manuscript and wanted to get it published .
 Gregory did notice, however, that there were photographs attached to some of them . Gregory: "There are photographs attached, but there are pictures attached to each of them"
 He said he had been given Gregory’s name at the public library and not at the employment commission . But again, lying to her for no apparent reason, he said that he had given Gregory's name at a public library .
 Gregory Gregory met a young American who had just arrived in Fort Worth with a Soviet wife . Gregory's youngest son, Paul, was especially interested . Gregory says he met the young American and his wife .
 He told his father that he would like to meet the Oswalds, especially Marina, and perhaps arrange to take language lessons from her . The Oswalds' son said he would want to meet Marina, Marina, especially to learn English .
 Her Russian would be fresh and up to date, whereas that of his father, who had been forty years in exile, might no longer encompass the idiom of young people in Russia . Her father had been in exile .
 Gregorys, father and son, paid a call at the house of Robert Oswald . Less than a week after their first meeting, the Gregorys paid a visit to Robert Oswald's house .
 Lee was proud as he introduced his wife to the Russian he had found for her . Lee's wife was proud of her husband's new love of Russian .
 She did not quite take to the elder Gregory, a Russian of the pre-Revolutionary generation, who seemed uncertain how to converse with a Soviet girl .
 The Gregorys visited for an hour with Marina, Marina, and the Gregorys . Marina had reservations about the visit, but she passed them over .
 Paul, after a short visit to San Francisco, would take Russian lessons from Marina . By the time they left, it was arranged that Paul would take lessons from her .
 Lee, meanwhile, had already telephoned the other Russian whose name he'd been given at the employment commission . Lee had already called the Russian he had been given to him .
 Her name was ‘Gali’ Clark, the wife of Max Clark, a Fort Worth attorney . She was named after her husband, Max, an attorney .
 Clark told Clark that he had just arrived with a Soviet wife and was looking for a woman for her to talk Russian to . Clark said he was looking to find a woman to help his wife talk Russian .
 She had read about him in the Fort Worth paper, and her impression had not been favorable . She had been impressed with him, she said .
 She put him off by saying that her husband was not at home; she would consult him, and they would call back . She said that she will consult him and consult him again . She put the call back and said they would be back .
 Clark telephoned Lee and invited him to drive over that afternoon with his wife and child . Clark invited Lee to drive with his family . Lee's wife and daughter were also invited .
 Lee, offended that he had not been welcomed on the first call, was churlish to Mrs. Lee . But Lee was not offended by the first phone call, but was chrylish to the first .
 Robert told Marina about the call at the dinner table with Robert and Vada, he said . Marina told Robert about the phone call that night .
 He told her to smile, be nice, and not let on to Robert that they were having a fight . They were speaking in Russian, of course, when suddenly, in a shift of mood, he told her .
 He was pale with anger, and there was a cold, pitiless look in his eyes which Marina had not seen before . Marina was not surprised by the look in her husband's eyes . Marina had never seen him before .
 He cuffed her several times, hard, across the face. Quietly, very quietly, so that Robert would not hear, he cuffs her . Robert was not listening to her screams .
 For two hours she walked alone around the neighborhood, trying to make sense of her situation . For the first time she had been separated from her family, she decided to walk alone .
 There was no one who could understand her plight even if she did try to explain her plight . She said: "No one who can understand her. She was not able to understand her."
 Marina walked alone that night, she glanced into the windows of people’s houses, saw them watching TV . Marina saw them leading normal lives, she said .
 It was wrong to live off other people and not know how to help them, how they cooked and cleaned house. "It's wrong to ... not be able to help other people," she said . She said. "I don't know how they cook and clean house"
 Robert had witnessed the angry scene at the dinner table without saying a word to defend her . She believed that Vada did not like her, and Robert had seen the angry scenes at the table without a word .
 Marina went back, back to Alka and the baby . With a heavy, automatic feeling, she went back to the baby's room .
 The next day, things were smoothed over with Alka, somehow, and that day, she met Peter Gregory . The day she met Gregory, she says, was the day after she met him .
 L ee's arrival in Fort Worth did not go unnoticed, but it was her first encounter with someone who could rescue her . She could, if she chose, explain her plight in her native tongue .
 He agreed to an interview at 1:00m. on Tuesday, June 26, at the FBI office in downtown Fort Worth .
 Lee arrived ten minutes early, but Special Agent John W Fain and his assistant, B Tom Carter, sat him down and started pelting him with questions . Lee arrived 10 minutes early but was met by Special Agent Fain, B Carter and B Tom .
 Oswald had gone to Russia. The question to which they returned again and again was why he had gone there was why Oswald went to Russia . Oswald had been in Russia at the time of his assassination .
 The agents’ real purpose was to try to find out whether Oswald had been recruited by Soviet Intelligence, possibly as the price for bringing out Marina . The agents' real purpose that day was to look into whether Oswald was recruited by the Soviets .
 Lee denied it, stressing how hard it had been to get Marina out, how long it had taken, and how much paperwork it had required . Lee: "It's been hard for me to get out of the house, but I'm not going to get it"
 He sketched Marina’s life for them but refused to give names and addresses of any of her relatives, lest it get them in trouble .
 Lee repeated familiar untruths, including that he never sought Soviet citizenship . Lee says he never offered radar information to the Russians . Lee: "I never offered information to Russians"
 He stated that because his wife held a Soviet passport, he would be getting in touch with the Soviet Embassy in Washington within a few days to give them her address . He said that because of his wife's Soviet passport he would give them the address .
 He said he held “no brief for the Russians or the Russian system” and promised to get in touch with the FBI if Soviet Intelligence made any effort to contact him .
 Oswald had been “evasive” and recommended that he be interviewed again, he said . Oswald was interviewed again and recommended he be re-interviewed again .
 He then told Robert the most staggering untruth he had perpetrated in quite a while. He then went on to tell Robert the truth, he said . Robert said: 'It was the most shocking thing I had ever heard of a lie I had heard'
 The FBI, he says, wanted to know whether he was an agent of the U.S. government . The FBI also wants to know if he is an agent, he said .
 She thought he was putting all his energies into job hunting and asked every night how it was going . He asked her how he was going and she said he was looking for a job .
 After a few days she stopped, for she could see that he was getting nowhere . She stopped, but he was still trying to get nowhere .
 She had heard all her life that unemployment was a problem of crisis dimensions in the United States . Lee did nothing to disabuse her of the idea, she says .
 Marina did not hound him; she accepted his explanations and gave him her sympathy and support . She accepted him's explanations and supported him .
 He had spent three years in the Soviet Union, a fact he probably did not confide to would-be employers, which left him with an abbreviated job history .
 The skills he had --radar training, the ability to speak Russian -- were not in demand in Fort Worth, Texas . The skills are not in need of a job, he says .
 He did not want blue-collar work of the kind he had had in Minsk . Yet he lacked the education for the whitecollar work he would accept, to say nothing of the intellectual work he really wanted .
 She gave up her job in Crowell and took an apartment in Fort Worth to live with her Russian daughter-in-law . The Prodigal Son and his Russian daughter in-law live together under one roof .
 He told his mother that he would soon be working, and he and Marina would then want to live on their own . He told her he would then be working and they would want to move to a new home .
 But Marguerite got her way, not so much by arguing the point as by acting as if it were already settled . Margueite got the way by acting like it was already settled, she said .
 Marina, Lee, and the baby moved to the Rotary Apartments at 1501 West Seventh Street in Fort Worth . Marguerite had found a two-room apartment for the couple .
 Marina slept in the living room, while Lee, Marina, and the baby had the bedroom to themselves . Lee and Marina shared the bedroom with Marina and Lee .
 Marina found her mother-in-law a superb housekeeper, meticulously neat, and one who used up every scrap of food . Marina found the housekeeper was meticulously neat .
 Had the way to Lee’s heart lain through his stomach, relations between mother and son would have been peaceful indeed . Lee's heart would have lain in his stomach .
 Marguerite had a car, and the first few mornings she drove Lee around, tracking down leads he got from newspaper ads and the state employment commission . She drove him around, using newspaper ads, state employment commissions .
 He stated falsely on his application that he had had sheet metal experience in the Marine Corps. He also said he had been sheet metal work in the Marines .
 The manager of the Louv-R-Pak Division of the company for which Lee worked later recalled that he was “one of the best employees” he ever had . Lee was one of the "best employees" he had ever had, he said .
 He came to work on time and might have become “a pretty good sheet metal man” if he’d stayed in it . But he came on time . He came on the job on time. He came off the job at the end of the day .
 Lee loathed the job, which, like his work in Russia, was heavy manual labor . Lee loathe the job and loathed it .
 He earned $1.25 an hour, worked up to nine hours a day, and took home $45 to $55 a week . But he also earned up to $45 a week, earning $55 per week .
 He told Marina again and again that he must pay off his debts to Robert and the Department of State as quickly as he could . Marina told Marina that she must pay back her debts to the State Department and Robert .
 Living rent-free with his mother helped, a major reason he did it, and he started paying back Robert right away . Living rent free with his mom helped, he said .
 Although they could hardly speak to one another, the two got along well at first . Although they couldn't speak to each other, they were able to get along .
 Marina was overjoyed to have a home and someone she could look to as a mother . Marina is now looking forward to having a home with a new mother .
 She noted with appreciation that Marguerite was good to the baby, although not as lavishly fond of her as her Russian relatives had been .
 Marina was pleased by the sudden lift in her husband's spirits . Above all, Marina said she was pleased with the lift in his spirits .
 Marina almost forgot his behavior on the boat and his hitting her at Robert’s. Marina almost forget his behavior . Robert's hit her in the face and hit her at the end of the night .
 She was unfamiliar with the ways of an American household and was not on easy terms with domesticity anyhow . But she was unfamiliar in the ways .
 The lion’s share of chores fell on Marguerite, who did all the cooking and the cleaning and claims to have helped the baby .
 She got out of the apartment only rarely, to see a movie or a friend, and seems to have felt stirrings of resentment . She seemed to be resentful of her husband's behavior .
 When Marguerite discovered that her daughter-in-law recognized Gregory Peck on television and could sing a few words of “Santa Lucia,” she began to suspect that Marina and Lee, and even Lee, might be a spy .
 Lee made no effort to include his mother in his conversations with Marina, Marina . Lee's mother was not included in the conversation .
 He huddled over books with her and sat with her at the dining room table by the hour, playing a sort of Russian tic-tac-toe . He played with her as well as the other children, he said .
 In the late afternoon or early evening, husband and wife went out walking, leaving Marguerite at home as babysitter . In the early hours of the day, the couple went out for a walk . The couple were able to enjoy a walk in the evening .
 Marina began to fear that Marguerite might blame her for alienating Lee’s affections . Marina feared she might be the woman to blame for her behaviour .
 After a fortnight or so, Marguerite started scolding her daughter-in-law when they were at home alone .
 She thought Marguerite resented having to cook for her, or that somehow she had displeased her mother-in-law . She thought she was upset by her mother's decision to cook .
 Marina was afraid her mother-in-law was going to hit her . But one day there was a scene with much weeping and screaming and slamming of doors, she says . Marina's mother was afraid she would hit her, she writes .
 Mother and son had it out the same night, once again with screaming and slamming of doors . The mother and son were in the middle of the argument .
 Lee told Marina to forget it; they would be leaving soon, anyhow . Afterward Lee told her to forget, Marina told her they would soon be leaving .
 She did not know that Marguerite had also fought with her other two sons over their wives . She had fought with them over the wives .
 She knew only that Marguerite had three sons, and not one of them wanted to live with her . "Marguerite has three sons," she said . "Not one of those sons wanted to stay with her," she added .
 To Marina Marguerite’s jealousy was natural; it was Lee whose feelings seemed unnatural . Lee's feelings were unnatural, but Marina's jealousy seemed natural, she said . Lee‘s jealousy seemed unnatural,’ she said.
 She regretted the way she had treated her own mother, and she did not want Lee to behave as she had done . Furthermore, she still regretted the . way she treated her . own mother .
 Toward Marguerite she continued to show deference and a readiness for affection, she said . Toward her daughter she continued showing deference .
 She felt sorry for her and urged Lee to show more warmth toward his mother . Lee's mother says she feels sorry for Lee's actions .
 On Saturday, August 10, less than a month after they had moved in with Marguerite, Marina and Lee moved out of the home .
 Robert was astonished to hear loud sounds of discord when he drove up that morning to help them move . He was astonished as he was to hear the family ways, Robert was shocked to hear them arguing .
 Marguerite was screaming, her hair mussed and her eyes red from crying . She was screaming and her hair was mussed, her eyes were red .
 They confronted their mother’s outcries with silence, creating a vacuum into which she poured even louder protestations . Their silence created a vacuum for her daughters to fill .
 When the young people clambered into the car and drove off, Marguerite ran a short way after them . The young people drove off in a short distance from the scene .
 The apartment Lee found was a furnished “duplex,” one-half of a shabby, single-story clapboard bungalow . Lee had found a furnished "duplex," a furnished 'duplex'
 Lee’s house was located across the street from a Montgomery Ward retail store . It was located among other oneand two-family frame houses at 2703 Mercedes Street, Fort Worth . Lee's job was down the road from a dusty road from his job .
 There was a bedroom, a living room with a dining area, a kitchen, and a bath, plus a yard and some grass outside . A bedroom, living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom and yard were all open .
 The furniture was cheap, but the place was clean, and that meant a lot to Marina . Marina said she was impressed by the cleanliness of the furniture .
 Marina was happier still to be alone with her husband . As content as she had been to live with her mother-in-law, Marina was happy to be with him alone .
 Marina might leave their supper simmering on the stove, take the baby in her arms, and walk down the road to meet him on his way home . Lee went to work in the morning, and in the afternoon, Marina might take their baby in the baby's arms . Marina might
 When he caught up with them, he would take June in one arm, and put the other arm around Marina, and they would slowly saunter home . The couple would slowly walk home from the park .
 Other afternoons she might sit on the front steps and wait for him there . Sometimes she sits on the steps of her home and waits for him .
 Marina had, indeed, found a fount of riches, a cornucopia of daydreams, across the street . Marina had indeed found a fountain of riches . Marina's dream was across the road, across a street .
 With June in her arms, she spent hours wandering through Montgomery Ward, a fairyland of treasures that could not be bought in all of Russia no matter how much money you had .
 Lee would visit the toy and dress departments while his wife would go to the gun department . When they went to the store together, she would go through the toy department . Lee would also visit the dress department and the toy store .
 Marina's father gave her $2 a week spending money, but except for cigarettes she never spent it . For the first week or so, he gave Marina $2,000, but she didn't spend it .
 Marina believed that the best political system was the one that does most for the people . Marina said that she wanted to see a better political system . Marina believes the best system is the best of all political systems .
 As she saw it, you went into a store in Russia, and there was nothing to buy, she said . You went into an American store in America, and a lot of things were there, she added . As she said, "There was a lot to buy"
 It followed that the U.S. cared more about its people and was a better country, it said . The United States cared more than its people, it was said. It followed .
 At night she would occasionally dream that she was at home again, telling her Russian friends what a paradise America is . At night, she would sometimes dream about being back in Russia again .
 He bought her foods she liked especially— sour cream, sauerkraut, pickles, kidneys, herring . He also bought her a kidney, kidneys and pickles .
 He stuffed it in the shopping basket and took out something he had chosen for himself . And for all it cost him, he stuffed it .
 When they got home, he sat at the dining table and looked on with a rapturous air while Marina ate the caviar . He sat with her at the table and watched as she ate it .
 He refused to touch it, not even when she tried to feed him with a spoon . He did not want to deprive her. But he refused to .
 Marina was about to serve dinner at the end of a hot night . Marina was serving her family's dinner at her home .
 Lee quickly stuffed his newspaper under the sofa cushion . Lee got up, glanced at the door, then quickly stuffed it under the couch cushion . The door was still open .
 A man entered, showed his documents to Lee, and, apologizing to Marina for delaying supper, asked him to come out to a waiting car . A man showed Lee his documents and apologized for delaying his meal . Marina: "I'm sorry for not having dinner, but I'm not
 He did not tell Marina that he had seen the FBI once before, at the downtown office in Fort Worth, Texas .
 Agent John W Fain reported on this second interview with Oswald in detail . Oswald was interviewed by Oswald in the early 1950s . Oswald's interview was the first time he had been interviewed by the FBI .
 Oswald chose to interview Oswald in the car, not the house, because he did not want to upset Marina . Oswald told Oswald that he had not gone to see him at work because he didn't want to embarrass him with his employer . Oswald chose not to see Oswald at work as he
 Oswald pounced on this remark, stored it up, and later on used it again and again . Oswald's use of the remark was so successful that he was able to use it in the future . Oswald used the remark in a series of other instances .
 Fain was impressed by the change in Oswald, who showed no reluctance to see him and even invited him into the house . Fain said he was impressed with Oswald's willingness to come back to his former home .
 Fain thought he talked “more freely” and not so evasively as during their previous interview . Fain said he talked more freely than in previous interview with Fain .
 Oswald played down any importance he might have to the Russians . He said he was not employed in a sensitive industry and that his company had no government contracts . Oswald said the company he worked for had no state contracts .
 Contrary to what he told Marina afterward, he did, in fact, promise for the second time to inform the FBI if there was any undercover Soviet effort to contact him . He did, however, promise to tell the FBI .
 It is clear, however, that his return to the United States had had a contingent character in his mind from the outset . He was contemplating a way out of the U.S.
 He had always had help in caring for his family, including help from the Soviet government and Marina’s relatives, help from Robert and his mother . Up to now he had always been helped by the government, Marina and Robert .
 "He profoundly wanted to be, but perhaps the responsibility made him anxious," he says . "He was profoundly wanted, but maybe the responsibility led him to be anxious," the author says .
 The probable truth, that the Soviet government would never allow him, a malcontent and an ex-defector, inside its borders again, does not seem to have entered his head . He is not sure that he will be allowed back in the Soviet Union again .
 Marina’s pleas to him—“Do anything, Alka, but don’t ever make me go back”—suggests that perhaps she guessed what was in his mind . Marina: “Don't ever make him go back.” Marina�
 Her unconscious awareness and anxiety must have made the adjustment to her new life much harder . And her unconscious awareness made it even harder for her to adjust to a new life .
 Oswald was ruffling the surface of his married life and rendering his existence more turbulent . Oswald was in involuntary ways, says the author .
 The conflicts that had sent him to Russia in the first place had been resolved neither by defection nor by his decision to come home . The conflicts had not been resolved by his defection or by his return to Russia .
 The chief source of those conflicts, his mother, soon reappeared, wholly unchastened, on the steps of his house on Mercedes Street .
 No one quite knew how she got there, since both Lee and Robert had been at pains to conceal the address . Robert and Lee were not sure how they got there .
 She looked out, and there, to her astonishment, stood “Mamochka” looking just as blithe and unconcerned as if the hysterical scene of parting had never occurred .
 Marguerite brought a high chair for the baby and silverware, dishes, and utensils for Marina and Lee . Marina brought the high chair, high chair and dishes for the couple .
 Lee was upset when he came home that night that night and heard that his mother had been there . Lee's mother was also upset that she was there .
 The next day Marguerite came again, with a live green and yellow parakeet inside a cage . The bird was found in a cage inside the cage .
 Lee had given the cage and the very same parakeet to his mother nearly seven years before, in November 1955, when he was 16 years old . Lee had money earned from his first real job as office boy at Tujague’s shipping company in New Orleans .
 She was sorry for her, sorry she had to live alone, and she still thought Alka was to blame . She still thinks Alka is to blame for her .
 Marguerite had a camera with her, and she was snapping a picture of the baby when Lee walked in . Lee walked into the room and took a photo of the newborn baby . Lee's wife was also snapping a photo when Lee came in .
 Marina thinks he told Marguerite not to come again, but she stood her ground and said she had a right to see her grandchild . Marina says he told her not to visit again, and she stood by her decision .
 One day, about a month later, Marina came home to find the parakeet gone . Marina's daughter Marina says she lost her beloved bird in the woods .
 Despite her son’s hostility, Marguerite came to the apartment fairly often . Despite son's hostility, she came to her mother's apartment several times a week .
 Marina was found nursing the baby with her head down when she was visiting her family . Marina's mother says she found her daughter in the bedroom nursing her baby .
 Marguerite saw that she had a black eye when she looked up at her daughter's face . She said, "I don't know what happened to me"
 From the moment of Marguerite’s first visit to Mercedes Street, the beatings had become routine . The beatings were once or twice a week, but now they are routine, the police say .
 Marina forgave him at the smallest sign that he valued her and the baby, Marina says . She forgives him after he left her pregnant wife and baby .
 Worn out by heavy physical work in hot weather, Lee did not want sex more than once a week or so . Marina was dispirited at the turn things were taking, either . Lee did want sex much, either, and Marina did not .
 Her stepfather, after all, had beaten her, and he had done it exactly as Lee did, with the flat of his hand, across her face . Lee's stepfather had done the same as Lee had done, and it was the same way .
 Marina decided that it was God’s judgment on her for having been cruel to her mother . Marina decided to blame her mother for the loss of her daughter .
 They devalued Marina in her own eyes, and she feared that they would devalue her in the eyes of anyone who knew of them . Marina feared that she would be devalued by the people who knew her . She feared that the couple's actions devalued her .
 She told herself, and later told others as well, that she had a fair skin that bruised easily and exaggerated the effect of every blow . She said she had to exaggerate the effects of her fair skin .
 If they suggested that she had brought the beatings on herself by talking too sharply to Lee when he was under strain, she agreed . She agreed if they suggested she brought on herself .
 She took the very Russian view that beatings are a private affair between man and wife, as private as sex . She said: "Beatings are an affair between husband and wife. As private sex as sex as private sex"
 She hoped that Robert might intervene, just as members of Russian families often did . Still, she said, she hoped that he might intervene . Robert's family has a history of fighting in Russia .
 Marina, who had a black eye, lingered unobtrusively in the kitchen . He had dropped by to see them one day, and Marina had black eye . Marina's husband had dropped in to see her and she lingered .
 Robert had suffered from Lee's anger in the past, and whether he was loath to invoke his brother’s wrath again or was simply the nonintervening sort, he stayed out of Lee's marital affairs . Lee's brother Robert was not involved in his brother's affairs
 Robert kept to himself about his brother’s harshness to Marina . Any thoughts he may have had about the harshness he had to endure to Marina kept quiet .
 All her life she had been charming people, attracting them to her, and making them want to look out for her . She had always been charming, attracting people to her and attracting them .
 Eager to improve his Russian, he started showing up twice a week in the late afternoons or evenings for lessons .
 His visits quickly became a pleasure and a resource to both the Oswalds. The Oswalds are now living in a retirement home in New York City .
 At twenty-one, Paul Gregory was a year and a half younger than Lee and a full-time college student . Lee was Lee's college roommate at the time of his death . Gregory was also a full time college student and a year older than Lee .
 Lee used to come home late, laden with books from the public library . Other evenings, too, he would come home with a large amount of books .
 He said he wanted to go to college, to Texas Christian or Arlington State, and get a degree in history, philosophy, or economics . He also wanted to get a history or philosophy degree .
 Lee and Paul had attended the same high school, Arlington Heights in Fort Worth, Texas . Both Lee, Paul attended Arlington Heights high school .
 Lee implied that he had graduated, when, in fact, he had been there only a few weeks in the tenth grade . Lee said he had only been there in tenth grade when he was in the ninth grade .
 Lee: The barrier to a college education for him was the need to support his family . Lee suggested that the barrier to college education was the family's support . Lee: "I'm not going to go to college, but I'm going to college. I want to help my family
 Lee appears to have lacked motivation to study at night to obtain first a high school and then a college degree . Lee also had to work at night in Russia, where he was also a student . Lee was a student at a Russian high school before attending a Russian university .
 When Lee was out, Paul’s "lessons" consisted largely of Russian conversations with Marina . Marina told him all about how she met Lee and their courtship in Minsk .
 Paul got the impression that she had been a rebel and a nonconformist, and that this was one of the main reasons for her early interest in Lee . Paul said she was one reason for her interest in the actress .
 Marina corrected Paul's grammar in an essay he was writing on a play called Man with a Gun, by Nikolai Pogodin . Marina also corrected Paul’s grammar in the essay .
 She and Paul huddled together over the dining room table while Lee sat reading Lenin on the sofa . Lee and Paul sat together over a dining table at the end of the night . Paul and Lee sat together in the living room reading Lenin .
 Lee thought the world’s troubles were caused not by ‘the people,” but by leaders, Paul says . Lee: "The world's troubles are caused by leaders. Not the people."
 When it came to specific leaders, however, he did not seem to harbor grudges . He did not appear to harbor a grudge against President Obama .
 He was enthusiastic about Castro, and, remarkably, continued to respect Paul in spite of their differences over Cuba . Paul: "I respect Paul, and I respect him very much, even though we disagree over Cuba"
 Oswalds kept, more or less permanently, a copy of Life magazine with a cover photo of the president . On their living room table, the Oswalds also kept a Life magazine cover photo .
 Paul got a glimpse of how Lee often treated Marina, who he described as a 'lovely woman' The pair were all leaving the house together at the end of the night .
 Marina Marina's husband was furious at Marina for allowing his baby to fall . He rushed over and picked up the baby, furious at her for letting him fall . Marina's baby fell to her father's side, who rushed over to pick her up .
 Paul and his wife applied a Band-Aid to Junie's head . It was “a real hot moment,” Paul recalls . The couple consulted a Russian book on baby care, and applied a bandaid .
 Leonard’s department store is noted for its low prices . Leonard's customers would go to Leonard's department store to buy groceries . The store is known for its many low-cost prices .
 Marina was nursing the baby, and they had fashioned a crib by putting two chairs together between their bed and the wall . They did without milk because Marina had to nurse the baby without milk . Marina and her partner built the crib using chairs between the bed and wall .
 Lee wanted to save money more than he wanted to buy a crib . True, the baby once fell into the crack between the chairs, but Lee didn't want to buy it .
 During the month of August, Lee spent two-thirds on living expenses and nearly one-third in partial payment of his debts . Lee spent about $200 in August, for example, when he netted $200, he said .
 From her excursions to Montgomery Ward, she knew that all kinds of things such a nice dresses, cribs, and playpens existed existed .
 Paul Gregory, shortly before leaving for college, handed her a check for $35, she was overwhelmed . She was overwhelmed when she received the money from her father .
 She suspected that the Gregorys, father and son, simply wanted to help her and, rather than offend by giving her money, had devised the pretext of the lessons . She suspected they were just helping her and that they had devised a pretext .
 Peter Gregory, Paul’s father, had been in the Oswalds’ apartment, and the sight of it evoked his sympathy . Peter Gregory was in the apartment at the time of the shooting .
 He did not want Marina to learn English, he said, lest he lose his own fluency in Russian . He said he didn't want her to speak English, as he did with his wife .
 Oswald’s answer signified that he cared nothing for his wife, only for himself, Gregory says . Oswald's answer to Gregory's question: ‘I care nothing for my wife. I care nothing about my wife,’ he says .
 News of the Oswalds’ arrival spread like a prairie fire among the twenty-five or thirty Russian emigre families in Dallas and Fort Worth .
 A decade earlier, fifty or sixty refugees from various parts of Eastern Europe had come to Texas . The refugees had come from Eastern Europe .
 World War II refugees preferred anything, any fate, over a return to the countries or territories dominated by Communism . Displaced or uprooted during WWII, every one of them had preferred anything .
 After years of hardship and uncertainty, they had made their way to the United States . Eventually, after years of uncertainty, the U.S. had made its way to America .
 A few of the women had married American soldiers in West Germany; the rest came by other routes . The women were married by American soldiers .
 The point was that they had arrived, they were on American soil, and the Russians would never lay hands on them again . But the point of the point is that the Russians had never laid their hands on the Americans again .
 They had geology or engineering in their backgrounds and were able to find jobs in what was then the major industry of the Dallas-Fort Worth area—oil . They had jobs in oil .
 The others, many of them men and women of some education who would have had fine professional careers back home, had to settle for such jobs as they could find . Many of them would have enjoyed fine careers back in the UK .
 Before they could even do this, they had to overcome a major obstacle to overcome . But before that, they were faced with a huge obstacle: The government of Nepal .
 Most of them arrived in the U.S. unable to speak a word of English . Most of the immigrants arrived unable to understand English . They are now living in the United States with a new generation .
 It was at this point that George Bouhe stepped into the lives of many of the emigres . Bouhe was at the centre of the struggle to find a way to help the emigrants .
 The Russian immigrant had been living in the U.S. since 1924, and in Dallas since 1939 . He was born in St. Petersburg as a member of the educated middle class of czarist Russia .
 A lively, inquiring man of fifty-eight, he had become the trusted personal accountant of one of the most powerful men in Dallas . Lewis W MacNaughton was chairman of the board of the huge and immensely wealthy geological and engineering firm of DeGolyer and MacN
 Bouhe knew very well that it was impossible to get by in America without speaking English . Bouhe said he wanted to be able to speak English .
 He personally led emigres to Crozier Technical High School, where they learned the rudiments of the language . He had personally taken several of them "by the hand"
 He had become the patriarch of the Russian emigre community . He had helped them in other ways, too, and helped them through the years .
 In spite of the hardships that lay behind them, the emigres had made a remarkable adjustment to Texas life . They had to adjust to the world of suburbs, supermarkets, and air-conditioned ranch houses .
 They were tearfully grateful to the United States, the country that gave them life when they had lost it . The U.S. is the nation that helped them to survive, they said .
 In a political sense, the section of the country to which they had gravitated was not incongruous at all . But in one sense, it was in a different way, the political sense .
 For this was deep anticommunist country, and the emigres, with an exception or two, were virulent anti-Communists . For this, they were also virulent against the Communist Party . The country was deeply anti-communist .
 For them it had not been a case of arriving in the Southwest, then adapting to its extreme political conservatism . For them, it was not a case for them to adapt to the Southwest's extreme conservatism . It was not the first time they had arrived in the U.S.
 They were conservatives when they came and would have remained so anywhere on earth . They were conservative when they arrived and would've remained so in the world .
 The political climate of Texas may actually have helped them adjust to American life . Texas is a state of origin in the U.S. state of Texas .
 They could not see another person suffer without doing what they could to help . Because they had suffered so much themselves themselves, they had to help others . They were determined to help someone who was suffering .
 Marina Oswalds was a member of the younger Soviet generation, with whom none of them had had any contact . Marina Oswald was one of the emigres who had no contact with the Oswalds .
 Gregorys introduce Oswalds to two members of the emigre community . The Gregorys decided to introduce them to two emigres .
 Marina and Lee were invited to a dinner party on Saturday, August 25, at the Gregorys’ home in Fort Worth . The Gregorys' home is in the midst of a major renovation .
 Anna Meller, a large and dramatically handsome blonde from Belgorod, southern Russia, had been living in the U.S. since 1952 . Meller is a forty-five-year-old blonde who has lived in the United States since 1952.
 She had driven over from her home in Dallas with the Gregorys’ other guest, George Bouhe . The Gregorys' other guest had driven from her Dallas home to attend the funeral .
 Bouhe was a bachelor, or a grass widower, with time and sympathy to spare . Bouhe died at the age of 92 on Sunday, October 8, at his home in New York City .
 He was eager to attend the dinner party and hear about conditions in his homeland . He all but burned up the telephone wires between Dallas and Fort Worth before accepting the invitation .
 Oswald's wife had had a brief and abrasive contact with Oswald shortly after he arrived in Texas . Oswald had been in contact with a Fort Worth lawyer whose wife had met Oswald before he died . Oswald was killed in September 1963 .
 Clark was like a highly placed in-law to all the Russians by virtue of the respect in which he was held in Fort Worth . His marriage to a member of the princely Shcherbatov family (the family that Leo Tolstoy rechristened “Shcherbats
 He and his wife Gali stood at the very apex of the emigre community, maybe a touch above it . They were often called upon as arbiters of its frequent clashes of politics and personalities .
 If so, Bouhe, who was anti-Soviet as possible, wanted nothing to do with him . Bouhe was a super-patriot for Texas besides, and a Texas hero .
 He did not work for the FBI, nor had talked with anyone in the FBI about Oswald, he says .
 Oswald was under FBI surveillance and would not be back in U.S. if he were thought to present any danger . Oswald would not have been back in this country if he had been thought to be a danger .
 Lee, immaculate in jacket, tie and white shirt with French cuffs, and Marina, his pretty, frail-looking wife, holding their baby daughter in her arms . Marina, Marina, is holding their daughter in their arms . Lee, Lee, Marina and Marina's daughter
 Everyone was aware that Lee was a poor man, and they were impressed at his meticulously dressed . Lee was known for his meticulously-dressed clothes .
 They were impressed, too, by his quiet manner and his grave, courtely air . They also were impressed by the quiet manner of his colleagues .
 They were prepared to respect him as a man who had taken the Soviet Union seriously enough enough to go and see it, yet was sensible enough to come back . The Soviet Union was a major source of interest in the country .
 The father-of-one was impressed by his affection for his baby, whom he held all evening on his lap . And they were impressed by the baby's affection .
 She appeared childlike, innocent waif, but her use of Russian was very cultivated . Russians tend to judge other Russians by how they speak the mother tongue .
 She was well mannered, and above all, she spoke that pure Leningrad Russian, innocent of jargon or slang, that to them bespoke intelligence and education .
 She was like a fragile fossil, a relic of their old and much-loved homeland, that had suddenly been dug out of the Russian earth, she said . She said: "She was like she was like an old fossil"
 Meeting these people was like seeing the characters in the plays of Chekhov and the novels of Turgenev and Tolstoy come to life . To meet these people, meeting these people is like seeing characters in these plays and novels of Tolstoys .
 In manner and speech Bouhe reminded Marina of her beloved aunt, Maria Yakovlevna, and she liked him right away . Bouhe was the son of Marina's late aunt, and he was a good friend .
 She liked him even better when he told her, in a way that probed and divined her thoughts, that he did not work for any intelligence service and therefore she could speak to him frankly .
 This he spread out on the floor and, inviting Marina to join him there, peppered her with questions about whether this or that old school, church, or outdoor market was still standing . This is not the first time Marina has been to visit a church or a school .
 Marina felt that she was being examined, and not only for her intelligence . Marina felt she had been being examined for not only her intelligence, but also for her own .
 She was from a district in which members of the working class and the new Soviet intelligentsia lived . Bouhe was asking about the heart of Old St. St. Peter's Cathedral .
 St. Petersburg is where the aristocracy used to live, and where descendants of the Old Intelligentsia, of people like Bouhe himself, were still living . Bouhe was a member of the aristocracy in the city of St. Peterburg, Russia .
 Marina thought he was an aristocrat, and because she was not she felt anxious and self-conscious . Because she felt not aristocratic, she thought she was anxious . Marina thought she felt self-confident .
 She wondered what these people would think of her when they found out where she really came from . She wondered how they would react to finding out about her story .
 He felt stirrings of protectiveness toward her, the beginnings of what was to become a father-daughter relationship . He said he felt protectiveness, the beginning of what he felt toward her .
 They guessed that his decision signified failure, if only the failure of having to admit that he had been wrong, then leaned over backward not to embarrass him . The decision was made by President Obama, who had to admit he was wrong .
 The venturesome Bouhe teetered up to it, indeed, by praising people with courage and good sense to change their minds .
 No one was certain whether or not Oswald had renounced his Communist proclivities . Politics was touchy for them all, for no one in the world was certain if or not .
 The emigres asked many questions about living conditions, prices, wages and smaller freedoms . Life had changed in little ways and how life had changed little ways, they said . Emigrants asked about the smaller freedoms and how they had changed .
 Some of those present considered him a trifle quick to protest the virtues of the USSR . They sensed in him a trace of the nashi luchshe mentality, a special Soviet attitude that ‘ours is better’
 Of the two, Marina was far more critical of Russia, she was critical of the country, she said . But there was no doubt in the mind of anybody there that, of the two .
 He was, in any case, much better than the emigres expected of a man who had once been fool enough to defect to Soviet Russia .
 Marina sensed in him that grudging edge of ungraciousness that told her he was doing it for her . It was not an evening he would go through for himself alone alone, she said .
 A failure of sympathy between Lee and the emigres appears to have had its origins that night . In fact, Lee's failure to sympathise with emigreans had started that night. Lee's relationship with them was a failure to show sympathy .
 In Russia Lee had grown accustomed to being asked about conditions in America, and he expected to be asked similar questions here . Lee said he expected the same questions when he returned to the United States .
 In his heart of hearts he was scornful of people who appeared to be interested mostly in money and material things . But in his heart, he said, "I'm not interested in material things. But I'm interested in people who are interested in the material things"
 Russian leader wanted to talk about political differences between Russia and U.S. He wanted to focus on Castro, Khrushchev, and de-Stalinization .
 He was no better educated than his listeners, but he had spent his life outside Russia . He was eager to hear anything he had to say, and they were eager to listen to him .
 The emigres were better educated, more widely traveled, and more experienced than he was . He was better educated and more traveled than he had been .
 Apart from information about wages and prices, he did not have much to tell them—that they wanted to hear, anyway . Apart from . information about . wages, prices, there was little to say to the people .
 They sized him up as a half-educated American boy, and they would have considered his Marxist views gauche . If he still held them, he would have been considered gauche, if he still had Marxist views .
 Evenings such as this were a time for polite feeling out, not open confrontation . Evenings are a time to feel out, rather than confront each other, says Simon Tisdall .
 Former U.S. Marine defector to Russia found in anti-Communist corner of the U.K. He was encumbered by a Soviet wife and an undesirable discharge from the United States Marines .
 Surely he would meet hostility everywhere, have trouble finding work, and suffer one rejection after another until he became hopeless and embittered . Surely he . would meet . hostility everywhere and have trouble . finding work . He would suffer rejection after each rejection until he . became hopeless . and em
 Lee’s homecoming was warmer and more welcoming than anyone might have supposed . Because of his meeting with the Russians, especially George Bouhe, Lee's homecoming is warmer . Lee's meeting with Bouhe was warm and welcoming .
 They would place at his service a flourishing grapevine and see to it that he found a job he liked . The grapevine would help him find a job that he liked, he said .
 They helped Lee as much, and as long, as he would allow, as long as he'd allow . Lee's friends and family helped him as much as he could stand . Lee died at the age of 92, a year after he was diagnosed with cancer .
 Lee Oswald had been a guest, the Russian people his hosts, and he was given the full measure of that country’s magnificent hospitality . Lee Oswald was a guest in Russia, and the Russians were his hosts . Oswald was given a measure of Russia's magnificent hospitality.
 The same thing was now to happen again—and in his own corner of his native Texas . Incredibly, the same thing happened again—in his own Texas .
 Oswald was treated, in his own country, as if he were the guest and this handful of emigres, some of them hardly any better off than he, the hosts . For no other reason, the breadth and generosity of the Russian soul, Oswald was once again to be treated
 Far from encountering hostility and rejection because of his past, he was accepted more readily than if he'd never been to Russia, he had never been there .
 The Oswalds were killed in the September 9, 1963, assassination . The Oswald family was killed by a bomb blast at the White House in Washington, D.C.
 Their marriage had been undergoing a sea change from the moment they stepped aboard the Maasdam . The couple had been married for more than 20 years .
 The encounter with the emigres helped crystallize that change, and the relationship between Lee and Marina was never to be the same again . A fter the dinner party, George Bouhe and Anna Meller drove to Fort Worth nearly every weekend to see the Oswalds .
 Marina, Marina and the baby looked ill-fed and ill-clothed, and that the baby was sleeping in a bureau drawer . They noticed immediately that the refrigerator was bare, that the fridge was bare and that Marina was ill-fattened .
 They appealed to all their friends for hand-me-downs and gave them to the Oswalds . The Oswalds are now in the hands of the Oswald family .
 The Oswalds noticed that Marina's front teeth were rotting, and they drove all the Oswalds to see Mrs. Marina . They noticed, too, that Marina’s front teeth had been rotting .
 Elena Hall, a Russian emigre, lived in Fort Worth and worked as a dental technician . Hall was a dental assistant at the time of her death . Hall says she is proud of her family's efforts to help the community .
 Hall told Oswalds where they could obtain low-cost dental care . Hall also solicited her friends and her employer’s wife for money and clothes for the Oswalds .
 One day, during her lunch hour, she took Marina shopping and bought her a couple of dresses . One day she took her to a boutique where she bought her dresses .
 Marina needed training as an American housewife, and they took her to a supermarket to show her the way around . Meller, meanwhile, decided to take her to the supermarket .
 Using $5 given them by George Bouhe, the three Oswalds took a bus to Dallas . On Sunday 9, September 9, using $5 . The Oswalds used the money to get to Dallas, Texas, using a bus .
 Bouhe met them and drove them to the apartment of Anna Meller and her husband, Teofil, where they had lunch and spent the afternoon . Bouhe drove the group to an apartment where they spent an afternoon with Meller's husband .
 Declan and Katya Ford, an American geologist and his Russian wife, and their baby, Gregory . They were joined by Declan Ford, a geologist, and his wife, a Russian wife .
 Oswalds had brought photographs of themselves and their friends in Minsk . The Oswalds were talking about how people lived there, and there was talk about how they lived there .
 Lee liked Katya Ford, a dark-complexioned, down-to-earth woman in her early thirties . Lee liked Ford, who was dark-skinned and down to-earth . Lee's new book is "Kara's Way"
 He insisted at the end of the afternoon on carrying her baby’s paraphernalia to the car . At first, she was impressed by him, too, especially when with utmost politeness he insisted .
 "He never seemed to blink, but from time to time it was as if clouds moved across his eyes and the expression in them changed," says the author of the book .
 He asked Lee whether the bus fare he had given him had been sufficient . Lee asked Lee if the fare he'd given him was enough . Lee said, "Yes, yes"
 Meller continued to visit the Oswalds’ Mercedes Street apartment, and on one occasion Lee’s ingratitude became even more apparent . Meller: “Lee was ingruthless. He was not happy with his treatment of the Oswald family.”
 Bouhe brought him a pair of old shirts, and Lee looked at them appraisingly, measuring and remeasuring them . Bouhe also brought him an old shirt, which he looked at closely .
 Bouhe suggested that he wear them a few times to work, then throw them away . Bouhe said that he should wear them for a few more times before they go to work .
 Meller peered into the refrigerator, noted that it was full, and asked where the groceries came from . Meller were at the apartment, peering into the fridge .
 He looked displeased so much of the time, and maintained such an air of disapproving quiet, that Bouhe and Mrs. Bouhe kept quiet . The couple were married for more than a decade .
 Meller learned to come at three in the afternoon on Saturdays, their free day, and stay only an hour or so in hopes of missing Lee . Lee returned home from work about five. Meller returned home about five after work .
 Lee could not conceive that anyone might be generous and kindhearted without any ulterior aim . Lee was shocked to discover that anyone could be kind and generous without ulterior motives .
 The beatings began when Marina opened the door to Lee’s mother, Marina said . Marina's friendship with the Russians now continued because of her friendship with them, she said .
 She felt again that she was “between two fires,” too torn to steer a tactful middle course . Just as she had been as a child with her mother and stepfather, she felt again . She was too torn .
 She would not give up her new friends any more than she would give up Lee . But she would never give up the new friends .
 She felt lucky to have found in George Bouhe an older man who was good to her, whom she trusted, and with whom she could be utterly frank . She said she was lucky to find a good man, who she trusted and trusted .
 The Russians woke up to the reality of Lee’s treatment of Marina, Marina . Lee's treatment of the Russian actress has been a problem for years . Lee is accused of sexually assaulting Marina in the past .
 They sensed Lee’s contempt for them, his feeling that they were people of petty, material interests, whereas he cared for higher things . Lee felt contempt for the people he met, and they sensed his contempt . Lee's contempt was evident in the eyes of his friends and family
 They saw, too, that he had by no means given up his romance with the Soviet Union and ideas .
 They spotted volumes by Lenin and Marx on the Oswalds’ coffee table and current Soviet magazines that they knew he could ill afford . The Oswalds' coffee table was filled with volumes by Marx and Lenin and Lenin .
 There was something in Lee’s attitude that led them to believe that he hated anyone in a position of authority simply because he wanted to be there himself . Lee's attitude, moreover, was that he was trying to be in authority himself, they say .
 Bouhe gave her a first-rate dictionary compiled by Russian emigres in the U.S. during World War II as a guide for American officers . Bouhe also gave her the dictionary compiled in the United States .
 He wrote out a few sentences in Russian . Under each sentence she was to write a translation and mail the result to him in Dallas . He wrote a few words in Russian; under each sentence, she wrote a translation .
 Each week Marina mailed Bouhe a lesson, and he mailed it back, corrected and with a new lesson . Bouhe mailed the lesson back to him, and it was returned with a lesson .
 This went on for five or six weeks until Marina gave up, largely because she felt that Lee did not approve of her actions . Marina decided to give up on the project because she was unhappy with Lee .
 Bouhe, who had been an accountant all his life, had a way of making some people feel accountable for his acts of kindness . It was said that Bouhe had a place in the world where he made people feel responsible for his kindness .
 He was free with his advice, exhorting Lee to get an education and lift himself up by his bootstraps . Lee's advice: Lift yourself up by getting an education . Lee: "Get an education, lift yourself up. Get an education"
 They thought that he ought to take better care of his wife and child, that he . ought to feed them and clothe them better . They thought he should feed them better. They thought .
 Lee wanted to spend as little on his family as he could and save the rest to pay off his debts . Lee, on the other hand, wanted to save the money to pay for his family .
 What the Russians took to be necessities, he considered luxuries . He resented having to thank them for presents that he did not want and that he thought his family did not need .
 The Russians brought a crib and mattress for June, he accepted it . Thus, when the Russians brought an infant, it was accepted .
 In reality Lee was accepting the Russians’ help, and in his own backhanded, ungracious manner, he even encouraged it . Lee accepted the help of the Russians, even though he was accepting it in a backhanded manner .
 On September 22, at Lee’s request, Robert Oswald cosigned an application by Lee for a charge account at Montgomery Ward . Robert Oswald signed the application at Lee's request on September 22 . Lee's application was signed by Robert Oswald at his request .
 He told Marina that he had bought it to keep her from being lonely, and that weekend they had an orgy of television watching . Marina said he bought it because he wanted her to be lonely .
 Marina was always especially kind to Marina just before any visit from them so she would not tell them he beat her . She was especially kind just before the visit so she wouldn't tell them that she beat her.
 He could have refused to see the Russians, or he could have consented to see them but refused to take any more help . He could also have declined to meet the Russians or refused to meet them .
 Some people didn't notice the position of the other arm when they saw it first . Others didn't see it until they saw the arm in the arm .
 Lee Oswald's elbow was bent, the hand slightly outstretched, and with it Lee Oswald was taking all the help that came his way . Oswald was taken to the White House in Washington, D.C. on September 4, 1945 . Oswald had been shot by the President of the
 The first to arrive that day was Marguerite Oswald, who, while still unwelcome at her son’s house, nevertheless dropped in from time to time . Oswald was the first woman to show up at his son's house .
 Next were Gary and Alexandra Taylor, a young couple who arrived from Dallas, bringing their baby son . The couple also brought their son, a baby boy .
 Alexandra Taylor was the daughter of George de Mohrenschildt, an emigre in Dallas . She had met the Oswalds about three weeks before the shooting .
 Alexandra Oswald met her husband, but it was her husband's first encounter with the Oswalds . Alexandra and Marina Oswalds met in New York City, New York, New Jersey . Alexandra Oswalds' daughter, Alexandra, also met Marina .
 The Taylors put their eight-month-old son in the playpen with Junie, who was five days younger than he was . Junie's parents put their son in a playpen five days before he was born .
 Their mothers kept an eye on the children for the rest of the afternoon . The girls' mothers kept their eyes on the girls as they walked away .
 Gary Taylor later observed that Lee’s mother was “a plump woman, out of place in the crowd that was there that afternoon,” Taylor said . Lee's mother left about 4:30. Taylor later said she was ‘out of place’ in
 Lyolya Hall and her estranged husband John were also meeting the Oswalds for the first time . George Bouhe and Anna Meller were among the "crowd" that had gathered .
 As usual, there was no food or drink; the Oswalds’ was simply a meeting place . The Oswalds' meeting place was just a place to meet .
 John Hall, George Bouhe and Gary Taylor worked out a plan to help Lee move and look for a job in Dallas . Since Fort Worth is bigger than Fort Worth, they thought Lee would have a better chance of finding work .
 Marina, who had a dental appointment the next day in Dallas, would leave that night with the Taylors, stay there two or three days, then return to Fort Worth and stay with Lyolya Hall until Lee had a job in Dallas . It was decided that Marina would stay
 Marina and the baby drove with the Taylors to Dallas that evening . Lee did not object, and that evening they drove to Dallas .
 The next evening Robert Oswald joined his brother at Mercedes Street and helped him pace his bigger belongings . Robert Oswald helped pace his brother's bigger belongings before he was killed .
 The Oswalds’ possessions were loaded into a pickup truck belonging to the Patterson Porcelain Laboratory . John and Lyolya Hall then arrived and loaded the Oswalds' possessions into a truck .
 His work was not “seasonal,” as he told the Russians, and the Leslie Welding Company had no thought of firing him . His work wasn't "seasonal" as he said, and he was not fired, company says .
 Lee turned up for work as usual, spent all day on the job, and simply walked off that afternoon without telling anyone he was quitting . Lee walked off the job that Monday, October 8 .
 It is probable that the Russians would have helped the Oswalds whether Lee had been fired or had simply quit . Lee was fired or simply quit. It is not known if Lee had resigned or was fired .
 Lee was not taking any chances; he did not quit until after he was sure of the Russians’ willingness to help him out . Lee quit after being sure of Russia’s willingness to assist him .
 Earlier, he had put himself in a posture to get help, “playing poor” and using Marina and the baby as bait, perhaps without even realizing it himself, perhaps .
 The timing was determined, apparently, by the fact that he had just paid off one of his debts, the $170 due to Robert for the airfare the previous June . But this time it was a matter of cool calculation .
 In spite of his grumblings about the Russians and his warnings to Marina about becoming dependent, it was Lee who had made himself dependent . Lee's grumbling about Russians and warnings he was becoming dependent .
 His move to Dallas was predicated on their offers of help in finding a job and on the certainty that they would care for his wife and child until he got on his feet . He said he moved to Dallas to find a job .
 Marina and June spent three nights with the Tayors in Dallas, Texas . Lee came to see them several times, and Lee visited them several .
 Marina and June took the bus to Fort Worth and settled in with Lyolya Hall . After her last dental appointment, Marina took June to a new home in Fort Worth .
 Marina and June stayed with George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt for nearly a month . They stayed in Dallas, Texas, except for a final dental appointment in Dallas .
 The Taylors' grocery and other expenses were paid by the family . Throughout this time their groceries were paid for by Mrs. Taylor .
 Lee never asked who was paying, did not offer to contribute, and did not tender any thanks . Lee never offered to offer to pay for the trip .
 Oswald was a Fort Worth boy who had lived in Russia, married a Russian girl, and had a child . Cunningham asked Cunningham to find work for Oswald, whom he described as an ex-Russian boy . Cunningham said Oswald lived in Fort Worth, Texas, and married a girl . Cunningham
 Cunningham was probably aware that Oswald had been a defector to Russia . Cunningham was likely aware of Oswald's defection to the country .
 She was a kind woman, she liked and respected Mr Meller, and she wanted to do him a favor . She wanted to help him do a favor, but she was a good woman, he says .
 Cunningham, Lee was referred to a graphic arts firm called Jaggers-Chiles-Stovall . Cunningham was referring to the graphic arts company Jaggers and Chiles Stovall. Cunningham was referred .
 He made a good impression on John Graef, head of the photographic department, who thought he was “serious,” ‘determined,’ and ‘likable” with a “slight edge” over one or two competitors for the job
 Lee was staying at the YMCA, and Bouhe stopped by to inquire about how he was getting along . Lee is staying at a YmCA, but Bouhe says he's not feeling well .
 He may also have given him a little money to tide him over until he found work .
 Once Lee has a job, Bouhe encouraged him to go to Crozier Tech night school to add to his qualifications . Bouhe asked him to stay in touch with him and encourage him to attend night school .
 The first few evenings after he started work, Bouhe called Bouhe from a pay telephone . Bouhe's first few nights after starting work, he used to call Bouhe on a pay phone . The first evening of work was Bouhe calling Bouhe for the first time .
 When he moved out of the “Y,” he told Bouhe he was staying at the Carlton Boarding House, in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas . Bouhe: "When I moved out I was staying there, I was living in a boarding house"
 He had by this time gained everything he wanted from him—a new job in a new town and temporary surcease from the responsibility of caring for Marina and the baby .
 They did not know of his lies, nor did they know that without their permission he was using their names as references, going so far as to list Bouhe at a false address . Bouhe was not allowed to use their names in reference to him .
 Bouhe made a decision “not to go all out” for Lee, Bouhe says . Lee was generous and generous, but Bouhe said he didn’t want to “go all out,” he says .
 Anna Meller phrased it in a way that reflected her European experience . Meller says it was a way of expressing her experience in Europe .
 He so outraged their notions of what decent conduct ought to be that he stunned them into giving him what he wanted . He stunned them with his actions, and they gave him what they wanted .
 After a while they regrouped, pulled together the bits and pieces of his behavior and made sense of it, and managed to resurrect their defenses . But after a while, they pulled together, and then made sense, of course .
 Lee Oswald always had help when he needed it without giving anything in return . Lee Oswald was a man who never gave anything in exchange for his own life . Oswald was the only person who helped him when he was in need .
 Oswald was ill-used after returning from Russia . He had a sense of having been ill used in his time in Russia . It is scarcely any wonder that a thread that runs through the recollections of nearly all the men and women .
 Dallas L ee started to visit Alexandra and Gary Taylor during the few days that Marina and the baby were staying with them in Dallas . Ultimately, not one of them could think of him without pain, outrage, and a feeling of personal betrayal .
 The Taylors thought the atmosphere between Lee and Marina was one of estrangement, and that they did not like, let alone love, one another . They never made any attempt to be alone together .
 He spent most of his time with the baby, playing and gurgling to her in Russian .
 "He popped in and out" of the Taylors' often for the next few weeks . But he seemed to have been lonely after Marina and June went back to Fort Worth, for "he popped in"
 He could be a very friendly person if he wished, and he could be very quiet if he wanted . He said: "He could be the very quietest person in the world, but he could also be friendly"
 She did not understand why her father’s Russian friends tried to help him . Her father's Russian friends were trying to help her father .
 He did not deserve it, they did not owe it to him, and yet she got the feeling that he thought they did . She got a feeling that they did, even though he did .
 He was an ardent Democrat, with a distaste for the John Birch Society, which was then very active in Dallas . He was a staunch Democrat .
 Gary was probably the first person Lee actually met who felt strongly about the John Birch Society . Gary was the first to tell Lee that he was a member of the society . Lee met Gary at the time, and Gary was one of the first people to tell him of his support for the
 Lee opened up with Gary and Alix . He was forever telling the Taylors that they were “stupid,” but because they were his age, more or less, he thought they were "stupid"
 With them he did not feel the same chip-on-the-shoulder need as he did with Bouhe and Mrs. Mrs. Bouhe . With them, he said: "With them he didn't feel the . same chip on the shoulder need"
 Meller gave the Taylors the impression that he had been very unhappy in Russia and did not want to go back . Meller to defend the USSR, he said .
 He believed in the perfect government, free of want and need and need, and free of taxation . Free of discrimination and discrimination, he also believed in total and complete freedom in everything .
 "He believed in no government whatsoever, just a perfect place where people lived happily all together and no religion, nothing of any sort, no ties and no ties," he said .
 I think he wanted to be a very important person without putting anything into it at all . He said: "I think he was very important. He wanted to ... be an important person"
 "He expected to be the highest paid immediately, the best liked, the highest skilled," he said . "He wanted to be ... the best paid immediately and the best skilled"
 He resented any people in high places, any people of any authority in government, he said . He said: "He resented anyone who was in authority in any form of government"
 Her husband told her she can't expect to get high pay and receive a good position with no education and no ambition, she says . She says her husband said you can't be something for nothing .
 "I don't think he knew what he wanted, and I don’t think he was too interested in working toward anything," says Bob Greene . "He was not interested in looking toward anything. He was very interested in the future," says Greene .
 Lee asked Alix if he had written anything about Russia, and he brought her his manuscript one evening . Alix asked Lee to write about Russia and he wrote a book about it .
 Hitler’s Mein Kampf and William L Shirer's Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . Mein Kampsf is published in Germany and Germany .
 Alix de Mohrenschildt re-read Orwell's 1984 and Animal Farm . Orwell's father loaned the anti-Communist classics to him by Alix's father .
 "Once, after an evening at their house, they dropped him off on the curb outside," she says . "They dropped him down on a curb outside. Once, after that, they kept him there," she said .
 Lee was actually at the Y only one work week, from Monday, October 15, until Friday morning, October 19 . Lee was there at least one week during that time .
 No one knows where he was living from October 8 to 13 or from October 21 to November 2 . He is believed to have been living in either of those dates .
 The Taylors helped him look for a room to rent and once spent an hour hunting for Lee at a North Beckley Street address given them by Alix’s stepmother . Alix's stepmother gave them an address given by her stepdaughter .
 Lee endorsed two checks that month, October 16 and 22, his final paychecks from Leslie Welding . Lee ended up endorsing two checks from the Welding.
 Both times he wrote not his own, but the Taylors’, address on the back with his signature . Both times, the address was not his . address .
 Even Marina had no idea where he was staying, and their Russian friends joked that her husband was sleeping on a park bench . Marina's husband was staying in a hotel in Moscow .
 He probably had a room in Oak Cliff, very likely on North Beckley Street . It was probably on the same street as a hotel .
 Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall was an advertising photography photography firm . It made billboards, posters, and advertisements for newspapers and magazines .
 For the first few days, Lee, an apprentice cameraman, followed his supervisor, John Graef, around to find out how things are done . Lee, who is now an apprentice, follows his supervisor around to learn more about his work .
 Lee learned the intrinsic quality of various types of paper and film, and then learned various photographic and developing techniques, including distortion photography . Lee learned how to develop film and paper .
 Marina, meanwhile, was outrageously happy in Fort Worth with Lyolya Hall . The couple has been together since 2010 .
 With no Lee, no one “beating on her nerves,” she says, she slept until two every day . She says she spent her afternoons in delicious solitude . She slept until 2 a.m. every day and spent the rest of her life in solitude
 Hall returned late from work, and the two had down-to-earth conversations in Russian . Hall and Hall were able to speak to each other in Russian for the first time .
 Marina replied that her married life was so strange, Lee was so cold to her, and they had sexual relations so seldom that she doubted she was in danger .
 Lee was not strong “as a man,” Marina explained, and came to a sexual climax very quickly . Marina said Lee came to sexual climax quickly, and Lee did not feel strong as a man .
 She wanted to baptize the baby, although she knew Lee was opposed to it . She wanted the baby to be baptized, but knew Lee would be opposed .
 Father Royster baptized June Lee Oswald, with Elena Hall as godmother . Elena Hall was godmother to Oswald . The two women drove to Dallas, Texas, to be the parents of the slain .
 Marina had saved up some money and bought him socks, a shirt, and a sweater . Marina also bought him a sweater and a pair of socks .
 Alexandra Taylor heard a knock at her front door, and there on the steps she found Mrs. Taylor . Alexandra Taylor was found on October 17, 2013, at her home .
 They explained that they had just had the baby baptized on the sly, and since they did not dare go to the Y, they asked Alix to give Alix his presents and invent a story to conceal the fact that they'd been in Dallas . They said that since they didn't
 She made up a story about the presents, but Lee put two and two together . Lee made up the story, but she found out about the gifts .
 Lyolya Hall was injured in an automobile crash the night after her baptism . Lyolye Hall was in the hospital for more than a week after the baptism .
 Gali Clark came by nearly every day and drove Marina to the grocery store . Clark paid for groceries but also bought Marina a carton of cigarettes .
 Marina, a chain-smoker, starved for cigarettes by her disapproving husband, was grateful . Marina was grateful for her freedom from her husband's disapproval of smoking .
 Gali was a “society person, from the “old aristocracy,” Marina commented later . Marina commented on Gali’s appearance in the film .
 Marina could not tell what she was thinking at times . Manners meant a lot to Gali, and she was always polite and polite .
 Marina preferred a proteletarian directness in other people, she preferred to be direct .
 Alex Kleinlerer, a friend of Lyolya Hall’s, also came every day during his lunch hour to check up on Marina . Marina Hall was hospitalized with a broken leg in March .
 At 1:30 in the afternoon he would wake her up by banging on the front door and ringing the bell . He would ring the bell and bang on the door to wake her from her bed .
 Inside he found chaos—dirty dishes in the sink and baby clothing everywhere . The baby was born in December 2013 .
 He and Marina took turns cooking; he would cook a Polish supper one night, she a Russian supper the next . He would cook Polish and Russian meals .
 Lee came by bus to Fort Worth for all or part of every weekend to see Marina and the baby . Lee and Marina's baby daughter was born in December . Lee's wife and baby were born in September 2013 .
 They missed each other, and their weekend interludes were comparatively idyllic . The couple's relationship was strained, but they got back together again .
 Hall's hospitality was paradoxical in view of his own Spartan style of living . Hall’s hospitality was . paradoxical, he said .
 Marina remembers that he was “always running to the icebox,” a thing he never did at home when he was paying for the groceries himself, to fix a Coke or sandwich .
 He was fascinated by the kitchen gadgets, like the electric can opener, the sort of thing that Mrs. Mrs. Gaffes said he was fascinated .
 At night he made love to Marina while watching another “gadget,” the bedroom television set . The distraction helped slightly his problem of premature ejaculation .
 Lee took an acute dislike to Alex Kleinlerer, a short, dark man of about forty who sported a black mustache, spoke with an accent, and dressed with European flair . Lee took a dislike of Kleinleer, who spoke with a European accent and wore a dark mustache
 The facts of Kleinlerer’s relationship to Marina were innocent, but it was no secret that he dropped by Mrs. Marina . The facts were innocent . Marina dropped by her husband, but he dropped her out of the house .
 Kleinlerer’s feelings for Marina were intensely, and obviously, protective . Marina was the center of the couple's relationship .
 Hall returned from the hospital, and on Sunday Alix and Gary Taylor picked Lee up outside the Dallas Y and drove over for the evening in Fort Worth . Hall returned to Dallas, Texas, on Sunday night .
 President Kennedy learned of the buildup of Soviet missiles on the island and demanded their withdrawal . President Kennedy had learned of Soviet missile buildup and demanded withdrawal .
 The previous Monday the president had declared a naval blockade of Cuba, and for nearly a week the world had been teetering on the brink of thermonuclear disaster .
 Lee observed that in Dallas people were hoarding food in anticipation of war . Lee: "In Dallas people are hoarded food in preparation for war" Lee: In Dallas people have been stockpiling food for months .
 Marina was certain that her country would never go to war over a tiny nation like Cuba, and Lee agreed . Lee agreed that the U.S. and Cuba would not fight over Cuba .
 Hall was sure the Soviet government would not start a war . Hall, to Kleinlerer, and the Taylors, and he was sure it would not be a war, he said .
 Marina felt torn between her own country and the kind Americans with their nice-looking president, Kennedy . Marina was greatly relieved, for throughout that ten-day period, she had felt torn .
 If Lee and Marina agreed about Russia, they seemed to disagree about everything else . The couple appeared to agree about Russia but also disagreed about other things .
 Kleinlerer was also critical of the way Lee had dumped his wife and child on Mrs. Lee . Mrs. Kleinleer said Lee dumped his child and wife on her .
 Lee “did not express any thanks or evidence of the slightest appreciation,” Kleinlerer said . Lee did not express “the slightest appreciation” for his work, the official says . Lee expressed “no thanks” to the man, he says .
 It was Marina, announcing that Lee had found them an apartment and she was moving to Dallas that weekend . Marina had been living in Dallas, Texas, for two years .
 Oswalds' possessions were in the garage and Mrs. Oswalds’ possessions were at the garage . He “directed” Kleinlerer to come to the Halls’ the next day to discuss the move, since the Oswald’s possessions were . The Halls�
 On Saturday, Kleinlerer arrived at the scene of a shooting in New York City . He says he witnessed a memorable scene in the area .
 He called to her in a very angry and commanding tone of voice just like an officer commanding a soldier, he said . He called her in the very angry, commanding voice . She said: 'He was very angry'
 When she reached the doorway he rudely reprimanded her in a flat imperious voice about being careless in her dress and slapped her hard in the face twice . He rudely told her she was careless in a dress and slapping her twice .
 "I had long been afraid of Oswald and I did not say anything. I was very much embarrassed and also angry," she says . She says she was embarrassed and angry, but had long feared Oswald .
 His presence during the removal of the Oswalds’ goods the following day was therefore a necessity . The Oswalds' goods were removed the next day . His presence was a necessity, he said .
 The Taylors drove over from Dallas to help, and Lee and Gary went off and rented a U-Haul trailer . Lee, Gary and Gary drove over to Dallas and rented the trailer .
 Kleinlerer had to intervene when Lee tried to load up some of Mrs. Lee's belongings .
 Marina had not yet seen it, and when they arrived that afternoon, she and Alix Taylor reacted identically to each other's reaction . Marina had never seen it before, and she reacted to it with identical reaction .
 It was their second drive to Fort Worth in behalf of the Oswalds in a single day . It was a round trip each time of nearly three hours . The Oswalds are in Fort Worth, Texas .
 Marina stayed up till five in the morning, scrubbing everything in sight . The couple's first night in their new apartment, November 4, was the first night .
 YMCA has no record that he stayed there after October 19 . It is likely he spent a final night in whatever rooming house he had been living in for the last two weeks .
 After a month away from Lee, she had forgotten his brutality and how hard he could be to live with . Perhaps, after her month away, she forgot his brutality .
 Or perhaps, having been treated with kindness, she had grown to think better of herself, and what she had considered her due only a few weeks before seemed intolerable to her now . Or perhaps she had thought she was due to be given her due .
 Lee had used the Russian blyad, a very strong word for “whore,” which was simply so insulting and profane that it seemed to give her no choice . Besides, Lee had also used the word for "whore," which was so insulting that it
 A garage attendant dialed the telephone of Teofil Meller after she kept repeating her name to him . But a garage attendant listened carefully to her repeated name and dialed a call to the phone .
 After a brief pause during which she convinced her recalcitrant husband, Mrs. Smith convinced her husband to follow her orders, he agreed .
 Marina went back to the apartment, grabbed the baby and a couple of diapers, and went out again . Marina then went back and grabbed a baby and some diapers .
 She went into a doughnut shop and somehow conveyed to the waitress that she needed a cab . She then went to a local restaurant and somehow managed to get a taxi .
 They found her shaking and upset, but she did not cry much and did not say what she and Lee had been fighting about . She was shaken and upset when she was found by police .
 Lee Harvey Oswald and George de Mohrenschildt can hardly be imagined . An unlikelier pair of candidates for a friendship than Lee Harvey Obeidallah's friendship can hardly imagine . Lee Harvey Harvey Oswald's friendship with George is an unlikely friendship .
 Oswald, 23, was a lower-middle-class American with a ninth-grade education and a head full of self-taught Marxist theories . Oswald was friendless, Puritanical, friendless and more or less lacking in humor, he says . Oswald had a 9-
 George de Mohrenschildt became by far the most important of the new people that Lee Oswald met following his return to the U.S. He met Lee Oswald in the fall and winter of 1962-1963 .
 Some who knew them denied they were really friends at all . The pair were so unlikely a pair were they that some people said they were not friends .
 De Mohrenschildt, these people claimed, was a patron, not a friend, of Oswald’s . De Mohranschildt was not a patron of Oswald's, they said . Oswald was a friend of Oswald, but a patron .
 George de Mohrenschildt and his wife Jeanne took in the many “stray dogs’s” out of generosity . He was just one of many ‘stray dog’ George took in out of his generosity .
 Others say de Mohrenschildt had no one but people like the Oswalds to fall back on . Others say his friendship with Lee and Marina was a measure of how far he had fallen .
 People felt de Mohrenschildt knew very well what sort of man Lee Oswald was and played him like a violin . People felt he knew what kind of man Oswald was . Lee Oswald played him "like a violin"
 de Mohrenschildt understood Lee's capacity for violence and used him to act out his own violent fantasies, they say .
 The two men had a good deal in common, starting with the connection they both had with Minsk, Belarus . The pair both had a connection with the city of Minsk .
 George de Mohrenschildt was born near Mozyr, Belorussia, in 1911 . It was near where he was born .
 Mohrenschildts traced their ancestry back to the Baltic nobility at the time of Sweden’s Queen Christina . But the family name was Swedish, and the family was the proudest nobility in Russia .
 The men of the family had a right to be called “Baron,” but such were their liberal opinions that they never used the title . George's father, Sergei von Mohrenschildt, nor his Uncle Ferdinand (first secretary of the czarist embassy in Washington)
 Sergei von Mohrenschildt had been a minor official of the czar . Before the Russian Revolution of 1917, he was a minor Russian official .
 He was marshal of nobility in Minsk Province, the landowners’ elected representative in the local government . The marshal was the owner of the land and a representative of the landowners in the Minsk province .
 Mohrenschildt was a classic liberal in the Russian mold, and deeply critical of the oppressions of the czar . But although he was an aristocrat, he was critical of his time in Russia .
 He wanted a constitution that would guarantee the rights of the individual, freedom of speech, and freedom of worship . He wanted to guarantee the individual's rights of speech and free speech .
 Anti-Semitism is a touchstone in Belorussia, where there was a large Jewish population and where pogroms had been a scourge of the Jews .
 He did all he could to help persecuted Jews whose troubles came to his attention . He helped persecuted Jews who came to the attention of him .
 The elder Mohrenschildt resigned as marshal of nobility and, through his connections, obtained a job as director of the extensive interests of the Nobels, a wealthy Swedish family, in Russia .
 For a while the Mohrenschildts lived in Baku, Sergei supervised the Nobels’ enormous holdings in the oil fields . For a time they lived in the country's oil fields, he supervised the oil industry .
 They were in one of those cities when the revolution struck in February and again in October 1917 . They were also in St. Petersburg, Russia, when the Russian Revolution struck .
 The family fled to their old home in Minsk, which was then under German occupation . Later, when the anarchy and violence that accompanied the Bolsheviks to power was compounded by famine, the family fled .
 Sergei von Mohrenschildt was thrown in jail for openly opposing them . But soon the Bolsheviks took over, and he was thrown out of prison .
 Sergei von Mohrenschildt could have fled to Poland, where he and his wife had an estate, but he elected to stay . When the Bolsheviks finally secured a permanent hold on Minsk in 1920, he stayed in Minsk .
 Bolsheviks rewarded him with an appointment to the Belorussian Commissariat of Agriculture . For his loyalty and his liberal views, he was rewarded for his loyalty .
 For several months “we lived more or less happily,” George de Mohrenschildt remembers . Like everyone else, the family was afflicted by famine .
 Sergei von Mohrenschildt’s outspokenness soon got him into trouble again . But he was soon back in the headlines again .
 He opposed the antireligious policy of the Bolsheviks and was arrested, tried, and sentenced to live out his life in Siberia with his wife and younger son, George .
 Ten-year-old George was left to run wild while his mother went about the country looking for friends who could help them . George's mother was looking for influential friends to help the family . George was the only child in the care of his mother .
 Miraculously, he was once again saved by Jews he had helped . This time, the prison doctors saved him from the hospital .
 They then advised the government that he might die and suggested that he be allowed to go home until such time as he recovered his health and could survive the journey to Siberia .
 The government agreed, and Sergei von Mohrenschildt, his wife, and George made their escape to Poland in a hay wagon . George made his escape in the hay wagon to escape from the government .
 The three wayfarers contracted typhoid on the difficult journey, and the mother died . The mother died of the typhoid .
 Father and son struggled to their feet in the town of Wilno, Poland, just across the border from Russia . The town is just across a border from the border with Russia .
 The family estate of six thousand heavily wooded acres in Polesie, near Wilno, had been taken over by the peasants . The estate was taken by peasants in the early 1900s .
 Sergei von Mohrenschildt regained ownership and sold the land back piecemeal to the peasants . He and his son were not, as many Russians in Wilno were, penniless refugees . But he sold back the land to peasants, so that they could not be left penniless .
 He became head of the Russian-language gymnasium, or high school, in Wilno, which was run for the children of refugees . And he became the head of a Russian language high school .
 George de Mohrenschildt grew up close to his father, lived with him until the age of eighteen, emulated and adored him . He emulated him and emulated his father until he was 18 .
 George graduated from the gymnasium at Wilno, attended the Polish cavalry academy, and left for Belgium at the age of twenty to attend the Institute of Higher Commercial Studies in Antwerp . While his older brother, Dmitry, left for the United States, earned degrees at Columbia and
 Throughout his seven years in Belgium, he made frequent trips to Poland to see his father . Throughout his time in Belgium he visited his father frequently .
 With a girlfriend he became part owner of a successful ski clothing boutique . He also owns a successful clothing clothing store .
 In 1938 de Mohrenschildt, aged twenty-seven, broke with the girlfriend, dissolved their partnership, and left for America .
 He carried with him to the New World certain assumptions, certain ways of looking at things, which he had acquired during his stormtossed early years in Russia . He had acquired certain assumptions and ways of thinking, he said .
 He had, first of all, the aristocratic assumption of privilege and second, a sunny resilience and sunny resilience . He would always know someone ‘at the top” who would come to his rescue, he says .
 He had learned that life is like a yo-yo, that one can plummet from top to bottom in no time and must, accordingly, learn to live by one’s wits and make the accidents of fortune work for one . But he had also learned that .
 George de Mohrenschildt, a man of devastating charm, was to do just that in America . He was to have devastating charm in America, and was to be a great success .
 He had other qualities that were to stand in the way of his success . And yet he had many qualities that stood in the middle of his career .
 The owner of a sprawling, poorly tended estates in Moscow and St. Petersburg was wealthy enough to send him off on long, leisurely visits . His outlook was predicated on privilege, on the possession of sprawling estates that yielded just enough income .
 St. Petersburg now and then before returning to carry on some enlightened but ill-fated experiment with the peasants . The Russian Revolution was an experiment in Russia .
 The Mohrenschildts were landowners no longer, yet George still had habits that were rooted in possession . George still has habits that he still had, including possession, of possession . He still had a habit that was rooted in his possession .
 Something in his upbringing, his aristocratic forebears perhaps, had endowed him with an enduring lack of interest in making money . Nothing, not all the burgher institutes of Belgium, could imbue him with a motive that was not really there, he says .
 George de Mohrenschildt had a liberal set of opinions and was extraordinarily outspoken in expressing them . He mingled with the rich, the highly placed, the “top men in any form of government,” he said .
 He had a strong feeling for the freedom of the individual and a hatred for anything that interfered with it . Thus he had a hatred of anything that interfere with it.
 Some felt that he hated all authority, that he was a perpetual rebel, a sort of one-man revolution, all in himself . Some felt he hated authority and was a constant rebel .
 Many of George de Mohrenschildt’s opinions, and certainly his forthrightness in expressing them, could be traced to his father . Many of his opinions, including his father, are traced to him .
 Sergei von Mohrenschildt had, after all, been living through his country's greatest crisis . He had been living in his country’s greatest crisis.
 He was a Don Quixote, in a sense, and amid the chaos of revolutionary Russia his actions had been as efficacious as a puff of smoke . He had been an effective force in Russia's revolutionary revolution .
 He did what a constitutional liberal of his time and place had to do . But he had his existence in a genuine historical setting, he said .
 These were people who, in the New World, were to clasp him to their bosoms time and again for his charm, only to throw him out for his unconventional political opinions . These were the people who clasped him to . their bosom time . again, but threw him out
 "He was on the inside, but again and again he was tossed out. Again and again, he was thrown out," he says . He says he's been on the “inside,’s on the "inside," but he's not on the outside .
 Time and again his father had been on the inside, first of the czarist, then the Bolshevik, government, government . He had been driven out, until ultimately he was driven from the country altogether .
 Four times when he was between the ages of five and ten, George looked on as his father plummeted from a position of influence, down into danger and disgrace . George watched his father plummet four times as he was aged five to ten .
 The sight seems to have impressed him very much, for it was to become the central dynamic of his own life . The sight seemed to be very much of the central character of his life .
 George's "exiles" were only parodies, mindless reenactments of his father's early, unforgettable odysseys into disgrace . But George’s ‘exiles’ were only ‘parodies’
 The historical setting had been lost, the model was gone, and George’s friends, to say nothing of his wives, were at a loss to understand why he had to shock people so . George‘s friends and family were at the loss .
 Much as they had loved one another, there was to be in the end a vast difference between the experience of father and son . And so, much as they'd loved each other, there would be a huge difference .
 Where Sergei had been cloaked in the dignity of history, George de Mohrenschildt was merely trying to epater les bourgeois . Where Sergei's death was cloaked in dignity, George's attempt to 'epater la bourgeois' was not .
 By the time he met Lee Oswald, George de Mohrenschildt was finally, irrevocably out of Dallas society . Where he had recently been ‘inside’ Dallas society, by the time Lee Oswald met him, he was finally out .
 As a young man in 1938, de Mohrenschildt spent his first summer in the United States with his brother and American sister-in-law at Bellport, near East Hampton, on the eastern, ocean tip of Long Island .
 White Russian noblemen were then very much the thing in the watering places of the very rich, sought after for their charm, their princely titles and their picturesque stories of woe .
 De Mohrenschildt is said to have liked Janet Bouvier very much . During his frequent visits to the family, he saw a good deal of Jacqueline and Jacqueline's nine-year-old .
 For all his ebullience and bonhomie, de Mohrenschildt’s early years in this country were poignant ones . ‘Just tough going’ he admitted later, adding that had it not been for his brother and friends he might have starved .
 The story was an incongruous one—the European aristocrat, product of generations of breeding, accustomed to a life of privilege but not really interested in money, trying to make it in the land where money is king .
 Margaret Clark Williams is a member of a family with vast oil holdings in Louisiana . She is one of the richest oil-rich families in the state .
 Armed with letters of introduction from her, de Mohrenschildt landed a job with the Humble Oil Company . He ended up as roustabout on an oil rig in Terebonne Parish, Louisiana .
 It was hard physical labor, and he excelled at it until he had an accident on the rig, was badly hurt, and contracted amoebic dysentery . He was badly injured and contracted the disease, but survived .
 For de Mohrenschildt these were years of high adventure; they were also years of failure and bruises to the ego . For many of them, they were high adventure and bruises . For others, it was years of success and bruises for their ego .
 It has been said that during the late 1930s he did odd jobs for the Polish Intelligence service in the United States . Before World War II, he worked under cover for French Intelligence in the US as well, buying up American oil for France .
 He spent nearly a year in Mexico City, painting and “going out” with Lilia . A Mexican general fell in love with her and had de Mohrenschildt expelled from the country .
 On that memorable foray into Mexico, de Mohrenschildt had what proved to be the first of many brushes with agents of the U.S. government .
 Driving along the deserted coast between Corpus Christi and the Mexican border, he and Lilia stopped at a wild spot called Aransas Pass to swim and do some sketching .
 Five toughs ransacked de Mohrenschildt's car and accused him of being a German spy . What they were sketching proved to be the site of a Coast Guard station .
 As he protested indignantly later on, he was spying for no one at the time, not even France . He was spying on no one in the 1930s, even though he was in France .
 He was the recipient of intermittent attention from the FBI after that, and if Lilia was the love of his life, the FBI became his great hate . The FBI became the subject of a series of investigations .
 His first wife was Dorothy Pierson, a young, well-connected American girl in Palm Beach, Florida . He had a daughter, Alexandra, on Christmas Day, 1943, by whom she was born .
 At times during the marriage de Mohrenschildt was utterly charming, while at others he flew into violent rages . At times he was charming, but at other times he became violent . At the end of the marriage, he was married to a British journalist .
 She left him after seven months of marriage, charging him with physical cruelty and infidelity . She also charged him with physically cruelty and cheating .
 Her parents were under the impression that their son-in-law had been pro-Nazi in his sympathies . Other who knew him at this time considered that he was, if anything, pro-Communist .
 From this period, there were well-concealed rumors of destructiveness . But from this time, too, there was well-kept secret rumors of destructive behavior .
 De Mohrenschildt’s roommate, Tito Harper, was a handsome and highly intelligent young man from a ranching family at Eagle Pass, Texas . Harper was from a family of ranching cattlemen .
 Tito's family was deeply religious, it stood at the very apex of the social aristocracy of the border . Tito was thought to have a splendid future, and Tito thought to be the future of the country .
 He renounced his U.S. citizenship and moved to Mexico, where he turned to drink and drugs . He later died mysteriously, possibly, possibly a suicide, in Mexico City .
 To the end his family blamed their son’s disintegration on the atheistic and antisocial influence of George de Mohrenschildt .
 Once he had his degree, de Mohrenschildt went to Venezuela prospecting for oil . He went on to find the country's oil reserves .
 In the late 1940s he turned up in Rangely, Colorado, one of the great boomtowns of the country, on a project compiling statistics for the oil companies .
 He spent three years in Rangely and was married a second time, to Phyllis Washington, the daughter of an American diplomat .
 There were rumors of violence but de Mohrenschildt was later to claim that he remained on the most amiable terms with Phyllis Washington and her family .
 de Mohrenschildt went into oil partnership with young man named Eddie Hooker, nephew by marriage . Next, he went into partnership with Hooker's nephew, Eddie, in oil .
 By this time de Mohrenschildt had a reputation as a very good man to do business with . He was straight and honest and never pursued his purposes in any ulterior fashion .
 He had affairs with the wives of countless oil tycoons, but never used any of them to promote his own business fortunes . He was said of him with respect that he did not use any of his affairs to promote himself .
 Friendships, mingling with the right people, the wrong people, any people, meant more to George de Mohrenschildt than vast sums of money ever did . Friendships were more important to him than money .
 It was then that he met and married Wynne Sharpies, a physician from a wealthy Philadelphia Quaker family . He was married to a doctor who was a practicing physician .
 Didi seems to have lacked humor, a requisite of marriage to de Mohrenschildt . But Didi seemed to be lacking humor, she says .
 Two children born in rapid succession suffering from cystic fibrosis . Difficulty deepened into tragedy when two children were born in succession .
 It was the de Mohrenschildt who started the National Foundation for Cystic Fibrosis . It was also the founder of the National foundation for cystic fibrosis . The foundation was set up by the same man who died of the disease .
 After he and Didi were divorced in 1956, de Mohrenschildt decided not to stay in oil promotion . He was afflicted with physical infirmities and an inability to concentrate .
 He took on a series of oil and natural gas consulting jobs abroad, mostly in Africa and Latin America . He went on a U.S. government junket to Yugoslavia .
 Those who knew him best believe that he was never employed by the CIA . CIA documents appear to support this, but those who know him best say he was not .
 It was in Dallas, after the journey to Yugoslavia, that de Mohrenschildt made his fourth marriage, to Jeanne LeGon .
 Jeanne had been born and raised in Harbin, China, as Evgenia Fomenko, like de Mohrenschildt a White Russian . She was born in China and raised there as a child .
 Her father, also like de Mohrenschildt’s, was a prominent man, the director of the Chinese Far Eastern Railway . Her father was eventually killed by the Communists .
 She and her first husband had been a successful dance team in Tientsin and Shanghai before coming to the U.S. in the late 1930s . Her first husband, Robert LeGon, was a successful dancer .
 She was said to be so aggressive in business that if you pushed her out the window she came back through the door . She was also said to have been so aggressive that she was pushed out of the window .
 Some years Jeanne earned over $20,000, plus clothing and travel expenses, although she never saved a cent . Some years she earned more than $10,000 .
 He grew depressed, dwelled more and more on his family’s loss of fortune in China . Unable to adjust to a new life in the United States, he eventually became a mental patient in California .
 After Jeanne started seeing George de Mohrenschildt, Robert LeGon came twice to Dallas . After Jeanne began seeing George, Robert came to Dallas twice .
 He is said to have gone after his wife’s admirer with a revolver . He then hired a private detective to look for the man .
 Like so many others before him, he succumbed to the de Mohrenschildt charm . But like so many before him before, it's not the first time .
 He declared that he would grant his wife a divorce on one condition— that de Mohrenschildt promise to marry her . He declared he would divorce his wife on the condition that she promised to marry him .
 De Mohrenschildt pronounced this rival “a charming fellow” and proceeded to do exactly as he had been asked . He said the rival was a charming fellow .
 A year or so later, George gathered up Jeanne and their dogs and set off on a year’s walking trip through Mexico and Central America . George was shattered by the death of his son from cystic fibrosis, shattered by his son's death .
 By the summer of 1962, nine months after their return to Dallas, they had barely recovered from their exertions . But it was a rugged trip, much rougher than they'd imagined, and by the summer, they'd barely recovered .
 George was writing a report of their Mexican adventure, hoping to publish it as a book . He was writing the report, which he hopes to publish .
 He had written a letter to President Kennedy, asking him to contribute the preface . He had even written to the president to contribute to the book .
 Jeanne, to support them, had taken a job in the millinery department of the Sanger-Harris department store . Jeanne took the job to support the family .
 The shah of Iran was now persona non-grata . Hunt, Hunt, the wealthy Murchison family, the banker Serge Semenenko, and even the shah were persona non grata. Hunt was also a target of Iran's enemies .
 "Nearly all of them were enchanted, very often against their better judgment," the author says . "On the contrary, nearly all of us were enchanted," he says .
 Summer and winter, in blazing heat and freezing cold, he would dash about Dallas in his open Cadillac convertible . He would dash around Dallas in an open Cadillac, impervious to the ravages of weather .
 De Mohrenschildt was never unaware of his body—or the effect it was having on others . He was never aware of his own body, or the effect of others .
 Women had always toppled into bed with him, while men envied him his swashbuckling charm . Women were always toppled in bed by him .
 de Mohrenschildt liked nothing better than to show up at one of the two Russian Orthodox churches in Dallas . He said he loved to sing in the choir and found it “amusing” to consort with the Russian folk afterward .
 On still another occasion, he might drop in on a formal party barefooted . On another occasion he might show up barefooted at a party .
 "Middleaged and spreading a bit, she had platinum blonde hair and went around in tight pants and a very tight top,” one of the Russians sniffed . “Like a teenager,’ she said, “like a teenager”
 In Jeanne, George had at last found a helpmeet so unconventional as to make him seem staid by comparison by comparison . In Jeanne she was so unconventional that she made George feel staid .
 Like her husband, she thought religion a ‘fraud’ and lost no opportunity of saying so . She thought religion was a "fraud," she said .
 Jeanne had two little Manchester terriers with whom it was not too much to say that she had fallen in love . Jeanne had been married to her husband for more than a decade .
 Friends who asked the de Mohrenschildt to dine found that they had asked the dogs, too . She would go nowhere without them, and friends who asked her to have them dined found it .
 She dressed them in diapers and fondled them ostentatiously, the entire time . She dressed the children in diapers .
 The de Mohrenschildts delighted in shocking even those friends who had remained loyal to them . They delighted to shock even those who had stayed loyal to the family .
 At a celebrated gathering of the Bohemian Club in Dallas at which close Jewish friends of George were present, he scandalized and hurt his friends by declaring in a speech that Heinrich Himmler had not been so bad . George's friends were present .
 "Whatever you favored politically, he would tell you that he held the opposite view," he said . "He held the same view. Whatever you wanted politically. He would say that he was an anti-Hillary Clinton supporter."
 If he could not get at you through politics, he would tell you that he favored free love . He would say: "I favor free love. And if he couldn't get at me, I would say that I favor it"
 Friends admit that social occasions with the de Mohrenschildts ‘did have a way of ending up in tension’ Another close friend has conceded that social events with the family “did end up” in tension .
 When they were at a party together, emotions often grew so intense that the party simply broke up in anger . The party often broke up because of the intense emotions .
 The de Mohrenschildts found that doors formerly open now were closed to them . That was how matters stood in the summer and fall of 1962, when they found them .
 George was a compulsively gregarious man who hated to spend an evening by himself . Yet he hated to be alone and his energies were by no means fully absorbed by his effort to write a book .
 Jeanne was a generous but indiscriminate collector of “stray dogs” Jeanne was also a generous and indiscriminate dog collector . Jeanne was an avid collector of "stray dog"
 de Mohrenschildt was in Fort Worth with an American friend of Russian descent, Colonel Lawrence Orlov . Orlov was in the U.S. with de Mohranschildt in September .
 Oswalds’ Mercedes Street apartment was visited by a couple newly arrived from Russia . They decided to pay a call on the couple who had recently arrived from the country .
 They were appalled at the ‘horrible surroundings,” the “slum” in which at first they found only Marina and her baby . The family was shocked to find out what they were doing in the slum .
 To de Mohrenschildt, Marina looked “a lost soul,” and the child unwell . Marina looked unwell, and the baby looked ‘unwell’ and ‘lost soul’
 Little June, with her big, bald head, resembled nothing so much as a miniature Khrushchev, he told her . But he quickly established a bantering tone by telling her that little June resembled nothing . Little June was born in June 1962, a year after the Soviet Union broke
 Like many an aristocrat, de Mohrenschildt had a perfect democracy of manner . But like many many aristocrats, he was also a democratised aristocrat .
 Besides, it struck him that there was ‘something charming” about the fellow, he said . Besides, there was something charming, he added .
 Jeanne had been hearing about the Oswalds from George Bouhe for weeks, but she had not done anything to help them, and she felt ashamed . Jeanne felt ashamed.
 Marina stayed with George’s daughter and son-in-law, Alix and Gary Taylor, and Jeanne drove her to the clinic . Jeanne drove Marina to the Dallas clinic .
 Late that evening, after George had gone to bed, Jeanne sat her guest down with wine and a lot of cigarettes and encouraged her to talk .
 Marina did, about her life and that of other young people in Russia . Talk Marina did . Marina was the first Russian woman to speak openly about her experiences in the country .
 Anxious to entertain and if possible to shock, she told stories of sexual orgies in Leningrad . Leaving it unclear whether she had engaged in them or not .
 To Jeanne, Marina seemed totally lacking in a sense of purpose; she was like a piece of flotsam, rising and falling on the surface of life without any goal whatsoever . Jeanne: "Marina seemed to be lacking in any purpose whatsoever"
 Marina represented a ‘degeneration,” a falling off in the quality of Soviet youth, she said . She concluded that Marina represents a “degenerated” youth . Marina was the daughter of a Soviet-born Russian woman .
 Marina was speechless—she sat there simply stroking her gifts with joy . Marina was left speechless . She sat there stroking herself joyously .
 Marina’s response to America, one of childish surprise, reminded Jeanne of her own feelings when she first came to this country . As a matter of fact, she said, ‘Marinna’�s reaction to America was a childish surprise .
 Marina snatched the baby’s pacifier off the floor, popped it into her own mouth, which was filled with rotting, infected teeth . She could not get over the way Marina snatched her own pacifier from the floor and popped it in her mouth .
 Marina, who had grown up in a country where there was supposed to be a high level of medical knowledge, could do such a thing to a child . Nor did she understand how Marina grew up in the country where she had been trained as a pharmacist .
 She also considered Marina “lazy,” noting the late hour at which she rose the next morning .
 Jeanne was enthusiastic about continuing to help Marina . In spite of her mixed feelings for Marina, Jeanne said she would continue to help her friend .
 Oswald was unusual in that he had “absolutely no hatred” of Russia, De Mohrenschildt says . Oswald was unique in that Oswald had no hatred of the country, he says .
 He seemed “a little too aloof,” as if he knew ‘all things a little too affirmatively, too dogmatically,’ he said . “He seemed too often close off discussion with an uncaring shrug.”
 Lee disappointed them again by finding the apartment in Oak Cliff, a neighborhood on the opposite of town from where all of them lived . The apartment is located in the same neighborhood as all the others .
 Marina, Marina, with her baby in her arms, stood on the Mellers’ doorstep . The Mellers' daughter was born in September 2013 .
 When she announced she had left Lee, the Russians, including George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt, once again came to her rescue .
 Her husband, Teo, was small and dark, with an expression of expression at once winsome and observant . Her husband was small, dark and dark .
 A professor of philosophy back in Poland, he was employed at the Sanger-Harris department store . He was employed as a professor in Poland and professor at the time .
 His wife had a full-time job, too, as draftswoman for the Dallas Power and Light Company .
 Marina was invited to stay in their apartment until she decided what she would do next . Both were gone all day, and they invited Marina to stay with them .
 Paul Wolff, who confirmed what they wanted to know, said she was not pregnant . He added that she was “very undernourished” and needed to gain weight right away .
 Lee and Marina should meet and decide for themselves whether their separation would be permanent . It was soon decided among the Russians, probably after a request from Lee to George de Mohrenschildt, that they should meet .
 He sensed such ‘inner resistance’ in him that it seemed useless to go on helping, he said . “He sensed such "inner resistance" in him, he sensed such 'inner resistance,” he said.
 He excoriated his treatment of Marina, considering it “crude and cruel,” and was eager to pry her away from him . He excoriously called her "cruel and cruel"
 Lee did not want to be present at the meeting, but did want to confront Lee face-to-face . Lee is accused of sexual misconduct in the past . Lee has been charged with sexual assault and sexual assault .
 The meeting of husband and wife was accordingly set for Sunday morning, November 11, at the de Mohrenschildts’ apartment . The meeting was set for November 11 .
 Bouhe escorted Marina inside, conferred a moment with de Mohrenschildt, and quickly left . Bouhe then escorted Marina into the building .
 When Lee arrived Lee arrived, he was nervous, pale, and obviously embarrassed to be having such a scene in front of the de Mohrenschildts . Lee arrived at the scene, and was nervous and pale .
 Jeanne, who adored her husband, joined him in all his enthusiasms and backed him in everything . Jeanne adored him and joined him, joining him in many of his hobbies and family activities .
 If you cannot live with each other peacefully, without all this awful behavior, maybe you should separate, and see. See. If you can't live peacefully, perhaps you should break up .
 Both the de Mohrenschildts used profanity a good deal, but they used it so naturally, it came out sounding like a caress . It was so much the coin of their personalities that it came from their personalities, it sounded like caresses .
 On the other she wanted him to, wanted to hurt him for the hurt he had done her . She wanted to harm him, but wanted to make him stop .
 When the de Mohrenschildts returned, she told them that she was not going back and she wanted to take her clothing from the apartment . She told them she did not want to return to the apartment and wanted her clothing taken from her apartment .
 The de Mohrenschildts agreed that separation for a few months might be best until they could decide whether they really loved each other . They agreed to live apart until they decided whether they were really in love .
 The four of them then drove to the Oswalds’ apartment on Elsbeth Street in George’s big gray convertible . The four members of the four-some-man team got into George's car .
 Marina smoked cigarette after cigarette, nervous but triumphant, knowing Lee was powerless to stop her smoking now that she was under George’s protection .
 He showed “real nastiness” and became “a little violent,” according to Jeanne and George . Jeanne said he became violent and a little bit uppity, George said .
 de Mohrenschildt threatened to call the police after he swore he would “get even” and grew so ugly that he called the police . They later said that he swore that he would get even .
 He said he would smash the baby's toys and tear up all Marina’s dresses if they took her away . He said, again according to the de Mohrenschildts, he would smashing toys and tearing up dresses .
 He trotted obediently after George, who was loading the car, and helped carry out Marina’s and the baby's belongings . He trotted after George and helped with Marina and George .
 As they packed up her belongings, his voice quavered and he was holding back tears . But as they packed them up, he held back tears as they left her belongings .
 The de Mohrenschildts delivered Marina and her possessions to the Mellers’’, and that same day George Bouhe drove her, the baby, and their most needed belongings to the house of Declan and Katya Ford .
 It would be easier for Katya to have them for a few days than for the Mellers . The Mellers have been married for more than a decade .
 Katya Ford had grown up in Rostov-on-Don and escaped from Russia during the war . She was forced to flee the country during the Second World War .
 Eventually, she was divorced and then married a second time, to Declan Ford, a consulting geologist . She was married to Ford for more than a decade before he died .
 Katya had a devastating eye for character. Scrupulous and realistic in her relationships, Katya was realistic and realistic. Katya's eyes were always on the scene .
 She had been favorably impressed by Lee at their first meeting, but her impression quickly changed . She was impressed with Lee at the first meeting .
 Marina had been at the Fords’ for two days when Lee went to George de Mohrenschildt and found out where she was staying . Lee had been staying with the couple at the couple’s home in New York .
 Lee then telephoned and, when Katya answered, asked to speak to Marina Marina . Lee then called Katya and asked her to talk to Marina, who had been married for years .
 She told him it was no use calling any more; she told him she was not going to come back . She said she was going to leave him .
 He started to call once or twice an evening after that . Marina was abrupt for a night or two, but the third night she allowed herself to be drawn in . He started calling her again after that night .
 She wondered what Robert would think of her for running away . She wondered how he would manage without her . She felt herself weaken .
 She felt that there was something strange, something not quite right about him . She felt he was not quite quite right . She said he was a strange man .
 Katya could not forgive him for hitting Marina, she says . In her view, hitting Marina was like hitting a frail, skinny kitten, she said . Katya said: "Katya could never forgive him. He hit Marina, and she would never forgive me"
 Katya thought it was foolhardy and provocative to talk back as sharply as Marina did . With a husband as highstrung, as ready to erupt as Lee, Katya said it was 'foolhardy' and provocative .
 A wife, the one person who is privy to all a man’s weaknesses, simply has to have tact, Katya believed, and Marina did not have an ounce of it . A wife must have tact to deal with a man's weaknesses, she said .
 It seemed out of the question for her to find a job and a home as a livein domestic helper . Her best hope until she learned English was to learn English .
 Until Marina can stand on her own feet, Katya thought, she had no choice but to go back to Lee . Until Marina could stand on herself, she was forced to return to Lee's home .
 Marina advised to start studying English right away and equip herself to hold a job .
 She felt that she could not go on living off other people forever, but she did not see, although her friends were doing their best to make her see, that she actually had a choice and could live alone . She felt she had to live alone.
 The week of November 12, while she was at Katya’s, he took her to lunch with Mrs. Mrs. Katya . He took her out for lunch with her .
 Ray was a Russian married to an American, and they had three small children . Ray was married to a Russian, and the couple had three children .
 Within minutes of her arrival, he telephoned and begged her to see him . Within minutes, she had arrived at his home . He begged to see her .
 Ford disliked him for that remark and for the cold way in which it was spoken, when they had, in fact, spent an afternoon at the Mellers’ in September . Ford disliked the remark and said it was a cold remark .
 This guy is looking for someone to support him, and it sure as hell isn’t going to be me, he says . This guy isn't looking for support, it's not going to go to him, he adds .
 Twice, Frank Ray asked Lee where he was working, and twice Lee changed the subject and avoided an answer . Frank Ray asks Lee twice, twice, where he is working, but he doesn't answer .
 Robert, he added, had invited them for Thanksgiving, and it would be terrible to show up without her . Robert said Robert invited them to Thanksgiving and they would be sad to leave her behind .
 He got up, protesting as he did so so he refused to get up until she forgave him . "He got up and got up again, protesting so he didn't get up," he said .
 He had engineered the reconciliation in the nick of time—Thanksgiving was only four days away . Thanksgiving was just four days ago .
 They had qualms about consigning her completely to the tender mercies of her husband . They discussed what they ought to do next . Still, they had no qualms .
 After that the Russians, with the exception of the de Mohrenschildts, saw very little of the Oswalds . After that, the Russians saw little of them . The Oswalds were killed by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 One day the de Mohrenschildts seemed to favor separation, while the next they favored reconciliation . One day they favored separation, one day they were in favor of reconciliation, another day .
 Max Clark heard that de Mohrenschildt “picked him up by his shirt and shook him like a dog and told him he would really work him over if he ever laid another hand” on Marina, he says .
 No sooner had the couple made up, Lee plucked the cigarette from his wife’s lips and snuffed it out on her shoulder, the story went . Lee snuffed the cigarette out on his wife's shoulder, according to the story .
 The Russians recalled that in the early days of the Bolshevik regime, officers of the Cheka, as the secret police, used to extinguish a cigarette on human flesh when they were trying to break a prisoner .
 Oswald's testimony is stunning testimony as to how they felt about Oswald . But the Russians believed that he did . Oswald was not the only person to have been involved in the assassination .
 Marina and Lee's relationship was founded on a mutual willingness to inflict and accept pain . The Russians, with the exception of Katya Ford, misunderstood the heart of the relationship between the pair .
 The Russians were puzzled and angered by Marina’s decision to return to her husband because they misunderstood her motive for marrying him in the first place . The Russian were puzzled by her decision to rejoin her husband .
 They thought she had married him to come to the U.S. They approved and respected it, and far from considering such a motive reprehensible, they approved it .
 Having come to the United States, they had tried their best to make their marriages work . If they had divorced, it was only because the marriage was impossible, they said .
 Marina's marriage ended in a five-minute marriage . But not one of them would have stayed five minutes in Marina’s marriage .
 Marina had married Lee not to come to America, but because he was an American, she said . Marina married Lee because she wanted him to be American, not because of his heritage . Lee was married to Marina, Marina said .
 His choice of her had bolstered her self-esteem and confirmed her feeling that she was special, she said .
 Marriage to an American gave her a way of expressing her rebelliousness and her lack of conformity to Russian ways . She says marriage to American was a way to express her rebelliousism .
 Marina’s motives for staying in the marriage were deep indeed . Once she was in the . marriage, Marina's motives for . staying in it were very deep indeed, she says .
 Language, the question of whether or not Marina would learn English, tells a good deal of the story . Marina was born in New York City, New York, in 2010 . She is now in the U.S. state of New York .
 The de Mohrenschildts gave her a small Victrola with some language records, and she never used them . She never used the record collection .
 She abandoned any effort to learn English because Lee did not want her to, and she was afraid of him . Lee was afraid to speak English because he wanted her to do so .
 She sensed that he wanted her to be dependent on him, and she was content to leave it that way . Moreover, she sensed he was trying to keep her dependent on his .
 Dependence and low self-esteem had carried her into the marriage, and together with a willingness to suffer, they were enough to make her stay .
 Lee wanted Marina dependent on him because it enhanced his control over her . As for Lee, he wanted Marina to be dependent on himself . Lee wanted her dependent on herself .
 He did not allow her to buy groceries, and he no longer took her to the grocery store with him . He no longer allowed her to go grocery shopping with him, she says .
 Instead of shopping list, he had her make out a shopping list and bought everything himself . Instead of buying her, he made out a list of what he wanted to buy himself .
 Lee wanted control not only over their money but over Marina herself . He wanted control of their money and Marina herself, he said . Lee wanted to control Marina's finances and control of her finances .
 She entertained telephone calls from her old boyfriends most of the time they had lived in Minsk . She had entertained phone calls from them from her ex-boyfriends .
 Even in the U.S. she had only met a handful of her compatriots and they were willing to rush to her rescue . She was able to meet a few of them in the United States .
 Lee looked at it, if Marina mastered English, her life might become one long escape hatch from him . Marina's English was one of the most important things in her life, Lee thought .
 She would have neighbors to appeal to; she would have friends; she might even meet other men . She would also have neighbors, friends, neighbors and even meet men .
 His control over her would be jeopardized, and he might easily lose her . He could lose her control over him .
 Even in Minsk before coming to the United States, he had in the back of his mind that he might return to live in Russia . He wanted to keep his Russian for that, and he wanted to .
 Knowing Russian gave him a reputation for being intelligent, and that helped make up for the profound feeling, stemming from his reading disability, that his intelligence did not receive its due . Moreover, knowing Russian made him feel he was intelligent .
 He needed to keep Marina ludicrously, outlandishly dependent on him to mask the fact that he was deeply and humiliatingly dependent on her . Finally, apart from his desire to control all circumstances of his existence, including his wife, he needed to control his wife's life .
 Marina, not Lee, was the fulcrum of their marriage, according to those who knew them best . Marina was not Lee's wife, they say, but she was the mother-of-two .
 He seems to have been even more dependent on her than she was on him . Dependent as they both were emotionally, they both seemed to be emotionally dependent on each other .
 He was exasperated by the fact that for the second time in his life he found himself dependent on a woman . He said: "I'm not going to get into a relationship with a woman again. I'm not looking forward to it."
 He was driven to strip Marina of autonomy in the matter of language but, by his beatings, of any sense that she was a human being, he said . And at times it made him so angry that he was driven .
 The beatings, in turn, depressed her and made her even less capable of breaking away from him than she had been before, she says . She says the beatings made her less likely to break away from her husband .
 Dependence was indeed the glue of the Oswalds’ marriage, and it held them together to the very end . Dependence, indeed, was the glue to the couple's marriage .
 She had lingered with her Russians to gain leverage and make her life more bearable with Lee . Lee's daughter was killed in a car crash last month .
 She had lost more than she had gained, for she had now relinquished their support . But typically, typically, she had lost .
 Even the de Mohrenschildts, who were the most sympathetic to the marriage, were ‘disgusted’ when she failed to make a real separation of it and stay away .
 Meller, and others who had been willing to open their homes to her, they were no longer standing by for the rescue . Meller and the others who were willing to stand by for her, no longer stand by . She had been in the care of Meller for more than
 They had offered her a way out, they had given her her chance—and she lost it . She had been offered her way out of prison . She lost it.
 Marina and Lee were 'like children together, and like children they had a good time,' Marina said of their reconciliation . Lee and Marina were like children together .
 Lee did the twist in the kitchen a night or so after her return . Grinning, holding aloft a cup of cocoa in one hand and a doughnut in the other .
 He escorted her to a bowling alley down the street and suggested that he teach her to bowl . He also suggested that she learn to bowl at the bowling alley .
 He played “Moscow Evenings” on the jukebox while they watched others bowl, and he crooned the words to her in Russian .
 Marina refused to draw her husband's bath after he refused to take a bath . Marina was inspired by a new spirit of independence and refused to be drawn in the bath .
 Marina never drew his bath again . Except for a few occasions when she felt like ‘spoiling’ him, she never drew him a bath .
 They had to wait, so the three of them squeezed into a booth and had themselves photographed . They had been waiting for a photo of themselves .
 He had had had his hair cut short in back and long on top in imitation of his brother Robert . He had cut it short in front and back and back imitation of Robert .
 He played the title song from the movie Exodus four or five times on the jukebox . He laughed, then he played the song again .
 Robert Oswald and John Pic met them at the Greyhound station in Fort Worth . Robert Oswald, John Pic and Robert O'Mara attended the event .
 John was now an air force sergeant stationed in San Antonio, Texas, and he, his wife, and their children were staying with Robert for the holidays . Robert was stationed in the U.S. and was stationed at San Antonio .
 It was the first meeting of the three brothers since Lee’s childhood and the only time they would all be together with their wives and children . Lee and his brothers met for the first time since his childhood .
 Marguerite Oswald, mother of all three boys, was not present that day . The mother-of-three boys, their opposing object and unifying force, is not present .
 All of Lee’s life, John had expected ‘some great tragedy to strike” his youngest brother, Lee . John had been expecting ‘great tragedy’ to strike him all of his life .
 Lee defected to Russia and came back, John supposed that he had had his tragedy and was curious to see how he had come out of it . John supposed Lee had defected and come back to Russia .
 John found his brother thinner and balder than he expected, with eyes somewhat sunk in his head . John was surprised to find his brother's eyes sunk in the head .
 Lee and John had seen each other once or twice and could have met other times, but Lee, still steaming over the family quarrel, had refused to speak to his elder brother . Lee was steamed over family quarrel and refused to talk to John . Lee's brother was killed in
 The brothers greeted each other warmly and chatted amicably in the car . The brothers chatted to each other in a warm car .
 They were welcomed at Robert's by the two wives, Marge Pic and Vada Oswald, and the four children, John’s two and Robert's two . The two wives of Robert and Marge are also in the family .
 Lee seemed happy to see his brothers and especially to tell John about his experiences in Russia and the Marine Corps . Lee was happy to talk about his experience with his brothers .
 He omitted to address another word to her all day. But in a way that was quite unmistakable he omitted to speak to her .
 She longed for someone she could talk to without Lee’s having to interpret her . She wanted someone to talk to her without her having to translate .
 She telephoned her old pupil, Paul Gregory, who was home in Fort Worth for the holiday . He came over at six in the evening to visit his old pupil .
 Lee introduced John as his “half brother,” a designation the three boys had been at pains all their lives to avoid . As Paul Gregory appeared in the doorway, Lee introduced him as his "half brother" Paul Gregory .
 They had always stood together as full brothers and fellow sufferers at the hands of Marguerite . The pair stood together in their grief of the same fate .
 John was aware that Lee was still smoldering with the old antagonism . Suddenly, John knew that Lee had been smoldered with the antagonism. Lee was not the first person John had met Lee .
 They spent the evening at the Gregorys’, where they spoke Russian and ate turkey sandwiches . They also spent the night at a friend’s house in Russia .
 They took a late bus back to Dallas, Dallas, arriving at one in the morning . Then they took another late bus home to Dallas .
 Lee and George W ith Marina’s return to the Elsbeth Street apartment, the Oswalds began their new life together in Dallas . It would be a year and a day before Lee saw any of his family again—on November 23, 1963, when Robert visited him
 Marina lived a lonely life with Lee at work all day and only infrequent contacts with her Russian friends . Lee was at work every day and had infrequent contact with Marina's friends .
 He intended to stay only a few minutes, but so warm was his welcome that he stayed for an hour or two . Marina ran down the street and bought doughnuts for the three of them .
 The Oswalds hardly ever had callers, and Marina was overjoyed to see a face from outside . Marina Oswalds was delighted to see the face of a stranger in her home .
 Meller was upset because the baby was ill and Lee would not take her to the doctor because he was afraid he could not pay the bill . Meller, upset because she was ill, said Lee wouldn't go to the hospital because he feared he would not pay .
 Lydia, who had never had a child of her own, was frightened because the baby seemed to be having trouble breathing and embarrassed because Marina kept telling her the truth . Lydia was shocked that in her country such callousness would be unthinkable .
 They drove on to a clinic, where they were dismayed to find forty sick children ahead of them . The children were taken to a nearby hospital to be treated for treatment .
 She would have to take her turn, the nurses said, and that might not be for three or four hours . The nurses said she would not be able to wait for her turn for hours .
 Lydia told them that she would hold them legally responsible if anything happened to the baby . Lydia said she will hold them responsible for the baby if anything happens to them . Lydia also told them she would not allow them to keep the baby in the care of Lydia .
 Lydia left Marina and the baby at the Elsbeth Street apartment, promising to return . Lydia said she would return to the apartment . Marina and her baby were staying at the apartment, but Lydia was not there .
 Lee was not yet home from work when she reappeared about five in the afternoon; and, afraid to go off without him, Marina asked her to wait . Lee was afraid to leave without her, Marina said she would wait for him to come home .
 Lee came in, calmly ate dinner, and announced that he refused to take the baby to the hospital . Lee came into the hospital with the baby and announced he would not take him to a hospital .
 His attitude was the more extraordinary because he doted on ‘his’ baby . He generally trembled with fear if she so much as hiccupped or coughed .
 Lydia heard the sounds of a verbal battle royal in the kitchen . Lydia heard Marina and Marina go into the kitchen to discuss it, and Lydia heard it .
 Husband and wife soon emerged and announced that they were going to the hospital . Husband soon emerged from the hospital and announced they were to be taken to a hospital .
 When he had finished treating her, he signed some forms and told Lee to take them to the service desk . Lee then took the forms and took them back to the waiting room .
 Lydia and her husband got into the back of Lydia’s car and immediately fell to fighting over which one would hold the baby . Lydia and Lydia were the first couple to have a baby together .
 The baby was sick, had been seriously sick for three days, and Lee was lying again . Lee was lied again. He said he had been sick, and that the baby was seriously sick .
 Up front, Lydia heard only Marina’s shrewish, schoolteacherish tone, not the substance of the battle . Lydia was left disappointed by the outcome of the election .
 Lydia sensed that he was angry and tense, sitting with fists clenched, trying to hold himself in until he came to his front door . Lydia sensed him was angry, tense, and tried to hold him inside until he arrived .
 The one thing he did say was that he ought not to have to pay at all, that in Russia doctors and medicines were free, and they ought to be free here, too . In Russia, doctors and medicine were free .
 Lydia was disgusted with both of them by the time she dropped them off, but much more disgusted with Marina . Lydia dropped the pair off and was disgusted by Marina's behavior .
 She thought she did, indeed, have a dreadful disposition and maybe a dreadful character as well, as well .
 Marina had caught her husband in another lie that afternoon, and that, along with the lies he told at Parkland, had been responsible for her outburst . Marina's husband had been lying to her .
 Lydia asked Lydia to send back a pair of dictionaries loaned to her by Bouhe and Anna Meller . Lydia had asked her to send the dictionaries back to Lydia's home . Lydia's mother had asked Lydia not to send them back .
 Marina answered, in all truthfulness as far as she knew, that Lee had already returned them . Marina said Lee had returned them to Marina's home .
 When he came home from work, she found out that he had not returned them . He had told her he had returned them, as he had said he had . But when he returned them she discovered he had only returned one .
 All through their marriage it was Lee's lying and Marina's telling him frankly what she thought of it that caused the worst fights between them . Lee’s lying was the worst fight between them, says Marina .
 His lies were bad enough, but what made her angrier was that he often placed her in a position where, knowingly or unknowingly, she ended up telling a lie, too . She said, "What made her even angrier is that ... he often put her in the position
 It was the sorest point of their life together as far as she was concerned, she said . It was a sore point of her life as well as her husband's life .
 Russians heard of Lee's behavior at Parkland and Marina’s tongue-lashing, they were confirmed in their hands-off policy toward the Oswalds . When the Russians heard . Lee and Marina Oswalds were in the midst of the scandal, the Russians were confirmed .
 Bouhe understood by now that Lee’s energies were so drained by inner turmoil that he had nothing left for anybody else . Bouhe: “Lee had nothing to give to anybody else. He was so drained that his energies were drained that he didn’t care for
 De Mohrenschildt said Bouhe was still worrying about her as if she were his daughter . Bouhe said that Bouhe is still worried about her life as if he were her father .
 If Marina had behaved badly at the hospital, Bouhe said to himself, it could only have been because Lee had goaded her beyond bearing . Bouhe: If Marina behaved badly, Lee must have been goaded by her .
 Bouhe thought and he thought, and he came up with the direst of prophecies . Bouhe said, "Bouhe thought ... and thought and thought" Bouhe's prophecies were not true .
 Alone among Russians, the de Mohrenschildts did not give up on the Oswalds . Alone among the Russians, they refused to give up .
 George dropped by every other week or so, and he generally brought Jeanne . He generally brought her to his home .
 Jeanne would remark that Marina’s return to Lee had all but killed George Bouhe, and this brought another roar of laughter from de Mohrenschildt .
 His high spirits had a way of rubbing off on those around him, he said . He always left the Oswalds in a far more cheerful mood than he found them, he added .
 Marina noticed that his visits left her with very little else—a few anecdotes and dirty stories but no residue, nothing of substance at all . Marina noticed she was left with nothing else but a few anecdotes, dirty stories .
 It pleased George to get along with someone the other Russians had written off . It pleased him to have a friend who had been written off by the Russians .
 De Mohrenschildt felt distaste for Bouhe’s bourgeois approach . Maybe it was a class thing .
 One of the reasons he liked Lee was that he was “not a beggar, a sponger,” says Bouhe . Bouhe bridled at taking help from Bouhe, and he had bridled .
 There were no strings attached; it never occurred to him to ask afterward what you had done with it . "There were never strings attached," he said . "I never thought it would occur to him if you had taken it," he added .
 George was delighted to discover in Lee a pearl, where the other Russians had found only a prickly oyster . George found a pearl in Lee, while the others had found an oyster. Lee's pearl was a pearl .
 Oswald, having seen Soviet reality, still had not given it up, still was reading Marx and praising Khrushchev . The emigres were disgusting because Oswald had not been given up . Oswald was still reading Marx, still praising the Soviet leader . Oswald had been reading Marx .
 His lack of gaiety, indeed, what might be called the deadness of his spirit, was a puzzle to the de Mohrenschildts, who had suffered and enjoyed .
 What to them would have been a glorious adventure to Lee was just another drink from life’s long, cold bucket of disappointment . Lee was not happy to see the end of his life as a result of his disappointment .
 Katya Ford gave it as her view that Lee was “all mixed up and not very bright,” the two of them sprang to his defense . Lee's defense came from his co-starring co-hosts .
 Marina got the impression that as the de Mohrenschildts saw him Lee was an unbourgeois, uncalculating spirit who had dared go to Russia without giving a damn for the consequences . Lee was as unconventional as they were, she says .
 The de Mohrenschildts gave Lee a warmth, an approval, and an emotional support that, after his return to America, he got from nobody else . Whatever it was they saw in him, they gave Lee in particular, gave him a warmth .
 Marina and Lee were separated from each other at the start of their marriage . Marina was married to Marina, but the two have been separated for more than a decade . Marina's ex-lover, Marina, said she preferred Lee to Marina .
 He was losing one son-in-law by divorce, Gary Taylor, with whom he was on good terms politically . For political reasons he was also on deteriorating terms with Jeanne’s son in-law, Ragnar Bogoyavlensky-Kearton . He was on
 She had no son of her own, and other things being equal, she liked men better than women . She liked men more than women, but had no children .
 de Mohrenschildts shared a passion for underdogs . But the great thing they shared was their passion for the underdog .
 As Jeanne was to put it later, Lee could be “disagreeable, very very disagreeable,” she said . As Jeanne said, Lee was “very disagreeable” and could be disagreeable .
 George considered Lee Lee one of those rare Americans who cared nothing for money or possessions, he viewed Marina as a real American in spirit . Marina was a "happy-golucky" bourgeois mouse who was bewitched by the gadgetry of American life .
 Even Jeanne, a woman so generous that one friend said she had “an overdeveloped mother tendency,” 8 appears to have been irritated by the bottomless pit of need that Marina represented .
 The de Mohrenschildts felt that Marina always had her hand outstretched, that she would take anything you gave her . Marina always always had an outstretched hand, they said .
 Marina liked Jeanne right away, although Lee complained after their first meeting that she was too fat and lavished too much affection on her dogs . Jeanne and Lee met at the beginning of their relationship .
 He saw that Jeanne was a good cook, a splendid companion, and a loyal, devoted wife . Jeanne was also a good companion and a devoted wife, he said . He saw her as a good, devoted woman, he added .
 It was not long before he was holding her up as an example Marina ought to follow . In fact, it was soon before he held her up .
 More than anyone else he met after his return to the United States, Lee was drawn to George, opened up with him, paid attention to his opinions, even sought his advice . Lee says he was drawn up with George, who he sought advice from him .
 Oswalds and Oswalds were close friends for decades . They saw one another 15 or 20 times in all, but people with resources far greater than the Oswalds’ still found any encounter with George unforgettable .
 Lee's score of meetings had all the more impact on Lee because they occurred in a vacuum . Lee says the meetings were held in a 'vacuous' environment .
 "His usual way of dealing with people simply vanished when he was with this older, more experienced man," he said . "He simply disappeared when he met him," he added .
 Lee used people to get what he wanted, then drove them away if they tried to get too close to him, or if they expected something in return for their kindness . Lee used to drive people away from him if they were too close, or wanted something from them .
 George saw that George expected nothing and did not intrude upon him, he left off maneuvering . But when he saw that . George expected . nothing . He saw that when he . saw . that George . expected nothing .
 de Mohrenschildt, too, who loved nothing better than to bruise the sensibilities of his bourgeois friends, was exquisitely tactful with Lee . Curiously, de Mohrassasst, also, was exquisite tactless with Lee.
 Where nearly everyone else considered Lee arrogant, de Mohrenschildt found him “very humble,” he found him humble .
 "If you asked him some questions about himself, he was just out of this world," he said . "He was out of the world. He was just like a normal man," he added. "He's out of it world"
 Lee would alter his opinion after listening to George's views, Lee says . Lee would often alter his opinions after hearing what George had to say . Lee says Lee would change his views after he heard what George said about him .
 George alone his discussions of Soviet affairs did not degenerate into argument and were not laced with hostility . With George alone he discussed Soviet affairs with Soviet affairs not degenerated into argument .
 Lee spoke knowingly and from the inside, and far more critically with George than with anybody else . Lee: Not feeling that he had to defend Russia, he spoke knowingly . Lee spoke with George George more critically than anyone else, not just him .
 He received several Soviet newspapers, and George used to ask what was in them . George asked if he could read the Soviet newspapers in Soviet newspapers .
 The two men would compare the Soviet version of some events with the stories in the American press . Very often the two of them would compare some of the events in the Soviet Union to the American media .
 Both assumed the American version to be the true one, and they had a good laugh over the discrepancies .
 Both men admired Khrushchev, his de-Stalinization and his policy of peaceful coexistence . Both men were proud of his achievements in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev's high spirits, his cheerful, slightly manic way of exuding aggressiveness, were not altogether unlike George’s own, he says . Besides, his high spirits and his cheerful manner of exude aggressiveness were not entirely unlike George's own .
 Lee told Lee how Stalin’s statue had been dynamited in Minsk and carried away under the cover of night . George roared with laughter when Lee told him how Stalin's statue was dynamited .
 He asked him to read his manuscript, “The Collective,” which he had shown previously only to the typist Pauline Bates, his brother Robert Oswald, and to Gary and Alexandra Taylor .
 George characterized Lee as a man of “exceedingly poor background who read rather advanced books and did not understand even the words in them” Lee was a “rather advanced” man, George said . Lee is accused of failing to understand anything in advanced books . Lee
 He read complicated economical treatises and just picked up difficult words out of what he had read and loved to display them . He loved displaying difficult words and displaying them .
 "There was always an element of pity I had, and my wife had, for him," he says . But there was always a pity for him, he adds. "But there were always elements of pity" for him."
 "An unstable individual, mixed-up individual, uneducated individual, without background. An unstable individual," he said .
 She thought that George liked her husband and treated him as an equal . Still, she thought he treated her husband as a good husband .
 Jeanne also treated Lee with warmth and respect, but she was frank with him, too, too . Jeanne was frank and frank with Lee about her relationship with him .
 She scolded him for his strictness with Marina, whom he forbade to drink, smoke, or wear makeup . He forbade her from drinking, smoking or wearing makeup .
 George and Jeanne told Lee that he must allow Marina, must encourage her, to study English . Lee must encourage Marina to learn English, they said .
 Lee refused with the usual excuse that he would forget his own Russian if he did not practice with Marina . Lee refused to give up his usual excuse for not practising with Marina because he feared she would forget her Russian .
 Marina was knitting away on a tiny jacket for one of her dogs . She advised Marina to give in to Lee more often .
 Marina, encouraged, felt invited into the older woman’s confidence and sought some advice about sex . Jeanne was repelled by Marina's request for advice on sex . But when Marina sought advice from Jeanne, Jeanne felt repelled .
 Her only other sexual confidences to friends were made in private . For one thing, her only other confidences were made to friends . For another thing, she said, "I don't have a sexual relationship with anyone else"
 For another, she knew that Lee would beat her terribly if she dared say any such thing . She knew she would never be able to say anything about Lee again .
 Lee had already encouraged Marina to leave him when they first moved to Dallas . He had already interfered in Lee's private life by encouraging Marina to break up with him . The couple had been married for two years .
 He had seen Lee’s capacity for violence, he knew that Lee had beaten Marina, and he may have been fearful for her safety, he said . He said: “He may have seen Lee's capacity for violent violence, and may have feared for his safety .
 "He respected the private lives of others, and he was not going to interfere again," he said . But he respected the privacy of others and said he would not interfere again .
 He was discreet about his own sexual exploits and evidently did not readily lend an ear to those of others . 'He was discreet' he said, 'but not readily lending an ear'
 Maybe she had gone back too soon, as Jeanne and the other Russians thought, but she had made the right decision . Maybe it was too soon for her to go back, but it was the right thing .
 George considered Lee a good fellow, and he hoped the marriage would stick . Lee was a good man, George said .
 The subject that George really liked to talk about with Lee was politics, he says . George would often talk about politics with Lee, who he says was a great friend .
 Sam Ballen and Declan and Katya Ford thought this was the real bond between them, and Marina remembers their talking politics every time they met .
 Lee and George have been married for more than a decade . The couple have been together for six months .
 She feels certain that her husband had no secrets from her husband . But when it came to his political ideas, she said, she was certain .
 In this sphere alone, Lee was comparatively frank . Lee was too frank, and with this one man, he was frank .
 Marina thinks George knew her husband’s political views better than anybody else . She says he read Lee's political views like an open book .
 President Kennedy was doing more for the black man than any president had before him . They agreed that he was doing a good job, doing more than any other president had .
 The Cuban missile crisis may have tempered Lee’s opinion of Kennedy, although in spite of himself he may well have admired his bravura display . Lee may have admired Kennedy, but may have been wary of his own actions .
 Lee did not say much about the crisis, but when he did talk about it, it was to George—perhaps in the week of the crisis . Lee spoke to George many times thereafter, including in the weeks leading up to that crisis .
 Those who saw George at the time recall that on this occasion, this occasion only, he was critical of Kennedy and that he was, as always, highly sympathetic to Castro . George was always supportive of Castro .
 George sided with the underdog on principle, while Lee had long admired and even hero-worshipped the Cuban dictator . The two were in strong agreement about Castro, so the two had strong agreement .
 Four times that fall, in September and early October, federal marshals and officials of the U.S. Department of Justice had tried to enroll James Meredith, a black man, in the university . Four times they desisted because of opposition from Governor Ross Barnett and angry crowd .
 President Kennedy called out the National Guard and sent United States army troops to nearby Memphis . Meredith was allowed to register, but at the cost of a riot in which two men lost their lives .
 President Eisenhower ordered General Walker to lead one thousand paratroopers into Little Rock, Arkansas, in the battle to integrate Central High School in 1957 . General Walker exhorted the segregationists at Ole Miss .
 He was then sent to Germany, where he disseminated extreme right-wing propaganda to the troops . He used his post to disseminate extreme right wing propaganda .
 He retired from the army to live in Dallas and soon became a leading figure in the John Birch Society . He retired and became a prominent figure in Dallas, Texas .
 Walker was arrested on charges of insurrection and seditious conspiracy . He was later released on $50,000 bond . Walker was sent to the United States prison and medical center at Springfield, Missouri .
 The John Birch Society, based in Massachusetts, had risen to national prominence while Lee was out of the country . Lee was not in the country when Lee was assassinated .
 He had read about Walker in the news magazines his mother had sent to Minsk . But he'd read about it, and about Walker, in the magazines he'd sent his mother sent him .
 He talked frequently about the ‘Birchers’ and the “Minutemen” with Gary and Alexandra Taylor when he first moved to Dallas .
 Lee says Walker seemed to carry about in his very person the threat of “fascism” in the U.S. The fact that Walker lived close at hand in Dallas seems to have stirred Lee a lot .
 He and George had endless discussions about the Birchers, Walker, and the danger of fascism, he says . George had conversations about the dangers of fascism .
 George was well aware from their conversations that Lee ‘disliked, even ‘hated,” General Walker, and by his own remarks George may not only have helped fuel Lee’s hatred but, in an odd way, may have given his approval .
 The fundamental bond between Lee and George was politics . Despite the differences between them as human beings, their political views were strikingly alike . The bond between George and Lee was politics; and despite differences .
 Unknown to either of them, however, what they were seeking was not a better world that lay ahead but a better one that lay behind, buried in the past of each of them .
 Each had lost his birthright, had lost something he considered rightly his. For each had lost their birthright .
 George had at one stroke lost his country, his mother, and his place in a secure social order . George lost his place as a man, his country and his social status .
 The effect on him was magnified by the fact that the father he loved was suffering the very same losses . And the effect on his father was magnifying the loss, he said .
 In later life George was to wander from country to country and never really feel at home in his adopted land, the United States . George was never really at home with his adopted country .
 Lee's loss had been palpable, measurable, while Lee's was infinite . Yet his loss had at least been palpable and measurable . Lee’s was infinite, while his loss was palpable . Lee's death had been measurable .
 What George and Lee had in common was not just their politics but something deeper that they shared -- a lifelong drama of dispossession . What George shared was a lifelong struggle of the dispossession of the South .
 It was this that gave depth to their relationship, this gave consonance and resonance to everything that passed between them . It was the depth of their relationship that gave them depth .
 Politically each was a sounding board for the other, but any account of the echoes that bounced back and forth is incomplete without reckoning in the wives, each of whom was likewise a sufferer in the drama of dispossession .
 Jeanne’s father had been killed by Communists and, in exile from her homeland, China, she had taken first a French and then an American identity . Jeanne's father died by Communists .
 Marina was illegitimate, had never been at home in any of her Russian ‘homes,” and, like the other three, had left the country of her birth . She was born illegitimate and never lived in any Russian "homes"
 Jeanne was the only woman whose political views Lee respected . George had influence that George had on Lee may have been amplified by the women, especially by Jeanne .
 George, for example, had innumerable avenues through which he was able to express the central drama of his life, that of yearning to be ‘in,” yet having to be thrown out . George's central drama was that he yearned to be "in," yet having
 He and Jeanne had countless harmless ways in which they could shock and outrage . They had countless ways to shock the world .
 Unlike the de Mohrenschildts, Lee had no hobbies, no eccentricities, no minor ways of expressing himself . Lee had 'no hobbies' and 'no eccentricities' in his life .
 He had already expressed his political ideas on a grand scale twice, by abandoning first America, then Russia, all before he had reached the age of twenty-three .
 Declan and Katya Ford spotted the critical difference between George and Lee . Declan said he and Lee Ford were 'very close' to each other .
 Their perspicacity was curious, for they liked George and disliked Lee . The two men were curious about each other's relationship with Lee .
 Lee was a “serious seeker,” and “idealist” while George only wanted to be “a commissar” George was “on top” himself . Lee was ‘serious seeker’ and ‘idealist,’
 Lee was capable of acting on his beliefs, according to the Fords . Lee's family says they saw him as a man capable of following his beliefs .
 Marina says that her husband was slightly afraid of George and that for George alone, he might even go so far as to amend his political opinions . Marina says she was afraid of her husband and that George alone .
 He would even take his advice on such matters as what time to go to bed, where to stay, and whether to get a new job .
 George himself said that “he is just a kid for me, with whom I played around. George himself . George himself himself said “He is just . a kid’s with whom he played around .
 The one man he longed to be close to, the one man whose esteem he coveted, was himself being kept at arm’s length by the one .
 Lee’s idea seems to have taken shape in 1963 that by a single, dramatic act whose political thrust George would approve, he might compel George's respect . As the winter of 1963 began, Lee's mind seemed to be in the shape of a single dramatic act . Lee's
 Lee’s mother and stepfather, Edwin A Ekdahl, were married in 1945 . Lee was Lee's stepfather and mother-in-law at the time .
 Marina at the age of 14 and about to enter pharmacy school, in the woods outside Leningrad . Marina was about to start pharmacy school when she was murdered . Marina died in a house explosion in the early hours of October 31, 1944 .
 Lee defected to Moscow in 1959 . Lee was a member of the Soviet Union . Lee's defection to Moscow was a major success in the Soviet bloc . Lee is credited with saving his country from ailing Russia .
 Lee in a photograph taken at the Minsk Radio Plant in mid-January, 1960 . Lee in photo taken at Minsk radio plant in January 1960 .
 Lee in the summer of 1960 relaxes in the courtyard of the Minsk Radio Plant with some of the men who taught him Russian . Lee's father was a radio engineer at the radio plant .
 Lee on a picnic in Minsk with Eleonora Ziger and a friend in the summer of 1960 . Lee on the picnic in 1960s .
 Lee’s birthday, October 18, 1960, with his best friend, Pavel Golovachev, and Ella Germann . Ella was the girl who refused to marry him . Lee's birthday is October 18 .
 Marina and Lee Axyonova were on a picnic in Minsk in the early autumn of 1961 . Marina was with her aunt Lyuba on the trip to Minsk .
 The Zigers see the Oswalds off at the Minsk railway station in May 1962 . The Ziger family was in Minsk at the time of the assassination .
 Marguerite Oswald in her uniform as a practical nurse, in a photograph she sent to Lee and Marina in Russia . Oswald sent a photograph of her nurse uniform to her family in Moscow .
 Lee posing with his rifle and pistol, holding copies of the Militant and the Worker, in a photograph taken by Marina in the backyard of their apartment on Neely Street in Dallas, Dallas, March 31, 1963 . Marina: Lee posed with his gun and rifle in a backyard of
 Marina and the author in Santa Fe, New Mexico, October 1964 . Lee and Marina climbed into the back seat of George’s big gray convertible to pick up Jeanne .
 When they reached the department store, he fairly leaped out of the car to fetch her . The couple had been married for more than a decade .
 Lee liked Jeanne for being able and willing to support her husband . In fact, Lee said he liked Jeanne because she was able to support him .
 They were on their way to a combination Christmas and New Year's party at Declan and Katya Ford’s . The party was held at the Ford's home in New York City .
 She was worried about the Oswalds’ being alone over the holidays and had telephoned Katya to ask if she might bring them to the party . The Oswalds were worried about being alone at the holidays .
 Katya, who hoped she had seen the last of the Oswalds, gulped a little and said yes . Katya said she hoped it was the last time she'd seen them .
 The Fords’ sprawling modern house on Brookcrest Drive was brightly lit for the occasion . It was lit by the Fords' sprawling modern modern house .
 She kissed him on the cheek and greeted him with embarrassed affection . She then hugged him and kissed him back .
 Lee spent most of the evening with Yaeko Okui, a young Japanese girl who had come with Lev Aronson . Aronson is an emigre from Latvia and a well-known cellist with the Dallas Symphony Orchestra . Lee spent the night with Okui .
 Marina moved happily from friend to friend, ate heartily and ended up with a group singing Russian songs at the piano .
 As the Russian at the party most recently arrived in the United States, she was the cynosure of attention . She was the most recently moved to the U.S.
 She felt, moreover, that everyone was genuinely happy to see everyone else . She felt that everyone felt genuinely happy seeing everyone else.
 She sensed a welcome absence of hypocrisy, of fake party manners, in the air . She sensed an absence of hypocrites, in air .
 George Bouhe and Anna Meller thought she was not looking well . Watching her, however, they said she was looking ill .
 Miss Okui was certified to teach ikebana, the Japanese art of flower arrangement . The pair talked about Japanese and American customs, and about ike bana .
 Marina noticed that she spoke Russian and was drinking only Coca-Cola, nothing stronger . Marina noticed she was speaking only Russian and drinking only Coke . Marina also noticed she spoke only Russian .
 It occurred to her that Miss Okui might work for American Intelligence . She thought she might be working for the CIA .
 During an interval in the kitchen, she cautioned Lee against talking politics and especially against praising Khrushchev . She also told Lee not to talk politics and not to praise the former leader .
 Never before before, and never again, was she to feel prompted to warn her secretive husband to keep his mouth shut .
 George de Mohrenschildt reacted to Miss Okui exactly as she did . George responded to her reaction to the incident .
 Others at the party noticed that Miss Okui’s escort, Lev Aronson, was more than a little jealous of Lee . Lee's escort was more interested in the model .
 Lee also made a strong impression on Katya Ford’s teenage daughter Linda . Lee made a good impression on the actress's teenage daughter .
 Declan Ford played a record called “The First Family” in which the comedian Vaughn Meader gave a hilarious imitation of President Kennedy .
 Lee Lee stared at Linda with his large, solemn eyes wide open and never once cracked a smile . While the others laughed, Lee kept his eyes closed as he stared at her wide open .
 Linda felt so uncomfortable under that unblinking stare that afterward she could remember nothing else about the party . Linda felt uncomfortable under the unblinked stare .
 The Russians were not invited to the other Christmas parties given by the Russians in the next few days . The Russians are not expected to attend the other parties .
 She begged Lee to buy her one as they walked home from the grocery store one night . Lee bought her one after she asked him to buy it for her .
 Later that evening Marina slipped out on the street, found an evergreen branch, propped it up on their bureau in front of the mirror . She spread cotton around it for snow .
 The next day she gathered up 19 cents that Lee had left lying about and made for the five-and-tencent store . She bought colored paper and miniature decorations .
 She shredded colored paper into tinsel; the decorations went on the branch . She shredded the colored paper and shredded the tinsel .
 Marina lost a purse containing $10 he had given her for groceries, and she expected to be scolded or even beaten . Around this time Marina lost $10 she had given him the money .
 Lee tried to cheer her up by talking baby talk, then talking like a Japanese . Lee said: 'Baby talk' was a good thing for her .
 He played games on the way to the grocery store, where he brought her red caviar, smoked herring, and other treats . He brought her caviar and smoked herrings .
 On New Year’s Eve, Lee, oblivious, or uncaring, went to bed about ten. He went into bed about 10.30pm on New Year's Eve . Lee was oblivious to the fact that it was the biggest holiday of the year .
 When midnight struck, Marina was alone in the bathtub thinking of her friends in Russia and wondering how they were celebrating . Marina was worried about how they would celebrate .
 In her imagination she could see corks flying into the air and friends back in Minsk singing and drinking New Year’s toasts, she said .
 By the time she emerged, tears of homesickness were pouring down her face . She was overcome by tears of home-sickness when she left the hospital .
 She felt that he did not love her, that her marriage and her life with him in America were a fraud, she said . She said she felt her marriage was a fraud and that her life in America was a sham .
 She wrote a letter to Anatoly Shpanko, the medical student whose offers of marriage she had refused both before and after meeting Lee . Lee had refused to marry Anatoly, the student who had offered her marriage twice before .
 Now that she was safely at a distance, her feelings for her rejected suitor came pouring out . Her feelings for the rejected suitor came pouring into her eyes .
 She realized that she had cared for him deeply, more than she knew at the time . She believed that, had it not been for Lee, she would have married Anatoly Anatoly .
 It is not for this I am writing, however, but because I feel very much alone . It is for this reason that I feel alone, and I'm not afraid to be alone .
 My husband does not love me and our relationship here in America is not what it was in Russia, she says . She says she and her husband do not love each other and their relationship is now strained .
 Alik does not treat me as I should like, and I fear that I shall never be happy with him . Alik is not happy with me, I fear I will never have a happy ending .
 I regret that I did not appreciate the happy times we had together and your goodness to me. I regret not appreciating the happiness I had with you .
 I am writing because you asked me to write you the truth about my life here and because I hope we are still friends . I'm writing because of you, and I'm glad we're still friends. I'm here to write the truth. I am here to tell you what I
 She took 25 cents’ worth of stamps from the drawer, stuck them on the envelope, and mailed it . Then she stuck them onto the envelope and stuck them in place .
 Lee came home from work waving an envelope . Lee was found dead in a car crash on January 7 . Lee says he was killed by a single gunshot to the head .
 He shoved the letter to Anatoly in front of her, then quickly snatched it away from her . He shoved it to her, but quickly snatched away it .
 She wanted to tear it out of his hands, but he hid it behind his back . He hid the letter behind the back, hiding it in his hands .
 She jumped up and tried to run out of the room, but he caught her and forced her to sit down . She tried to escape, but was caught and forced to sit back .
 Halfway through her handwriting, he stumbled over her handwriting and asked her what the rest contained . He stumbled over the rest of the book .
 Marina snatched the letter and hid it in the drawer where their bed linens were kept . Marina hid the letter in a drawer in the couple's bed linen drawer .
 He slumped onto the sofa and sat there, his head in his hands, for a long time . He slumped on the sofa, sitting there, for the longest time. He slumped into the arms of his wife .
 "You knew they changed the postage and that the letter would come back to me. You knew that you knew that it would," she said . "I'm glad that I've been able to get the letter back," she says .
 Marina says that there were times when she tried to make Lee jealous, but this was not one of them . Marina says she was not jealous of Lee, but that she is not .
 Marina’s mistake seems to have been that the letter was overweight . The postal rates had not changed; the postal rates were not changed . Marina's mistake was that she had written an overweight letter .
 Lee’s response was a good deal milder than she might have expected . Lee responded to the question: “I don’t think you’re OK with me.”
 "This time he merely slapped her, and he did not have the mean, murderous look he generally had when he hit her," he said . "But this time he simply slapped her," she said. "He didn't have the look he normally had."
 'He practically ignored it when she did something dreadful, yet for a mouthful of sharp words or a bit of mulish behavior, he would beat her up,' he said . 'He would beat up her up. He almost ignored it. Yet for the moment, she would be
 She repented her foolishness and was relieved that he had not received her letter . She was relieved he hadn't received the letter .
 Anatoly would scan the book for a hidden or separate message inside . He scanned the book to see if it was to be sent to a girlfriend who knew Anatoly . Anatoly: "No matter to whom it was written, he would scan it for a message"
 Lee feared for Anatoly's life when his girlfriend slipped a letter past Lee to one of her girlfriends in Minsk requesting news of Anatoly . Lee feared Anatoly would not be able to see him again .
 But aside from these breaches of discipline, she lapsed into helplessness . She lapsed in helplessness as she was forced to take responsibility .
 Stamps were expensive, and she depended on Lee for them, except for such change as she could scrounge from his bureau . Stamps are expensive, but Lee was the only person to get them .
 He hated to run into any of them, hated being seen coming or going . He refused to exchange pleasantries in the hallway, and invariably used the back door of the building .
 Mahlon Tobias is the wife of the elderly, white-haired manager of the building . She is pictured with her elderly wife at the scene of the incident .
 He told her that he was afraid he would be fired or thrown out if Marina was known to be Russian . He said he feared she would be thrown out of the apartment if she was found to be a Russian . Marina said he was worried he would lose his job if he was known
 Jurek may have thought that Mr Jureks would prefer a Czech to a Russian tenant . If so, he may think that he would prefer to a Czech .
 Tobiases noticed that he seldom let Marina out of his sight . Lee was at home on the weekends with Marina . Lee rarely let Marina go out of sight .
 He even came with her to fetch the vacuum cleaner, use of which is shared by all the tenants .
 Lee vacuumed the apartment, carried out the garbage, did most of the dishes, and turned down the bed every night . Neighbors say they didn't know he was doing the chores .
 He was not only dutiful but an affectionate husband, he said . He would follow Marina around all day, following her around, she said .
 He got up by himself very early, made his breakfast, and left his coffee on the stove for Marina . He left the coffee for Marina, who he left behind .
 Lee made up their beds on Sundays, and Saturdays if he did not go to work, it was Lee who made up the beds . Lee was also responsible for the children's bed arrangements .
 He played with the baby daily, and most evenings it was he who gave the baby her bath . Most evenings he gave her a bath, he said .
 He drew the water and tested its temperature with great care before he lowered the baby into the bathtub . He tested the temperature of the water before lowering it into the water .
 Marina would step naked with the exception of a washcloth over his private parts . Then, to Marina’s horror, he would step in himself, utterly naked . Marina would then step in herself, completely naked, with the except for a wash cloth .
 He would splash June and play with her as if he longed to be a little child himself . Then he would splash her in the water . He would also play with June, who he said was a baby .
 To the baby's delight he would splash the rubber ball in the water . And to the baby’s delight he was able to splash it in the air .
 Lee was squeamish about his ears when he had a mastoid operation as a child . Junie could not have cared less, but Lee wiped the water off the baby’s ear .
 He continued to hit Marina, but their battles were within limits both could bear . He and Marina were able to withstand each other's battles .
 Toward the middle of January, however, things somehow, subtly, began to change . Toward that month, things started to change, but then again, slowly, slowly .
 A series of other events occurred at about this time that may have led to what was to be a dramatic shift in his behavior .
 George de Mohrenschildt came by the Elsbeth Street apartment for a brief visit . George came to visit the apartment at the beginning of January .
 Lee was at work, George was in Oak Cliff on business, and he felt like gossiping . Lee was in the midst of work, and George was on business . Lee felt like he was gossiping with George, who was in Dallas, Texas .
 It was a parting remark, the only one of its kind ever to pass between them . It was the last one of the kind of parting remark ever to come between them.
 As George’s suggestions to women went, it was nothing, a mere way of getting out the door . As George's suggestions went, the suggestions were nothing, just a way out of the door. It was nothing .
 Lee may have suspected that George, too, was attracted to Marina . Marina never told him of George’s remark, but since he suspected everyone, Lee suspected everyone . Lee may also suspect that George also attracted to Lee .
 Marina told her to take her dress off when she was going to visit the de Mohrenschildts' home . Lee told Marina to wear a sweater and slacks when they were going to the family's home .
 Lee was taking no chances when they went anywhere, to the park or even the grocery store . It was the same when they were going anywhere . Lee took no chances.
 So jealousy may have been still another of the emotions he felt for George de Mohrenschildt . So jealousy could have been another of his feelings for the man .
 Lee signed up for a nighttime typing course at Crozier Technical High School . Lee was to start at the end of the month . A few days later, on January 14, he signed up to the course .
 Lee and Marina had an extraordinary conversation, another in the chain of events that may have harmed Lee’s peace of mind, Marina says . Lee's marriage to Marina ended in January . Marina says she and Lee had a "extraordinary conversation" about their relationship .
 They were lying in bed together, the light out, in a companionable mood . The couple were in a 'companion' mood when they were together .
 It was one of those times when it seemed as if there was an alliance between the two of them against the rest of the world . It was a time when they seemed to be united against each other .
 Speaking Russian, they were using the lingo of children, and Lee was describing his old girlfriends . Lee was speaking Russian, speaking to his old girlfriend .
 Marina asked him to tell her in advance if ever he was planning to be unfaithful . Marina told him she wanted to know if he was going to cheat on her .
 Marina noticed that he was smiling and appeared uncertain whether to believe her or not . Marina noticed he seemed to be smiling and seemed uncertain whether he would believe her .
 It had been a lesson to her for the whole of her life and had killed her desire for anyone but Lee . She had learned her desire to be with anyone else was dead . Lee had taught her that she would never want to see anyone else .
 The pair had a game that whenever either of them said “word of honor,” the other had to tell the truth . They had to play a game where they would say “words of honor” to each other . The game was a game of truth .
 The next morning, as he was dressing for work, he brought up the subject again . The next day, he said, 'I'm not going to let it slide down'
 Marina made her confession out of a desire to bid up her own value, a wish to make a clean breast of things, and a momentary lapse into the old trust and frankness that cropped up from time to time between them, especially on her side .
 He decided that her letter to Anatoly had been a ruse and her infidelity with Leonid a lie, and that both had been concocted by Marina to make him jealous, he said . He decided to end the affair with Anatoly .
 As usual he denied the plain truth and thought up other ‘truths’ instead . As usual, he denied it and said other 'truths' instead . He denied the truth and instead thought up new 'truth'
 He signed in promptly every morning by 8:00 or 8:15 and stayed until 5:30 in the afternoon, often later . "He signed in early hours of the morning and signed in at least five times a day"
 He begged for overtime because it meant extra pay, and he came to work eagerly every Saturday whenever he was asked . He said: "I'm a very happy man. I'm a happy man."
 Marina for the life of her could not understand what he did there, although he explained it in detail . Marina was shocked to discover what he had done .
 About mid-January, Lee began to have trouble at work— trouble with the job itself and trouble with other men . Lee had trouble with work and with the other men, he says .
 For his first three months there, he had been a trainee, and as promising as any other . He had been at the centre of the world's attention for three months .
 In January his status became about the same as that of any other employee . But in January he was allowed to have his status as a non-employee .
 He was expected to take more responsibility for the company’s clients and see each piece of work through from start to finish .
 He was often cruel and capricious and treated her harshly without any pretext, she says . He often treated her badly without pretext, and she says he was cruel .
 Sometimes he would stalk out, cursing her in English . Sometimes he got so angry that he stalked her out of the house .
 One day Alka was the perfect husband, affectionate with her and the baby, while the next day he hit her for no reason . One day he was affectionate and hit her, while another day he would hit her again .
 Lee worked on Saturday, January 26, from 8:00 in the morning until 5:30 in the afternoon . Lee worked for the day from 8 to 5:00 hours .
 Marina woke him, feeling sexual desire, he says . They went to bed early that evening, and the next morning he woke him up .
 She did not want to get out of bed, and they made love without taking precautions . She said: "She didn't want to take precautions. She wanted to make love"
 She felt closer to Lee and closer to being satisfied by him sexually than ever before . Lee was closer to her than she'd been with him sexually before . She said she felt closer than ever to Lee .
 Lee did not show any happiness over the night before, or elation over the possibility of another child . Nor did he show any elation .
 Lee had managed to save $600 to pay back his loans from Robert and the U.S. Department of State . Lee had saved $600 .
 On January 25, in the form of two postal money orders totaling $106, he paid the final installment of the State Department loan . He paid the last installment of his State Department debt in January .
 Lee filled out a form and sent it to Seaport Traders, Inc., a mail-order firm in Los Angeles . Lee is now free of debt for the first time since his return from Russia .
 The balance of the cost of the revolver, $19.95 plus shipping charges, was to be paid on delivery . The balance was paid on the delivery .
 The order had to be witnessed by someone who could attest that the signer was an American citizen and had not been convicted of a felony . The signer had to sign the order and not be convicted of any felony .
 Experts later testified that Oswald's signature was in Oswald’s handwriting . Oswald's handwriting was later found to be in the form itself .
 The day after he ordered the revolver, Lee committed himself to the typing course . Lee had signed up tentatively two weeks earlier to take part in the course .
 He put down his $9 enrollment fee in cash and started attending typing classes at Crozier Technical High School . The school was only a few blocks from where he worked .
 Typing would enable him to get a better job at Jaggars-ChilesStovall . Typing combined with photographic skills would help him get a job .
 Lee had already put out feelers for part-time work as a stringer in photography . They might even qualify him for a newspaper job, he says .
 Lee persuaded a colleague to teach him techniques he did not know, using the company’s lab and materials after hours, a practice the company tried to discourage . Lee had persuaded his colleague, Dennis Hyman Ofstein, to teach Lee techniques he didn't know .
 Lee made sample calling cards for himself and for George de Mohrenschildt . Lee made the cards for both himself and de Mohranschildt.
 Lee had begun corresponding with both organizations soon after his return from Russia . Lee subscribed to both newspapers . Lee had corresponded to both organizations .
 It gave Lee a cover, so that he would not have to account for his evenings to anyone . Lee's evenings were given to him, but he would have to explain them to anyone else . Lee said: 'It gave him a cover. It gave me a cover . It gave
 The typing class met three nights a week, on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays, from 6:15 to 7:15 . Lee was never home any weeknight before seven, and he often came in even later, Marina says .
 Marina noticed that her husband spent a great deal of time by himself in the kitchen . Marina also noticed that she noticed that he spent a lot of time alone .
 He did not have a typewriter to practice on, but he had a large textbook with a printed keyboard . He used to practice with a large textbook with printed keyboard.
 He was studying a layout of the city, and Marina, Marina, of course, asked why . Marina was surprised by the question .
 He answered that he was trying to figure out the quickest way from work to night school . He told her not to make any noise .
 Marina never looked closely at the maps, never realized that Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall and Crozier Tech were only a few blocks apart, and never stopped to ask herself why it seemed to be taking him so long, hunched over the kitchen table, to
 The bus schedules and maps had almost certainly nothing do with his work or night school . The bus schedule and maps may have nothing to do with him .
 It was also at about this time, toward the end of January, that Lee began to hint to Marina that he was thinking of sending her and the baby back to Russia .
 She felt that she was the sole cause of his increasing irritability and that marrying her had ruined some far-reaching scheme he had for his life . She felt he was the only cause of growing irritability . She said she felt that marriage had ruined her far-ranging scheme .
 Although his hints were more than enough to poison her frame of mind, she did not really believe them . She did not believe her husband's hints .
 Lee knew very well what he was saying, and he did indeed have a far-reaching scheme . But the fact is that Lee knew what he meant to say, and it's not a joke .
 Police say he took the Elsbeth Street apartment in early November . It is a scheme he may already have had in mind when he took it in November .
 Alexandra Taylor's month of February 1963 was far and away the worst in all her married life . Alexandra Taylor noticed that on the day he moved in, he inspected all the doors and windows with care, perhaps to check whether the neighbors could witness his comings and goings .
 Lee had been hitting her ever since they arrived in America; in February there was a dramatic change in the style and ferocity with which he did it . Lee's wife says he has been hitting his wife ever since the couple arrived in the United States .
 No longer did he strike her once across the face with the flat of his hand . He no longer struck her in the face . He said: "I don't know what it is like to say to her now"
 The second he got angry, he turned pale and pressed his lips tightly together . He turned pale, pressed his eyes tightly together. He was angry at the second he became angry .
 His voice dropped to a murmur, and she could not understand what he was saying . She could not hear him talking again .
 When he started to strike her, his face became red and his voice grew angry and loud, she said . "When he started striking her, he became angry and became angry," she said. "He started to hit her and she started to cry."
 He wore a look of concentration, as if Marina were the author of every slight he had ever suffered and he was bent on wiping her out, obliterating her completely . Marina's eyes looked as if she had written the book to him and he wanted to wipe her out .
 To Marina it seemed that it was not even a human being he saw in front of him. Marina was shocked by the sight of her husband's body .
 Their fights occurred over nothing, with Lee’s anger ballooning up quickly, out of all proportion to the occasion . Their fights were over nothing. Lee's anger ballooned up quickly .
 He became stingier than usual, and if by accident Marina left some item off the grocery list she gave him, it might be the cause of another beating . He became even stingier if she went to a store by herself and bought some item, no matter how cheap, that they
 He stored up every grievance, and at the tiniest pinprick from her, they all came pouring out, he said . 'He stored up his grievances, and he stored them up,' he said. 'They all came out of him'
 Marina's feelings were so hurt that she would run from the room . But whenever she tried to wheedle it out of him, he would say, “I know what you want,” meaning sex .
 He insisted on having sex any time he felt like it, whether Marina wanted it or not . He insisted to have sex with Marina, Marina, even if she didn't want it .
 He would pin her down by the arms and legs and take her by force while the tears came pouring down her cheeks . He would hold her down and force her to the ground while she cried . She was taken to the hospital with a broken leg and broken arm .
 Marina thought it was only the violence, the struggle, that made him want her at all . Marina thought that it was just the violence and the struggle .
 He grabbed her by the throat and threatened to kill her if ever she said that again, she said it again . He then grabbed her and threatened her with a knife, she says .
 When she asked why he had begged her to come back, he said it was only because of the baby . He said she had begged him to return because of her baby .
 In Minsk Lee had urged Marina more than once to stand up for herself, “be her own person,” and express her individuality, she said . Lee had also urged Marina to “express her individuality”
 He was smiling triumphantly when he had forced her to beg his forgiveness . But now he behaved like a slave owner, smiling triumphalantly .
 Marina recalled a halcyon time, the Stone Age, when she read that there had been matriarchy before patriarchy reared its ugly head . Wistfully, Marina recalled that she thought it was, when .
 She adds with regret, however, that the ‘slave revolts’ were quickly put down by force . She says she regrets that the 'slave' revolts were put down quickly .
 Lee and another man, each hurrying as usual to meet a deadline, were trying to develop film in the same pan . Lee and the other man were working on film at the same time in the darkroom . Lee: "It's not easy to say goodbye to a man who
 Lee refused to move over a little, saying he had gotten there first . The man asked Lee to move a little . Lee refused . Lee said he was the man who got there first, not the man . Lee: "I'm not sorry. I'm sorry."
 John Graef spotted trouble on the far side of the darkroom and moved in to break it up . Graef broke up the fight in the midst of narrow aisles and delicate equipment . The pair were on the edge of fisticuffs when Graef intervened .
 It was this incident that awakened Graef to the fact that of the 18 or twenty men in the photographic department, not one liked Lee . Graef was angered by the incident .
 When he started typing school, he began to sign out of work half to three to three-quarters of an hour later than he had before . He now signs out of his work half-to-three-quarters-hour later .
 On Wednesdays, when he did not have a class, he regularly signed out even later . He regularly, and from the outset, signed out later .
 It is possible that Lee rifled files of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall and reproduced its tax returns . Lee later appended to a curriculum vitae as an example of his photographic proficiency .
 It is also likely that on his way from work to typing class, he regularly stopped by the post office to see if the gun had arrived, which would account for the fact that he often “slipped into” class late and out of breath .
 Lee’s increasing inability to control himself both at home and at work suggests that emotionally he was in turmoil . Lee's increasing inability of control himself at home or work suggests he was struggling emotionally .
 What cannot be known is whether his deterioration was the result of a cumulative process that had been taking place for months, or whether in January he suffered some sort of precipitous ‘breakdown” triggered perhaps by Marina’s letter to Anatoly .
 Signing up for night school on January 14 fitted in with that plan; but it may also have been an indication that he had conceived another plan . It may also be an expression of his political views that would require a cover .
 Ordering a revolver on January 27 under a false name, and hints to Marina starting the same day that he was thinking of sending her back to Russia without him, both suggest that he may be leaning further toward violence . Ordering revolver under false name suggests he was leaning toward violence,
 During the first week of February, he twice misdated his time sheets at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall . The time sheets were also misdated during that time .
 It was the sort of error he made when he was under stress and in conflict, he said . "It was the kind of error that he made," he said. "I'm not surprised," he added .
 Gradually, with what appears to have been pain, he was reaching a decision to use the gun . Gradually he reached for the gun, reaching for use, he said .
 The party had been organized around a showing of the de Mohrenschildts’ film about their adventures in Mexico . The party was organized to show the film of their adventures .
 Lee and another young man stood in the center of the room all evening locked in conversation . The other guests, and there were six or eight of them, remember Lee . Lee and the other young man were locked in discussion .
 Lee was wearing slacks and an open-collared shirt while the rest of the men were in business suits . Lee is known for his blond, unmistakably German good looks .
 Schmidt had arrived only recently from Germany and was going back there in a week or two on holiday . Schmidt arrived in Germany only recently and is going back to Germany for a few weeks .
 Lee was interested in Germany, and Schmidt in Lee’s account of his experiences in Russia .
 George de Mohrenschildt must have been astonished by the rapport between these two young men . He knew politics, he knew, ought rightly to have set them at war . But George had been astonished to discover the rapport .
 It is not known what Lee and Schmidt discussed, although Schmidt did say later their conversation lasted “several hours” and had been about politics . Schmidt said later that their conversation had been “about politics’s”
 He also felt that the young American had enormous ambition but was resigned, because of his limited education, to being unable ever to fulfill it .
 George was at the wheel of his convertible, with Lee and Marina in the back seat . George was driving the convertible with Lee in the passenger seat .
 Marina remembers Lee’s intense concentration on every word George said, and the use by both of them, for the first time in her hearing, of the word “Fascist,” which is the same in both Russian and English . Marina remembers how Lee focused on every
 George and Lee began to speak in English, a sign that they were talking politics . Then they began to talk again, then they began speaking in English .
 Marina could not follow what they were saying, but she has always felt that this evening was a turning point in Lee’s life . Marina said: “This evening was the turning point of Lee's life. Marina felt it was the beginning of her life."
 She believes Lee pounced on some remark George made, which affected his later actions . Lee believes that Lee's reaction to George's remark was to blame for his actions .
 She suspects that George said something that inadvertently, in her words, “influenced Lee’s sick fantasy,” she says . Lee, having seized the idea, squirreled it away out of sight so that neither she nor George would guess where it came
 George was convinced that a group of Birchers and FBI men had together broken into his apartment while he was in Mexico and rifled his papers . Not only did George hate the John Birch Society, he also believed that he was rifled by FBI agents .
 He and Lee had often discussed the John Birch Society and its most visible spokesman, General Edwin A Walker . Walker was a prominent member of the society . Walker died at the age of 92 .
 George may have said or implied about them on this occasion, or in some earlier discussion, is a matter for speculation . Just what it was that George might have said about them is speculation .
 George did not know that Lee already was thinking of killing Walker . Lee had already been planning to kill Walker, Lee says .
 Schmidt was rumored to be the son of an SS officer and may have reminded Lee of the attempt on Hitler’s life by officers of his own staff in 1944 . Had it been successful, it might have ended the war early and saved lives of many Germans .
 George may again have equated the John Birch Society and General Walker with the “Fascist threat” in the U.S. Then there was his talk with George, who may again equated them with the "fascist threat" in the United States .
 He was not original in the way he phrased things, and in this case even his words may have come from Schmidt or de Mohrenschildt . Even his words were not original .
 Lee looked on Walker as the “Hitler’s of tomorrow,” he said . With or without them to say it for him, it is clear that Lee looked at Walker as tomorrow's Hitler .
 Lee may have found the sanction—the permission—he needed to go ahead with his plan . So did George, and in this consonance of views with a man whom he admired and whom he very much wanted to impress . Lee's plan may have been approved by George, who he
 Lee Harvey Oswald was a dedicated idealist willing to make any sacrifice for the sake of his political beliefs . He would at one stroke win George’s respect and even awe, save the United States from fascism, and save the U.S. from fascism .
 Walker will join evangelist Billy James Hargis in a cross-country speaking tour to warn against the dangers of communism . The next day the Dallas Morning News announced that Walker would join the well-known evangelist .
 The tour, to be called “Operation Midnight Ride,” was to begin February 27 in Miami and end in Los Angeles on April 3 .
 Marina de Mohrenschildts says she heard Lee talking in his sleep about Walker tour . She doesn't know which night of announcement of tour .
 Marina sat upright in bed, thinking he was talking to her . He spoke very loudly and enunciated each word so clearly that Marina sat awake in bed . Marina said: 'He was talking very loudly. He was speaking very clearly'
 He was speaking in English, not Russian, and was repeating the same words again and again . But he was talking in English .
 Marina did not understand what he was saying, but it was the first time he had talked in his sleep since they were in Minsk, when Lee was making up his mind to return to the United States . Lee was afraid that he would be arrested by U.S. officials .
 He was anxious after that and once or twice in the weeks that followed asked whether he had talked in his sleep the night before . But he was anxious again and asked if he had been talking in the sleep the day before .
 Walker’s anti-Communist, anti-Castro crusade continues . Walker has been in touch with the Cuban government for decades . Walker is a former CIA director .
 Lee lived in Dallas, Dallas, just across the river from Lee . Lee was close to Lee when he died . Lee's wife was also a Dallas resident .
 The stories must have been electrifying to Lee, yet filled him with anxiety at the same time . Lee's life was filled with anxiety and excitement, but also anxiety .
 Either he must kill Walker right away, or he would have to wait for six weeks, until Walker returned from his tour . Either he had to wait six weeks to kill Walker, or it would be six weeks .
 Lee meant to kill Walker at close range and at the risk of his own life . Meanwhile the revolver had not arrived, a choice of weapon that indicated that Lee intended to kill him . Lee's gun was not ready, and the revolver was not arrived .
 Lee was not the man, at any time, to show his face in a gun shop and buy a weapon openly, police say . Lee has been charged with gun crimes in the U.S.
 His colleagues John Graef and Dennis Ofstein remember that he was always headed for the post office when he left work . But whenever they offered him a ride he invariably declined, they say .
 He could pick up a package at the post office only between 8:00 and 5:30 on weekdays, hours when he was normally at work, or 12 noon on Saturdays . He could only pick up packages between 8-5:30 and 12 noon .
 Lee signed out of work at 5:15 a.m., early enough to pick up a package at the post office . On Friday, February 15, the day after the Walker trip was announced, Lee went to the post post office to collect a package from the post . Lee signed
 The next morning, Saturday, for the only time in all his months at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, he signed in at 9:00m., a full hour later than usual, an indication that he may again have stopped by the post office hoping to pick
 Lee received another piece of news that must have confounded his plans and emotions—until he found a way to fit them together . Lee received the news the same day that had confounded him and his emotions .
 He crowed and exclaimed for a day or two, but then, uncharacteristically, seemed to forget all about it . "He crowed about it for a couple of days, and then, after that, he seems to forget it," he said .
 It was the story that made Walker seem the closest and most human of any of any . It stressed the anti-Castro side of his trip . Walker's story made him seem closer and more human to Castro .
 Marina, a Soviet citizen, forced to write to Nikolai Reznichenko, chief of the consular section of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, asking that she and June be allowed to return to the USSR alone, without Lee .
 Marina asked the embassy to give her ‘material aid’ for the journey . Marina asked for help from the embassy in a message dictated by Lee .
 Lee asked the Soviet government to pay for his wife and child's return to Russia . Lee had moved heaven and earth to get them out of Russia, less than a year later he was asking for their return . Lee: "I want to make sure that the government pays for the return
 Marina’s handwriting, which is usually neat, was sloppy and the message brief and casual, almost to the point of disrespect . Marina's handwriting was sloppy, she said .
 She must have been distraught and seems also to have been seeking to sabotage her husband’s purpose . She must also have been trying to sabotage his purpose, she said .
 She had no idea of her husband’s motive, nor did he say a word to enlighten her . She said he did not say anything about the motive .
 She would be going back to relatives who did not want her and with the stigma of her husband’s rejection, she said . She said: “She would be . going back . back to . relatives who didn’t want her. She would have to go back
 All this, plus her pregnancy, was very nearly more than she could bear, she said . She was pregnant with a baby girl .
 Marina was waking up to how calculating Lee could be, and how far ahead he laid his plans . Marina was starting to realize how calculating he could be . Lee was planning to take advantage of his wife's trust in him .
 She suspected that he wanted her out of the way in time for expenses of the new baby’s birth to be paid by the USSR . But she was probably right, as she suspected he wanted to pay for the birth .
 "He always left it open a crack just in case he decided to pass through again," he said . He always left the crack crack open just a crack .
 When he defected to Russia, he failed to take the oath renouncing his American citizenship . The oath would have irrevocably prevented his return to the U.S.
 He hinted to officers of the FBI, the Soviet Embassy, and Marina herself, that he might want to go back to Russia . When he did return, he hinted that he may want to return to the Soviet Union .
 Marina refused to learn English or become too attached to American life . That was a major reason he refused to allow her to speak English . He refused to let her learn English .
 His restlessness can perhaps be traced to an incapacity to accept responsibility, for Marina, his children—or himself . The restlessness is perhaps traced to his inability to take responsibility for his family or himself .
 He had expected the Soviet government to take care of him while he was in Russia, and the American government to pay for his journey home . He had also expected the U.S. government to help him get home .
 In Texas, he had maneuvered the Russian emigres into helping him, and now it was once again the government’s turn . In Texas he had managed to get the government to help him, but now it is again .
 Only days after he learned of Marina’s first pregnancy in Minsk, he had set in motion the machinery for their return to America .
 The day after he learned of her second pregnancy, in Dallas, he began to prepare for her return to Russia . He began preparing for her to return to Dallas .
 On the day he ordered his revolver, January 27, he first hinted to Marina that he was thinking of sending her back to Russia— to get her used to the idea . He first hinted that he wanted to send her home to Russia . He wanted to get Marina used to being sent
 The week he seems to have decided that he would actually carry out the scheme, he took the initial steps for her return . And the week after he decided to carry out, he seemed to be determined to do so .
 Lee had assumed that a close-up assault on Walker would immediately result in his own death . Lee had probably assumed that he would die instantly . Lee was killed by Walker's gunfight .
 Killing Walker would be perceived by everyone as a political statement against “fascism” and the American right . Killing Walker was perceived as a statement against fascism and the U.S. right .
 From his prison cell, or in a trial, he could enunciate that statement, and the Soviet government would approve it . From prison cell or trial, it could be said to be approved by Soviet government, he said .
 The American government might agree to expatriate him, and the Soviet government may agree to accept him . With Marina and his child already there, he could be expatriated to Russia .
 By sending Marina and June to Russia, then, he would create his own asylum in advance . By sending them to Russia he would be creating his own Asylum in advance, it would create an asylum .
 The week after Lee forced Marina to write to the Soviet Embassy was the most violent in all their married life . Lee and Marina's marriage was the 'most violent' week after the incident was 'the most violent ever' Lee's marriage to Marina was 'a violent week'
 "He showed no concern for her pregnancy and treated her in a manner that reached the point of ferocity," she said . He showed "no concern for his wife's pregnancy," she added .
 Marina was hit so hard across the face that her nose started bleeding . Marina's father hit her so hard that she had to have her nose bled . Marina was a victim of her father's violent beatings .
 Quietly, he smashed a pane of glass in the kitchen door, then coolly reached in and unlocked it . Quietly he smashed the glass, then reached in to unlock it .
 He scooped up the pieces of glass and piled them neatly on top of the kitchen trash . The glass shattered glass fell into a pile of trash .
 He strode into the bedroom and, without a word to Marina, lay down on the bed with his back to her . Without a word, he lay down in front of her without any word .
 As baffling as his anger were his repentances, for sometimes his fury departed quickly . Sometimes his anger departed quickly, as did his repentance .
 At the sight of his tears, she, too, would burst into tears, and the two of them would cling to one another and cry . At the time, she would burst .
 She had no idea what was causing it and told herself that perhaps he struck out at her because he had to hold himself in at work and she was the only person he could get angry at . She told herself he was angry at her for being angry at him .
 She also told herself that she was to blame, that she brought on many of their quarrels, and that her punishments were the least she deserved . She also said she brought many of them quarrels .
 Marina, too, was at the breaking point, and her tongue lost none of its acerbity . Marina's tongue was on the edge of her tongue, and she was clearly annoyed .
 Her sharp words probably brought on a few beatings, but they also helped keep her intact, helped her feel that she was still a human being in spite of humiliations that imperiled her fragile self-respect . She said: "Her sharp words were probably bringing on some beatings
 Marina survived Lee’s beatings, she struggled to survive them, but what did not survive was her respect for Lee . “Marina survived Lee's beatings but what she struggled with them,” she said. “She struggled to cope with them but what
 The crisis came on February 23, General Walker’s last Saturday in Dallas . General Walker's last Saturday was February 23 .
 He may have been spying on Walker, but he was not stalking him . The revolver had not arrived . Walker was not stalked by Walker .
 Lee has asked Marina to fix him something special for dinner, a Southern dish called red beans and rice . Lee asks Marina to make it special for him, but she turns him down .
 Hungarian dishes have a good deal of rice, so she took her Hungarian cookbook off the shelf and pored over it . She also took a look at the recipes in her new book .
 She found nothing helpful there and fell back on Mother Russia . She fell back to her usual routine in Russia .
 He told her that she should fix the rice separately and then pour the beans over it . He said she should do the same thing separately .
 The next thing she knew she knew was in the bedroom and he was about to hit her . He was going to be hitting her, she said . She said: 'He was going on the attack'
 He hit her hard across the face, then whirled and started to leave the room . "He hit her . Then he started to walk away," he said .
 His lips were pressed together, and he had an inhuman look of hate on his face . He had a look of hatred on the face. He had pressed his lips together and his face was pressed together .
 Lee went to the baby and sat alone with her in the next room for a long time while Marina lay on the bed and sobbed . Lee sat with the baby for long time before Marina cried and went back to the bed . Lee and Marina were devastated by the loss .
 She went into the bathroom, glanced into the mirror, and saw bruises all over her face . She went to the bathroom to find out what happened to her daughter .
 She picked up the rope she used for hanging the baby’s diapers, tied it around her neck, and climbed onto the toilet seat . She then tied the rope around the neck and climbed on to the toilet .
 He went back to the baby in the living room, with the door open so he could watch Marina . The baby was in the baby's mother's arms when he left her in the room .
 Lee told Marina again and again that she was “the best woman” for him, sexually and in every other way . They made love the whole night long, and Lee said she was the best woman for him .
 Lee seemed calmer, as if his attempt to strangle Marina had been a substitute for killing Walker . For the next few days, Lee seemed calm, as though his attempt was a substitute .
 Lee was frustrated by the failure of the gun to arrive as the day approached when Walker would be leaving Dallas . Lee had taken out his rage on Marina after the gun failed to arrive .
 For weeks the Oswalds’ neighbors had been troubled by the sounds of discord from their apartment . The Oswalds' neighbors had heard the sounds from the apartment for weeks . For weeks, they had lived in the same apartment .
 Tobias cooked up a pretext and dropped by to see if Marina was all right . Tobias was surprised to discover that Marina had been in a bad way .
 The owners of the building paid a call on Lee, warning him that he and his wife would have to stop fighting or move . William Martin Jurek, the owners, paid Lee a call to tell him he would not be allowed to move .
 Lee tried to shrug it off, but the visit told him what he was uncomfortably aware of already . Lee's visit was the first time he'd been told what he had already been told about .
 He had too many neighbors on Elsbeth Street, too many eyes and ears upon him . He had to be quiet and quiet, too much of the time .
 As usual, he scouted ‘For Rent’ signs in the neighborhood, not newspaper ads . Before the week was out, he announced to a startled Marina that he had found them a new place to live .
 It was cleaner than the place they had, and the rent was less, $60 a month instead of $68 . The rent is less, and it was less than $68 a month .
 There were fewer neighbors there, fewer witnesses to their comings and goings . "There are fewer neighbors than neighbors there," she says .
 The greatest attraction, however, as far as Lee was concerned, was a tiny room, not much bigger than a double coat closet, that he could use as a study . Lee: "The greatest attraction is the tiny room that he can use as his study"
 Lee could lock both doors and enter and leave the apartment without Marina’s knowledge . Lee was able to lock both of the doors and leave without Marina's knowledge .
 She knew nothing of the warning Lee had received, and it embarrassed her to leave for no reason people who had befriended her left . Lee knew nothing about the warning she had received from Lee .
 Lee and his wife piled their belongings on top of the baby's stroller . Lee's books, the baby’s things, a few dishes were piled in the stroller on March 2 .
 The couple walked away from Elsbeth Street, owing a couple of days’ rent . With that, the clothing in their arms, and the baby herself, they walked away with them .
 Tobias Tobias advised they had considerable difficulty with Mr Oswald who apparently drank to excess and beat his wife numerous times . Tobias advised Mr Oswald had been drinking too much and beating his wife on numerous occasions . Tobias said Mr Oswald was a 'drinker' and 'beat his wife'
 Oswald’s drinking and beating his wife were complaints from the other tenants due to his drinking . Oswald beat his wife . Oswald's wife was also beaten .
 Geral Walker left Dallas on February 28, two days before the Oswalds moved to West Neely Street . Lee’s suspicion that he was being watched was not altogether ill founded .
 Lee’s plan had to be postponed, and the move itself may have been a welcome sidetrack . Lee's plan was postponed, but it was a good move for Lee .
 Lee could reconsider his plan; he would compose his mind as he had not been able to do before; and above everything, he could write the justification for history that appears to have been nearly as important to him as the deed itself . Lee could now reconsider his plans and write a justification
 Lee’s behavior changed dramatically. Now that he had decided to go ahead, he had changed dramatically . Lee's behavior has changed dramatically, he said .
 His violence toward Marina almost stopped, and he hit her rarely, if all, if at all . He hit her often, but she was never violent toward him .
 'From having been absorbed by turmoil within, he now shifted to the world outside, and that world he moved with speed and efficiency. From having had to deal with that world, he shifted to that world outside,' he said .
 Marina supposed his new calm to be a product of their move, experience having taught her that any move to a new apartment bought her a few days of peace . She supposed his calm was a result of a new move, and he was calm again .
 Lee devoted his first two evenings on Neely Street to fixing up the apartment . Lee's first two nights were spent fixing up his apartment .
 He built shelves for his special room and moved in a chair and a table, creating his own tiny office . He also built shelves and moved chairs and tables .
 Marina realized that it was this “office, and not the balcony he had used as bait for her, that was the reason he had moved them to Neely Street . Marina realized she had been moved to the ‘office,’ and the balcony was not being used as
 Marina, who had been warned often enough not to pry into her husband’s affairs, complied .
 Trousers off, he would sit with legs extended on the coffee table, or he would drape a leg and a thigh over one arm of the sofa . It was his way of asking for a kiss or, if they had had an argument, of asking to make up .
 When she had finished and was ready to do the other leg, he would say no, the right one wasn’t clean yet . He would say 'no' when she finished the leg . When she finished she would say ‘no’ when she was ready, she
 He made her wash one leg four or five times before he would consent to raise the other . He said she had to wash the other leg before he could raise it .
 Next, he would refuse to get out of the tub, his complaint being that the floor was cold, and he told her to put a towel down for him . He would also complain that he didn't want the floor to be cold .
 At her urging, Lee at last read All Quiet on the Western Front by Erich Maria Remarque, a great favorite in Russia . Lee at first read the book at her urging . Lee: "All Quiet on Western Front" was a favorite of the book .
 He closed the book with a disgusted air, went to the public library, and took out a biography of Leon Trotsky . Mr. Trotsky was a member of the Trotskyist movement in Russia .
 One evening, in a romantic mood, he asked her to put on the red brocade dress she had worn on the evening they met . She said yes, 'Yes' to the dress .
 Marina was amused that she was not a Cinderella at a ball any more, but a wife who was pregnant with her second child . She reflected that she had changed her name to Marina .
 Whenever Marina saw Lee on the bed, his arms folded under his head, gazing up at the ceiling, she knew he was thinking about the new baby . Marina knew Lee was thinking of the baby when she saw him on bed .
 He was heartened to hear that her symptoms were different from those while she was pregnant with June .
 Marina, too, wanted a boy, but to please Lee, not because she wanted any son of hers to be president . Marina also wanted a son, but not a son of her husband, Lee, to please her .
 She thought politics was sick, and that anyone engaged in politics had to be sick as well . She said she thought politics is sick. She thought it was sick. Anyone engaged in it should be sick .
 She was reluctant and ashamed, anxious to conceal from the other Russians that Bouhe’s prophecy had been fulfilled . She said she was reluctant to conceal the truth, but was ashamed .
 Since it had happened, however, she told herself that there was merit in having two children close together .
 She would go back to work and support Lee so he could go to college . Then she would go to work, support Lee . She would then support him in college . Lee would be able to go to school .
 He asked Marina to fetch him his Sears, Roebuck catalogue from the Sears catalogue . He asked her to bring it to his kitchen to see what he had read .
 She brought him the catalogue, then crept behind his chair to see what he was going to buy . She crept behind the chair to find out what he had been going on to buy.
 Lee’s life appears to have been fairly normal that first week of March . Lee's life appeared to be quite normal that month .
 He signed in and out of work at regular hours and seems to have attended typing class as usual . He also attended typing classes as usual, according to reports .
 Lee “gravitated” from the outset to the back-row seat beside the window . Instead of sitting up front by the keyboard chart with the other beginners, where she could help him, she sat in the back of the seat .
 She noticed that each night he brought his textbook wrapped in brown paper or a brown paper bag, unwrapped it, propped it up in front of him, and typed from it, she said .
 Yoakum says that he could easily have been typing something of his own without her noticing it . He says he's not surprised that she noticed that he was typing something .
 She assumed that Lee, like some of her other students, was taking the course to escape an unhappy marriage . Lee's mother says she thought Lee was trying to escape a unhappy marriage.
 Marie Ortiz, of Dallas, had been left ill and unable to work with six children . She had also suffered a fire and was unable to care for her children . Ortiz was also left unable to cope with the responsibility of caring for the children .
 Among the most telling are the caustic reference to Christmas and the sarcastic remark that “some kind person” had suggested to Mrs. Mrs. Rosie .
 The remark appears to reflect Lee’s own bitterness over having been sent to an orphanage . Lee's desire that his mother, like Mrs. Mrs. Lee, would be able to take her own life .
 Marina recalls that he later told her that “he wanted to leave a complete record so that all the details would be in it . Lee probably took more than five photographs, for Marina recalls .
 Lee probably developed the photographs at work the following evening, March 11, the next day . Lee probably had studied Walker's house and photos of Walker's home .
 Lee ordered a high-powered Italian carbine, called a Mannlicher-Carcano, from Klein’s Sporting Goods Company, a mail-order house in Chicago . Lee used a coupon clipped from the February issue of American Rifleman magazine .
 Robert wrote that his company had promoted him and transferred him to Malvern, Arkansas . He wrote that he had been transferred to Arkansas .
 He asked Lee and Marina to visit, adding that occasionally he came to Dallas and would like Lee’s home address so he could stop in and see the family . If Lee was not at home, he would like to visit June and Marina, he said .
 Brother refused to give Robert his home address to his brother . It hints at the affection he felt for his brother, yet he refused to tell Robert his address .
 Lee had rented the Neely Street apartment for a purpose, and he did not think he would be there long . Lee rented the apartment for the purpose, but he didn't think he'd be there for long .
 Lee spent hours thinking about his plan to send Robert the answer to Robert . The intensity with which Lee was thinking about the plan is underlined by the extraordinary hours he put in on the day he mailed his answer . Lee's plan was revealed in a new documentary, "Robert Lee's
 It was Saturday, March 16, a day for which he would receive overtime pay, and he contrived to work for ten hours . "It was Saturday March 16," he said .
 Marina, meanwhile, had received an answer to her letter of February 17 to the Soviet Embassy . Marina's letter was sent to the Embassy in Moscow .
 In order to return to the USSR she would have to furnish a long list of documents and photographs, all in triplicate, plus letters from her relatives in Russia . With utmost politeness the embassy explained that in order to . return to Russia she would . have to . furnish a
 Faced by the mountain of red tape that she had lived with all her life, she knew it would take five or six months to clasp her to its bosom once again, but more like five or 6 years .
 Lee forced her to sit down a second time and fill out the embassy’s forms . So on Sunday, March 17, she was not as catastrophically affected as she had been the month before . Lee: "I'm not as bad as I was a month before.
 His time sheets at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall reveal that he signed out early enough nearly every day that week to pick up a package if it arrived .
 The revolver that Lee had ordered in January from Los Angeles and the rifle he had ordered from Chicago in March were both shipped on the same day, March 20 . Lee ordered the revolver in January and a rifle in March in Chicago .
 Lee probably received notice of their arrival early in the morning on Monday, March 25 . Lee signed out early enough that day, and only on that day of the week, to pick up his rifle at the post office . Lee probably got notice of the arrival early that day .
 Lee had to ride a bus two miles from downtown Dallas to an office close to Love Field . The revolver, meanwhile, had arrived by REA Express, and to pick it up Lee rode a bus .
 Lee probably picked it up in Dallas on Monday or Friday evening of that week . Lee was probably in Dallas at the time of the 1963 shooting . Lee's body was found in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Marina recalls, however, that she first saw the rifle toward the end of the week . Marina recalls that she was shocked to see the rifle .
 It was propped up in Lee’s office, and he had camouflaged it, more or less, by draping his raincoat over it . Lee had draped it in a raincoat to cover it .
 The last time I recall seeing him he seemed to “want” me to observe him before he located his seat . I’ve asked myself why he usually “seemed” to try to slip in when my back was turned .
 There were evenings when he came home from work and slipped into the apartment so quietly that Marina did not hear him . He slipped in to the apartment to slip in and out of Marina's apartment .
 She would run to the balcony and trace his silhouette as it disappeared down the street . She would track his silhouette and trace it as it went down the road .
 He would return for supper and then retire to his “little closet,” as Marina calls it . Marina calls her husband's closet a ‘little closet’ He would go to his closet for supper, then retire .
 Lee filled a looseleaf folder with photos of Walker’s house, route he planned to use to escape after he shot Walker . Months before, George Bouhe had given him a blue looseleaf file . Lee now filled it with a description and photographs of Walker's house .
 He may have included a brief autobiography with photographs of himself in Russia and the Pacific .
 Lee wrote on lined paper a fairly long historical rationale, which was both a justification for what he was about to do and a political program for the future . Lee also wrote a lengthy historical rationale for his decision .
 The first document, the historical rationale, is apocalyptic in tone and is hand-printed, not written, as if he had attempted several drafts, then printed it carefully . The historical rationale is apocalyptic and is apocalyptic, but it's not written .
 He had to cross out a good many words, a sign that he was excited, hurried, or disturbed when he wrote it . Even so, he made mistakes and had to write them down .
 Lee predicted that a ‘total crisis’ would soon destroy the capitalist system and the government of the U.S. Lee predicted a total crisis would destroy the capitalism and the American government . Lee also predicted a "total crisis" would destroy capitalism .
 There are two world systems, one twisted beyond recognition ... the other decadent and dying . One of the world's most decadent systems, the other is dying, the author says .
 A truly democratic system would combine the better qualities of the two upon an American foundation, opposed to both ... as they are now . The system would be more democratic than the current system .
 The other document was handwritten, not printed, and set out Lee’s political program in detail . Lee's political program was set out in detail in the document .
 Lee drafted and redrafted documents until midnight or 1:00 a.m. many nights during March . Lee reported to his job regularly, and worked long hours every Saturday that month except March 2 . Lee drafted, redrafted and redrawn these documents until late nights .
 He did some fishing, which, next to hunting, was his favorite sport, and he had luck catching goldfish . "He had luck catch goldfish," he said .
 Marina made fish soup for dinner with her husband's catch . Marina made the soup for the family .
 Lee could not bear to go into the kitchen while the cooking was going on . The fish were swimming and thrashing in the pail right up to the moment Marina thrust them into the pot of boiling water .
 He was often cold to her, sometimes snappish and cross, and frequently the very sight of her seemed to annoy him . But he often seemed to be cold and cross to her .
 Often he came home at night, sat on the balcony with June on his knee, sipped a bottle of Dr. Dr. Pepper .
 She hated guns and was annoyed that Lee was spending money on what she called ‘this dangerous toy” at a time when they were scrimping and saving even on food . Lee hated guns but was annoyed at Lee's decision to buy guns .
 Marina reflected that it was his money; he earned it, and he had a right to spend it as he liked . Marina reflected: "It's his money. He earned it and he deserved it"
 Marina got a huge surprise when Lee came up to her in the backyard and asked her to take his picture . Sunday afternoon, March 31, was Marina's birthday birthday .
 Oswalds had the fenced-in yard to themselves in their backyard . The Oswalds' ground-floor neighbors were away, and the Oswalds were alone .
 Her surprise was transformed into astonishment when she saw her husband descending slowly, triumphantly, down the outdoor staircase dressed, as she had never seen him before, all in black .
 In one hand he carried his rifle, in the other he had a camera and a couple of newspapers . "In one hand, he carried a camera," he said. "I was carrying a rifle, a camera, and a few newspapers"
 One of the chief aims of In tourist, the Soviet travel agency, is to impress foreigners . In tourist is in the Soviet state of the Soviet Union .
 Lee had two cameras, one a Soviet Smena-2, the other a duo-lens American Imperial Reflex . Lee had one camera, a Russian Smena 2, and a pair of cameras, a Soviet-2 . Lee's camera was a duo lens, one Soviet Sm
 The Smena-2 could be set automatically, so you could be in the picture and take it, too . Smena 2 could be automatically set automatically to take pictures of yourself .
 Marina remembers that Lee could not buy film for it in the U.S. Lee's film was not available in the United States . Marina remembers Lee's decision to buy the film was made in a bid to make the film .
 Marina thinks it was about 4:00 pm., for she recalls that Lee was worried about the shadows . Marina thinks she was worried that the shadows were too bright for Lee .
 She thinks that she held the camera incorrectly, at eye rather than waist level . She also thinks she held her camera incorrectly at eye level .
 Not until months later, she realized, on being shown a pair of photographs, that she had snapped the shutter not once, as she first remembered, but twice . She said, "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 Marina did not know it, but Lee had a special reason for sending his picture to the Militant . Lee had sent the picture to Marina, Marina, but she knew he had a reason for it .
 Lee wanted the Militant to know exactly whom it had had the honor of publishing, and that the author had meant every word when he said that he “questioned” the system . Lee wanted to go down in history, and wanted to know who it had been publishing .
 Lee probably developed the photographs at work the following day, April 1 . Lee was likely to have developed the photos at work that day . Lee is believed to have taken the pictures at work .
 John Graef noticed that Lee was reading a Russian humor magazine, Krokodil . Graef had noticed Lee had been reading the magazine in a slack moment . The magazine was a popular Russian magazine .
 He used to dress well for work, but now he's wearing nothing but a white T-shirt with his slacks . "He used to be a good guy," he says .
 Lee worked fast, everyone agreed on that, but he tried almost desperately to work well, and he tried very hard . Lee worked quickly and everyone agreed that he worked fast . He tried to work hard, but the result was a disaster .
 Many more jobs than average had to be done over because they failed to meet company standards . But in the course of a normal day, many more of his jobs had to do over because of standards .
 He told him that business was pretty slow, “ ‘but the point is that you haven’t been turning the work out like you should.” He said .
 Lee worked at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall the rest of that week, through April 6 . Lee worked there until April 6.
 He kept to himself his disappointment at losing the only job he had ever really liked . He kept his disappointment to himself at losing his job .
 His failure had almost certainly been caused by the emotional troubles that became apparent in mid-January . His failure was almost certainly caused by his emotional troubles .
 The troubles must have made it exceedingly taxing for him to do precise work requiring concentration . Those troubles made it difficult to concentrate for him .
 For example, he had become unable to tolerate the presence of anybody near him in the close confines of the darkroom .
 Lee’s frustration and sense of failure on the job, which are vividly described by everyone who worked with him, must have made his emotional trouble worse . It was a vicious circle, for Lee's frustration . Lee's anger and frustration with the job must have led to his emotional
 His indecision in February about whether and when to kill Walker nearly erupted into murderous violence at home . Next there was his indecision about whether or when he killed Walker, and the accompanying torment that nearly erupted in murderous violence .
 In March, with his mind made up and his energies released, he took on a crushing schedule . He worked long hours at work, constant checking at the post office and typing classes .
 Lee took the news more quietly than most men would have, Graef says . Graef: Lee's subdued response was typical of him typical of his quiet demeanor .
 Walker managed to be fired between the date when he received notice that his weapons had arrived and the date he was expected back . Walker was expected to be back in the next few days . Walker is a Marine Corps veteran .
 This coincidence, together with Lee’s own behavior, gives rise to doubt as to what it was he wanted most . Lee's behavior, along with his behavior, raises doubts as to whether he was really trying to kill himself .
 In March he had written to his brother Robert that he had become ‘adept’ in his work and was expecting a raise . In March, he had told his brother he was looking forward to a raise in his job .
 He flaunted a Russian newspaper, which contributed greatly to his being fired . Yet he flaunted it, he was fired .
 Lee said he could always go back to Russia if he failed to find a job . Lee was fired from his job at a printing plant in Russia .
 The truth appears to be that Lee, even now, needed a final push to go through with his plan to shoot Walker . Lee needed a last push to get through with the plan to kill Walker, police say .
 The arrival of his guns was a portent, but by itself it was not enough . "The arrival of the guns was ... not enough," he said . "By itself, it is not enough"
 By maneuvering matters, Lee handed himself a part of the “trigger” he required, he was able to get his job . Lee was fired by President Barack Obama .
 All his life he had responded to being hurt, or rejected, by whirling around and hurting someone else . He had been hurt or rejected all his life, he said . He said: "All his life I've been hurt by being rejected or rejected. All my life I have
 The firing was a catalyst for his characteristic response, he says . The firing would help galvanize him into making a characteristic response . "The firing was the catalyst"
 The rest of the push would be supplied by the return of the Evil Man himself, according to the author .
 Marina, meanwhile, had found a friend, her first since she had given up her Russians . Marina's friend is her first friend since she gave up Russians .
 The de Mohrenschildts met at a party given by Everett Glover, a chemist at Socony Mobil Oil in Dallas . They had met at the party on February 22 .
 Glover knew Marina was badly treated by her husband and was in need of a friend with whom she could speak Russian . Glover knew that Marina was suffering and needed a friend .
 He invited six or eight guests to the party, among them Ruth and Michael Paine, who were in a madrigal-singing group with him . He invited them to his party, which included Ruth Paine .
 Most of the evening she chatted with Marina in her halting Russian while Lee held forth on his experiences in the Soviet Union . Lee spoke to her in halting Russian .
 Ruth drove to Neely Street to visit Marina twice during the first half of March . The two women took their children to the park . Ruth and Marina visited the park twice in March .
 June Oswald was one year old, and Ruth Oswald’s two children were two and three years old . June Oswald died at the age of one . Ruth Oswald was married to June Oswald, who died at one point .
 Ruth’s spoken Russian was hesitant, and Marina’�s English was almost nonexistent . Ruth and Marina's English is almost nonexistent, and Ruth's spoken Russian is hesitant .
 Ruth, who at thirty-one was ten years Marina’s senior, felt that this girl did indeed need a friend . Ruth felt that she was needed by Marina, who is ten years older than her .
 On her third visit, she picked up June and Marina and drove them to her house in Irving, Texas, a suburb on the other side of town . On the end of March, she drove them back to her home in Irving .
 Ruth and Michael Paine invited the Oswalds to supper at their home on Tuesday, April 2, and undertook to arrange transportation . The Oswalds were invited to the Paine's home by Ruth Paine, Michael and Michael Oswald .
 Michael Paine was a research engineer at Bell Helicopter Corporation . Paine: Helicopter is on the road between Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas . He says it's a long way from Fort Worth .
 He left work sometime after five that afternoon and drove to Oak Cliff, Texas, to see his son . He was there at 5:30 p.m. on Monday morning .
 He found the apartment on Neely Street and arrived just before seven o’clock . The apartment is located in the middle of the night .
 She had not packed the baby’s diapers, bottles, and toys and could not decide what to take . The baby's mother was unable to pack her baby's diapers and bottles .
 He had heard about Lee’s experiences in the Soviet Union and was glad of a chance to talk to him before the evening got under way .
 Lee Oswald ordered his frail-looking wife around like a drill instructor, telling her in a loud, harsh voice what to pack but doing nothing to help . Oswald ordered her to pack her belongings but did not help her . Oswald's wife was in the house at the time of the assassination
 He sat on the sofa talking to Michael, interrupting himself only to bark out a new order . He sat and talked to Michael only once or twice a few times .
 Michael said it was “the most fruitful half-hour” he and Lee ever spent together . Michael said later that their conversation was ‘most fruitful’ he had ever spent .
 Lee said he hated exploitation, adding with an edge in his voice that the company that employed him earned a lot more from his labor than it ever paid back to him . Lee said the printing and engraving plant he worked for earned more than he ever received .
 Michael noted that Lee’s voice was laced with scorn for both Russia and America . Michael noted how Lee spoke of his disdain for the U.S. and Russia .
 In Russia, he said, you could not choose your job or where you were going to live . You could not even own a rifle unless you belonged to a paramilitary organization .
 Marina had now packed, the car was bursting with baby things, and they were off to Irving . Marina had packed the car, and the baby was soon asleep . Marina and her family were now in Irving .
 Marina recalls that Lee was shy, and Michael did most of the talking . Marina recalls how Michael was shy and Michael was quiet during the journey .
 Marina caught snatches of the conversation, and Lee had to translate the rest of it . Lee translated the rest with an air of supreme annoyance, as if it were an imposition .
 Michael wished that Ruth were translating instead of Michael's translator . Ruth was so perfunctory that Michael did not trust his translator's interpolations .
 She might not be as fluent as Lee, but she would be at pains to give a full account . She would have been at pains not to say what happened .
 Marina had no way of communicating with anyone except through Lee and was dependent on him for everything she knew . Michael was appalled that Marina had to rely on Lee for all her life .
 He asked where she had learned Russian and whether she had found it hard, adding that he was delighted that she now had a friend with whom she could speak her own language .
 After supper Ruth and Marina washed dishes and spoke Russian in the kitchen, while the men sat in the living room and picked up their conversation where they had left off . Ruth, Marina and the men spoke to each other again after supper .
 Lee smiled an ‘inscrutable’ smile when asked about General Walker, Michael says . Lee and Michael discussed Russian and American politics, Michael later remembered .
 When the women rejoined them, Michael tried to include Marina in the conversation . When the two women were reunited, he asked her to join him .
 He thought that Lee’s behavior toward Marina, his treating her like a vassal and enjoying it, was in cruel contrast with the affection he showed toward his child, he said .
 Paine was a man who respected privacy above everything . The idea was uncharacteristic, for Michael Paine . Paine's idea was not uncharacteristically unusual for him .
 He would not for the world intervene in someone else's affairs unless goaded by outrage and an inner, irresistible prompting . He said he would not intervene in the world .
 Lee's treatment of Marina was so offensive to his notion of human dignity that a reservoir of charity opened up in him that he would have denied he possessed at all . But so appalling was Lee’s treatment, he would’ve denied he had any charity he possessed .
 Marina remembers that the two men talked again about politics . Marina says she remembers that they talked about politics again that night .
 Lee liked Michael, who had listened to his political ideas with respect . Lee also liked Michael's views on the economy, but he didn't like Michael .
 Marina was grateful to her husband for sanctioning this new friendship, for she had nobody else . As for Marina, she was grateful for her husband .
 It was one of the very few times Lee ever mentioned that she might learn English, and that pleased her, too . Lee said she wanted to learn English and that she was pleased .
 It did not occur to her that Lee may have been looking forward to a moment, in the not too distant future, when she would need an American friend who spoke Russian . Lee: "I'm not sure if I'm going to have a friend who speaks Russian"
 The day after the dinner at the Paines’, he used his rifle for the first time . It was on Wednesday, April 3, the day after that dinner, that he used it .
 He signed out of work at five, rode the bus home, slipped upstairs to fetch his rifle, and slipped out again without Marina’s hearing him . “He signed out at five. He rode home, walked home, climbed the stairs and slipped upstairs . He slipped out
 He walked a half-dozen blocks to the corner of Sixth Street and Beckley Avenue and boarded an inbound bus . He walked as rapidly as he could, he walked as fast as possible .
 He rode a mile and a half, a five-to seven-minute ride, to the intersection of West Commerce Street and Beckley Avenue . The ride was a 5 to 7-minute walk .
 He got off the bus and strode quickly down the levee to an uninhabited area 35 feet below called the Trinity River bottom . He strode down the river's levee, then strode to the bottom of the river .
 There he practiced with his second-hand Mannlicher-Carcano C2766 and his four-power telescopic sight .
 He had to get the feel of the trigger action of this particular rifle, which was new to him and more powerful than any he had used before . He had also to learn to work the bolt smoothly so as not to disturb the alignment of the barrel .
 He also had to adjust the sight so that all his shots landed within a fairly small radius . He also adjusted the sight to make sure shots landed in a small area .
 It was the first time he had owned a fourpower sight, and he had to get used to it . He had to learn how to use it .
 Experts say learning to use a telescopic sight is easy (General Walker calls it “very easy” General Walker says it is a skill that vastly enhances accuracy . General Walker: Learning to use telescopic sights is easy .
 Oswald’s training and experience would be able to adjust to the new rifle and scope, “would be capable of sighting that rifle in well, firing it,” with only ten rounds of practice . It has been estimated that a man of Oswald's training and . experience
 Small-game hunting with his brothers in his early years seems to have given him an ease and familiarity with guns . Small game hunting with brothers in early years seemed to have helped him learn to shoot .
 His training in marksmanship in the Marine Corps, at Camp Pendleton, California, was intensive . He learned to sight, aim, and fire from a variety of positions at targets up to five hundred yards away .
 He now had a four-power telescopic sight, which would more than compensate for a lack of recent practice . Moreover, he now had four power telescopic sights .
 Lee signed out of work at 5:05 and arrived home just as Marina was about to take the baby for a walk . On Friday, April 5, two days after his first practice session with his new rifle, Lee went to work .
 Lee announced that he would like to join them; go on ahead, he said, and he would catch up with them . Lee said he would not join them, but go ahead and catch up . Lee: "Go on ahead. Go on ahead"
 Marina pushed the baby slowly in her stroller, and Lee caught up with them before they had walked two blocks . Marina and Lee were walking two blocks away from each other when Lee caught them .
 Marina could not help notice that he was carrying his rifle, clumsily wrapped in his green Marine Corps raincoat . He was moving even more rapidly than usual, and Marina noticed that he had moved even more quickly . Marina was moving more rapidly, and noticed that she was carrying her
 He promised her something, then yanked it away, in this case the pleasure of a walk . As often happened between them, he had promised something, but yanked away .
 When they came within sight of the bus stop, she burst into open reproach . "When they come within sight, she bursts into open . reproach," she said .
 He caught a glimpse of the bus over his shoulder and started sprinting to catch it . The bus was headed for the end of the day .
 Lee leaped aboard the bus and was gone, but by the time she got to the stop, she was gone . Lee had leaped onto the bus at the time of her last stop .
 Lee was too secretive to show his face on a rifle range, and there is no evidence that he did so at any time following his return from Russia . Lee was not known to be on the rifle range at the time of his return .
 He was perfectly capable of climbing onto a crowded bus carrying a rifle poorly concealed in his raincoat . So anomalous was he, however, that he was able to carry a rifle on the bus with him .
 He said he had been practicing, and Marina told him to watch out for the police . Marina said she had been told he should be careful of the situation .
 He said that where he had been, there was no one around to hear him practice . He said where he'd been, he had gone to practice, he said .
 Marina had said that she watched Lee clean the rifle three to five times that week . Marina said she watched him clean his rifle three or five times a week . Lee had said he cleaned the rifle up to four times a day .
 The first time she took his photograph was March 31, when he cleaned the rifle “on the sofa” although he did not fire it that day . She took the photo of him cleaning the rifle on the sofa .
 Lee practiced firing the Mannlicher-Carcano on Wednesday, April 3, and Friday, April 5 . It is possible that the evenings of April 3 and April 5 are the only occasions Lee ever practiced firing . Lee is believed to be the only person to have practiced firing a Mann
 Saturday was his last day at work, and he may have practiced on Sunday, April 7 . Saturday was Saturday's last day for him .
 Marina could not have seen Lee clean the rifle after that—Lee did not have it at home . Marina could have seen him clean it after that .
 Terrified lest it go off, she never went near it, never touched it or moved it no matter where it might be . Terrified she never touched or touched it, even if it might go off .
 Compulsive housekeeper though she was, she did her cleaning in a careful circle all around it . She did her housekeeping circle around it.
 Lee had said he was going hunting, and it made sense to her that he might go target-shooting first, she said . Lee said he wanted to go hunting .
 Jeanne de Mohrenschildt came to call with Jeanne on Thursday or Friday, the 4th or 5th of April . Jeanne came to visit Jeanne on April 4th and 5th .
 She had free time during the day and the use of George’s convertible . She paid her first visit to Marina on Neely Street .
 Marina was drawn to Lee’s ‘office’ but to a clothes closet where he was keeping his rifle . Marina was also drawn to the closet where Lee kept the weapon . Lee was a Marine Marine Marine .
 Jeanne’s father had been a gun collector, and she knew her way around rifles . Jeanne's father was a gun enthusiast, and Jeanne knew she had a way around guns .
 Marina’s worst worry that week had nothing to do with the rifle or target practice . Marina's worst worry was that her husband's target practice was going to kill her .
 She was upset because he was talking in his sleep again, the first time in six weeks . She was also upset that he had stopped talking in the sleep again .
 She sometimes had to wake him twice a night to get out of bed . But during the last days of March and early in April, she had to do so much more .
 "When he came home for supper at six that night, he no longer had the rifle," he said . "He didn't have a rifle. He didn't know what to do with it. When he came back for supper, he had no idea."
 Marina does not remember at what hour he came home . He left the apartment again after supper, and Marina doesn't remember when he returned .
 He buried his rifle near Walker’s house in a wooded spot he had picked out and photographed exactly one month before . He later explained to Marina that he later explained that he buried the rifle near the house .
 Lee's hiding place was in a park 25 to 30 feet above street level next to a footpath 90 feet from the curb line of Turtle Creek Boulevard . Lee’s hiding place, rendered better hidden still by large stacks of underbrush nearby, was better hidden .
 By the most direct auto route, it was not quite half a mile from the point where the footpath met the curb line to the Walker house . The most direct route to the house was not nearly a mile away .
 On foot, the spot could be reached by walking east or southeast from the rear of the house . The distance from the house was somewhat less .
 He deceived Marina by rising early as usual, putting on a T-shirt, and leaving the apartment as if he were going to work . He deceived her by dressing up like he was going to go to work, she said . Marina says he left the apartment pretending he was working .
 He visited the Texas Employment Commission and told the sympathetic ladies there that he was out of a job . He told the ladies at the commission that he had been told he had no job .
 Walker came back, he himself recalls, “in the late afternoon or break of evening” that day . Walker: “I came back in the late hours or breaks of evening" Walker: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to have
 Marina assumed that he had gone to Crozier Tech. Then he went out again, and Marina had no idea he had quit typing school . Marina didn't know that he'd quit school .
 She noticed that he returned earlier than usual after typing class, but it didn't occur to her to ask why . She noticed he returned early than usual, but didn't ask why.
 After supper he boarded a bus that would take him to the spot where he had buried his rifle . The bus took him to Crozier Tech, not the bus he took to school, but one of several buses that would carry him close to the site .
 Lee was to claim later to Marina, Marina, he glanced at the church announcements in the paper . Lee was on his way to Marina when he saw the announcement .
 They were more numerous and more prominent because it was Holy Week, the week between Palm Sunday and Easter . They are more numerous than usual because of Holy Week .
 The Church of Latter Day Saints, the Mormon church at 4027 Turtle Creek Boulevard, was having a service Wednesday night that would get out at about nine o’clock . General Walker noticed that the church was just behind General Walker’s house .
 He told Marina that it was a holiday and he was going to collect his paycheck . He told her he was collecting his paycheck, but she said it was just a day off .
 For the third time since his final Saturday at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, he was gone the whole day . For the first time since the final Saturday of the season, he is gone for a whole day. For the second time in a row he has been
 He came home at six and after supper walked down the street as he often did to buy a newspaper and a bottle of Dr. Dr. Pepper . He often did, but after supper he often walked down to buy newspaper and Dr. pepper .
 After two months of being irritable, Marina says, after two months, he unexpectedly turned tender toward her . When he returned, he sat out on the balcony, where, she says, he turned tender .
 Dr. Pepper, then handed the bottle to her and grandly urged her to drink it all . He then handed her a bottle of Pepper, which he then gave her a glass of soda .
 Marina thought Lee looked pensive and rather sad on the morning of Wednesday, April 10 . Marina said Lee looked 'pensive' and 'rather sad'
 'The boss just didn't want to keep someone the FBI was interested in. But probably the FBI came and asked about me, he says . The boss just wanted to keep the FBI interested in him, he adds .
 She had no idea how to comfort him, and when he went out for the day, she supposed he was looking for work . When he went for work, she thought he was just looking for a job .
 Lee did not come home for supper that night, Marina recalls . Lee's wife Marina says he was not at home at all times . Marina recalls that Lee never came home that night .
 She waited until seven, an hour past their usual suppertime, then absent-mindedly cooked something for herself . She waited for her husband to arrive at 7 p.m.
 Lee had taught her not to pry, not even to ask herself what he might be up to . Lee taught her to not pry. Lee had also taught her that he might have been up to something .
 He had accustomed her to his absences at hours when most workingmen and, above all, most family men, are at home with their wives . He had grown accustomed to his absence .
 Despite efforts to censor her curiosity, she could not suppress an awareness that his comings and goings had been out of the ordinary . Nor, despite efforts to suppress efforts to . suppress her curiosity .
 Marina sensed, too clearly for her own peace of mind, that this element on top of the rest made up a recipe for danger . What kind of danger she could not have said, but what kind of was danger she feared .
 While she was waiting for Lee, she thought back to the last time he had been so late . While she waited for him, she remembered when he was late .
 Frantic with worry, she had gone to the Tobiases next door and asked them if she might use the phone . She had been worried about her daughter's safety .
 Tobias called George de Mohrenschildt, told him Lee had not come home, and asked him to find out what he could . Tobias was Tobias doing the dialing .
 George called the printing plant, then called back to report that Lee had left hours before . George called back, called back hours later to say Lee had been there .
 Lee no longer had a neighbor with a phone, and Lee had a job where, in a pinch, she could try to reach him . Lee was forced to leave her home to live with her husband . She no longer has a neighbor who has a phone with her .
 On an impulse, about ten o’clock, she opened the door to her husband’s study . She opened it to him in his study .
 As for my personal papers (both military papers and papers from the factory), I prefer that you keep them . As for your personal papers, I prefer to keep them. As for his personal papers you can keep them, he prefers that they keep .
 At 11:30 Lee walked in, white, covered with sweat, his eyes glittering, covered in sweat . Lee walked into the room at 11:15 a.m. for a meeting .
 She was certain that police dogs would track down the rifle and be at the house any second . She said she was certain they would find the rifle in the house .
 She lay awake for hours listening for the barking of police dogs and the footsteps of policemen on the staircase . She listened for hours to hear police dogs barking and footsteps on the stairs .
 She glanced over at Lee, who was lying like a dead man beside her, and she felt sorry for him . Lee was lying beside her . She felt sorry .
 She felt the pity almost physical in its closeness and fear of what the police would do to him . She felt a pity almost physically in her pity .
 She would go to the police and tell them, in sign language or some other way, what her husband had done . She would then tell them what she had done to her husband .
 The truth is that she had no one to lean on but Lee and was deathly afraid of losing him . The truth was that Lee was not the only one she was leaning on to .
 She did not know how to tell her story, much less make anyone believe her . Nor, with her lack of English, did she know how she would have to tell it .
 Marina’s dependence upon Lee was so great was she did not consider other alternatives . Marina's dependence on Lee was too great for her to consider other options .
 She was forever picking up loose change from Lee’s bureau and buying cigarettes he forbade her . She was always collecting loose change and buying the cigarettes he banned her from smoking .
 She could have picked up a dime, called the de Mohrenschildts from a public phone, and asked them to drive her to the police station and interpret for her . She could've called the police, but she could have called them from the phone .
 Failing the de Mohrenschildts, she could, in sign language or in some other way, have asked her former neighbors, the Tobiases, to help, and they lived just around the corner .
 She didn't think police might be able to find a Russian interpreter . Nor did it occur to her that the police might have been able to use an interpreter .
 She grew up in a world where police spies are everywhere and it is your duty by law to inform on anyone, even the person closest to you, if you know he has committed a crime . She had grown up in the world of police spies and it was her duty to inform .
 In such an environment the only honor, the only way of keeping faith, is never, ever, to inform . The only way to keep faith is never to inform. In such a situation the only honour is to inform the public.
 Marina’s private morality says that you must not. The law says you must . Marina's private morality tells that she must not . The law is the law; Marina's morality says she must .
 It would be one thing to scold Lee harshly, to his face, or even to try to change him, but quite another to go to the police or involve the state in any way . And so it would be a mistake to try and change Lee, or to appeal to friends
 Marina would have been incapable of going to court even in selfdefense when her stepfather tried to frame her as a prostitute . Marina would not have been able to go to court in self-defense when she was framed .
 As she saw it, her going to court against him, even though it was he who brought the charges, would have destroyed their relationship . She saw it as she would have gone against him .
 She did not know that in this matter Soviet and American law are directly opposite . Soviet law is directly opposite to American law, she says .
 She would not in any state have been allowed to testify against Lee in court . Here, in most states, it was not her duty to go to the police; she would not have been able to testify in court against Lee .
 She assumed that her legal duty in the U.S. was exactly what it would have been in Russia . But since she didn't act, her failure to act made her in her eyes— and perhaps in Lee’s—his accomplice .
 Marina did not go to the police, or consider it for more than a moment or two . So Marina decided not to go to police, and did not consider going to the authorities .
 Although she told herself that it was her legal duty to inform on Lee, her personal morality stressed loyalty to her husband above everything . Although she said she had a legal duty, she said it was not her moral duty to do so .
 Many people told her that if only she had gone to the police “after Walker,” a later, lethal event would not have happened . And this loyalty was to expose her to a crushing sense of guilt, she says .
 Marina’s feelings of guilt continued to cluster incongruously around the dim, but intact, figure of General Walker . ‘Even after that event, Marina continued to feel guilty,’ she said .
 Her guilt over her failure to inform on Lee ‘after Walker’ was to save her, until she could better bear it, from facing the huge, intangible and infinitely more complex question of what responsibility, if any, she bore in a much greater tragedy .
 Marina was hugely relieved, but she was still too nervous to touch her morning cup of coffee . Marina was relieved to see her first day back in the UK .
 She had heard the name before but she had no idea what he had done that might make Lee want to kill him . She was worried about what Lee had done to kill her .
 He merely said Walker was a “Fascist” and a former general, a madman and a leader of a Fascist organization, he said . Walker is a "madman" and "a former general," he added .
 Marina objected that no matter who he was, Lee had no right to kill him . Marina objected to Lee's killing, saying he had no obligation to kill her . Marina said Lee should have been allowed to kill the man .
 All her life she had heard about Hitler’s atrocities, and she could not think how to respond, she said . ‘All her life . She had heard of Hitler's atrocities, she had no idea how to . respond. She could not . think how . to respond
 General Walker, he told her, had been sitting at the back of his house near a window, working at his desk . General Walker said he had been at a desk in front of a window when he was killed .
 Marina's account is not clear whether Lee rode one bus home that night or two . It is unclear if Lee rode a bus home or not a bus .
 It is logical that he would have run straight through the woods to his hiding place, buried the rifle, then hurried to a bus stop and ridden home . He would have been able to get to the bus stop, then run straight to the hideout and get home .
 Lee’s scent would pick up the rifle and trace the rifle to its hiding place . Lee's scent would be picked up by the police . Lee was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Lee boarded a bus near Walker’s house carrying his rifle, hopped off close to his site in the woods, buried the rifle, then took another bus home . From that remark it could be inferred that Lee boarded the bus carrying the rifle .
 He did tell Marina that the bus he took was not the one he generally rode when he went to General Walker’s . The bus he used to take was not one he normally rode .
 The Dallas papers of Thursday, April 11, ran front-page stories about the attempt on Walker’s life . Walker was shot in the head by police officers .
 Lee left the apartment to buy both morning and afternoon editions of the radio . Lee lay on the sofa listening to news bulletins on the radio and listened to them on his sofa . Lee left to buy the radio for the first time and bought a new set of editions . Lee says he
 An aide to the general had noticed two men in a “late-model, unlicensed car” in an alley behind Walker’s house . It was also reported that an aide to Walker had noticed the men in the alley behind his house .
 A 14-year-old boy, who was a neighbor of Walker’s, claimed that he had seen two cars, one with one man in it, the other with several, speed away from the scene .
 Lee was angry at himself and disappointed with the police decision to arrest him . Lee said he was disappointed with his actions and was angry with himself .
 She saw photographs of a house from various angles, and the book was filled with lined sheets covered with handwriting . She saw photos of the house from different angles .
 Marina guessed that some of the handwriting, all of which was in English, was the political justification for Lee’s act . There were pages of typing, too, and some of it was written in English .
 He tore the sheets in half, crumpled them into balls, and one by one touched a match to them . Slowly he tore them in half and crunched them up into balls .
 As each ball of paper caught the flames, he dropped it into the toilet . He then dropped it in the toilet to catch the flames .
 "He did this thoughtfully, with great reluctance, as if it were the funeral pyre of his ideas," he said . He said .
 He did not burn the handwritten pages that contained his political philosophy and program . The handwritten pages were handwritten pages of his political program .
 Lee was so sorry to part with his papers, and Marina was so relieved, that neither could think of anything to say . Lee and Marina were so relieved they couldn't say anything else .
 Lee seemed withdrawn, and fearful for the first time that he might be caught . Lee was withdrawn and seemed withdrawn at the end of the interview .
 Lee suffered anxiety attacks in his sleep 24 hours after his attempt on Walker’s life . Lee suffered an anxiety attack in the night he attempted to kill Walker .
 He shook all over from head to toe four times at intervals of a half hour or so, but without waking up . He shook up four times, shaking all over, but didn't wake up .
 His claim was refused a few days later on grounds that his earnings at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall were too low for him to qualify . A ruling that was later reversed was later overturned .
 Marina, meanwhile, was grateful that she had chores to do, anything to keep her from thinking . Marina was grateful she had to do chores, anything she could do .
 She now knew that Lee took his politics far more seriously than she had ever, in her wildest dreams, supposed, supposed . She now knows that Lee's politics is far more serious than she imagined .
 She knew, for the first time, that she knew, that he was capable of killing in cold blood, merely for the sake of his ideas .
 Lee was bitterly disappointed by his failure to kill Walker, that he still was keyed up and tense, and that his desire to do the deed had by no means burned itself out . She saw that Lee was disappointed by not killing Walker .
 "It never occurred to her, then or at any time thereafter, that he would try to shoot anybody else," she says . She says she was shocked to learn that he had tried to shoot anyone else .
 Marina immediately began to beg Lee, and try to force him to promise, to never do such a thing again . With her ear still cocked for the yelping of police dogs, police dogs began to yelp . Marina immediately begged Lee to promise never to do that again
 She told him that when Walker moved his head at the last minute it had been a sign from fate . Walker's death was a sign of fate, she said . Walker is now in a coma in the hospital with a brain injury .
 In Russia you used to say that there was freedom of speech in America, that everyone can say what he pleases . In Russia, that was not the case, it was the case of free speech in the U.S. In America, it's a matter of principle, not
 "The Russians here like you. And he added, with a touch of malice in his tone, “The Russians like you," he said .
 Marina and Lee got through Thursday and Friday, but they still had one more ordeal . Marina's husband, Lee, is still recovering in the hospital . Lee and Marina's mother, Marina, are still recovering from the ordeal .
 It occurred on Saturday, the eve of Easter, which happened to fall on the same day that year in both Western and Orthodox churches . The incident occurred on the night before Easter .
 They were not expecting callers and were getting ready for bed when they heard a sudden commotion at the door . They heard the very thing they had been dreading . The couple was not expecting the callers .
 George de Mohrenschildt booming out a loud hello to police dogs barking . But instead of a police dog barking, he was booming out loud hello . Police dogs bark, but instead of barking, it was George's booming hello .
 Marina and Lee went downstairs to let the de Mohrenschildts in . Marina was relieved and Lee was relieved . Lee and Marina went downstairs and Marina were able to let them in .
 Jeanne came first, dressed to the nines and clutching a pink plush rabbit for June . Jeanne came in first dressed in the best of the summer .
 The first words out of Oswalds' mouth struck the Oswalds with the impact of a bomb . "The first words ... were the first out of his mouth struck them with the . impact of the bomb," Oswalds said .
 Lee and Marina, standing at the foot of the stairs as their guests went up with their backs to them, stared at one another in horror . The couple's guests went upstairs with the backs of their backs turned on them, leaving the shocked couple staring at each other .
 Marina and Lee de Mohrenschildts were in the middle of the night when they met Marina's husband . Lee and Marina were trying to keep their eyes open in the dark out of doors . Marina said it was hard for them to see their faces, or so they hoped .
 Marina reflected gratefully that they both seemed a little bit high . They were euphoric, on top of the world, she said . Marina reflected that she was grateful that they seemed high .
 Lee rushed back and forth carrying chairs for all of them to sit on . Lee, for his part, rushed back to his office carrying chairs . Lee: "It's been a great day for the kids, but I'm not so sure about it."
 He had read every morsel in the Dallas papers and was eager to discuss it with Lee . Lee had read all of the papers and is eager to talk about it with him .
 Marina concluded that Lee, uncharacteristically, had taken George into his confidence . He knew so many of the details that Marina concluded . Lee knew so much about George that he had taken him in confidence .
 He continued to jump up and down and kept running in and out with cups of coffee .
 Marina thought that Lee’s behavior was fairly composed under the circumstances . Marina said that Lee's behavior was quite composed under circumstances .
 George said even in the dark Lee “shriveled” and wore a “peculiar’ look . George said later that even in dark Lee was “tense” George said Lee ‘shrilled’ and wore ‘pe
 Even by his soaring standards he was unusually ebullient, and the conversation soon shifted to another topic . Even by their soaring standards, the former president was unusually upbeat .
 After being down for so long, the de Mohrenschildts were on their way up again . After being . down, they were back in the business .
 Marina was scarcely able to follow the conversation as she sat in the dark, still numb with shock . Marina was barely able to listen to the conversation .
 Even years later, remembering how close George had come with his opening remark, she shook all over with fear . She shook over fear .
 Marina went into the backyard, picked an armful of roses, and handed them to Jeanne . The de Mohrenschildts got ready to leave, and Marina went to the backyard .
 Lee believed Marina’s disclaimer, she believed his, and they were both right . Lee and Marina believed Marina's disclaimer, Marina believed his and they both right.
 George later denied any responsibility for influencing Lee’s actions . George later explained why he had made his remark to Lee .
 There they were taking some of their belongings with them to Haiti, and the rest were going into storage in Dallas . Some of the belongings were going to Haiti .
 They wanted to see the Oswalds one more time but heard that they had already left town . The Oswalds were already gone when they returned to their hometown .
 Jeanne was to remember, however, that before their departure, they received something in the mail from Lee, and that it bore a New Orleans address . Jeanne and Lee were to remember that before they left early June, Lee had sent something to Jeanne .
 The de Mohrenschildts did not return to Dallas for more than three years . They were forced to leave Dallas, Texas, after their divorce .
 They came back in 1966, and when they got around to retrieve their possessions from storage, they had an enormous surprise . The couple's possessions were retrieved from storage in 1967 .
 Marina's parents loaned her a stack of records to help her learn English . It was wrapped in brown paper and contained records that they had loaned to Marina in an effort to help .
 They were unable to remember whether the bundle bore a postmark or not . The bundle had been delivered to the postmark .
 It was not the bundle of records itself, but something that had been laid neatly and purposefully on top . It was a photograph of Lee with his guns and dressed in black, one of the two Marina had taken .
 Under the inscription, which was bold and clear, was a small sketch of a terrier . The de Mohrenschildts owned the kind of terrier the kind the kind they owned .
 Marina today, fourteen years later, has no recollection of having written it . Marina today has no memory of writing the book .
 In the lower left-hand corner, cattycorner and in English, was another message in handwriting that appears to be Lee’s . And in the lower right hand corner was a message in English . Lee's handwriting appears to indicate he is Lee .
 The date was probably supposed to be May 4, 1963, and Lee had mailed the records from New Orleans . Lee had, as nearly as can be guessed, mailed the record from 1963 to the U.S.
 Marina, half idly, and half as a warning to Lee that he must not go around shooting people or he would be found out, she wrote on one of the photographs and wrote on it mocking Lee, “Hunter for the Fascists”
 The sketch of a little dog links her inscription to George’s remarkable guess . George's remarkable guess is revealed in a sketch of the sketch .
 She must have done it, characteristically, to warn Lee and simultaneously to mock him, to laugh him out of further dangerous adventures . Lee's mother must have warned him to avoid further adventures .
 Lee’s choosing a copy of the photograph that had this inscription on it to send to George was itself a message that contained a whole world of meaning . Lee chose the photograph to send George to Lee's side .
 George, and George alone, had made a guess that it was Lee who tried to kill General Walker . George and George believed Lee was behind Walker's death .
 Those who knew them both, notably Samuel Ballen, had observed “a mutuality,” ‘an emotional complicity” between Lee and George . Ballen was right, of course .
 Lee and George knew perfectly what each other was thinking politically . Lee knew each other's thinking politically during the winter of 1962-1963 . Each of them knew what they were thinking politically.
 Lee realized that there was going to be no evidence, not even a clue, to link him to the attempted killing . Lee decided to let George know that his uncanny guess had been on the mark . Lee realized there was no evidence linking him to Walker .
 George was the one friend he had, the one person whose respect, admiration, even affection, he coveted—and it was George whom he had wanted to impress . George was George's one friend and the one he coveted .
 George had been Lee’s ‘constituent’ in the sense that Lee believed he had been acting as George himself might have wanted to do, and in a manner that would win George's approval . George was Lee's “constituant” in the
 He had expected that by the time the editors received the photograph, Walker would be dead . Walker had expected the initials “L.H.” would be famous . Walker expected to be dead when he received the photo .
 Lee’s two chief constituents when he fired at General Walker, with de Mohrenschildt, the flesh-and-blood friend whose approval he desired, far and away the more important . Lee's approval of the Militant was far more important than that of his flesh-
 In the photograph Lee was dressed in black, the color of death, and he was bristling with guns . Lee was wearing black when he took the photo of his life .
 Lee is leaving Dallas, leaving Lee, leaving Dallas . Lee has no remorse, yet without a scruple of remorse, without a twinge of regret . Lee was leaving Dallas without regret, indeed, with insulting jubilation, he says .
 Lee Ekdahl's stepfather Lee was abandoning him . Like his father and like his father, Lee left his stepfather George . George was abandoning Lee . Lee's stepdad Lee was leaving George .
 Lee wanted to avenge himself on everyone who had ever let him down in that way . Lee now wanted to take revenge on everyone he'd let down him . Lee wanted revenge on those who'd let him go .
 One means of doing so was to leave town before George did—abandon George, rather than be abandoned by him . One way to do this was to abandon George, not abandon him, but abandon him .
 Lee had profoundly favorable feelings for George, but also had murderous feelings as well, he says . The photograph, with its black and its guns, conveys the message that in addition to his favorable feelings, Lee had also murderous feelings .
 Envy is another of the emotions Lee appears to have harbored toward his friend . Envy seems to be another of Lee's feelings toward his former friend .
 George, unlike Lee, had known and loved his father and had grown up close to him . George had known Lee and loved him and had known him well .
 George called Lee ‘puny’ and treated him as if he could be trifled with . George, the possessor of a powerful physique, had called Lee 'puny' Lee had called George ‘punchy” and had called him “puny
 Lee had been 'liberated' by Marina a few months earlier . At the request of George Bouhe and Anna Meller, he had intervened in Lee’s private affairs .
 The de Mohrenschildts noted at the time that Lee “boiled and boiled,” then meekly gave in . Lee's wife says he "boiled, boiled and boiled" before giving in .
 He was saying to George what he had forborne to say in November, that, armed with weapons, he was as powerful as any man . Now he was saying what he said to George: "He was saying ... he was ... as powerful"
 He was expressing resentment at George’s interference and warning him not to try his physical superiority again . ‘Not on him and not on Marina. Not on Marina,’ he said. ‘I’m not on him,” he said .
 He was saying that in politics as in physical strength, he was as good a man as George, a better one, in fact . He was also saying he was a better man as a politician than George George .
 The plebeian son was prepared to go his aristocratic father one better . And now he was declaring that no matter where it might lead, even to death, he was prepared .
 In addition to the many meanings implicit in the photograph, George may have played other roles in Lee’s fantasy life .
 George was the only person Lee knew who had connections “at the top,” to President and Mrs. Obama . Lee knew George was only person he knew to have connections to the president and first lady .
 George wrote to the president and asked him to provide a preface for his book about his adventures in Mexico . By virtue of his acquaintance with Jacqueline Kennedy and her mother, George had written to President Kennedy .
 He supposed that these adventures fitted admirably with the president’s physical fitness campaign . The president's physical fitness is being tested for his fitness .
 George was awaiting a reply when Lee and George knew one another . Lee was waiting for a reply throughout the winter when Lee first spoke to George .
 George was an emotional lightning rod linking Lee’s fantasies about the presidency to the real human being who was president . Lee wanted his ‘son’ to be president and even wanted to be himself himself, he says .
 Anything George said about the Kennedys in Lee's presence could have helped bring the president within Lee's emotional range . Marina recalls that it was very little, although George said very little .
 Lee's feelings for George were an emotional profile, a shadow, a clue, to feelings that he was later to develop for the president . Lee had feelings he later developed for George that he later had for President George .
 Lee may have taken the feelings he had for George and displaced some of them onto President Kennedy . As George himself vanished from Lee’s life to recede into the jungles of Haiti, Lee may, without being aware of it, have taken his feelings for George . Lee may
 Lee felt that George had given him the sanction he needed to go ahead and shoot General Walker . Lee felt he had been given the sanction to shoot Walker in February . Lee was killed by Walker in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 Lee was given the token of admiration he desired . George George had given him the recognition, the token he wanted . Now, on April 13, George had .
 Lee returned to his hiding place by the railroad tracks, dug up his rifle, and carried it home . Lee returned the next day, Easter Sunday, April 14, just after supper but before dark, just before dark . Lee carried the rifle home the next morning .
 The publicity and the manhunt that followed the attempt had subsided anyhow, with disappointing speed as far as Lee was concerned . Lee was not pleased with the publicity surrounding the attempt to kill himself .
 She saw that he still was keyed up and tense and that, because of the failure of his attempt, he had a reservoir of . unexpended inner energy and was casting about for a way to use it .
 Cuba, as always, was in the news, with calls for a new invasion and the overthrow of Castro being sounded by the nest of exiled leaders in Miami and their powerful supporters in Congress and Congress .
 Lee subscribed to the Militant and the Worker, which were demanding a “hands-off’ policy toward Cuba on the part of the Kennedy administration . These calls from the right to which Lee was exposed were mirrored on the left .
 Lee moved his preoccupation with Cuba from the back of his mind to the front . Lee decided to act. Lee, a Cuban-born American, decided to move to Cuba .
 He hung it around his neck and went out, quite possibly on the day after digging up his rifle, to stand on a street corner and hand out pro-Castro leaflets . It is not known whether he went out that day to hand out leaflets .
 Not a clue came to light that linked him to the Walker affair, and his demonstration on behalf of Castro went unnoticed .
 Lee heard Lee talk in his sleep again that week, and she watched as he scanned every edition of the Dallas papers looking, as she knew, for his name . But she heard him talk again, and he scanned the papers looking for his identity .
 Lee's reluctance with which he had burned his papers about the Walker attempt, and from his refusal to get rid of the rifle that might incriminate him, she understood that Lee had wanted to be caught . From this, from this, she also understood that he wanted to get caught .
 Marina was now aware that Dallas was a dangerous place for Lee, dangerous because it was full of temptation, and by “temptation” she meant General Walker . Marina was aware of the dangers of the city .
 If she had failed in her effort to make Lee get rid of his rifle, she could try to do the next best thing: get him out of town . If she failed, she might try to get Lee to get him away from town .
 Just as quickly as she could, she would remove him from proximity to his target . She would remove the man from close proximity to her target .
 New Orleans was a port city, she pointed out, and she had been raised in one, too—Archangel. She said she was raised in New Orleans and raised in a port .
 They had failed to answer a letter he had written them from Russia, and he was afraid they disapproved of him for going there . He was afraid of them disapproving of him .
 She found him curiously receptive, as if he half-welcomed the idea . She found her husband curiously receptive .
 From Easter Sunday on, Lee and Marina discussed what they ought to do next . Marina and Lee spent Easter Sunday discussing what they should do next. Lee's wife, Marina, is now in a relationship with Marina .
 Lyolya and John Hall drove over from Fort Worth to attend Easter services at one of the Orthodox churches . They noticed that Lee Oswald was discouraged . Lee was discouraged, they said .
 He complained about the lack of job security in America and hinted that he was thinking of going back to Russia . He said he was considering a return to Russia as a tourist .
 In America unemployment compensation is as high as an engineer’s salary in Russia, she said . She pointed out that unemployment compensation in the U.S. is highest in Russia .
 Lee suggested the move to New Orleans and allowed the idea to sink in, rather than, as Marina supposed, she who suggested it and he who gradually picked it up . Conceivably, it was Lee who subtly suggested that the move .
 Lee suddenly agreed to move to a new home on April 17 . Lee and Lee were talking about it during the evening of Wednesday, April 17, when he suddenly agreed .
 Lee now knew that the de Mohrenschildts were soon to leave Dallas . Lee knew that they were leaving Dallas, but it was significant .
 Marina was greatly relieved, and on Saturday, April 20, she, Lee, and June went to a lake nearby to have a picnic with Ruth Paine and her children .
 Lee went out early to buy a newspaper and some doughnuts, and the two had breakfast together . Marina was doing the dishes, straightening the apartment, and dressing the baby . Lee sat in the living room and read the newspaper, while Marina was straightening and dressing .
 Richard Nixon delivered a speech accusing President Kennedy of being too soft on Castro . Nixon also demanded a “command decision” to force the Russians out of Cuba .
 He laid the paper carefully on the coffee table as if he wanted her, or someone, to see it . But she noticed after finishing her chores that he had laid it on the table .
 She noticed that the door to his office was open, which was unusual, she said . Then she noticed that she saw that his office door was open . The door to the office was also open .
 Suddenly Lee stood before her, dressed in his gray slacks, white shirt, and a tie . Suddenly Lee appeared before her in a gray suit .
 He had his pistol at his waist and was about to put on his best jacket . He had been preparing for a possible assassination attempt .
 Thinking fast, she went into the bathroom and asked Lee to follow her there . Thinking fast she went to the bathroom, she asked him to join her .
 It was a door that could only be locked from inside, but Marina held it as hard as she could, bracing her feet against the wall . Marina held the door as she tried to lock it from inside . The door was only locked from the inside of the room .
 You promised me you’d never shoot anyone else and here you are starting in all over again,’s mother says . You promised to never shoot someone else, she says, but here you're starting in again .
 Marina was hurt, angry, and in tears, with red nervous splothes all over her face, a frowsy little figure in her housecoat . Marina had been hurt and angry, but she was angry and angry when she found out .
 Their tug war lasted three minutes, with the advantage sometimes on her side, sometimes on his . Their tug of war was between her and her husband .
 Marina could summon up a wonderful, concentrated energy at moments like this . Although she weighed less than one houndred pounds, she could summon a wonderful energy .
 She had held Lee in the bathroom before at least once in their apartment in Fort Worth, Texas . She was to do so three or four times again, in New Orleans, almost always to avoid beating .
 His face was red from exertion, and his eyes had the angry glitter she knew well . His eyes had an angry glitter, and she knew she had to look at him .
 She shoved the gun under the mattress without looking to see if it was loaded . She shoved it under the bedside without looking at it if she had loaded it .
 For two or three hours Lee sat on the toilet seat, reading with the door closed . Lee sat in the toilet for two or more hours with the book close to him .
 Marina could not see him, but she kept her eyes on the door and her ears alert for any sound . Marina kept looking at the door, keeping her eyes and ears open .
 He sat in the living room, reading in the undershorts that were all Marina would allow him . Finally, at three or four in the afternoon, he came out of the bathroom and sat . He sat there for hours .
 He carried the baby to her bath and sat with her naked, naked, in the tub . Toward evening, he carried her to her bed and sat naked with her, naked .
 It was only now, when he was naked and in the bathtub, that Marina let him out of her sight .
 She ran downstairs and bolted all the doors, including the backyard gate, into the house . She then bolted the doors and the gate to the backyard .
 She wanted to make sure that if she was busy later on, cooking or getting the baby to bed, she would hear him if he tried to get out, hear him fiddling with the locks . She said she wanted to keep him in the house so she could hear him trying to
 He brought his book to the table, and neither of them spoke for the rest of the evening . Neither of the two men spoke again .
 As they were getting ready to go to bed, he asked if he might have his pistol back . He asked for his gun back .
 Lee drew the pistol out and put it where he usually kept it, on the top shelf in his office . Lee drew it out, putting it back on top shelf, then put it there again .
 He left her in possession of the ‘evidence’ against him that she had mentioned to him that day . But curiously, he left her with the evidence she'd mentioned to her that day.
 It was the note he had left her, in Russian, on the night he went to shoot General Walker . The note he left her was in Russian . It was a note he'd left her in the night before the shooting .
 She kept the note, moving it from place to place, until it finally came to rest among her cookbooks . She kept it in her cookbook, but kept it for years .
 With the ‘Nixon’ drama over, Marina sensed a falling off, an easing of her husband’s tension, she says . Marina sensed the "falling off" with the "Nixon" drama .
 Since his attempt on Walker, he had been hanging over an emotional precipice . He was hanging over a precipice since his attempt to kill Walker .
 He had geared himself up to kill, to be captured, and face trial and punishment . He planned to kill himself, to face trial, and to face punishment .
 Lee poured his energy on the nearest person, the safest person, and it worked . Lee poured it on the person who was the closest to him . Lee's energy was directed to the person he was trying to protect . Lee says it's a good thing for Lee to focus on the
 Exactly what he had in mind when he said he was going to “look” at Nixon will never be known . Exactly what Nixon said he wanted to "look" at Nixon is never known .
 From the painstaking way he had laid the paper face up, on the coffee table, perhaps he hoped to be caught at something and make a show of his concern for Cuba . Perhaps he had hoped to make it appear that he was trying to make a point .
 Governor John Connally of Texas was due in Dallas to speak at the Marriott Hotel . Lee had corresponded in a fruitless effort to alter his ‘undesirable’ discharge .
 The day after that, Vice President Johnson would be at the same place . Vice President Lyndon Johnson would also be there the next day .
 Lee might have tried to shoot either of them, but Lee had lost his keenness to kill . He might have shot either of the two men, but he had lost keenness for killing .
 Marina later observed that their little charade had been aimed not at ‘Nixon’ but at her . Marina later noted that the charade was aimed at her, not Nixon .
 She sensed it had been Lee’s purpose to wound her or test her in some way . She sensed that it was intended to test her or wound her .
 Lee was testing her to see whether, when he reached a certain frame of mind, he could count on her to stop him . Lee was tested to see if she would stop him from doing so again . Lee had been testing her on whether she would be able to do so .
 Lee mentioned Nixon, the one American politician whose name he knew she might recognize because Nixon had been to Russia, in order to warn her that he might kill somebody else, not just Walker . Lee said Nixon's name was one of the names she knew because he had visited Russia .
 She continued to cling to the idea that General Walker was the only political figure who might be in danger from Lee . Lee was assassinated by Lee in 1865 .
 Marina had learned a lot about Lee, knowledge she would rather not have had . But Marina was happy to learn a lot more about Lee from her daughter .
 She now knows the full extent of his interest in politics, which she had not measured before . She said she now knew the extent of her husband's political interest .
 Lee’s maps, his guns, his bus schedules, even the photograph for June, she says . Isolated phenomena that she had been trying for months suddenly fell into place . Lee's maps, guns, buses schedules, and even the photo for June .
 Lee had been planning his attempt on General Walker for at least two months . Lee had planned and foreseen every detail, and had lied unblushingly to her . Lee's attempt on Walker had been planned for months .
 She began to see that her husband was, in his own eyes, a great man who was unjustly ignored by the world and would do anything to wrest its attention .
 Marina’s worst discovery by far was her awareness that Lee would kill abstractly, for the sake of his ideas . Yet Marina's worst discovery was that she knew Lee would be a killer .
 He had tried to strangle her, of course, and for months she had been afraid of him . For months, she had feared him for months . She was afraid he would kill her .
 To kill someone you did not know, had never met, a man who had done you no harm, all for the sake of politics—to her that was unbelievable, she said . To kill a man you didn't know and had done no harm for political purposes, she wrote .
 Even Lee’s beatings had done nothing to temper the audacity of her tongue, she said . ‘I’m not afraid to say anything.’
 Lee could beat up her body, but he could not beat up the spirit, nor alter what she thought . He could not alter what he thought of her, nor what she felt . Lee could be beaten up by her spirit, he said .
 She saw that if she thought deeply about the Walker affair and all it told her about Lee, she would go out of her mind . Already she had learned more about him than she could handle, and she saw that .
 It was with relief that she turned to the baby, the cooking, the cleaning . She was relieved that she had finally been able to give birth to her daughter .
 They save her from dwelling too long on the new knowledge of which she was now the uneasy possessor . She was saved by the knowledge she had acquired .
 Her decision not to go to the police after the Walker shooting bore the stamp of her Soviet upbringing, so did the decision she came to now . Just as her decision to not go to police in the aftermath of the shooting, she also came to this decision .
 In true Russian fashion, she decided that she was, indeed, her husband’s keeper . He was her responsibility, and it was up to her to straighten him out .
 She saw that she would have to use as her tools sympathy, affection, and understanding, and not so many of the harsh words that flooded all too readily from her tongue .
 After Nixon episode they decided to move to New Orleans right away . After the Nixon episode, the couple decided to relocate .
 Lee would go ahead and look for work while Marina stayed on Neely Street until he sent for her . Marina would stay at home until Lee sent her home .
 Walker and Dallas appeared synonymous to her, and the two together spelled violence . Walker's death was the result of a shooting in Dallas, Texas, police say .
 Lee’s agreeing to leave Dallas must mean that he was giving up violence and choosing a peaceful life instead . Lee agreed to leave the city for a better life . Lee: "I’m leaving Dallas. I’ve been here for a long time"
 They would help Lee find a job and would serve as a moral influence and a restraint . They would also help him find a new job, he says . Lee would be a good influence and restraint, he adds .
 Marina was sure that he would be ashamed to shoot anybody in a city where he had a right-thinking family looking on . Marina said she was sure he would not be ashamed of shooting anybody in the city .
 Things would be different in New Orleans, she said . She would figure out how to go about remaking her husband .
 Marina could not have known it, but with the Walker attempt over, the crudest and most poignant days of her marriage were over, too . Marina's marriage was over, and with Walker's end, too, too.
 The Nixon episode that followed, and the Nixon episode, sealed a curious compact between husband and wife .
 Marina had not gone to the police after Walker, and in her motion at the mattress on the night of April 21, she had allowed Lee to have his pistol back .
 He for his part never asked her for the note he had left behind on the night he attempted to shoot General Walker . The note he left behind was found in the wreckage of his attempt to shoot Walker .
 She trusted him with his weapon, he trusted her with evidence she could use to stop him in the future . It was an odd sort of trust, she said . She trusted her husband with his gun, she trusted her to help him stop him .
 With that compact, if that was what it was, things did change a little between them . Yet with that compact , if that is what it is, things were changed a little . The pair's compact was the first time they had been together since 2008 .
 Lee began to admit Marina to the more daring and private of his two worlds . Slowly, very slowly, he began to . Lee began . slowly to admit . Marina . Lee .
 She says she was still “an obstacle in his way, but he no longer showed it as openly as he had before . She says that she still was ‘an obstacle’ in her way .
 "I was someone with whom he could take off his mask,” she says . “For a moment now and then, he could trust me," she says of her ex-husband .
 Marina had learned a good deal about Lee from his attempt on General Walker, he, too, had drawn lessons—portentous ones . If Marina learned a lot from Lee, he also had learned lessons from his own attempt on Walker .
 He had learned that if ever he was to win attention for himself and his ideas, he would have to do it on a very grand scale . First, he had learned he had to do something very grand .
 He had shot at the most famous man in Dallas, he had missed him by less than an inch, and the only newspaper coverage had been a single, front-page story in each of the two Dallas papers and another tiny story inside one of them .
 Lee was astonished at how easily he got off and at the ineptness of the police . Second, he was astonished by how easily Lee got off . Lee said he was shocked by how quickly he got away and at how easy he was arrested .
 They had the bullet, yet they identified it wrongly and wrongly identified the type of rifle from which it was fired . The bullet was fired from a rifle fired at the scene of the shooting, police say .
 Lee knew rumors about cars and coconspirators, rumors Lee knew to be false . They had apparently been thrown off by rumors about car and coconpirators .
 Lee concluded, as he said to Marina, that you can do anything and get away with it if only you think it out ahead ahead .
 Lee carried out of the Walker attempt was the conviction that he was invulnerable, that he stood at the center of a magic circle swathed in a cloak of immunity . Lee's greatest legacy was that he believed he was at center of the magic circle . Lee: "He stood at
 It was a feeling that fitted dangerously with the feeling he already had that he was special, that he had particular prerogatives . It was the feeling that fit dangerously with a feeling of being special, he said .
 It was the one place where he had resources—relatives who might shelter him and help him pick up the threads of his life . It was also the place he was going to be able to pick up his life, he says .
 It was the city where he was born and in which he had spent seven of his twenty-three years, more than in any other place . It was also where he spent seven years of his life in New York City .
 Lee had lived in New Orleans until he was four, staying by turns with his mother, aunt and aunt . Lee lived in a children’s home with his brothers . Lee's aunt Lillian Murret and her family helped raise him up .
 New Orleans had been a refuge to him then, and it was to be a refuge now, he says . New Orleans was a refuge for him when he was a young man .
 Lee spent two and a half years in prison as a teenager in January 1954 to June 1956 . Lee spent that time in prison filled with portents for his future . Lee had spent the time there as a teen .
 It was there he became interested in a cause, Marxism; there he began to visit the public library and read Das Kapital and other Communist books . There he spoke for the first and only time about shooting a president of the United States .
 It was as if everything that happened to Lee had already happened before . Indeed, during the summer that lay ahead of him, the summer of 1963, it was as . as if . everything that . happened to him, Lee . Lee . The summer of that summer, 1963, was
 He was a little like an actor on a stage, walking through a part he had already played, he said . He was walking through the part he'd already played. He said: 'He was a bit like an . actor on stage. He was like a little . like an
 If he thought about killing anybody now, it would be as a volunteer for Fidel Castro, shooting up the American invader, he says . And if he thought . anybody now would be a . volunteer for Castro, he would be .
 The summer of 1963 was to be Lee’s time of peaceful political action, the time in which he came closer than ever in his life before to creating a serious, nonviolent, political identity for himself .
 Lee tried everything he could think of to change U.S. policy toward Cuba . Lee tried picketing, handing out leaflets, debating on the radio .
 He wanted to make a dent in the complacent American society he saw around him and change it peacefully from below from below .
 Almost exactly four years later, on September 25, 1963, he was to leave New Orleans again, this time trying to reach Cuba via Mexico City . He left New Orleans four years before he was set to try to make it to Cuba .
 Lee’s memories of his adolescent years in New Orleans contained both good and bad . Lee's memories of the New Orleans experience were positive and negative . Lee: "It was a great time to spend time with my family and friends," Lee says .
 There had been Friday night seafood suppers at his aunt Lillian’s—evenings he had loved and looked forward to . He had been looking forward to the Friday night dinners he'd enjoyed at her aunt's house .
 Edward Voebel patched him up in the restroom after his second fight at Beauregard . He says he was cut up in a bathroom after the second fight . He said: "I'm not a fighter, I'm a fighter. It's a fighter."
 Lee and Voebel would go downstairs to the pool hall just below the apartment, shoot a few games of pool, and throw darts . Lee would also spend some time throwing darts at the apartment .
 Lee was a proud but dissatisfied possessor of a plastic .45 . He confided his plan to break into a store on Rampart Street, using a glass cutter he had . He had a real pistol that he had spotted in the window . Lee's friend Voebel helped him
 Voebel accompanied Lee to the store, went inside to case it with him, then quietly talked him out of his scheme . The glass cutter would set off the burglar alarm, he said, but he didn't .
 Lee worked as a messenger in a dental lab after quitting high school . Palmer McBride, a friend of Lee's, remembered a threat that he made to a friend .
 Lee “hollered’s about Communism in a “loudmouthed’ and “boisterous’ way,” the boy says . Lee was "hollering" about Communism, according to the video .
 Wulf’s father, a refugee from Germany who was touchy in political matters, overheard them . Wulf's father was touchedy in politics matters, and he overheard them.
 Wulf gave the epitaph, not only for Lee at sixteen at sixteen, but for Lee during the summer of 1963 and indeed throughout his life . Lee's epitaph was given to Wulf by Wulf, who also gave his epitaph .
 There is something touching in the fact that this man, for whom it was a struggle, because of his reading disability and his limited education, even to write at all, should have spent scores of hours in lonely dialogue with himself .
 It may be, as Marina once said, that it may be nothing but fame Lee was after . Lee may be looking for fame, but it may not be what he really wanted .
 "It may be that when he looked up from his books, it may be not human beings he saw around him, but only an abstract vision of humanity," he wrote .
 It may be that, struggling with the devils inside and pasting them onto politics, it was not others he was trying to help, only himself . The devil may be in politics, not others, but himself, he says .
 It may be that it was not truth he was seeking, only personal salvation . And it may be not truth, only salvation, for personal salvation.
 He had lived in two great opposing social systems and tried to make sense of them . He was trying to make some sense of the world's two opposing systems .
 He believed that the perfect society would combine the best features of both . He said that the ideal society would be a society that combines the best of both.
 He thought government should take care of people, give them medicine and education, guarantee their civil liberties and put an end to racial discrimination . He thought that government ought to take care for people .
 Lee's ideals he cherished were good ones, and that, had they been carried into practice, they would have meant a better life for others . Lee: "It says something for Lee that, if he had carried out his ideals, it would have been good ones. It says something
 New Orleans, in the summer of 1963, was the place where he made his last try . New Orleans was where he played for the first time .
 Ruth Paine drove from Irving to Dallas with her two children, ready for another outing with the Oswalds . Paine and Oswalds went on a picnic a few days before . The Oswalds were killed in Dallas in 1963 .
 She was surprised to find the three of them, Lee, Marina, and little June, perched on a mountain of luggage . Lee and Marina were traveling with June and Lee in the early hours .
 Marina and the baby would stay on Neely Street, keeping only a minimum of possessions and waiting until Lee could send for them . Lee was going ahead to look for work, while Marina would stay with the baby . Lee and Marina were going to stay in the house until he could send
 All six of them, children and grown-ups, crowded into Ruth's station wagon around Lee’s gear . She agreed, and all six of the kids got into the car .
 Lee went inside to check his bags and buy two tickets, one for him to use that night and one for Marina when she came to join him . They drove to the Continental Trailways terminal, where Lee bought two tickets for Marina and Lee .
 Marina on Neely Street would be without a telephone, knowing only a few words of English and with no easy way of reaching Lee . It would be hard for Marina to find a way to reach Lee without a phone .
 She would have a small child in tow, and although Lee was plainly carrying everything he could, she would still have clothing, dishes, a playpen, a stroller, and a crib .
 Marina confided that Lee meant to send her back to Russia and she did not want to go . She started worrying more after one of their outings in March, when she confided she was worried .
 Marina had not mentioned it since, and Ruth was mystified as to where the Oswalds’ marriage stood . The Oswalds' marriage has never been publicly reconciled .
 Marina and Michael felt that it was ‘cruel’ of Lee not to let Marina learn English . But both she and Michael said they felt it was 'cruel' of Lee to not teach Marina English .
 They were appalled that she might have to go back to Russia against her will . They were shocked that she may have to return to Russia without her will.
 It had occurred to them that they might be able to offer her an alternative if the need became acute .
 Fearful that she might offend and that, with her limited Russian, she might not be able to find the proper words in conversation, she had sat down on April 7, taken out her English-Russian dictionary and, with enormous effort, written a letter .
 In it she suggested that if things became too difficult between her and Lee and they were not able to work out their problems, then she and June would be welcome to stay at the Paines’ for as long as they needed .
 Ruth was willing and able to make it because Michael was not living at home, there was an extra room, and she was lonely . She had talked to Michael about her offer, but he was not interested .
 As she sat in the car, it occurred to her that she might be able to help during the days just ahead .
 She realized she had the words at her command to make her invitation in Russian, so that Marina, as well as Lee, would understand .
 Marina was offered part of her fare to use as spending money by the man . He accepted, strode back into the terminal, redeemed Marina’s ticket, and returned to the car .
 He did not offer to contribute to groceries or other costs of the suddenly expanded Paine household .
 Lee asked Ruth if she would stop for a moment at the central post office at the post office . Ruth was carrying Marina's and the baby's possessions when Lee asked her to stop .
 Lee began to load the baby things into Ruth’s car when they got back to the apartment . Lee then loaded the car with the playpen, the crib, the stroller .
 Marina had at most an overnight bag . Since the suitcases were going with him, she had only a few overnight bags with her .
 The helter-skelter nature of his packing differed sharply from the careful job he had done the night before .
 "Then, he gave everything the most sedulous attention and refused to let Marina help," he said . "He gave it the most sordid attention," Marina said .
 He was subdued, even downcast, over their separation and the uncertainty ahead . He said he was downcast over the separation .
 She felt that his agreement to move signified a renunciation of violence—as, in a way, it did . She said: "I felt that he felt that it was a renounce of violence"
 Ruth, Marina, and the children set off for Irving about four in the afternoon, leaving Lee behind in the apartment . Ruth and Marina left Lee behind at the apartment, leaving him behind .
 He moved from Fort Worth to Dallas and found someone to take care of Marina and June while he got settled in a new city . Once again, just as when he moved to Dallas, he had found someone who took care of the children .
 Ruth had been expected that day, and Lee knew that she would agree to drive him and his baggage to the bus station . Ruth was expected to take him to the end of the day .
 Lee's last-minute offer to take Marina to Irving came as a convenient surprise . Lee, in confronting Ruth with his helpless wife and child, must at least have been counting on her to watch out for them on Neely Street .
 He stayed only a few hours in the Neely Street apartment after Marina and Ruth left, then boarded an evening bus for New Orleans . He stayed in the apartment for a short time before boarding a bus to New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Murret had heard of her prodigal nephew, he had defected to the USSR with considerable publicity, to the great embarrassment of them all . Murret's nephew defected from the Soviet Union in disgraceful circumstances . He defected in the USSR to the Soviet state with considerable
 They thought that what he had done was reprehensible, and they supposed that they would never be seeing him again . They thought he had committed a crime of reprehensible .
 Lee asked his aunt if she could put him up for a while, and she agreed . Lee asked her aunt to stay with her for a couple of weeks .
 He was afraid they might not welcome him to New Orleans . "They were extremely conservative, they disapproved of his going to Russia," he said .
 Lee had confided to Marina that he suspected the Murrets lived beyond what his uncle’s earnings would support . Lee had told Marina he suspected they lived beyond that amount .
 Lillian’s husband, Charles Ferdinand, or “Dutz,” Murret, was a steamship clerk . Lee thought that his uncle might be engaged in some other activity on the side, like bookmaking . Lillian's husband was known since his pri
 There is no evidence that this was so, but that was Lee’s way of accounting for their discomfiture at his going to Russia and the possibility that they might not be glad to see him . Lee: “That was . a way of . accounting for .
 He thought they did not want to do anything that might bring attention to them . He said they wanted to avoid anything bringing attention to the family .
 By confiding his suspicions to Marina, Lee had covered in advance his own embarrassment in case they refused to help him . Lee had also covered up his embarrassment by confiding in advance to Marina .
 Lillian Murret had taken care of Lee both as a child and as a teenager . If her own children had been jealous of him, they had never once shown it . Lillian's own children never once showed it .
 The Murrets were a close-knit Catholic family, and the children were raised to be kind . They were raised in a loving Catholic family . They are raising their children to be a kind person .
 Lee's parents considered Lee different from other children and felt sorry for him . Lee's family considered him different from others and considered him special . Lee was adopted by the parents of Lee's mother and father .
 Marilyn was a schoolteacher, tall, thin, and thirty-five, with straight dark hair . Marilyn was tall and thin, with long hair, and a thin, dark skin .
 She had spent three and a half years roaming the world on tramp steamers . She had taught in places as far away as Australia, New Zealand and Japan .
 She liked Lee, Lee liked her, and they were pleased to see each other again . Lee liked Lee and Lee liked each other . Lee was a good friend, Lee said, and Lee was good friends .
 Bogie thought Lee had grown intellectually, especially in his vocabulary, although he realized that Lee purposely picked his words to impress people . Bogie said Lee's vocabulary was more refined than he thought .
 Lee, as usual, stood on his pride, appeared to ask nothing, acting as if he did not want help and yet accepted it . Lee stood on pride and appeared to accept it, but as usual he did nothing .
 The Murrets noticed that Lee seldom spoke of the country unless they asked . They talked a little about Russia, but Lee rarely spoke of it . Lee rarely said anything about Russia .
 The person from whom he would take more frank talk than from anyone else was his sixty-three-year-old aunt Lillian, he says .
 She saw the faults of others but did not hold them to account for them . She saw her faults but didn't hold them accountable for them, she said . She said: "I'm not going to blame anyone for anything."
 It was to Lillian that Lee owed most of his happy memories, and there was little she could say that would put him off . Lee owed Lillian most of those happy memories to her .
 As soon as he arrived from the bus terminal, Lee confided his plans to his wife . Lee's plan was revealed to her as soon as she arrived at her home .
 He skipped breakfast, scanned all the want ads in the morning paper, and started off about 8:30 a.m. He got dressed, skipped breakfast and scanned ads .
 "He was out all day and came home just in time for supper at 5:30 or 6:00m. He was out for supper," says father-of-one .
 After supper he sat down with the rest of the family and watched television . After supper, the family sat down to watch television .
 On one of his first evenings with the Murrets, Dutz drove Lee to the Continental Trail ways terminal to pick up his bags . Dutz: "I'm not afraid to go to the airport, but I'm glad to see you there now" Lee: "It's a
 When they were home again, Lee refused to allow his uncle to touch anything . When they returned home, he refused to let his uncle touch anything.
 The family attributed his insistence on doing it all himself to his being the old Lee they knew so well . Lee was the proud, independent Lee who did not need anything from anyone, they said .
 On Sunday morning, three days after Lee’s arrival, they were talking about relatives . Lee and his wife are still in touch with relatives .
 He realized he missed not being close to his family and not knowing anyone on his father’s side . After that, he realized that he wanted to know more about his father's side .
 That very morning he boarded the streetcar that ran past the Murrets’ house to the end of the Lakeview line and the cemetery where his father was buried . The Murrets' house was home to the family who lived in the neighbourhood .
 Lee sat down with a telephone directory and called every Oswald in the book to ask how he could contact his grandfather, Harvey Oswald . Lee's grandfather was Harvey Oswald, the grandson of Lee Oswald, who was killed in the June 4, 1963 .
 He reached an elderly lady in Metairie who was able to answer his questions . Finally, he reached out to an elderly woman who answered his questions about the situation .
 Robert E Lee Oswald, Lee’s father, was assassinated in June 1917 . Lee's father, Lee's mother, was killed in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln in 1917 .
 She gave Lee his father’s photograph and explained who his relatives were . Lee's father's photograph was given to him by the woman who gave him the photograph .
 The Oswalds were of French and German descent . Lee's family on his mother’s side, the Claveries, were of German, French and French descent .
 Hazel said his father had three sisters, all alive and in New Orleans . Hazel said that his uncles were dead, but that his father's sisters were alive .
 Lee also had six first cousins in New Orleans and at least one first cousin once removed . Lee had at least two first cousins once removed from New Orleans . Lee was a New Orleans native .
 Lee Oswald had been separated from his first wife for some time when he met Marguerite . He got a divorce only when he decided to remarry, and he got it when he remarried .
 His funeral in August 1939 had been the end of it . A few of them continued to see him and his new family, but his funeral was the end .
 Hazel, like the rest of the family, had read of Lee’s defection in the papers but had been too tactful to bring it up . Hazel had read the papers, but was too shy to bring up Lee's defection .
 On seeing Marina’s photograph, however, her curiosity involuntarily slipped out . Marina's curiosity slipped out after seeing the photograph .
 He didn't look up his cousins or his aunts or go back to visit his father’s grave . Nor did he look up relatives or visit relatives or go to his father's grave .
 Perhaps he had discovered all he wanted to know, perhaps Hazel’s question put him off . Perhaps his father's photograph was a disappointment; perhaps his interests simply shifted . Perhaps he was disappointed, perhaps his interest in the photograph simply shifted.
 He had made at least an attempt to trace his father’s history, to find out where he came from, to whom he belonged .
 In the city of his birth, he had gone back to the beginning of his life in search of the father he had lost . He had said goodbye to George de Mohrenschildt only two weeks earlier .
 He did not tell Marina that he had visited his father’s grave or gone to see Hazel Oswald . He didn't tell Marina he had gone to visit his father's grave .
 Lee continued his search for a job by answering newspaper ads and through the Louisiana State Employment Office . Lee lied about his previous job history and claimed, on his unemployment compensation forms, to have applied for jobs he had not applied for at all . Lee continued to lie about previous jobs and claimed
 He often used his Uncle Dutz Murret’s name, although he had not asked his permission . Murret often used the name of his uncle, who died in 2011 .
 Lee fell back for references on William S. Oswald Jr., Alice Barre, and William S . Oswald III, an uncle, aunt, and cousin, respectively, whom he did not know and did not bother to look up . Lee also fell back on references to William S Oswald Jr
 Lee found a job as a greaser and maintenance man at the William B Reily Company, distributor of Luzianne coffee . Lee found the job two weeks to the day after his arrival in New Orleans, New Orleans .
 On his brief application there, he may have set his own record for lies . On the brief application, there may have been a few lies .
 Lee had applied for photography jobs, or so he claimed on his unemployment compensation forms . Lee did not bother to show up for a job interview with the Louisiana State Employment Office . Lee said he applied for a photography job but didn't show up .
 Myrtle and Julian Evans had known Lee and his mother when he was growing up, and Marguerite had once rented an apartment from them . Myrtle, Julian Evans, and Lee's mother, had known each other for years .
 Julian Evans was seated at breakfast drinking his last cup of coffee, recognized him right away . Lee went to their building, and Julian Evans, who was sitting down at breakfast .
 He had known Lee both as a child and as a teenager, and there was something about him that neither he nor Myrtle liked . Myrtle was not happy with Lee, but he and Myrtle knew each other .
 Julian finished his coffee, shook hands with the caller, and left for work . Julian finished up his coffee and left his work .
 Lee's wife Myrtle, a heavy-set woman in her fifties, peered at Lee closely . Myrtle wore glasses and had reddish hair in a bun . Lee was married to a heavy set woman in his 50s .
 There was nothing available at the Evanses, but Myrtle volunteered to help him look . Myrtle helped him look for a new home .
 It occurred to her that if he was going to work at the Reily coffee company, they might as well try on Magazine Street so Lee could live close to his job .
 There were two apartments for rent at 4907 Magazine Street, and the bigger one looked as if it might do .
 It had a long living room, a screened-in front porch, a yard, and the kind of iron fence children can’t crawl through . It was a long-lived home with a screened in front porch and an iron fence .
 Myrtle advised Lee that it was the best value for his money and he’d better take it . Myrtle told Lee that he'd better take his money .
 Jesse Garner, and Lee gave her a month’s rent and an application for utilities along with a $5 deposit . Garner, Lee and Lee also gave her rent, utilities and a month's rent .
 They talked about New Orleans, about Lee’s mother and brothers, and about Russia . Lee's mother and brother were also in New Orleans .
 Lee called Marina that evening to tell her about the job and the apartment . Lee called her to tell Marina that she had a job and an apartment in New York .
 The next day, Friday, May 10, he went to work at the Reily coffee company for the first time . He spent the night in his new apartment in New York .
 Marina was expected that day, and they decided to move Lee’s luggage before she came . Marina was due to arrive that day . Lee's luggage was moved before she arrived .
 Lee loaded the car by himself; then he and Dutz sat in front with Marilyn and her mother behind . Marilyn and Marilyn's mother sat behind, and the four of them drove to Magazine Street together . Lee loaded himself by himself, then Dutz and Marilyn sat in the front seat
 The neighborhood was not good, but the apartment had been freshly painted, the icebox was new, and some of the furniture looked new . The apartment was freshly painted and the ice box was new .
 Marina, like many Soviet Russians, did not like high ceilings in her apartment . Marina's apartment in the Soviet Union had high ceilings, and Marina disliked them .
 Marina stayed at Ruth Paine’s home for two weeks . The two weeks she stayed there were like a vacation .
 She was tired; she was still trying to absorb the horrifying new facts she had only just learned about her husband's death . She was exhausted; she had just learned that he was dead .
 "It was a relief to be taken care of and have no responsibility other than looking after June," she said .
 It was a relief not to have to anticipate Lee’s moods every second and try to guess what new and dreadful surprise might be lurking around the corner . ‘I’m a relief to have no idea what’ll be happening next to me,’
 Ruth Paine was of all Americans the very last whom Marina’s experience could have equipped her to understand . But she was not the last whom she could have helped her understand .
 Like the de Mohrenschildts, the Paines were an extremely unlikely couple to have befriended the Oswalds . The Paines and Oswalds were extremely unlikely to have been friends .
 She had a thin, longish face with freckles and short, slightly wavy brown hair .
 The appearance of seriousness she gave was enhanced by a pair of rimless glasses . She gave a serious face-to-face interview with the presenter .
 Like many people who have been serious even as children, she had a good deal of unexpended child in her . She had to be serious even even as a child, she says .
 Ruth Avery Hyde grew up in the Middle West, the daughter of parents who felt strongly about the value of education and good works . She was raised in the United States by her parents .
 The next summer she was with a traveling Bible school, teaching in Ohio and Indiana . The next year she was teaching at traveling Bible schools in Ohio .
 At 19, as a student at Antioch College in Ohio, she became a Quaker . She became a convinced Quaker, often the most dedicated kind of kind .
 She wanted to be a teacher, and by the time she graduated, she had held an astonishing array of jobs . She had held a range of jobs, including teaching, as well as a teacher .
 She had taught in elementary schools in the East and the Middle West . She had been a recreation leader at Jewish community centers in Ohio, Indiana and Indiana .
 Ruth was liked and respected and was always asked to come back . Whatever the job, Ruth was always popular and respected . Ruth was asked to return to work .
 She was a teacher, aged twenty-five, at the Germantown Friends’s School in Philadelphia when she met and married Michael Paine . She was married to Michael at the age of 25 .
 The marriage was not only suitable, it appeared inevitable, so much did Ruth and Michael share . Michael and Ruth were married at the end of the 1960s .
 They met through a common love of madrigal singing and folk dancing . Both were children of divorce, and both came from families of exceptional social conscience .
 Michael was not sure about his capacity for love when he married Michael . The couple's marriage was in trouble from the start, before the start of the marriage .
 Michael was now living alone in an apartment in Grand Prairie, Texas, and came home two or three times a week . Michael is now living in a home with his wife .
 This, the break with Michael, which she was hoping against hope to mend, was the sorrow of Ruth’s life . Ruth's relationship with Michael was one of the most difficult relationships she'd had with Michael .
 Marina, slightly and for a while, was to fill the aching place that Marina had been to fill . It was aching . Marina was to be aching for a long time, and it was a place to fill it .
 Ruth had spent her life helping others, but charitable though her every instinct was, she had mixed feelings about Lee . Ruth's life had been filled with sympathy for Lee, who she had spent most of her life .
 Lee had taken it for granted that she would ferry him to the bus terminal . Lee was on his way to New Orleans from New Orleans to New York City .
 Ruth invited Lee’s wife and child to stay with her for a week . Lee's wife and daughter were invited by Ruth to stay at Ruth's home . Ruth says she was not aware of Lee's family's relationship with her .
 Ruth's concern, characteristically, was for Marina, not herself. And when he accepted without even offering to help with their expenses, Ruth’s concern was for her not herself, she said . The couple have been married for more than a decade .
 Ruth thought that Lee must not love his wife at all if he could place her in so awkward a situation and go to so little trouble to take care of her . Ruth thought he must love her very little if he did not love her at all .
 She hated being a burden, hated being in a position where she had little to give, she said . She said: "She hated being . a burden"
 On April 24, even before the two women left for Irving, Marina seems to have sought reassurance . The two women were traveling to Irving, Texas, on April 24 .
 Marina hardly had a penny, she contributed nothing to the household, and she was ashamed . She was ashamed. Still, she hardly had to pay a penny. She contributed nothing .
 Marina tried to tell herself that she was doing more for Ruth than Ruth was doing for her, and Ruth, too, told her the same thing many times . Marina told her that she had to do more for her than Ruth did for her .
 Ruth was thirty-one, Marina twenty-21, and to Marina the gap was enormous . Ruth and Marina were married at the time of their marriage .
 She was in Ruth’s home, dependent on her, and it was natural to place her in the role of mother . Ruth was in the home, dependently dependent on Ruth, and she was the mother .
 Ruth guessed that Marina’s feelings toward her mother had been very mixed, compounded of hate as well as love . Ruth guessed she had a mixed reaction to her mother's actions .
 She sensed any relationship in which she was cast in the role of mother could turn out to be a minefield of complications . She sensed that any relationship with her mother could be difficult .
 "There was a huge, frustrating gap between what this thoughtful, sensitive woman might be thinking and what she could say in Russian," she said .
 Ruth later recalled that her lack of Russian was “a terrible impediment to talking and to friendship” with Marina; it was ‘a terrible embarrassment” and an ironic one as well . Ruth recalled that she was a ‘terrible embarrassment’ and an �
 She was commanding the telephone, recruiting lawn mowers and babysitters, making arrangements with marvelous efficiency . Yet linguistically she was on Marina’s turf .
 She chattered freely about her life in Russia, her girlfriends, her aunts, her boyfriends . She also chatted freely about life in her native Russia . She said: "I love you, you love you. I love you"
 She had the wit not to mention that Lee had a rifle and had attempted to kill General Walker . She did not know that Ruth was a pacifist, nor even what a . pacifist is .
 Lee's wife says she persuaded him to move to New Orleans out of fear of his using it again . She says she didn't say that she had persuaded Lee to move out of New Orleans . Lee's ex-wife says she's worried about his use of the city .
 Ruth had said that knowledge of the Walker attempt would have altered all her actions toward the Oswalds . Ruth said she would not have reacted differently to the attempt to kill Oswald .
 She would have gone to the police and found a psychiatrist for Lee, or done both, as soon as she learned of it, she said . She would've gone to police or done something similar to what happened to Lee .
 Doubt as to whether their husbands loved them and would ever want to live with them again—this was the rock on which their companionship was built . Doubt was the strength of the women's companionship .
 Ruth was later to say that she and Marina gave each other ‘great moral support” at a difficult time for both . Ruth later said that she was grateful for Marina's "moral support’
 As for the difference between them, their fundamental incongruousness as friends made for a restful distance, a feeling of live and let live, and respect for each other's privacy .
 As she got to know Marina, Ruth’s reservations about Lee grew to active dislike . Ruth's reservations about Marina grew to an active dislike of Lee .
 Ruth had made almost a life’s work out of finding the best in people, but she had yet to find anything good in Lee . Ruth had always found good in people but had never found a good thing in Lee.
 Talking with Marina, Ruth came away with the impression that although she was troubled about Lee, she was committed to their marriage . She said she would give her all for its survival .
 The Walker affair and its “Nixon’s sequel meant that Lee loved “politics” more than he loved her and June . Lee loved politics more than his love for his wife, Marina .
 She feared that he could not wait to ship them both off to Russia so he could resume the political activities they had unwittingly interrupted . She feared he could soon be back in Russia .
 Life, or Lee, she limply supposed, would carry her as far as New Orleans . She limply hoped she would carry life and Lee as far away as she could .
 Marina had the evidence of her own eyes of Ruth's relationship with Michael . Ruth's feelings about Michael are still strong, Marina says .
 She skipped skipping, almost airborne, about the house, singing madrigals in anticipation . She went skipping, nearly airborne, around the house .
 At suppertime, Michael's mother served dinner by candlelight and set the table with great care . Michael generally came on Tuesday and Friday evening .
 She was familiar enough with the ways of anger, but coldness she could not understand . She was not angry enough with anger but she was angry with the way she felt .
 To her it appeared that Michael had no feelings for anyone, not for Ruth, not even for his own children . To her, she appeared to have no feelings . Michael's children were his children .
 Marina could not have known was that Michael blamed himself bitterly . Marina blamed herself bitterly for her husband's suicide .
 Marina could never have guessed was that underneath Michael’s reserve, his icily intellectual New England exterior, lay considerable compassion for her . Marina was shocked to discover that underneath his reserve, he had compassion .
 She had a happy note from him, written the day after his arrival in New Orleans, announcing that his aunt Lillian had taken him in warmly . She had written that he was looking for work and would write to her as soon as he found it . The note was written the
 Marina was pleased that he signed the letter with the Russian Tseluyu —“I kiss you” or “Love”—a greeting he did not use even with his own mother . Marina said she was pleased with the letter, which he signed with a Russian
 Maybe in spite of all that had happened he really did love her after all . Maybe he really loved her again? Maybe he did after all that .
 She wrote him a letter in which she mentioned that Ruth was driving east on her vacation and had offered to take her along . And another time she said she was going to take Ruth along with her .
 Her enthusiasm was in contrast with the passivity she had shown a few months earlier when George Bouhe and Katya Ford had tried to show her that she was not bound to Lee, that she could find a job .
 The fact that she was at a distance from Lee and living in the household of a woman who was preparing to be self-supporting probably had something to do with the change . She was living with the woman who had a lot of support for herself .
 Marina may have been suggesting she could try to find work and help support them if Lee was unable to get a job . But Marina may also be suggesting, as she had done before, that she could help support the family if Lee fails to get work .
 If he really did not love her and did not want to live with her again, here was a chance to get rid of her without forcing her to go back to Russia . Here is a chance for him to get her out of the country, she says .
 Marina wrote to Lee about finding a job was also the sort of ploy she used when she was trying to win somebody’s love . And yet, for Marina, writing to Lee was also a ploy to win someone's love .
 By hinting that she, too, had choices, that other people thought she could find a job, she was bidding up her own value to win back Lee’s love, she said .
 She knew that it would make him jealous, and that for his jealousy she would have to pay . She knew she would pay for it .
 Lee said he still had not found a job, but his uncle had offered him a loan of $200 . Lee's uncle had also offered him $200. Lee said his uncle was a good Samaritan .
 By noon the next day Marina, Ruth, and the three children were off in Ruth’s station wagon on the five hundred-mile journey to New Orleans . Marina hated the new apartment. Ruth hated the apartment.
 She took one look at the high ceilings and the cockroaches and could barely hide her disappointment . She was disappointed with the high ceiling and cockroach-infested ceilings .
 Lee tried to show her how nice it was—the screenedin porch and the yard with wild strawberries growing in it . Lee tried . Lee said it was nice to have the screen on the porch and to see the yard .
 He had mopped the floor and cleaned the place, hoping she would like it . He mopped it up and cleaned it up, hoping it would be a nice thing for her .
 Marina knew it, knew his desire to please, but her feelings showed through . Marina knew he wanted her to please him .
 Lee might or might not care about Marina's opinion, but he certainly cared about her opinion, Ruth said . Ruth was surprised to see Lee and Marina together again .
 Two tired women and three small children tumbled out of the station wagon and created chaos . The five-some-tired women and small children created chaos in the chaos .
 Lee was beside himself with pride as he introduced Marina and the baby . The couple have been married for more than a decade .
 He carried June on his shoulders and was ecstatic to see her walking for the first time . June's father carried her on his shoulder and carried her around on a walker .
 The truth reached her; she was going to have to live somewhere else . Then the truth reached . She was told she would have to move somewhere else.
 The Murrets were very kind to her, but Marina was miserably self-conscious . Marina was self-confessed to the Murrets, but she was very shy .
 After an hour at the Murrets’, they drove to Magazine Street, and settled in fairly quickly . Marina recovered from her initial shock, the five of them settled in quickly .
 Ruth and the three children slept in the living room and a small extra room beside, it . Lee and Marina used the bedroom in back of the house . Ruth and Lee slept in a bedroom in front of a small room .
 They made love three times that night and the next morning . They were happy to be together again . “I’ve missed you so,” Lee said again and again .
 It was the first time they had made love since March 29 or 30, the weekend when Marina had taken Lee’s photograph with the rifle . Marina took the photograph with Lee's photograph .
 In the morning Ruth, on her way to the bathroom, passed by as they were making love . Ruth passed by in the morning as they made love .
 Lee hardly dared face Ruth in the kitchen, and Marina felt the same way . Marina was too scared to face her sister's wrath .
 Lee and Marina had been pleased to see each other at first, but anger flared up quickly . Ruth noticed that irritation and anger flared quickly between them, often over nothing . As for Ruth, she noticed that, as pleased as Lee had been to see one another, irritation and even anger
 Lee tried to make blackberry wine on Sunday . She and Marina had bought blackberries as they drove across Louisiana . Lee and Marina made blackberry wines .
 Lee kept on with it, but he was disheartened by Marina’s anger, and when she was not looking, he threw the whole mess out, berries, wine, and all. Lee kept going, but Marina was angry, and he threw it out .
 Ruth decided the presence of three extra people must be adding to the strain . Ruth decided that the extra people added to the bickering was adding to it .
 But the bickering went on, for it was the currency of their relationship . The couple's relationship was built on the strength of their marriage, she says .
 Lee did not beat her, but their fights were amplified in Russian, an unfamiliar tongue . Lee's neighbors in New Orleans were soon in nearly the same condition of shock as their neighbors in Dallas . Lee and his wife's fight was amplified in the Russian tongue .
 The state of the marriage, the state of mind of the principals, had to be measured by something other than the decibel count . "The state of marriage," the author says. "It's important to be seen as a marriage, not a marriage."
 With the Oswalds, ordinary conversation sounded like argument, and a real argument like a fight to the finish . The Oswalds are a family of four, with a daughter and a son .
 What counted was the mood of the marriage, and in New Orleans, the first couple of months were hard . What counted mattered is the mood, and it was hard for the couple to get married, she says .
 Lee bought some crabs, brought them home, and left them simmering on the stove . Lee bought the crabs for a week or so after Marina’s arrival, Lee bought them .
 Marina added spices, the ones she knew from Russia, to her husband's recipe . Not knowing that he meant to cook them his own way, she added spices to the dishes .
 Marina sometimes got up at night and went to the kitchen for something cold to drink . Marina sometimes went out for a cold drink .
 He would run in naked from the bedroom, brandishing a can of roach spray and squirting it everywhere, police say . "He would run into the bedroom brandishing the spray," police officer says .
 Marina laughed, because he was too stingy to buy decent spray and because he put it in the wrong places . Marina laughed because he didn't use enough of it .
 Marina scrubbed the floor and furniture every day while her husband was at work . She scrubbed her floors and furniture while he was in the office .
 The apartment was old and dark, and no matter how hard she tried to clean it, the place still got her down . But she said she still wanted to keep it clean, even though she cleaned it .
 She loved to go walking at night with Lee, letting him show her New Orleans . She sometimes felt that he did it because he thought it was his duty and not because he wanted to . But she loved going walking with him, even though she sometimes felt he did not want to .
 Marina began to wonder just how many schools he had been to . Marina was often asked if he had attended more than one school in his life .
 "She adored the lights and the music and the glimpses of strippers dancing," she said . She said, "I'm so happy to be here. She adored it"
 He refused, said Bourbon Street was “a dirty place,” and put on a show of inattentiveness as they walked past the famous swinging doors . He refused to walk past the swinging doors, saying it was a dirty place .
 At the newsstands, she would pick out the most unwholesome-looking magazines she could find and pore over the photographs of nude men and women . She would pore through the photographs .
 Aside from June, sex was again the brightest feature of their marriage . The couple both adored June .
 After intercourse he would go into the bathroom to wash off, emerge singing one of his arias, and lie down with his back to Marina . He would go to the bathroom and sing a song of his own .
 Lee would pile up pillows at the head of the bed so he could watch them making love . There was a mirror at the foot of their bed, and Lee would watch them make love with pillows in bed .
 Marina insists that their sexual life was improving right up to the end of Lee's death . Marina insists she still would have chosen him over any other man . But the balance had shifted, and the relationship had shifted .
 Lee would beg off making love on the ground that he would be unable to keep it up long enough to satisfy Marina . Sometimes when Lee came home hot and tired from work, he would beg not to make love .
 Marina was glad to give her husband satisfaction even if she did not receive it in return . But even when her pregnancy made intercourse uncomfortable for her, Marina was happy .
 For she was no longer sure that Lee loved her, and she wanted to be needed and reassured . She wanted to know that she was needed, and that she needed Lee .
 "Every day she expected to hear that he still meant to send her back to Russia," she says . Every day she was worried he would send her to Russia . "I'm not going to go back," she said .
 Her fears abated only when they were walking along Bourbon Street at night . Her fears were only when she was walking along the street .
 The lights and the music and the sight of people enjoying themselves lifted her spirits a little . Then the lights . and the . sight of them enjoying themselves lift her spirits, she said .
 The change became effective May 14, and Lee once again began to receive magazines and newspapers to which he subscribed . Lee was featured in Soviet Belorussia and the Militant News of Fidel Castro .
 The move to New Orleans, and the search for a new job and a new apartment, had distracted him from politics only briefly . He had been looking for a job and apartment in New Orleans . The move had been a distraction, he said .
 He was to become more deeply involved in the Cuban cause than he ever had been . Now he was to identify himself more strongly with this particular revolution and its heroes, he says .
 On May 22 he paid his first visit to the New Orleans Public Library, applied for a borrower’s card, and took out his first book . The New Orleans library is the largest in the city's history .
 Marina says that Lee compared himself to the great men he read about in books and genuinely believed that he was one of them . Marina says she believes that Lee was a great writer and a great man himself .
 At this moment, Lee was thinking more about changing the society he was in than about building a new one, as Mao and Castro had done . Lee was more interested in changing society than in building new one .
 President Obama hopes to change U.S. policy toward Cuba . He says he wants to change Cuba policy first . He hopes to make changes to Cuba policy .
 He requested a charter for his chapter and formal membership for himself, said he was thinking of renting an office for $30 a month . He asked how he might acquire membership blanks and bulk literature .
 For the office he was hoping to set up, he added that “a picture of Fidel, suitable for framing, would be a welcome touch”
 Two days later he returned to put down $4 cash on the order . He said his name was Lee Osborne, and two days later, he said he was Osborne . Osborne said he is Osborne .
 On June 4, he paid the remaining $5.89 in cash and picked up a thousand copies of the handbill . The handbill was published in June 2013 .
 Lee Osborne ordered five hundred copies of a yellow, 4-by-9-inch membership application for his New Orleans “ chapter” of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . He also ordered, from the Mailers’ Service Company on Magazine Street, five hundred .
 “Osborne” at first was not satisfied with heavy, “card-type” paper for his membership cards . John Anderson, who took the order at Mailers’ Service, recalled that “Oborne’s at first not satisfied because he wanted
 He accepted the order, paid $3.50 in cash, and went off with the cards . However, he accepted it and went to the store to take the cards away .
 Vincent T Lee, national director of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, replied to Lee’s letter on May 29 . Lee replied to the letter, saying that the Cuban government should not be allowed to play in Cuba .
 It was the longest, warmest letter he had ever received from the head of any organization . He said he had received the longest letter he'd received from a head of the organization .
 It offered him, for the first time in his life, a real chance to work with a political group . He says it offered him a chance to get involved in the political process .
 He suggested Lee used only first-class mail on committee business and never put a full name on the return address on the envelope . He also suggested that Lee never used a full address on an envelope .
 Vincent Lee wrote that he had gone through the committee’s files and could scarcely conceive of a chapter “with as few members as seem to exist in the New Orleans area” But he would gladly issue a charter if Lee could come up with enough members .
 Lee did not send the application forms and membership cards that Lee had requested . Nor did he send the membership cards and application forms that Lee requested .
 Lee decided to print up his own forms and cards after he received the letter . Lee printed up the cards and forms after receiving the letter from his friend .
 Marina might have guessed that he was again becoming involved in ‘politics,’ for the blow she was dreading had fallen . The blow had fallen for Marina, who had been dreading it had fallen.
 Less than two weeks after her arrival in New Orleans, Lee told her that he did not love her . Lee wrote to the FPCC, even before he wrote to her, he told her he was not in love with her .
 She was “in his way,” he said, and he still meant to send her back to Russia . She was in his way . He said she was in the way of sending her home .
 Sometimes he went a whole day without speaking, then spent the next day making up to her . Sometimes he would go without speaking to her, then make up for her next day .
 He would take her and Junie to the park, do the laundry, mop the floor, clean the floor . He would also take them to the dog park, take her to a park, clean up the laundry .
 Marina and Lee were a “cute,” “family-conscious” and “devoted” couple, the couple’s friends said . They thought they were a "cute" couple .
 She was afraid that Lee was nice to her only because he would soon be getting rid of her . She was worried that Lee would soon get rid of herself .
 "I feel very hurt because Lee’s attitude toward me is such that every minute I feel as if I am tying him down," she says . "I’m very hurt," she adds .
 I like America very much, and I think that even without Lee I would not be lost here. I like it very much and I would like it,’s a great American citizen. I think I would never be lost in the U.S. Even without Lee, I
 Lee took Marina and June to the Napoleon Branch of the public library, the branch nearest their apartment, to look for books in Russian for Marina . Marina's mother, Marina, was also looking to buy Russian books for her daughter .
 The Huey Long murder case is the story of a man who was murdered in the Berlin Wall . Deutsch is published by Dean and David Heller, and The Hueys Long Murder Case .
 Lee ducked into a store and had his photograph taken—evidently for a passport . Marina and the baby waited outside while Lee had the photo taken .
 Next thing she knew she was lying on the sidewalk and Lee had his arms around her . She was lying in the street and Lee was holding her around .
 He carried her inside the store, carrying her inside, and some strangers brought her to with ammonia . She was taken to the hospital, but some strangers were able to resuscitate her .
 He put her to bed, brought her some juice, and tiptoed around the rest of the day, taking care of her . June is now in a stable condition .
 Marina received a letter from the consular section of the Soviet Embassy in Washington . Marina received the letter on June 4 from the embassy in Washington, D.C.
 It had been mailed directly to her at 4907 Magazine Street, New Orleans . It was mailed to her address .
 When Lee came home that night, she asked how the embassy knew her new address . Lee asked how she was able to get the address .
 He wanted Marina to sign a membership card in the New Orleans " chapter" of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Marina had been using an alias for several months, he wanted her to sign it .
 Marina remembered the letter that had arrived from the Soviet Embassy that day . Marina remembered that she had received a letter from the embassy .
 She told herself that it was nothing but child’s play anyway, and it was better for him to be playing with bits of paper than with a gun .
 As long as she was going to sign, she wanted her writing to look pretty .
 Several times, on a piece of scratch paper, she practiced writing the name Lee wanted her to sign . She practiced writing Lee's name on scratch paper before signing it .
 He took a standard yellow international vaccination certificate, wrote his name on the top, stamped it “Dr. Dr. David’s name on top . He stamped it on top of the certificate .
 In addition to being president of the New Orleans "chapter" of the FPCC, “Hidell” was also his doctor .
 A third important letter arrived during the first week of June, this one from Ruth Paine . The letter was written by Paine, a friend of Paine's wife and author of the novel .
 Ruth repeated her offer for Marina to come to Texas to have her baby at clinic in Grand Prairie, Texas . Ruth repeated the offer .
 Marina would have to bring her medical records from New Orleans, she said . She expressed hope that she would go to a doctor soon to anticipate any complications in her pregnancy .
 The letter seems to have had an effect on Marina Lee, who had a fainting spell on June 1 .
 Marina was taken to New Orleans Charity Hospital for a medical examination . The hospital is a large institution near their home in New Orleans . Marina's father took her to the hospital on Saturday .
 Louisiana hospital was a state hospital, permitted to treat only Louisiana residents or emergency cases . Unfortunately, it was only available to treat Louisiana residents only .
 Marina had not lived long enough long enough in Louisiana to qualify as a resident, nor was hers an emergency . Marina had lived in Louisiana long enough time to qualify for emergency .
 Lee spent a full hour pleading to have a doctor examine her, the Oswalds were turned away . Lee spent the entire time pleading for a doctor to examine her .
 Lee always had an extra $10 in his pocket, Marina later realized that he could have taken her to a doctor . Marina realized that Lee always always had a $10 extra .
 She wanted to see a doctor, but she put the idea aside and was not examined until she was in her ninth month . She said she wanted to be examined, but was not .
 The week that began two days later, on Monday, June 10, was a memorable one in the presidency of John F Kennedy and a memorable, as well as tragic, one for the civil rights movement . The week of the Kennedy assassination was one of the most memorable weeks in American history
 June 11 was a landmark in the civil rights struggle that had been raging that spring with its focus in Birmingham, Alabama . The following day, June 11, was the first anniversary of the Civil Rights movement .
 In January a governor named George Wallace had been inaugurated in Alabama with a speech promising that he “would stand in the schoolhouse door, if necessary,” to resist courtordered desegregation . In January, Wallace had vowed to stand in schoolhouse doors if necessary .
 Twice Wallace held out his hand in a ‘stop’ signal, twice James Hood and Vivian Malone, two black students had to retreat . The deputy attorney general of the United States, Nicholas Katzenbach, was also involved in the incident .
 President Kennedy, in Washington, signed an order federalizing part of the National Guard .
 Governor Wallace walked off, and the two students were allowed to register . As guardsmen walked onto the campus, Governor Wallace left and walked off . The two students registered with Wallace .
 That evening President Kennedy went on the air from the White House to call for a new civil rights law . That evening he called for the law . President Kennedy called for civil rights reform .
 Medgar Evers, field secretary of the NAACP in Mississippi, was shot and killed by a sniper in Jackson, Mississippi . The sniper was a sniper who had been lying in wait outside his home in Jackson .
 Lee had often spoken of the necessity for greater understanding between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Lee often spoke of the need for greater cooperation between the two countries .
 He claimed racial discrimination in America was the chief reason he had become a Marxist . He claimed that racial discrimination was the main reason he became Marxist .
 President Kennedy had taken major steps toward better relations with Russia abroad . But he did not give the slightest sign of it . Kennedy did not recognize that he had taken steps to improve relations between Russia and America .
 Evers’s tumultuous funeral was reported in every newspaper in the land . Lee went to the Dumaine Street Wharf, where the USS Wasp was berthed, without a word to anyone, to the site .
 Lee was approached by Harbor Patrolman Girod Ray and asked whether he had a permit . Lee replied that he did not and he had no need of one . Lee said he was not in need of a permit and was not allowed to carry out the act .
 Patrolman Ray informed him that he was on property of the New Orleans Port Authority and that a permit was required . The permit was, indeed, required by the Port Authority .
 Oswald’s interest in Castro was not new . Lee Harvey Oswald was interested in Castro . Oswald was involved in the assassination of Castro in 1961 .
 As early as the fall of 1958, when he was barely nineteen and was stationed in the Marine Corps at El Toro, California, after his tour of duty in the Far East .
 He was leading a guerrilla band in the Sierra Maestre, fighting to overthrow the Cuban dictatorship . He was fighting for an overthrow of the Cuban government .
 When he returned, Castro was the ruler of Cuba . Castro returned to Cuba just after January 1, 1959 .
 Oswald told Delgado that he mistrusted both the Communist and the American forms of government . Oswald said he mistook the Communist government and American government . Delgado: "I don't believe in the American government"
 Morgan became a legend because he quit the United States Army with a dishonorable discharge . He fought under Castro in the Escambres, and came out as a Cuban Army major . Morgan was a major in the Cuban Army .
 Delgado's knowledge of Spanish and Oswald's ideas about government fit with those of Castro . They would have honorable discharges, and between Delgado and Oswald’s ideas, things might go well for them in Cuba .
 One of the ideas they had was to “do away with Trujillo” and free the Dominican people, they said . The idea was to free the people of the country .
 He peppered Delgado with questions about how they could get to Cuba and become part of the revolutionary movement . Delgado: "I want to go to Cuba. I want to be a part of it"
 Oswald bought a Spanish-English dictionary and started studying Spanish . On Delgado’s advice, Oswald went to the local library and bought a dictionary .
 Delgado also suggested that Oswald contact the Cuban Embassy, he assured him there was nothing subversive about it because the United States was on friendly terms with Cuba . Delgado said the U.S. and Cuba were friendly terms .
 Oswald actually did contact the Cuban consulate in Los Angeles in hopes of getting into Cuba . And there is evidence that Oswald actually tried to get into Cuba with the help of the consulate .
 As the months went by and Castro started arresting political opponents, Delgado cooled off on Cuba . Delgado cooled off on the island nation .
 Delgado had the impression that rumors of arrests and executions were, if anything, making Oswald “more reverent” toward Castro . Delgado: The rumors of arrest and executions made Oswald more reverent toward Castro than before .
 Cuba seemed like a truly revolutionary country, like Russia before it went wrong, before bureaucratic ossification set in . Once he was disappointed there, Cuba seemed all the more like Russia, before bureaucracy set in.
 Four years earlier he had thought about gaining Castro’s trust and joining his revolution . Four years later he had planned to join Castro's revolution . He had considered joining the Castro regime .
 His effort to establish a chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans appears to have been two-pronged, both an attempt to change U.S. policy toward Cuba by peaceful political action at the grassroots level .
 Oswald needed a social system to idealize, and that for the moment was Cuba . Lee Oswald needed to be idealized in Cuba . Oswald's Cuba was the place he was idealizing, and it was Cuba.
 He also needed a hero with whom he could identify; that hero was Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was a hero for Fidel Castro, who was Fidel in Cuba .
 The pseudonym a man uses, his alias, tells a good deal about him and whom he would like to be . "His alias" tells a lot about who he wants to be, and how he would want to be a man .
 Lee Oswald’s alias, the only one he ever used consistently, was Alik James Hidell . Lee Oswald used Hidell as his alias . Hidell was one of the only ones he used consistently .
 There is no “James” who is known to have meant anything to Oswald in real life . Oswald was not Oswald's target in the real life, but he is believed to have been Oswald . Oswald had a long line of friends and family members, including Oswald .
 Oswald's name may have been taken from James Bond, the fictional hero created by Ian Fleming, whose novels Oswald read with enjoyment . Oswald was named after the James Bond character, James Bond .
 Bond is a spy, as Oswald often said he would like to be, and he had the altogether miraculous quality of extricating himself from every danger . Bond was a spy as Oswald said he wanted to be and had the miraculous ability to extricate himself from danger .
 James Bond was, indeed, at the center of a magic circle of invulnerability, just as Lee supposed himself to be, especially after his attempt on General Walker and his own miraculous escape .
 Oswald's name came from several sources, including the name "Oswold" Oswald . Oswald is the son of Oswald, who was assassinated in 1918 . Oswald's son is the grandson of Oswald's wife, who is now the president of the United States .
 The name “Hidell” pronounced with a long “i” has an exquisite economy, defining its use, “hide,” to perfection . Since the purpose of an alias is to hide one’s identity, the name ‘Hidell,
 If the “i” is pronounced as a long “e,’ the name becomes “Heedell,” a simple rhyme of Fidel . But if the ‘i’s’i is pronounced, it becomes ‘Heed
 Oswald’s Russian name, “Alik,” linked it with the magical properties of James Bond, and made Oswald one with his hero, Fidel . The beauty of ‘Alik James Hidell’ is that it held within it Oswald”s Russian
 Lee used both his own name and his alias on his leaflets and hand-bills . Lee used the alias of both himself and the person he was using .
 Handbills are spread out all over the coffee table in the living room, Marina says .
 Lee hesitated guiltily, then started to put his ‘papers’ away . Lee was taken by surprise, then began to put them away .
 Lee put on a special, wheedling voice, a mixture of pleading and baby talk . Lee put his plea in a wistling voice for help . Lee said: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sorry for it"
 He put his handbills away and spent the rest of the day playing with June, doing housework, and making up to his wife in every way .
 Marina sat in the rocking chair and Lee, seated at the coffee table, stamping leaflets . Marina and Lee spent a lot of evenings after that with Marina sitting in a rocking chair .
 Marina was not happy to see him busy with ‘politics’ again, but she told herself that as long as it had to do with papers and not a gun, she need not worry too much . Marina told herself she would not worry much if he was busy with 'politics
 Marina was preoccupied by troubles of her own, especially her fear that Lee would force her to go back to Russia . Besides, Marina was also worried about her own troubles .
 Night after night she sat rocking June to sleep with tears cascading down her cheeks . She sat rocking her daughter with tears running down her face .
 Sometimes the sight of her tears actually put him in good spirits, and he would break out singing or whistling . Sometimes he would sing or whistle as she cried .
 He kept her under unremitting pressure to write the Soviet Embassy and ask for her visa to be speeded up . She unremittingly refused to do so .
 He tried to force her to write the embassy whenever she did or said anything that displeased him . Nearly every night when he got home from work he asked whether she had written yet . He asked if she'd written yet.
 She believed it was his family, June and her, whom he loved in his heart, but that in accordance with his lofty ideas about himself, he disguised his real feelings and forced himself to put politics above everything else . She believed that it was June and June .
 Lee could give up June, whom he loved above everyone, and a new baby he had never even seen . But she did not see how, for the sake of his ‘foolish politics,” Lee could do so .
 Lee gave Marina grounds for suspecting that, icy and indifferent as he tried to appear, underneath his feelings were not so cold . Lee did give Marina grounds to suspect that he was not so icy .
 He obviously loved June, and every so often, on an impulse, he would put his arms around Marina and kiss her, too . He would put arms around her and she would kiss her too, too.
 She says she was like a ‘blind kitten’ who, for the sake of one caress, keeps coming back to the person who hits it . She says it's like a "blind kitten" who keeps returning to the same person .
 Sometimes Lee’s cruelty so repelled Marina that she could not bear to be in the same room with him . Marina could no longer bear the cruelty of Lee's cruelty to her daughter .
 Marina had moods in which she thought she might go back to Russia if it would please Lee . Sometimes Marina thought she may return to Russia to please her husband .
 She counted on time, Soviet red tape, and a change in their relationship to save her life . She counts on time and red tape to save herself from Soviet red Tape .
 She saw that Lee, for some reason she could not comprehend, would not allow her to go back to Russia without legal ties to him . Lee would not let her return to Russia, she said .
 If she continued to insist on a divorce, perhaps he would change his mind entirely, perhaps .
 Lee kept bringing it up, and it was Lee who kept talking about it . Once the name was out of the bag, it came up again and again . Lee: "Once the name came up, it was always a topic of discussion"
 He reminded Marina of the letter she had written to Anatoly the previous winter and told her he would never forget it . He reminded her of her letter she'd written to him the previous year . He told Marina he'd never forget .
 If Marina reminisced about some escapade she had had in Minsk, he assumed that she had been with Anatoly . He assumed that Anatoly would be with Marina .
 Marina went too far and remarked that Anatoly used to kiss so well it had made her head spin . Anatoly kissed Marina so much it made her feel dizzy that she couldn't keep up with it .
 Lee asked her to teach him how to kiss Anatoly, but she said he kissed her again . Lee asked Lee to teach Anatoly how to do it .
 Anatoly, she replied, half in humor, kissed so well that if Lee spent his whole life trying he would never learn to kiss that way . Anatoly's kiss is so good that Lee would never be able to kiss him again, she said .
 Her life with Lee had been so hard that anyone who had ever been good to her now seemed like an angel . Her life had been hard for her, and Lee was the only person she had ever seen since .
 After Lee intercepted her letter to him and read it aloud, she had resolved to forget him . She had written him a letter of apology . Lee intercepted the letter and said it was a mistake .
 If she did go back to Russia, he was the man she would marry, he would have her . He would be happy to have her back in Russia, she says .
 In fact, she bought a photograph of President Kennedy to remind her of him . She bought a photo of him to remind herself of him.
 The film actor Mel Ferrer, who played Prince Andrei in the film version of War and Peace, also reminded her of Anatoly .
 Marina Lee never knew that in her eyes the president’s features were a prized reminder of the love she had lost . Lee is not aware of Marina Lee's love for the president .
 It could very well be that she somehow telegraphed her feeling that Kennedy resembled Anatoly and that her message got through to Lee . Yet knowing her capacity to arouse jealousy, and Lee’s proclivity to be jealous, it could very likely be that it could
 In any case Lee had seen Anatoly on the night he first met Marina, and if a resemblance truly existed and was marked, he may have observed it for himself . Lee had a resemblance to Anatoly .
 He was jealous of Kennedy, whether he had seen a resemblance or not . And he was jealous, whether it was true or not, he said .
 In the summer of 1963, Lee and Marina had special feelings about the Kennedys . Lee's wife, Marina, had a special moment in the summer when she visited the family .
 The names of the president and his wife were a staple item of their household conversation . President Obama's name was a staple topic of conversation for the couple .
 He admired her, he said, for accompanying her husband on his travels . From reading Time and the newspapers, he seemed to have about as detailed a knowledge of her obstetrical history .
 He told Marina that, in addition to Caroline, John Jr., and the child she was due to have that autumn, Mrs. Caroline was also due to give birth in the autumn .
 Lee said he was Roman Catholic, one of a large family of brothers and sisters, and a Democrat . Lee said that his father was a millionaire who made money in the whiskey business . Lee also said that he was a Roman Catholic .
 In spite of his father’s help, Kennedy was equipped to be president and deserved it, he said . He told her that in spite of the help his father had, Kennedy deserved it .
 Marina admired Kennedy in his own right—not only as a reminder of Anatoly. Anatoly, she said, but she also admired Kennedy .
 Lee translated everything for her, every article and every caption—about the president, his wife, their children, and the Robert F Kennedy family . With a patience that was utterly unlike him, Lee kept up with her, she translated everything .
 He did not balk, as he did when she asked him to read about movie stars, nor did he scold her for being unable to read it herself . He didn't balk, but he did not scold .
 He seemed nearly as interested in the Kennedys as she was, and if the article was favorable, he seemed to agree with it .
 Lee listened intently and said ‘Shh’ once when Marina asked him to translate while the president was still speaking . Lee said “Shh,” once when asked to translate .
 Lee told her that the speech had been an appeal for disarmament . Lee said Kennedy's speech was probably the one of July 26 when he announced the signing of a nuclear test-ban treaty in Moscow . Lee: "After one speech, probably one of the most important speeches, probably
 Marina Kennedy believed that for the United States in 1963, John F Kennedy was the best president the country could hope to have . Marina got the impression that her husband liked and approved of the president and believed that .
 Kennedy would like to pursue a better, more gentle policy toward Cuba but was not free to do as he wished, he said . He added, however, that Kennedy would not be free to pursue such a better policy . Kennedy added that he would like a better approach to Cuba .
 Marina Kennedy, like Marina, was a wife and mother, and both of them were pregnant . Both of the Kennedy sisters were also pregnant .
 Marina supposed that, being Catholic and upper class, she must have been taught to restrain them . She might conceivably have passionate feelings underneath, but Marina supposed . She supposed that she would have to restrain her .
 She was interested in what she wore and how she fixed her hair, and she was concerned about her pregnancy . She was also concerned about what she was wearing and how it was done .
 She loved photographs of Kennedy that showed him with his face wide open in a smile . She also loved photos of Kennedy with his smile . Kennedy died at age 85 .
 Most of all she loved the pictures of him walking along a beach or on the golf course, his hands thrust into his pockets and wearing an old sweater and a pair of khaki pants, just like anybody else . Most of the pictures she loved of him were of him simply like anybody
 She was astonished that in this country such photographs of the president were allowed to appear . She said she was astonished by the photographs of him .
 When she thought of Lee or of other men she had known, it was clear to her that anyone who cared about politics, especially any man who was even tempted to place politics over his own family, must be sick or trying to escape personal unhappiness .
 To her, President Kennedy’s interest in politics meant that something was missing in her life . She said Kennedy's interest in political matters meant that she felt something missing in life .
 Marina speculated—to herself, not to Lee, about the president as man and lover . Marina speculated about the relationship between the president and her lover .
 Marina did her best to convince herself that because he had a bad back he probably wasn’t much of a lover . Marina tried to convince her that because of his bad back, he probably was a lover. Marina did not want him to be a lover again.
 Marina's feelings toward the president are identical to the words she uses of only two other men in her life until then, Anatoly and Lee . Even so, the words Marina now uses to sum up her feelings toward President Obama are identical .
 Marina had her photograph of President Kennedy, and Lee had his of Fidel Castro, which he clipped out of the Soviet magazine Ogonyok and pinned to the living room wall . Marina had a photograph of the Cuban leader taken from a Soviet magazine .
 Marina did not know what he planned to do with all his leaflets . She didn't know that on the afternoon of June 16 he had passed some of them out .
 By late May and early June, he had become alarmingly indifferent to the way he looked and went around wearing only sandals, work pants, and a dirty T-shirt .
 Marina would beg him, when they were going out, please to put on a fresh shirt . Marina would plead him to change his clothes when they went out .
 By mid-July he shaved only every other day . He stopped shaving on weekends and shaved only once a day a week .
 Where formerly he had brushed his teeth three times a day, now he brushed them only at night . Now he brushes his teeth only once a night .
 He just sat listlessly in the bathtub until he could stir himself to get out . "He just sat there listlessly," he said of his bathtub .
 He refused to let Marina darn his socks, preferring to go around in old, holey ones instead . Marina's husband refused to allow her to do the job .
 He would burp at meals without excusing himself, and he got his hair cut at the nape of the neck so he had hair only on the top of his head . He burped at meals .
 Marina told him that her Russian relatives had thought he was from a good family because he was clean and good-looking . Marina said her Russian family thought he had a good looking family because of his clean looks .
 Marina used to beg him to brush his teeth, especially if he was going to kiss her . His breath got bad, and Marina begged him to get his teeth out of his mouth .
 He would come at her, his mouth open, breathing as hard as he could . He would say, "You’re supposed to love me any way I am," and he would come back at her . She said, "I’m supposed to be loved me any
 He would try to kiss her, yet his eyes were so full of hate she thought he was going to kill her instead . She thought he would kiss her instead of kill her .
 Lee would change his mind and tell them to go without him. Then, at the last minute, he would change their mind and say they would go . Lee would then tell them they would not go with him. Lee would say he was going to go with them, then change his
 Sometimes it was a ploy to get rid of them so he could work on his writings alone . Sometimes he would use them to get away from them to concentrate on writing alone .
 He hated their being away for long and was distraught if they were as little as half an hour late getting home . Yet he hated being away too long and would be distraught if he got home late . He said: 'I'm not happy to be away from my family'
 Lee felt that Marina was his property, or slave, and he her owner, in June . Lee felt she was his slave or slave for a few weeks in June, and Marina was her slave .
 This meant he had the right to take her, sexually, by force any time he liked, and now and then he tried . He had a right to force her sexually by force, even if he didn't want her to be raped .
 Marina, too, was part of this world, and it was her role to rear and protect his “treasure,” June . June. June. Marina .
 Lee existed in that world, too, and from time to time it seems to have intruded upon his fantasies . Lee's fantasy world was his own, but it was not his own .
 The New Orleans Times-Picayune carried a front-page story to the effect that President Kennedy had left Washington by air for a major journey to Western Europe . Kennedy had more time than usual to read the newspaper when he had time to read .
 Lee took the first step toward putting his own travel plans into effect Monday, June 24 . Lee says he plans to travel to the U.S. next week . Lee: "It's a dream come true"
 Exactly one year after his old passport had expired, he went downtown and applied for a new one . The man's old passport expired one year ago .
 He said on the application form that he expected to be traveling three months to a year as a tourist in England, France, Germany, Holland, the Soviet Union, Finland, Italy and Poland .
 He expected to leave New Orleans between October and December 1963 on the Lykes Steamship Line, the same one he took in 1959 when he defected to the Soviet Union . He was expected to sail from New Orleans on the same steamship line he used in 1959 .
 He gave Lillian Murret, not Marina, as the person to notify in case of his death . He gave Murret a list of people to notify .
 Lee was having trouble in his sleep again, the first time since February . Lee's mother knew nothing about his sleep condition . She was worried he was getting into trouble again .
 One night he cried, yet when he woke up he could not remember what his dream had been about . He cried, but when he awoke he couldn't remember what he had been dreaming about .
 "He started having nosebleeds, once or twice he talked in his sleep, and one night toward the very end of June he had four anxiety attacks during which he shook from head to toe at intervals of half an hour and never once woke up .
 The attacks appear to have presaged a decision that was causing him pain . Just as in the period when he was making up his mind to shoot General Walker, these attacks presaged his decision . The attacks appeared to have prefigured the decision he made to shoot Walker .
 Marina, too, was sleeping badly because of her fear of being sent back to Russia, she said . Marina said she was sleeping because she feared she would be sent home .
 Sometimes he went a whole day without speaking to her, or if he did he would say, “Hey you,” do this or that, without ever calling her by name . Sometimes he would speak to her without naming her, he says .
 Marina was sitting in her rocker holding back tears when she noticed that Lee looked unhappy, too . She noticed that one night Marina was holding back her tears . Marina was shocked to discover that Lee was unhappy with her .
 He stole a glance in her direction, and she saw a look of sadness in his eyes . She saw a sad look in her husband's eyes as she walked away .
 Marina put her arms around him, stroked his head, and could feel him shaking with sobs . Marina stroked him to comfort her son, who was shaking sobs as she held him to her arms .
 Lee held her by the shoulders and told her to write to the Soviet Embassy that he would be coming, too . Lee told her she should write the embassy that he'd be coming too, too.
 In bed that night they spent hours talking about where they were going to live . They spent hours discussing where they would live in their new home .
 Marina wrote her longest, warmest, and so far her only uncoerced letter to Nikolai Reznichenko, head of the consular section of the Soviet Embassy in Washington . Marina wrote the letter to the head of Russia's embassy in Washington, D.C. She
 She announced that her husband wished to accompany her to the USSR and begged him to hurry up their visas . She joyfully announced that she wanted to accompany him .
 She added that they were too poor to visit the embassy in Washington (as the embassy requested) and could not even pay their medical bills . She said they were not even able to go to the embassy to see the embassy .
 Lee told Marina what to write—“more tears and fewer facts,” he ordered. Lee told her to write. “More tears and . fewer facts.” she said .
 Marina was certain that he would not bother to read her letter when she had finished . Marina added a sentence or two of her own to the letter . She was certain he would never bother to bother reading it .
 She made a formal request that they be allowed to live in Leningrad on the grounds that she would have a better chance of finding a job as a pharmacist there . She said they would be able to find a job at a better job in the city .
 She is going to have a baby in October, therefore you must grant the entrance visa and make the transportation arrangements before then . She is due to give birth in October . The mother-to-be is expecting her first child .
 The letter was startlingly similar in tone and content to Lee’s correspondence with the American Embassy in Moscow years before . Lee H Oswald wrote the letter to the U.S. Embassy .
 A foreign government is under no obligation whatsoever to him, he says . Once again he was asking a government, this time a foreign government, to make his travel arrangements .
 "He sought to place the responsibility for his wife and child on somebody else," he said . "I'm not going to be able to live with my wife and my child," he added .
 He repeatedly sought the same old solutions to problems in his life, he says . Confronted with problems, he repeatedly sought to solve them, he said .
 Lee asked the Soviet Embassy to consider his visa application separately from Marina’s because he knew that Marina, as a Soviet citizen who had requested a visa nearly five months before, might receive it much sooner than he . Lee asked for his visa to be considered separately because he did not
 He does appear to have been considering a return to Russia himself, or holding it open as a place to fall back on .
 He had told Marina that he wanted to go to Cuba or China, but as yet he did not have any definite plans .
 With Marina and the baby in Russia, he might travel anywhere he liked, and return to them when it suited his convenience . He might return to Russia when it suits his convenience, he said .
 Oswalds wrote friends in Leningrad and Minsk that they had applied to come back to Russia . The Oswalds had maintained a lively correspondence with relatives and friends in the USSR ever since their arrival in America .
 In their replies they welcomed the Oswalds on one hand and warned them on the other . The Oswalds were both welcomed and warned by the British government .
 He urged Lee to think it over, advising that this next Atlantic crossing, if he made it, was certain to be his last . Lee: "If you make it, if you do it, it will be your last"
 For the friend to have written so explicit a warning, aware that it would be read by authorities on both sides, was a testament to the very great loyalty he bore the Oswalds . The friend's loyalty to Oswalds is testament to his loyalty to the family .
 Lee paid another visit to the Napoleon Branch of the New Orleans Public Library on Monday, July 1 . Lee wrote the embassy on the same day he wrote the letter .
 He had recently been reading a spy novel, space fiction, and a few volumes on Communism and on Russia . He said he had been reading spy novels .
 It was William Manchester’s Portrait of a President, a biography of John F Kennedy . M arina's spirits lifted the moment Lee said he would go back with her to Russia .
 In her euphoria it made no difference to her what country they lived in, just so the two of them could be together, and with the children .
 Marina had told Lee that she could not go on living if he left her, and she meant it . Marina told Lee she would not live if Lee left her . Lee had told her that she was going to die if he did .
 He had shown that he needed her and was not going to throw her away . Now he had, by his actions, reassured her, had shown she was not being thrown away . He had also shown her that he was not throwing her away.
 Marina was no longer as afraid as she had been that he was going to send her to Russia alone, or that he might, without warning, kill someone . Marina was able to be more understanding of the situation .
 She decided to try to be more kind and affectionate so that he would confide in her and express his feelings more openly . He decided to confide with her so she could be more affectionate .
 She knew that she, too, was responsible for their fights . She resolved to turn over a new leaf and not be so quick to take offense .
 Up to now, he had been keeping his feelings out of sight as only he knew how to do . He had kept his feelings in the shadows for a long time .
 The tears he shed in the kitchen seemed to release him a little, and he became less edgy and tense . But the tears he had shed seemed to be released, and became less tense and tense again .
 Neither was an angel, of course, and they had no revolution in their home . Neither was angel, though, and neither was angel in their lives .
 Marina's stepfather had the irritating habit of leaning back in a chair with his dirty shoes all over the kitchen table, so that Marina was having to wash and rewash the table .
 He continued to complain about her cooking, and she about his wanting to make love without brushing his teeth . She also complained about the outrageous way he spoiled the baby . The couple continued to talk about their relationship .
 They still had fights, but there was humor in their battles now, and they forgot what they had been fighting about . "There were no fights now, but they still had each other's fights now," she says .
 There were times when Lee refused to touch the last piece of meat on his plate at supper at supper . Lee's wife was also a vegetarian .
 She put it in the refrigerator, but later in the evening she would take it out and try to get him to eat it . She would try and eat it again, but he wouldn't eat it.
 She realizes that perhaps it was not enough, perhaps what each had to give was not what the other needed most . She realizes perhaps it is not enough .
 He had told her he had a job in photography, but when he came home night after night smelling of coffee and covered with grease and coffee dust, she knew he had lied to her again . He had said he was working in photography .
 She was certain that his job had to do with coffee when he started bringing home packages of coffee and coupons . She said he brought home packages and coupons from the store .
 They used the coupons to buy a coffee pot and a huge saucepan for cooking crabs . They used them to buy coffee pots and a saucepan .
 Marina was pleased that Lee was doing something for their home, but she begged him to stop bringing the coupons home . She begged him not to bring home the coupons .
 She knew that he had stolen them and said that his job meant more to them than coupons . She said that he stole them and that he said his job was more important to her family .
 Maintenance men were responsible for keeping coffee machines clean and oiling them after they had been in use . He was one of four maintenance men at the Reily coffee company .
 Lee from the very first day did not seem to care whether he caught on or not, the man who broke him in said later that Lee did not care if he caught up or not . Lee's new roommate said Lee was always smiling and laughing at him .
 He would squirt his can of oil here and there and more or less hope the oil landed in the right spot . The oil was squirted by the man at the center of the story .
 He scarcely spoke to the other employees, and later it would be discovered that he was lying in his greasing log . He claimed to have lubricated machines that he had not touched .
 Lee had been there only a few weeks when the personnel manager who hired him had already come close to firing him more than once . Lee was hired by the same personnel manager as the previous manager .
 He refrained only because there was a shortage of men in the maintenance department . He said he refrained because of a shortage in maintenance staff .
 Lee ate his lunch alone at Martin’s Restaurant down the street . Sometimes, during a break, while the other men were sitting in the driveway smoking and shooting the breeze, Lee sat on a bench by himself .
 He stared straight into space, and if anyone happened to speak to him, he looked right at the person and did not reply . He did not respond to anyone who spoke to him and stared straight at him .
 One day while LeBlanc was greasing one of the machines, Lee offered to help . Lee is a friend of the late actor and director of the series .
 Twenty minutes, half an hour, three-quarters of an hour—and no knew where to find him. He was found in the middle of the night .
 He was next door at the Crescent City Garage, where he would get a Coke out of a machine and lose track of time . He was also next door to a bar where he'd get a drink from a machine .
 Lee talked with Adrian Alba, the owner of the garage the Secret Service used in New Orleans, about guns . The Secret Service was using the garage at the time of the incident .
 Lee was nearly in love with a Japanese rifle Alba owned, and begged him to sell it to him or buy another . Alba was able to buy a carbine for $35 that was easily worth $75 or $100 . Lee begged Alba to sell the rifle or buy
 Alba explained that he did not want to sell and under NRA rules he was entitled to purchase only one . Under NRA rules, he is entitled to buy one of the guns . Alba said he wanted to sell the gun, but he didn't want it .
 Lee hinted that he would make an offer for his rifle that he could not refuse . Lee acted as if he had not heard and hinted he would offer Alba an offer that he couldn't refuse . But Lee said he would not refuse to give up his rifle .
 At the cost of only $5 he, too, could join the NRA and buy a carbine himself . Apparently it never crossed his mind that at the $5 cost he could .
 Lee had no interest in handguns, only rifles, and he and Alba held earnest conversations about the killing power of small-caliber versus large-caliber bullets when used against a human target . Lee was not interested in handguns .
 Being hit by a small-caliber bullet is like being hit by an icepick compared with a 10-inch bread knife, experts say . Small-caliber bullets are deadlier than a bread knife or icepick, they say .
 Alba had a hundred or more issues of various gun magazines lying around his office . Alba: "American Rifleman, Field and Stream, Argosy , Guns and Hunting"
 Lee read them there, or borrowed one or two at a time and kept them between three days and a week . Lee kept them at home between three and five days .
 Before borrowing any new ones, he always made a great point of showing Alba that he had brought back the ones he had . He also made a point of making sure that Alba had returned the ones they had .
 Marina was to be twenty-two on July 17, and Lee had promised her something special, a dress or a new pair of shoes .
 He went to work that day and returned home as usual, oblivious of the date . He went on his way to work and returned as usual .
 He took her to the drugstore across the street and bought her face powder and Coca-Cola . He also bought face powder from the drug store . He said he took her there to buy face powder, soda and powder .
 Marina took it well, attributing his loss of work to widespread unemployment in the U.S. and not to any failings in her husband . Marina said he lost his job in the United States .
 The loss of his job, no matter how he felt about the work, must have been a great blow to Lee . Lee's picture of himself was further out of line with reality .
 Certain that he was a great man who had been unjustly denied recognition, he now had to be told that he could not even grease a coffee machine adequately . He was certain that he had been unfairly denied recognition .
 Lee could tell himself what he pleased, but with each new hurt or disappointment of this kind it was characteristic of him to draw deeper into a world of his own imagining and to retreat further from the world of reality . Lee can tell his own version of what he wants to say, but
 Lee had just finished reading Manchester’s Portrait of a President . Lee began to talk about himself and his future in exalted terms about his future .
 He had spoken this way before the birth of his first child, and again early in Marina’s second pregnancy, before he tried to shoot General Walker . He also spoke this way again before the death of Marina's first child .
 He said that in twenty years’ time, he would be President or prime minister . He said he would become President or Prime Minister in 20 years' time .
 Marina held up her underclothes to show him the worn-out elastic . One night as she stepped out of the bathtub, she showed him the elastic she had worn out .
 She was ashamed of Lee because he lacked a college education, and in five years or so, when the children were in school, it was her intention to go to work and support him so he could study philosophy and economics .
 She approved of his choices, and she approved them, because she thought they might straighten out his thinking and help him see his mistakes . Those were his choices . She said she approved of them because she wanted them to straighten up his thinking .
 His ideas seemed so unreal, so unconnected with life, that she was ashamed of him for even daydreaming about it . His ideas were so unreal that she felt ashamed for even thinking about them .
 She begged him to come out of the clouds, come down to earth and be like other mortals, she said . She said, 'I'm not going to be afraid of him'
 Marina asked how on earth he meant to be president when he had no training for it and had not even been to college . Marina asked him how he would be president without any training and no college experience . Marina said he was not even a college student .
 These days a president had to have been to college . Maybe it had once been that way, but now a president has to have had to be to college.
 He returned Portrait of a President to the Napoleon Branch of the public library . He took his time over this one, and took out two other books .
 In his biography Manchester mentioned, in passing, that Kennedy had recently read Alan Moorehead's The White Nile .
 Kennedy also took out his own Pulitzer Prize-winning volume, Profiles in Courage . Kennedy's book was published by Pulitzer Prize winning journalist Robert Kennedy .
 Lee read more about and by Kennedy than any other political figure . Lee spent the summer reading more about Kennedy than anyone else . Lee read about Kennedy's life in a book called "The Kennedy Years"
 Lee boasted to Marina that he would be president in twenty years, Kennedy's age when he was elected to the presidency . Lee wanted to be like Kennedy and perhaps follow in his footsteps as closely as possible .
 Reading Manchester’s book may have reminded him that in some ways he was like Kennedy already . Reading Manchester's book may remind him that he was already like him already .
 Both served with the armed forces in the Pacific, both had poor handwriting and were poor spellers . Both had very young children, and both had a brother named Robert . Both loved to read books, both loved foreign travel, and had served with armed forces .
 There was an unbridgeable gulf between them, and of this, too, Lee must have been poignantly aware . But there was also a gulf between the two sides, and there was this too .
 Kennedy not only read books, he wrote them and had received a Pulitzer Prize for his writing . Kennedy won the Pulitzer for his work . Kennedy was awarded the Pulitzer Prize .
 Of the two, Kennedy was, of course, the taller and better looking and was, as far as Lee knew, a more impressive physical specimen . Lee knew that Kennedy was taller, better looking, and was a better physical specimen than Lee .
 Lee cultivated the appearance of impermeability, of having made up his mind about everything . Lee was also suggestible, and there was a thread running through the Manchester biography that may have fascinated him—the theme of death .
 Lee had tried to commit suicide at least once and had attempted political murder . Lee had attempted a political murder that might have resulted in his own death . Lee's suicide attempt may have been a suicide attempt .
 Kennedy may have been particularly spellbound by Manchester’s many references to his close brushes with death . The film is set to be released in New York City on Friday .
 During the PT-boat episode of World War II, Manchester wrote, Kennedy’s superiors assumed that he had been killed in action . Manchester wrote that Kennedy's superiors assumed he was killed in battle .
 Even when he was speaking solely of politics, the words Manchester used were suggestive . Manchester used to use suggestive language during his speeches .
 Manchester was captivated by the president and mystified that he was not yet pre-eminent in the affections of his countrymen . Manchester City is captivated with the president's popularity .
 Kennedy tells about eight U.S. senators who, when called upon in a crisis to choose between the politically popular and the course they believed to be right, had chosen the right course even at the cost of their careers .
 Kennedy called upon every citizen of the U.S. to bear on his shoulders all the burdens of the politician . Kennedy called on citizens to bear all the burden of politicians .
 Every man must do as his conscience required, do the great, lonely, the lonely thing, the unpopular thing, he says . "It would in the long run be best for the people," he adds .
 He might be reviled, he might even lose his life, but history would vindicate and understand him . He might have been reviled but history will vindicate him, he says. He says . He says he hopes history will prove him right .
 With such words it may be possible that President Kennedy handed his assassin the very weapon he needed most, not the gun or the bullet, but the argument . President Kennedy may have given his killer the weapon of choice, not gun or bullet .
 If Lee, at this time, did start to consider another act of violence that would awaken the American people to the danger they were in, then he very quickly shoved the idea onto the back burner of his mind, where it might well have simmered forever . Lee: If Lee
 He resumed his peaceful political activity in behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Cuba remained on the front burner, and he resumed his political activity .
 He enclosed one of his handbills, in which he claimed to have a “charter chapter,” another lie, another lie . He enclosed a copy of the handbill, which he said he had a "charter book"
 Mr Lee gave a lecture on the system of dues he had set up, assuring him that it would not cheat the national office out of any money . He also enclosed the membership application he had had printed .
 He had hopes of what a discreet and energetic new member might be able to achieve even in inhospitable territory .
 Oswald was the kind who would be “isolated” no matter what community he was in . Even the few steps he had taken made clear that Oswald would be "isolated" no matter where he lived .
 He was exposing FPCC to reprisals that could be a public embarrassment . What was worse was worse, he was claiming to speak for the FPCC when he was exposing it to reprisal .
 By being associated with such a freebooter, the FPCC had much to lose and nothing to gain . The FPCC was in a precarious situation anyhow anyhow, anyhow .
 Oswald did not perceive for some time, if ever, that the FPCC had cut him off . Oswald was not cut off by FPCC, but by the end of the day . Oswald had no idea he was cut off .
 He kept on writing Vincent Lee, sending clippings, trying to impress him . Vincent Lee kept on sending them, sending them clippers, trying not to impress .
 He scoured the Help Wanted ads in the newspaper for jobs in photography, clerk-typist jobs . He answered a variety of them, including yard man at a marble and granite company .
 He filed a claim for unemployment compensation based on his employment in Texas . He was granted maximum benefits payable at $33 a week for thirteen weeks .
 In order to qualify for the payments, he had to visit the Louisiana Employment Commission every Tuesday and list the names of the concerns where he had applied for work . He had to list the concerns in order to get the payments .
 Lee embroidered reality; number of enterprises at which he falsely claimed to have sought employment was in the scores . Lee said he was falsely employed at scores of businesses . Lee: "It's not a lie. It's a lie"
 From the end of July, he looked for work only desultorily, and after the middle of August, he stopped looking altogether . He stopped looking for work altogether .
 He had started to receive unemployment compensation, and on these payments, plus what he had saved while he was working, he managed to live until October . He had been on unemployment compensation since October .
 Lee was unemployed and unable even to hold down a job as a manual laborer, Lee was oddly enough capable of a public life of a kind . Lee was unable to hold a job even though he was unemployed .
 Lee's cousin Eugene Murret invited him to speak at his seminary about Russia . Murret was training to be a Jesuit priest, inviting Lee to speak . Lee was a member of a Jesuit family . Lee's daughter was also invited to speak about Russia at the seminary .
 Lee accepted the invitation, and the Murret drove him and Marina to Mobile, Alabama . Lee accepted it and Marina's parents drove the couple to Mobile .
 Aunt Lillian, not realizing that in his own eyes Lee was a public man already, urged him to make notes so that he would not be nervous . Aunt Lilla urged him not to be nervous, but to be very careful with his notes .
 Russia's state takes care of everyone, says Putin . What he liked best about Russia, he said, was that the state takes all its own care .
 If a man gets sick, no matter how poor he is, the government will provide for him . The government will also provide for people in need of medical care .
 He said he was a Marxist and favored a brand of socialism that would combine the best of capitalism and Communism . He said that he was Marxist .
 Two of the priests who were present said later that Lee had handled himself well . Lee was charged with assaulting a priest at the scene of the shooting .
 Lee became more and more active on behalf of Castro after he was forced to leave the military . Lee became active in Cuba in the 1980s and '90s . Lee is a former member of the Castro family .
 He was turned away from a printing shop where he tried to order three thousand more ‘Hands Off Cuba’ leaflets . Vincent Lee had failed to answer his most recent letter, he says .
 I rented an office as I planned and was promptly closed three days later for some obscure reasons by the renters, they said something about remodeling, ect., I’m sure you understand . I rented a office as well as the office I planned, but it was quickly closed three
 Some Cuban-exial “gusanos” [a word for the anti-Castro exiles] often used in the Militant] were attacked . A street demonstration was attacked and we were officially cautioned by police .
 Thousands of circulars were distrubed and many, many pamphlets which your office supplied . Nevertheless thousands of circulared circulars and pamphlets were distributed . Your office supplied many of the pamphlets .
 The letter was dated August 1 and postmarked August 4 . It contains not a single fact apart from the reference to picketing the fleet, which had occurred a month and a half before .
 The uncanny thing about the letter is that on Monday, August 5, the day after he mailed it, Lee started to bring about the events he had just described . Lee: "The day after I sent the letter, I started to start thinking about what happened."
 He visited a clothing store run by Carlos Bringuier, New Orleans representative of the Cuban Student Directorate, an anti-Castro exiles group .
 He said he would gladly train Cubans to fight Castro . He said that he had been in the Marine Corps, had been trained in guerrilla warfare .
 Lee explained to teenagers how to make a homemade gun and how to derail a train . Lee also explained how to use gunpowder to make gunpowder and make a train derail .
 He told them in detail how to blow up the Huey Long Bridge, as if learning this delicate art had been the part of his training he relished most .
 Lee offered to contribute to Bringuier’s cause . Lee put his hand in his pocket and offered to donate .
 Bringuier was skeptical because he had been warned that the FBI might try to infiltrate his organization . He was not sure what breed of cat Oswald was, whether he was from the FBI or whether he might, on the other hand, be pro-Castro .
 Lee returned to the store the next day and left his Guidebook for Marines . The next day he returned and left the book .
 Bringuier and two friends went in search of the man and found themselves face-to-face with Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald was Lee Oswald, the assassin responsible for the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 He explained to the crowd that this man had presented himself a few days earlier as an anti-Castro volunteer . Now it turned out that he was a Castro agent and a Communist, he said .
 A policeman told Bringuier to keep moving and let Oswald hand out his literature . Oswald was given the opportunity to hand out literature by a policeman . A policeman said he would not let Oswald give out the literature .
 Bringuier’s companions grabbed a handful of Oswald's leaflets, tore them up, and hurled them in the air . But one of the Oswald's companions grabbed the leaflets and threw them away . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast in November 1945 .
 Bringuier removed his eyeglasses and went up to Oswald as if to hit him . Oswald was shot in the head by a German soldier . Oswald died of his injuries in a car crash in August .
 Oswald, Oswald and the three exiles were taken to the police station . Just then two patrol cars arrived and took all four of them to the station . Oswald was arrested and taken to a police station by police officers .
 Bringuier noticed at the station that Oswald appeared confident, cool, very much in command of himself . Oswald appeared cool, cool and confident at the time of his death .
 Bringuier and his friends each put up $25 bond and were told to show up in court on Monday . The men were told they must show up to court in court next week .
 A lieutenant in the Intelligence Division of the police department, Francis Martello, decided to have a talk with Oswald the next morning . Oswald was a member of the Police Department's Intelligence Division .
 Lee was flattered that Martello listened seriously to his views about Russia and Marxism . Lee says Martello's views on Marxism were taken seriously by Martello .
 He claimed that the New Orleans “chapter” of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee comprised thirty-five members . The committee met monthly at various addresses, he declined to divulge .
 Martello’s later account suggests that Lee was in a grandiloquent frame of mind, but his response to a question was striking succinct . Lee's response to the question is striking succinct, Martello's account suggests .
 Martello impressed by Lee’s calm, calm demeanor, lack of aggressiveness or emotional outbursts . Martello says Lee was unable to taunt Bringuier into physical combat .
 Dutz was away on a religious retreat, and Lillian was in the hospital, recovering from an ear operation . Dutz is away on religious retreat; Lillian is recovering from ear surgery .
 The only member of the family on the spot was the older daughter, Joyce Murret O’Brien, who was on a visit from Beaumont, Texas . The only person on the scene was Joyce O'Brien's older daughter .
 She came to the jail, but when she learned that her cousin’s trouble had to do with politics, with helping Castro in some way, she became frightened . She became frightened and did not want to bail him out .
 Joyce and her mother decided to call Emile Bruneau, a politician of their acquaintance, and ask his help . Joyce conferred with her mother, and they decided that the best course of action was to call the politician .
 Oswald came to the police station, John Quigley had never seen Oswald’s file . He did not recognize the name nor realize that another FBI agent, Milton Kaack, was already engaged in a mild investigation of Oswald .
 Kaack visited Oswald’s landlady and the Reily coffee company only a few days before, on August 5 . Kaack had visited Oswald and the company just days before .
 In an hour and a half interview with Quigley, Lee told a number of lies that was unprecedented even for him . Lee's lies were unprecedented for him, even though he has a long history of lying .
 No one from the agency had been to see him in a year, and there is every reason to suppose that Lee would stay as far away from the FBI as he possibly could . Lee was not in contact with the FBI for a year .
 Lee’s brother Robert has suggested it was part of his continuing effort to create mystery and drama around himself . Perhaps, as Robert suggested, it was an attempt to create a mystery around himself.
 Perhaps he wanted to impress the officers at the police station, encourage them to think that he had been acting as an FBI provocateur and thereby secure an early release . Perhaps he was trying to impress them, perhaps to convince them that he was an FBI agent .
 Lee needed to feel singular and important, and summoning the FBI gave him that feeling . Or perhaps, finding himself in jail for the first time, Lee needed the feeling of being singular .
 It is possible that the FBI’s lack of overt attention over the past year, relief though it was, had created a feeling of suspense in him and had strained his sense of self-importance . It is even possible that .
 Lee may have anticipated that local FBI officers would read about his street scene in the newspapers . Lee may also have anticipated he would be reading about the incident in newspapers .
 By being the first one to tell them about it, and in his own terms, he may have felt that he could control the situation . He may have thought that he would control it .
 Lee knew that the FBI would have been most interested in his recent attempt on General Walker . Lee knew, moreover, that he was most likely to be targeted by the FBI .
 He may have hoped to catch the eye of someone who would stop him before he did anything worse . He was in a police station, obviously up to no good .
 Lee still wanted, in a way, to be punished for his part in the Walker affair . Lee wanted to punish Walker for his role in the scandal . Lee says he still wants to see Walker punished . Lee: "I want to see justice"
 By deliberately inviting the FBI into his life again, perhaps he thought he could control even his own punishment . The FBI is investigating whether he deliberately invited them back to his home .
 The lies he told Agent Quigley did help revive the FBI’s interest in him . The FBI is still interested in the case, but it's not clear why .
 Lee carried away from his incarceration was a brief but exhilarating memory . But for the moment what Lee carries away is a brief, exhilarating moment . Lee was in prison for 18 months before he was released .
 He had been locked up just long enough so that he could later claim to have paid a price for the pro-Castro cause . He was locked up long enough to claim he had been a victim of the Castro regime .
 He had turned the tables on the FBI, summoning an officer at his pleasure rather than being summoned at theirs . The FBI had been summoned by the president of the United States at the request of the president .
 His happiest recollections were his talks with Lieutenant Martello . And by far his happiest memories were those of his time with the Italian general .
 Lee arrived home in scapegrace good spirits, dirty, rumpled, unshaven, with a glint of humor in his eye and an air of gaiety about him . Lee arrived at home in good spirits .
 He explained that the beds had no mattresses, so he had taken off all his clothes and made a mattress of them . He said that he took off his clothes to make a mattress .
 He added that in the morning he had been taken to see a police officer, a good man and “a kindly uncle,” to whom he explained his theories . He said he was taken to the police officer to explain his theories to him .
 She knew that he was out with his leaflets and guessed he was in trouble with the police . She knew he was going to be in trouble .
 She had memories of the Walker evening, however, and so she had checked Lee’s closet . She had remembered the Walker night, however .
 Marina had not been able to get to sleep until three o’clock in the morning . Even so, Marina had been unable to sleep .
 A little sheepishly, he confessed on awakening that there was supposed to be a trial . He confessed on waking up that there were supposed to been a trial.
 He noticed with horror Castro’s photograph pinned to the wall and asked Lee straight out if he was part of any ‘Commie’ group . Lee said he was shocked to see Castro's photo pinned to his wall . Castro asked Lee if he had been a member of
 Dutz told him to show up in court the next day and, after that, go out, get a job, and support his family . He told him in no uncertain terms to go to court and get back to work . Dutz: "I don't want him to be
 Lee appeared in court on schedule, sat squarely in the middle of the black section of the segregated courtroom . He pleaded guilty to the charge of “disturbing the peace by creating a scene,” paid his $10 fine, and left .
 June asked him for a piece of soap from the cabinet, and he absentmindedly gave her Marina’s makeup mirror instead of a piece . June asked for soap, he gave her a mirror instead .
 She banged it on the toilet seat, and the mirror slid out of its frame and shattered against the toilet pipes . The mirror slides out of frame and shatters against the pipes .
 She was afraid that something was going to happen to her or the baby she was expecting in October . She was pregnant with a baby girl in October, she says .
 He asked Marina, not the first time, what sex their child would be, and again she predicted a son . He asked her what sex they would have a son, and she said it would be a boy .
 Doctors were afraid for his life and had rushed him to a special hospital . The doctors were afraid to save his life . He was rushed to a hospital in special hospital in a special way .
 The doctors, Lee added, would be the best, and the baby would probably survive . Lee added that the doctors would be best, with the baby likely to survive .
 Patrick Kennedy was very sick and the doctors did not have much hope, he said . As evening came on, he admitted that Patrick Kennedy is very sick . He said that the doctors had little hope .
 The news signified to Marina that things would go badly for their baby, too . The couple's baby was born with a broken mirror, Marina said .
 Marina wept when the news came over the radio early on August 9 that Patrick Kennedy had died during the night . Marina says she was devastated when she heard the news .
 Maybe it was better for the baby to die rather than be sick all its life . Maybe it's better than being sick all your life, says CNN.com .
 Friday, August 9, the day Patrick Kennedy died, was the same day Lee was arrested . Lee was charged with murder in connection with the death of Kennedy .
 He and Marina sat many nights after that, she sewing and he pausing now and then to listen as she tried to talk him out of it . Marina was sewing and she sewing, and he paused to listen .
 Sometimes he stole the leaflets from the closet when she was not looking and tried to stamp them on the sly . He stole them from her closet and sometimes tried to steal them from the sly. Sometimes he took them from when she wasn't looking .
 Marina was trying to drag him back to reality and make him see himself as others saw him . Marina was also trying to make him think he had a better life .
 She told him he was no genius, “not like a tall pine tree on a flat plain,” towering above everybody else . She said he was not a genius, but a "tall pine tree" on a plain .
 Even if he were clever and everyone else stupid, he still had to understand how others looked on things before he could win them over . Even if they were clever or stupid, they still needed to understand others before they could win over them .
 Cuba has lived without you, and it can continue to get along without you now . Cuba will continue to live with you now, says Cuban President Obama .
 Marina said she had never seen leaflets passed out except in old movies of the Russian Revolution . Marina said sarcastically that she never saw leaflets pass out except from old movies .
 Marina did not mention the obvious—that he ought to be out looking for work rather than spending the little money they had on guns and leaflets and fines .
 Their conversations went on like this for weeks, and it seemed there was nothing Marina could say to convince her husband that he was only an ordinary person . Marina was able to convince him that he is not an alcoholic .
 Marina thinks that Lee’s feeling that he was a great man was a man of loftier concerns than the common herd . Marina thinks, together with the letter, this letter of May 29, contributed, to the feeling that Lee was a good man . Lee's letter to Marina
 Lee had already told Marina that American Communists were not like Russian ones . Lee had told Marina he was not a Communist, but a Communist . Marina had already been told that the Russians were not Communists .
 Lee waited with unaccustomed patience for Marina to iron his favorite shirt on Friday, August 16 . Lee was arrested a week earlier for allegedly assaulting a police officer in New York .
 He had already called the local TV stations to tell them that there would be a Fair Play for Cuba demonstration that day in front of the Trade Mart building in downtown New Orleans .
 Lee hired two recruits, a nineteen-year-old boy named Charles Hall Steele Jr. and another young man who has never been identified, to help him hand out his leaflets . Lee hired the two recruits to hand out leaflets .
 Lee's demonstration went off without trouble, and pictures of Lee were shown on the television news that night .
 William K Stuckey, a young reporter with a weekly radio show on station WDSU, drove up to the Oswalds’ in search of Lee . He had obtained the name and address of Lee from Carlos Bringuier . The next day, Saturday, August 17,
 He expected to find a “folk-singer type” a fellow in sandals and beard . He was startled when a cleancut young man appeared, clad only in Marine Corps fatigues, no shirt .
 Lee said he would like to ask Stuckey in for coffee, but his wife and child were still asleep . Lee: "I want to ask him for coffee. He wants to see him again."
 Stuckey explained who he was and invited Lee to record a fiveminute interview for his show that night . Lee was invited to record the interview for the show . Lee recorded the interview on his own .
 If Lee would come to the station about 5:00m., well before the 7:30 broadcast, they could have a long interview and Stuckey could cut it to the required few minutes . Lee's interview could take place at about 5 p.m.
 He showed up punctually and recorded an interview of nearly forty minutes . The interview was conducted with the help of CNN iReporters .
 Stuckey cut the tape to four and a half minutes . Lee’s tape was cut to four-and-half minutes .
 He had not allowed himself to be lured out of his depth or led into talking about subjects he did not wish to pursue . He said: "I'm not going to be drawn into a conversation that I'm not interested in."
 Stuckey knew nothing about his years in Russia, since he knew nothing of them . Nor was anything said about the years he spent in the country .
 Stuckey, too, was pleased, and he used the edited tape on his program that evening . Stuckeys was pleased and used it on his show that night .
 He found Oswald highly “articulate,” a man who seemed “deliberate” about every word he spoke and every gesture he made, the sort who would inspire confidence because of his self-control . Oswald was found to be highly ‘artic
 He was more than a little amused that such a man should have materialized as a pro-Castro organizer in New Orleans .
 Lee asked the news director of his station to let him run the entire thirty-seven-minute tape . Hoping to persuade him to do so, Lee asked Lee to call him on Monday .
 Rather than run the uncut tape, he urged Stuckey to schedule a radio debate with some local anti-Communists to refute Oswald . Rather than running the tape, the president wanted to use the tape to debate Oswald .
 Lee telephoned Stuckey on Monday and was asked to take part in a debate on Wednesday, August 21 . Lee will appear in the debate, which will take place on August 21 at 8pm .
 The other participants were to be Carlos Bringuier and Edward Scanned Butler, director of the Information Council of the Americas . Butler taped interviews with Cuban refugees and refugees from Iron Curtain countries and distributed them to radio stations .
 Stuckey made the tape available to the local FBI office . The stenographer pool made a transcript, then returned the tape to the FBI with a copy of the transcript .
 Oswald had been to Russia, tried to renounce his U.S. citizenship, stayed there nearly three years, married a Russian woman . Stuckey was talking to an FBI source over the phone that day . He was put through to the chief or deputy chief of the New Orleans
 Stuckey went to the FBI office and was permitted to examine the file . The file includes newspaper clippings from Moscow at the time of Oswald’s defection . The FBI has never released a copy of the file from Oswald's defection.
 Carlos Bringuier and Carlos Quiroga visited Edward Butler at the FBI office . Butler received a visit from the two men who had done some investigating of their own . Butler was a Cuban exile in Cuba .
 Quiroga posed as a Castro sympathizer and paid Oswald a call to see what he could find out about the demonstration . Oswald was Oswald's target at the Trade Mart .
 Oswald suspected that Quiroga was an agent either from Bringuier or from the FBI . Oswald, who suspected that he was an FBI agent, told him nothing .
 June came running out and spoke to her father in Russian in Russian . The two men were talking on the porch when June spoke to them . June's father says she spoke to him in Russian.
 Bringuier and Quiroga reported the incident to Butler and told him they had information that Oswald had been to Russia and had a Russian wife . Butler later told Butler that Oswald's wife had been in Russia and Oswald had a wife .
 On Wednesday Lee arrived at the station first, wearing a heavy flannel suit that was totally wrong for the New Orleans heat . Lee arrived first, looking nervous because he knew that this time he faced opposition .
 He wrote down what he wanted to say on scraps of paper . He strode around the living room delivering his remarks with what he thought were appropriate gestures .
 Bringuier was the next to appear; Lee went up to shake hands with him . He said that if ever Lee wanted to join his side, the anti-Castro side, he would have nothing against him personally . Lee was the first person to appear in a meeting with Br
 Lee answered good-naturedly that he believed he was right and was doing his best . Lee: "I'm doing my best. I believe he's doing my very best"
 The debate was taped for broadcast that evening, and it was a disaster for Lee . Lee was the first to lose his seat in the debate debate .
 Stuckey started off by announcing that Oswald had a Russian past, had tried to renounce his United States citizenship, and had concealed it on their interview only a few days before . Oswald had concealed his past on the interview only days before, according to the book .
 Lee had been sandbagged, and there was little he could do but keep his temper, which he did . Lee kept his temper and kept his anger cool . Lee was not angry, but he kept his cool .
 Afterward he looked “dejected,” Stuckey invited him to have a drink with him . Afterward, he looked "dejected," and he was invited to drink .
 Lee nursed a beer at Comeaux’s, a bar down the street from the station, where he and Lee went to Comeaux's . They went to a bar near the station where Lee slowly nursed his beer .
 Lee's father-in-law, a colonel in the Red Army, taught him to drink vodka straight . Stuckey: "I'm not doing well with my beer, I'm accustomed to vodka"
 He thought Lee was open, friendly, relaxed and relaxed, and perhaps even relieved that his Russian past was out in the open . Lee was 'open, friendly and relaxed'
 Lee felt he was living in a world of clods, of men and women who were his intellectual inferiors . Stuckey also got the impression that Lee felt that Lee, without being arrogant exactly, felt that he felt like an inferior man .
 Marina did not understand who was saying what, but she could tell who was on what side and that Lee was claiming to be secretary of an organization . Marina was able to tell Lee that she was on the wrong side of the debate .
 Her reaction was not one of pride at hearing her husband speak, but of amusement at the way he sat, “proud as a rooster,” listening to his own voice . Her reaction to her husband's speech was to be amused at his own reaction .
 Lee seems to have realized that his position as a political organizer in New Orleans had been drastically changed as a result of his exposure as an ex-defector . Whatever euphoria he may have felt at the moment, after thinking it over, Lee seemed to realize that his job had been
 He had sent a small clipping from the New Orleans Times-Picayune of August 13 about his arraignment for “disturbing the peace” He had also written Vincent Lee about the August 16 demonstration and his original appearance on Stuckey’s program .
 Since he was going to write the party, it would have been logical to write Arnold Johnson . Arnold Johnson would have written Arnold Johnson, the author of the book .
 He decided to go straight to the top, to the Central Committee— the party’s highest governing body . Instead he decided, typically, that he would go straight into the top . Instead, he decided to head directly to the party's Central Committee . The party's highest governing
 It also reveals that, as usual, he felt entitled to special consideration, even when he might have done wrong . "It's also a sign of respect for the country," he says .
 The letter is remarkable for its execrable spelling, a sign that Lee was upset, and for its totally uncharacteristic tone of humility . It is also remarkable for the tone of the letter, which Lee wrote, and the spelling .
 He wondered whether he could continue to wage the struggle against ‘anti-progressive forces above ground,” or whether he would have to go underground .
 After the radio debate of August 21, he was ready to face the situation . "I'm not afraid," he said . "It's a good thing to say yes," he added .
 He had passed out nearly a thousand handbills and membership applications . He had engaged in public demonstrations, and had spoken twice over the radio .
 He had to face the fact that for him, in New Orleans, the FPCC was a lost cause . The FPCC is a New Orleans-based community group .
 So once again he fell back on an old plan that had been at the back of his mind for years . The former Manchester United star fell back to the old plan again .
 The State Department had banned travel to Cuba by American citizens . The Militant had been filled with stories about Americans who faced imprisonment and fines on their return .
 Lee did not intend to return, however, for Lee . Lee was only a minor deterrent, but said he would not return . Lee said he did not want to return to the country .
 If he did not like it there, he would go to China, or else seek readmission to Russia, where he would rejoin Marina . Or else he would seek re-entry to Russia or China, if he wanted to return to Russia .
 He announced to Marina that he had decided to go to Cuba in August, possibly just after the radio debate .
 Since there was no legal way to get there, he was going to hijack an airplane . Since there were no legal ways of getting to the U.S. he was hijacking an airplane, he went to hijacker an airplane. The hijacker hijacked an airplane to get
 Lee immediately started exercising to strengthen his muscles—deep knee bends and arm exercises . Lee started exercising immediately after the incident .
 Each evening he tore through the apartment in his undershorts for half an hour, making practice leaps as he went . He tore through his home in his undergarment in his undershorts for half a hour .
 June, who thought he was getting ready to play with her, jumped up in bed, followed him everywhere with her eyes, and burst out laughing . June thought she was playing with him when she saw him, and he jumped up to play .
 Lee kept up his exercises for a couple of weeks, causing much merriment in the household . Lee keeps up his exercise for a few weeks causing a lot of laughter .
 "Afterward he rubbed himself all over with strong-smelling liniment, took a cold shower, and came out of the bathroom as red as a lobster," he said .
 He brought home airline schedules and a large map of the world, which he tacked up inside the porch . Meanwhile, he had brought home an airline schedule and a map .
 He started measuring distances on a map of the world which he tacked up inside the porch . He measured distances on the map of world .
 Marina listened with disbelief as Lee explained how he planned to hijack the plane . Marina listened to Lee explain how he had planned the hijacking .
 No one would notice when he got up and quietly moved into the pilot’s cabin . The pilot was flying with a small group of people in the pilot's cabin .
 First, they would buy tickets under different names so no one would know they were man and wife . Then they would use different names to buy tickets for different shows .
 Lee was to rise, holding June by the hand, and speak to the passengers, urging them to be calm . Once Lee had subdued the pilot, she was to raise the passengers and speak .
 Marina reminded him that she could not speak those words either . Shaking all over over with laughter, Marina told him she was too scared to speak .
 He promised to buy her a small, womansized gun . If only she would play her part, he promised to give her a gun .
 He implored her just to hold the pistol even if she did not mean to use it . He implores her to hold it even though she didn't know she was using it .
 It’s not my nature to go around killing people, and I don’t advise you to do it, either, either . "I’m not going to kill people, but I’ll advise you, either," he says of his son .
 Marina told him lots of things could go wrong; there was plenty he hadn’t thought of . She told him there were plenty of things to go wrong, he hadn't thought of. Marina .
 Lee went to the airport and obtained more schedules, this time of flights not from New Orleans but from a smaller city nearby . Lee says he would have fewer passengers to subdue . Lee: "I don't want to be in New Orleans anymore"
 He told Marina he had been looking for someone who would help him, someone who might want to go to Cuba . After he had tried about four times to talk Marina into joining him in his scheme, he had failed .
 At this stage of their marriage, Lee was confiding in Marina, making her his touchstone, his lightning rod to reality . Marina was making Lee's touchstone . Lee confided in Marina as his wife, Marina .
 She drew funny word pictures for him to show how his plan looked in the clear light of day . Even though she wondered, as he unfolded his hijacking scheme, whether or not he was crazy .
 Ever since the night, at the end of June, when he had broken down and cried in the kitchen, she perceived that Lee needed her . Ever since that night, she felt that Lee needs her .
 She appears to have an inborn sympathy for anyone who is lost or in trouble, or on the outs with the world . She reached out and responded to his need .
 By August of 1963 their relationship had become an extraordinary feat of empathy on Marina’s part, one that few people could have achieved, much less a girl of twenty-two . Indeed, by August of that time, Marina had become a model of empathy .
 No doubt it was this quality that had enabled her to get through to Lee and win from him such trust as he was capable of giving . No doubt she had won such trust from Lee and won from him .
 Marina was the one person whom Lee trusted, and feeling responsible for his actions as she did . Marina was painfully at odds with herself and her surroundings .
 In part, it was this that had drawn her to Lee, and this that still helped her to understand him . In part she was drawn to Lee because of his vulnerability .
 She was about to be the mother of a second child, and carrying the full weight of the family, she badly needed an anchor . But now she is about to carry the full burden of her family with her second child .
 Everything in her life was strained toward staying in one place, settling in America, building a nest . She says she wanted to stay in America and build a nest in the U.S.
 "He was still a rebel, and he kept repeating the same actions again and again," he said . He was still still an "reluctant rebel," he added .
 He yanked Marina away from the stability she coveted, placed her squarely outside American life, and prevented her from building her nest . Marina was forced to leave the U.S. for the first time .
 Husband and wife were also at odds over right and wrong . Even that was not the worst, for husband and wife also were at odds .
 Marina tried, not always successfully, to resist complicity in Lee’s deceptions . Marina tried not to be complicit in his deceptions, but she was always complicit .
 She now insists that he had a stronger character than she, “because he brought me low and made me cover up his ‘black deeds,’ when it was against my morality to do so.’ She says he brought her 'low' and made her cover up
 Marina's words are an apology for her failure to make a different man of Lee and alter the outcome of his life . Marina’s words were an apology, she said, for not being able to change Lee's life .
 They are an admission of the guilt she felt for the way that their life together worked out . They are also an admission to the guilt they felt for their lives together .
 There is no such thing as being married to a man like Lee Oswald and not becoming his emotional accomplice . But the truth is that there is no . thing about being . married to Lee Oswald . Oswald and his wife were both married to him .
 Lee was trying to find his way without letting him get dangerously off course . Meanwhile, she went on trying to help him find his path .
 "Of course,” she added, “it would be better to save for the new baby’s new baby . Of course, she said, ‘It would be best to save” for the baby .
 I'll show them my clippings, show them how much I’ve done for Cuba, and explain how hard it is to help in America, he says . "I’m going to show them what I've done for Cuban people," he says of Cuba .
 She accepted his going to Cuba, so long as he did it in a legal way, for she knew that he would have to see the country with his own eyes before he could give up his dream . She knew that she would have accepted his request to go to Cuba .
 It was her guess that no country would satisfy him and that he would be home in three months to a year . Her guess is that he will return to the U.S. within three months .
 Since he was American and the Cubans would be flattered to have an American defector, they would give him a job and a nice little house . The Cuban government would have been flattered if he defected, he says .
 Russians felt that foreigners were somehow better than they were and gave them every privilege . Russians felt they were better than the people they thought they were . Russians believed foreigners were superior to them .
 She could not believe the same might be true of Castro, of whom she had heard nothing but good . She had been impressed by Castro's performance .
 You'll have to work for ten years before they’ll give you any privileges . You’ve got to work 10 years before you get any privileges. You'll work for 10 years .
 Of course she would have to join him if she had no way of living in America . She would have joined him in the U.S.
 It was her hope that he would become disillusioned in Cuba as he had in Russia, and that this time he might learn from it .
 He would come home, settle down, and live a normal life with his family, police say . He would be able to come home and live with his wife and family .
 He added that while he was in Mexico City, he would go to the Soviet embassy and try to speed up her visa .
 Marina did not realize that Lee could not go to Cuba and simply come home when he had had enough . Lee's wife, Marina, said he could not come home and come home . Marina said Lee would not be able to return to Cuba if he wanted to return .
 It was not easy for an American to gain admission to Cuba, even from Mexico City . Nor was it easy to gain entry to Cuba .
 He would first have to go to the Soviet embassy and apply for a visa for Russia . He would then have to travel to Russia to get a visa .
 He could go to the Cuban embassy with his Russian visa and apply for a visa to visit Cuba “in transit” to Russia . Then he could go back to Cuba "in transit" to Russia, where he would be able to visit the island .
 Russia was still a place of refuge in his mind, the place he would go if he got in trouble or if he ran out of choices elsewhere . Russia still was still an important part of his life, he says .
 Russia held the same place in his thoughts that it had five years earlier, during his talks with his Marine Corps comrades . Even though he had now experienced life in the Soviet Union for himself, Russia continued to hold a place in Russia .
 Maybe they would allow him to join the army and train recruits in guerrilla warfare . Maybe they'd allow him join them and train guerrilla warfare. Maybe they're not allowed to join .
 Or maybe he would stand by to help if there was a U.S. invasion from the United States. Maybe he would be willing to help defend himself from an invasion .
 He might go to China or take his American passport and visit various countries in Western Europe at a leisurely pace . Later, if he got tired of Cuba, he might visit China or visit various Western European countries .
 Money, of course, was a problem, but maybe he would have earned some as a mercenary or as a Castro volunteer . Money was a big problem, he says .
 Lee’s plan bore a haunting similarity to his defection from America to Russia only four years before . Lee defected from the U.S. to Russia four years ago . Lee's defection to Russia was similar to that of four years earlier .
 Once again he would forsake his homeland and count on a foreign government to take care of him . Once again, he would abandon his homeland to count on foreign government .
 Even if Marina was permitted to return to Russia, it is extremely unlikely that he would be readmitted .
 There are no guarantees that he would be allowed to visit Cuba in transit, much less to remain there . There were no guarantees of him being allowed to stay there .
 He would face prosecution and imprisonment if he tried to return to America . And if he did succeed in visiting Cuba and was then denied readmission to Russia, he would face imprisonment .
 Lee before the end of August was studying Spanish again, as he had done in 1958 . Lee had been studying Spanish at the beginning of the year . Lee is now hoping to return to Spain in 2015 .
 Lee appreciated Marina’s acquiescence, or her awareness, that it was no use telling him what to do, anyhow . Lee appreciated that he was going to Cuba to learn whether he liked Cuba . Lee: "The only way for him to learn  was to go there
 There was an occasional sign that it was not a case of two minds with but a single thought . Despite the harmony that presently prevailed between them, there was a sign of doubt .
 Lee had been turning another name over in his mind, and he cautiously broached it to Marina . But for some time Lee was turning over a name over and thought it was a good idea .
 Marina was trying to give in, trying to understand and accept Lee, and do nothing to jangle his nerves . Marina had been trying to . give in . Marina tried to . accept Lee and do not jangle him nerves .
 To think that politics, the cause of all her woes and the thing she hated most in life, was to be insinuated into her family, into her very belly, was more than Marina could abide . Marina could not abide .
 One of them was out of work, too, and it seems he enjoyed nothing better than noticing Lee’s comings and goings .
 All the neighbors agree that Lee was “in and out’ of his apartment during the day but invariably home at night . Lee was in and out of the apartment at night, neighbors say . Neighbors say Lee was always home at the end of the night, even though he
 After reading at home all morning, during the afternoons he would catch a bus on the corner headed toward the business section, or walk that way . After reading all morning he would sometimes catch a . bus .
 Once in a while he walked to a confectionery store on the corner of Magazine and Dufosset Streets, bought some ice cream, and carried it back to the apartment .
 Oswalds did their grocery shopping at the WinnDixie on Prytania Street . The Oswalds went grocery shopping there on Prydania Street in the early days of the week .
 The Garners, managers of the building, recall that Lee was never on time with the rent . Lee's rent was never paid, the Garners say .
 Garner remembers Lee, clad only in a pair of outgrown, gold high school basketball shorts, no shirt . Lee stuffed his garbage into everybody’s cans, including hers, because he could not or would not spend money to buy a garbage can for himself . Garner vividly remembers Lee
 Lee spent most of the day and the early evening, until the light began to fade, reading on the screened-in side porch of his apartment . Lee: "I'm not afraid to die. I'm scared to die"
 As summer lengthened and dusk came on earlier, he carried a lamp onto the porch so he could read a little later . He carried the lamp out of the porch to read a bit later .
 The seriousness and even the quantity of his reading had fallen off, he said . But the seriousness of his studies has also fallen off in recent years .
 During the first part of the summer, he had read political books, biographies, and books about Russia and Communism, from one of which he confronted Marina one night with the surmise that she must be illegitimate .
 After the beginning of August, most of his reading consisted of spy novels and science fiction . Most of August he read more about spy novels, science fiction and spy novels .
 Marina had no idea what he was reading, but from indoors she could see that sometimes Lee was not reading at all . Marina was not sure what Lee was reading when she saw him at home .
 One evening during the last week of August, she and June went for a stroll . She and June were enjoying a walk in front of June .
 Lee was found on the porch perched on one knee, pointing his rifle toward the street . Lee's parents say Lee was a Marine Corps veteran . Lee was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 It was the first time she had seen him with his rifle in months—and she was horrified . She was horrified to see him with a rifle in his arms .
 Marina frequently heard a clicking sound out on the porch while Lee was sitting there at dusk . After that, busy indoors, Marina often heard the clicking sound from Lee's porch .
 She heard it three times a week, maybe more often, until the middle of September . She said it was a good thing for her to hear it three or more often .
 Often she saw him clean the rifle, but this did not worry her because she knew that he had not taken it out of the house to practice . She also knew he was not going to practice with it .
 "If he’s got to use his gun,” she thought to herself, “let him take it to his Cuba.” She said. “Let him take his gun to his Cuban Cuba. If he's got to shoot,’ she thought
 She exacted a promise from him that he would not use the rifle against anybody in the United States . But just in case, she exacted him a promise that he wouldn't use it against anyone in the U.S.
 In the early days of September, Lee increasingly concentrated on one thing --Cuba . Lee's focus was on Cuba, not the United States .
 When he was able to leave for Mexico, however, would depend on the one person whom both the Oswalds now looked on as their “savior”—Ruth Paine . The Oswalds looked on to Paine as their savior .
 She always asked how he was, and whenever there were decisions to be made, she addressed sections of her letters, in English, to him . She always addressed him with her letters .
 Ruth was not certain that she liked Lee, but she thought he was a vulnerable man, and she respected his feelings . Ruth thought Lee was vulnerable and respected her .
 Lee Oswald was very much a part of her friendship for Marina, Marina says . Lee was a big part of the Oswalds' friendship, Marina's friend says .
 Ruth wrote renewing her invitation to Marina to stay with her in Irving before and after the new baby’s birth . About the middle of July, more than a month after two letters had arrived from Marina announcing that things were not going well, Ruth wrote .
 Marina could stay as long as she needed if it would save her from going back to Russia against her will . Marina was able to stay in Russia as long she needed .
 He tended to favor it since Marina’s earlier visit had worked out well . But he decided to consult Frank Krystinik, his best friend at work, about whether Lee might turn out to be a “violent person”
 Michael and Krystinik concluded that if Lee were handled in a “gentle and considerate” manner, so that his feelings were not offended, he would not be a danger . Lee was not a danger, they said .
 Only after they had considered the possibility that Lee might be violent and rejected it did Ruth go ahead and invite Marina for the longer stay . Only after considering the possibility of Lee's violent reaction did Ruth invite Marina to stay .
 Despite a false assurance from Marina that she had been to see a doctor, Ruth somehow divined that she was going to be needed even before the new baby arrived . Despite a postscript from Lee about the cost of maternity care in New Orleans, Ruth managed to find a doctor .
 Marina wrote that she would stop in New Orleans about September 18 . She plans to visit relatives in the East and the Midwest .
 Marina could decide whether she wants to stay in New Orleans, drive back to Dallas with Ruth to await the baby, or come later on her own closer to the due date .
 Lee’s thoughts must have turned decisively toward adventure . He told Marina to write Ruth that he had lost his job and they were out of money . Lee's wife and children were in danger .
 She was not to speak of Cuba in the letter or say that he had agreed to go with her to Russia . Instead, she was not allowed to say he agreed to travel with her .
 Marina did as she was told, and her letter (postmarked August 11, the day after Lee’s release from the police station) contains a ring of embarrassment or evasion . Marina did what she did .
 Marina was not withholding information out of loyalty to Lee, unlike the previous spring when she omitted to tell Ruth anything about the Walker affair . This time, unlike in previous spring, she omitted anything .
 She consciously allowed Lee to use her as an instrument to get what he wanted out of Ruth . Instead, she consciously allowed her to be used as a tool for him to get his agenda .
 Marina was embarrassed because Lee was so obviously appealing to Ruth to take her off his hands . She was embarrassed by Lee's request for her to be taken away from him .
 The baby was due before long, Lee wanted to be rid of her, and she had nowhere else to turn . Lee wanted the baby to be born before long . She was pregnant with a baby girl .
 Ruth mailed a letter from Paoli, Pennsylvania, promising to be in New Orleans on September 20 exactly exactly, and during the daylight hours if she could make it . Ruth said she would be in the city for the first time since September 20 .
 Lee knew he would be free to leave for Mexico within a few days of September 20 . Lee knew that he would leave for the country within a week . Lee says he's been in Mexico since August 27 or 28 .
 He was already dry-firing his rifle on the porch of his home in August . "He was already, that last week of August, dry-fired his rifle," he says .
 Lee wrote three remarkable letters while waiting for Ruth's arrival . Lee wrote the letters while he waited for the arrival of Ruth .
 In that event perhaps he thought he might move to the Northeast and try to establish himself as a left-wing activist .
 Russian-speaking communities are places where Marina might be able to find a job, Ruth says . They include cities with Russian-language communities that Ruth had mentioned where she might find work .
 Lee had scolded Marina for even considering a visit to those cities with Ruth, but now, characteristically, he picked up the very same idea . Lee was impressed with the idea .
 If there is not much prejudice against people who knew Russian and had been to Russia, perhaps he, instead of Marina, could find work there .
 Lee may also have decided that it was in the Northeast that he would have the best chance of putting together a politically oriented life . Civil rights activities that were most heavily covered in the press, including the Militant, that summer, were in the Baltimore-Washington area .
 In one of the appendices included with the section called “Photographer” were the photographs he had taken of tax returns of Jaggars-ChilesStovall . Perhaps to prove to some intended recipient that his Marxist convictions were so strong he was not above rifling
 It is fruitless to try to make the fragments of Lee Oswald’s mind fit together as neatly as a jigsaw puzzle . Lee Oswald's mind is a puzzle, but it's fruitless trying to make it fit together neatly as well .
 It is better to leave the puzzle loose, with fragments scattered here and there, than to leave it loose . It's better to 'leave it loose' than 'leak the puzzle'
 The volume of his correspondence was significant, and certain of his letters were very revealing . Some of the letters are very revealing, but the volume of them is significant .
 He next applied for freelance photographic work in the Southwest for both the Militant and the Worker .
 He had shot at General Walker partly to establish himself as a hero of the American left . He had also shot at the general's father, General Walker, in an attempt to become a hero .
 He needed a cause to belong to, something outside himself that was bigger than he was and could be reflected back into his inflated selfimage to help sustain it . He needed something outside of himself that could be bigger than himself, he said .
 The same quality that required him to seek recognition also made any sort of real belonging wholly impossible . Yet the very same quality demanded him seek recognition and made him seek real belonging .
 His self-image was so far out of line with reality that he was unable to see himself as others saw him or to deal with them on a real footing . His self image was so out-of-line that he couldn't deal with others as either an equal or a subordinate
 Lee had another difficulty, and it, too, arose out of his estrangement from reality . Lee's difficulty arose from being estranged from reality, he says . Lee had a difficulty of being able to communicate with reality .
 There was a flaw in his signal system, his antennae, his equipment for receiving messages, he says . There was also a problem with his antenna system .
 Lee picked up countless signals from newspapers and people and books, but somehow they were distorted in transmission . Lee's signal was distorted in transmitting, but he was able to pick up the signals .
 "He lacked that capacity for communication that is at the heart of working with other people," he said . He lacked capacity for communicating that is "at the heart"
 The most he was capable of was a sort of pseudo-belonging to something very far away that existed only in his mind . He was capable only of being capable of being able to speak to something that existed in his own mind .
 Their letters were distant, polite, the sort of letter an organization writes to someone it is not actually rebuffing but with whom it has no relationship . The letters were polite, polite and the kind of letters an organization would write to someone with no relationship with them .
 This was the community he yearned to belong to and whose hero he hoped to become . Yet this was the same community he had yearned for and hoped to be his hero .
 On Labor Day Lee called the Murrets and asked if he and his family could come for a visit . The Murrets are raising money to raise money for a new generation of women .
 There, for the first time in two months, he saw his favorite cousin Marilyn . Marilyn was his cousin's first cousin to visit him .
 Lee soaked up everything from a two-month bus trip through Mexico, Central America, and Panama . Lee soaked in everything she said, and Lee soaked it up .
 The fact that three of the people he liked best, Marilyn and George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt, had all been to Mexico, must have made an impression on Lee, but he gave no hint of that either either .
 The Murrets challenged Lee for discouraging Marina from learning English . Lee's wife, Marina, says she wants to learn English in English . Marina's family says Lee discouraged her from speaking English .
 Lee's aunt broke into his aunt's conversation and he was spared from having to meet her perspicacity head on . Luckily for Lee, somebody broke into their conversation, and he didn't have to meet his aunt .
 On the way he drove them past the church in which he was soon to be married and the large house in which his fiancee lived . He drove them through the church and the house where he planned to marry .
 Marina could tell that his fists were clenched in anger . Lee did not say anything, but Marina could see that he was clenching his fists .
 Lee, she says, did not hate the owners of these houses, but he did hate the system that made it possible for anyone to be so wealthy . Lee: "He didn't hate the people who got rich, he hated the system" Lee says .
 Lee did not want a lot of money for himself. Stingy as he was, and forever saving up in little ways, he saved up little ways .
 What she sensed in him that night was his hatred of American capitalism, she says . She sensed in her son's eyes that he hated American capitalism .
 Marina would be leaving for Dallas and Lee for Mexico City . It was less than three weeks before Marina would leave for Dallas . Lee would be moving to Mexico City, Marina to Dallas .
 The last weeks together in New Orleans contained episodes that were funny, touching, sad . They might be parted for a short time, or forever, and those last weeks contained episodes .
 It was fearfully sultry and hot, and their only air-conditioning was an old kitchen fan . The only air of comfort was a kitchen fan, and the only air conditioning was a small kitchen fan.
 Lee went naked around the apartment a good deal of the time and sometimes spent the whole day lying on the sofa on his stomach, without a stitch on, reading a book . Lee spent a lot of time lying naked around his apartment and sometimes went naked on the couch .
 He played with Junie continually, took baths with her, and spent a good hour and a half putting her to bed every night . He also took her baths and put her in bed every day .
 Lee gets so much into the spirit that he sometimes leaped into Junie’s bed himself, as if the two of them were babies going to sleep together . These were boisterous sessions, with Lee getting so much . Sometimes Lee leaped in to Junie's bed
 He behaved like a baby with Marina, too, competing with Junie for her attention . He behaved as a baby .
 He would stick out one leg, then the other, and let Marina put on his underpants . Marina would have to put on her underpants to get him dressed .
 If Marina did not dry him off quickly enough or refused to mop up the puddles he and the baby made on the floor, he threatened to stay in the bathtub all day . If Marina didn't get him out of the tub quickly enough, he would threaten to stay
 If Marina was busy with something else and was not able to dry him off, he strode naked through the apartment, splattering water everywhere . Marina was too busy to dry her naked body, splashing water everywhere.
 He knew that Marina hated that; she was afraid to have the neighbors see him naked . He knew she hated that . Marina was afraid of having her naked in front of him .
 Marina gave the baby a little slap on the behind after she was naughty . Marina said: 'Once in a while the baby was naughty, and Marina gave her a slap'
 Junie was the joy of Lee’s life, his tie to reality, the one person, Marina thinks, with whom he came down from the clouds and behaved like a human being . Marina thinks he came to terms with Junie, who he said was the one he came
 Lee loved taking Marina and June to the amusement park at Lake Pontchartrain . Although they were living on very little money and spent almost nothing on recreation, Lee loved to take them there .
 During the last several weeks in New Orleans, he ate very little and became so thin that his ribs and collarbone stuck out . During the past several weeks, he became very thin .
 Marina thinks he was starving himself not only to save money but also because he was in a wave of emotional tension . Marina believes he was trying to save himself from starvation .
 His last month in New Orleans was the worst . He had lost weight other times, including in Moscow in July 1961 .
 He, in turn, scolded her for the way she spent even the small amount of money that he did give her .
 Lee was saving for his trip to Mexico, although neither of them spoke about it much . Lee and Lee were saving for the trip, but neither spoke much about it .
 Marina said nothing when Lee failed to pay the $65 rent due September 9 for the following month . Marina was so ashamed that she did not dare leave the apartment during the day for fear of running into Mr or Mrs. Lee .
 Lee promised Marina he would lend her money to play with, and when she won she started jumping around the room for joy . When she won, Lee promised her he would be lending her money .
 "I earned thirty dollars teaching Russian and spent all but four of it on you," she says . "I earn thirty dollars  teaching Russian  and spent most of that money on you"
 It was as if she had been storing them up like firecrackers in her mouth and Lee had touched a match to them . It was like she'd been storing up the secrets of her life like she had held them up . Lee touched the match to the firecracker in her
 I have to ask Ruth to help because Papa has got something more important on his mind. I have been asked to help. Ruth is going to help, but Papa's got something else important to do .
 Marina was so angry, and her words poured out so rapidly, that Lee was silent . Marina was silent as she spoke out her anger . Lee had been silent for the entire time .
 Lee took Marina’s clothes out of the suitcase and hung them back in the closet . Lee took the suitcase back to the closet and hung the clothes in the back of the closet.
 "I never ‘support’ you. And the whole time you’re giving me hell," she said . "I’m giving you hell and saying I never 'support' you," she added . 'I never 'supported' you,' she said.
 Lee tried to soothe her and begged her not to leave . She pulled away from him and kept on packing, while Lee begged her to stay . Lee said: 'I love you, I love you'
 He offered to give back the money she had won at cards, but Marina refused to touch it . He offered the money back to her, but she turned it down .
 After she had packed and unpacked twice, Lee kissed her, and she finally quieted down . After she'd unpacked again, she was quiet again .
 Marina’s outburst had been caused in part by her sorrow and anxiety about the parting that lay ahead . Marina's outburst was caused by her grief and anxiety over the parting .
 Realizing that she might never see Lee again, she begged him to take her with him with him . Realizing he might not see her again she asked him to leave her .
 In the meantime she was not to tell Ruth where Lee was, nor would he write to her at Ruth's . She was not allowed to tell her where he was and not to write him to her .
 If she had not heard from him in two weeks then she would know he was in Cuba . But if she hadn't heard from her husband two weeks ago, he would be in Cuba, she'd know he's there .
 Marina went out to buy a few last-minute groceries on Friday afternoon, September 20, for her first day of her wedding . Marina says she's getting ready to get ready for her big day .
 Lee was greeted by Ruth and her children on the porch of her home . Ruth and the children had arrived, and Lee was greeting them on the front porch . Lee returned to the porch to greet the family .
 He was overjoyed to see Ruth, and she, for her part, was impressed by the change in him .
 Ruth and her children stayed the weekend, and they all had a pleasant time . Ruth stayed with her family for the rest of the weekend . Ruth's children stayed with the family .
 Lee appeared genuinely concerned about Marina’s welfare and where she would have the baby . Lee appeared concerned about where Marina would have her baby .
 He gave her a duplicate tax form from Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, his Dallas employer from October 1962 to April 1963, to present to Parkland Hospital in Dallas . Marina was a one-year Texas resident, hence entitled to care based on her ability to pay
 In case the hospital authorities asked, he was anxious that Ruth avoid any suggestion that he had “abandoned” his wife . He was anxious she avoided any suggestion he had abandoned her .
 He told Ruth that he was going to Houston or Philadelphia to look for work . As soon as he found it, he would be back to fetch Marina, Ruth said .
 Ruth assumed that Marina was coming to stay with her for only a few weeks . She assumed that she was only going to stay in the house for a couple of weeks .
 Lee had a grudging admiration for Ruth, despite his usual contempt for anyone who helped him . Ruth was the only person Lee had ever been helped by .
 She was “too tall” and “a fool” but he was sympathetic to her marital troubles . Lee called everyone ‘a fool,’ but he called everyone a fool . She was too tall and a fool, he said .
 In a reversal of his customary moralistic stance, Lee declared that Ruth would be ‘a fool’ not to take a lover . Lee, prompted by Marina, declared that she would be a ‘fool’ if she did not .
 Marina wanted to take Ruth on a tour of the nightclubs on Bourbon Street . She wanted to show her off the famous Bourbon Street nightclubs .
 He hated nightclubs and had never, in all the time Marina knew him, been inside one . He had never been inside a nightclub before .
 Marina and Ruth made the tour, “a tall Quaker lady,” as Marina describes it, holding a small boy and girl by either hand, and a small, very pregnant woman, holding her tiny daughter by the hand .
 Children try to dance to the striptease music . They just peeked through the swinging doors .
 He had washed the dishes, straightened up the apartment—and started packing . He was moving out of the apartment and had washed up the dishes .
 Ruth was impressed by Lee’s insistence on doing every bit of packing himself . Ruth said Lee insisted on packing himself himself .
 Among the items he was loading with such care in her car was, almost certainly, his rifle, dismantled, wrapped in brown paper and a blanket, and tied up in heavy string . What she did not know was that among the items she was loading was, probably, his gun .
 When he had finished loading the car, he assured Marina that he knew he did not have to worry about her so long as she was with Ruth .
 When he kissed Marina goodbye, his lips were trembling, and it was all he could do to keep from crying .
 Marina thought that he might be wondering, for the first time, whether he had a right to act in a way that could hurt his wife and baby . Marina thought he might have been wondering whether he should have acted in the way that he did .
 Marina, too, was close to tears and tried to conceal from Ruth how much the parting was costing her . Marina tried to hide the pain of perhaps leaving Lee forever . Ruth, Marina and Ruth were in tears .
 She was ashamed at being dumped on Ruth, ashamed most of all that she could not tell the truth even to the friend who had come to her rescue . Ruth was ashamed of being dumped and ashamed of all she could do .
 Ruth noticed a rumbling in one of her tires as she drove away from the hospital . Ruth noticed the tire was rumbling when she got into the car .
 She pulled up at a gas station one block from the apartment to have it changed . She pulled the car up to the gas station to get it changed.
 "For him, too, the hardest thing was to conceal from Ruth that the parting might be forever," he says . For him, he also hid from Ruth, "the hardest thing is to conceal"
 Lee held Junie in front of the Coke machine to help them gain their composure . So while the two of them fought back their tears, Lee held them to a Coke machine .
 Lee Harvey Oswald spent months in New Orleans, when he was unemployed . Lee warned Marina not to tell Ruth he was going to Cuba . He warned Marina that, above all, she was not to . tell Ruth that he was . going to . Cuba .
 Oswald attributed to clandestine meetings and conspiratorial relationships . Oswald is believed to have been involved in many of the events during the Second World War .
 Available evidence suggests that both were unlikely, if not impossible . But the available evidence suggests they were unlikely to be impossible .
 He had wanted to be a spy, and he was, in fact, a nearly successful assassin . He'd wanted to become a spy . He was, indeed, a successful assassin. He was a spy.
 It cannot be established that conspirators did not ever contact him, or he them . Since it is difficult to prove a negative, it is impossible to prove that he was contacted by conspirators .
 Oswald would appear to have been too conspicuous, especially in the Southwest . He was an ex-defector to Russia who flaunted his Russian and had a Russian wife . Oswald was an almost inevitable magnet for the FBI’s attentions .
 He was so incapable of cooperating with anyone that he had been unable even to establish the loosest of relationships with the FPCC, fifteen hundred miles away .
 Apart from the rare occasions when their living arrangements forced him to admit to Marina what he was doing, or when a momentary breach in the armor allowed him to confide in her .
 He had proven that he was capable of taking drastic actions and dangerous risks, but always alone . He had proved that he had proven he had to take drastic actions .
 A few months before in Dallas, eager for George de Mohrenschildt’s approval, he does appear to have been influenced to shoot at General Walker . As to whether or not he was susceptible to influence, he was eager for approval, a few months earlier .
 With the possible exception of Marina, there was no one in his environment whose love and approval he craved, he said . He craved the approval of his mother, Marina .
 Even if there was an attempt to influence him by someone who might have known him casually, there appears to have been no such person in his life . The metaphor of the pool hall seems appropriate .
 Someone desiring to influence Lee might shoot a ball, an idea, at him, but there was no way of predicting how it might come caroming off . Lee was never able to predict how an idea might come out of his mind .
 Lee would have left on Monday, the 23rd, the same day that Ruth and Marina left New Orleans . Lee's eagerness to be off for Mexico, one might expect him to leave on Monday . Ruth, Marina and Lee are expected to leave New Orleans on Monday 23rd .
 His movements over the next two days have given rise to conflicting testimony, even among eyewitnesses, as well as to much controversy . He did not leave until Wednesday, the 25th .
 Jesse Garner spotted nearly all the Oswalds’ belongings in the car, asked him if he was leaving . Lee was loading Ruth’s station wagon, Jesse Garner said . Garner asked Lee if he would leave, and he said yes .
 He did stay in New Orleans for two more days, but his movements were so furtive that neighbors could not agree on when they saw him actually leave the apartment .
 Lee was seen racing to catch a bus on the corner, carrying a piece of luggage in each hand, police say . Two of them reported later that they saw Lee racing for a bus at five or six in the evening .
 Two people thought it was Monday, the other that it was Tuesday evening . But one of them thought it would be Tuesday evening. The two thought they were in the middle of the night .
 On Wednesday Jesse Garner entered the Oswalds’ apartment and found it empty . Jesse Garner: "On Wednesday it was empty. On Wednesday it's empty" Jesse Garner found the couple's apartment empty .
 Lee was obviously trying to cheat the Garners out of the rent . Whether or not he stayed in the apartment Monday or Tuesday night, Lee was clearly trying to get the rent out of it .
 That appears to have been the only secret activity in which he was engaged during those two days . He was engaged in secret activities during that time .
 Money was also the reason he waited until Wednesday to leave for Mexico City .
 He filed the claim, and the check was forwarded to him the following week in care of Michael Paine in Irving .
 He popped a change-of-address card in the mailbox, and it was stamped at the main post office at 11:00m. While there, he popped a new address card .
 Lee picked up his check at Lafayette Square post office station no later than 10:20 that morning . Postal officials say Lee had picked up the check at the Lafayette Square station at around 10:30 a.m. Lee's check was picked up at the time of the check .
 He then went to the Winn-Dixie store on Magazine Street and cashed the check . The check was cashed sometime before noon .
 He had, in all probability, already deposited his baggage at the bus terminal, which gave him freedom to complete all his business on Wednesday morning without risking a confrontation with Garner .
 By cashing his $33 check at a store where he was not known, he also hoped to avoid being seen or recognized by his neighbors . The check was cashed at the store where the check went to be cashed .
 Mr Garner owed Mr Garner for fifteen or sixteen days, one-half of his monthly rental of $65. He owed Mr. Garner for 15 or sixteen . Mr Garner . He owed him for . fifteen or . sixteen days .
 He therefore saved almost exactly exactly $33, the same amount as his unemployment check . He saved $33 from unemployment, saving almost exactly as he did .
 Lee’s departure from New Orleans resembled his departure nearly five months earlier from Dallas . Lee was a Dallas native . Lee left New Orleans five months ago for Dallas .
 Both times Ruth and Marina left ahead of him, and both times he stayed at the apartment and checked his luggage at the bus terminal prior to his departure . Both times he left the apartment at the end of the night .
 There were no eyewitnesses to his arrival at his arrival there, but after that he blazed a fairly conspicuous trial .
 Estelle Twiford, the wife of a merchant seaman named Horace Elroy, received a telephone call from Lee Harvey Oswald . Estelle received a call from a man who identified himself as Oswald . That night in Houston, Houston, a woman named Estelle was named Est
 He said he was on his way “by air” to Mexico, would be in town a few hours, and would like “to discuss ideas” with her husband . He said that he would like to discuss ideas .
 Lee left his name and said that he was with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Lee said he is a member of the committee that supports Cuba's efforts to play in Cuba .
 Oswald mailed Oswald at least one issue of a small paper he put out called the Weekly People . He then mailed Oswald a small issue of the weekly People .
 Oswald's telephone call was their only contact with Oswald . That was the only knowledge the Twifords had of Oswald . Oswald's phone call was his only contact .
 John B McFarland, an English couple who were fellow passengers, said he was secretary of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans . The couple were also passengers of the plane .
 He was going to Mexico to evade the American ban on travel to Cuba, he said . He was on his way to Cuba to see Castro if he could, he added .
 He asked if they had been to Russia, took out his old U.S. passport to show them his Soviet visa, and said he had lived there two years . He said he'd lived in Russia for two years and had lived in the Soviet Union .
 While he acted very much the world traveler, the girls noticed that he was at a loss with the Spanish menus .
 Every two hours, Lee was unable to pick and choose when the passengers disembarked for food and rest stop . Lee just pointed at something on the menu and had to eat a full meal every two hours .
 “Texas” ate every meal alone, but he did make an exception for the McFarlands . He had breakfast with them as they arrived in Mexico City on Friday .
 Less than an hour after his arrival, Lee was installed in Room 18 of the Hotel del Comercio, four blocks from the bus terminal . Lee is installed in a room four blocks away from the main bus terminal in Madrid .
 The room cost $1.28 a day . The maid was impressed not only by the paucity of personal effects . He left a few items to dry in the bathroom each time he went out .
 He spent most of Friday and Saturday bouncing back and forth between the Soviet and Cuban embassies . The embassies were located within a few blocks of one another .
 At the Soviet embassy he told the consular official that his wife had applied several months earlier to return to the USSR with their child . Valery Vladimirovich Kostikov, a Soviet citizen, told the official he had applied to return with his wife .
 He displayed various pieces of evidence of his prior residence in the USSR and membership in a pro-Castro organization in the United States . He said he had been in touch with the Soviet embassy in Washington about a reentry visa for himself .
 At the Cuban embassy Lee fell into the sympathetic hands of Sylvia Duran, a twenty-six-year-old Mexican woman who was a Cuban consular official . Lee was taken to the Cuban Embassy in Havana .
 J Hidell’s “resume,” the several looseleaf, handwritten sheets on which he had summarized his life as an ‘Organizer’, ‘Marxist,’ ‘Defector’ and so on . Hidell's "
 Lee said he had a right to go to Cuba in view of his background and loyalty and his activities in behalf of the Cuban movement . When she informed Lee that a Cuban visa could not be issued until he had the Soviet visa, he became annoyed .
 Duran put him into direct contact with one or two persons at the Soviet embassy, probably by telephone . Duran was probably in contact with some of the embassy staff at the time .
 The story was still the same, and Lee became so excited that he became so angry that Mrs. Lee became angry that she had changed her story . Lee became very excited and angry that the story had changed .
 Duran begged the Cuban consul, Senor Eusebio Asque, to come out of his office and talk to Oswald himself . Duran: "I want to know what happened to Oswald. I want to talk to him again"
 Asque called the Soviet consulate and confirmed that there would be a waiting period of four to six months . Asque likewise called the . Soviet consulate in Moscow confirmed that the waiting period would be four to .
 Oswald suggested to Oswald that he leave Mexico and return when he had a Soviet visa, which he would be given a Cuban transit visa . He suggested to return to the Soviet Union in order to get a transit visa to Cuba . Oswald was given a Soviet transit visa, but would be allowed
 Lee again became furious and demanded his rights in a scene that may have resembled his behavior at the American embassy in Moscow in 1959 . At that, Lee became angry and demanded that his rights be granted .
 She handed him a slip of paper with her name and telephone number on it, and she went ahead and processed his visa application . She went ahead with the application .
 Oswald’s visa application was approved on condition that the Soviet visa be obtained first . Fifteen to thirty days later, a routine reply arrived from Havana approving Oswald's visa application .
 On Sunday he apparently visited museums and did some sightseeing in Mexico City . On Sunday, he was apparently visiting museums and sightseeing .
 On Monday he went to a travel agency and purchased bus tickets from Mexico City to Laredo and then to Dallas . On Monday, he bought bus tickets to get to Dallas, Texas, where he is headed .
 On Tuesday, October 1, he attempted a final assault on the fortress of Soviet bureaucracy . And on October 1 he attempted to do so again .
 He somehow contacted the Soviet military attache and asked whether a reply had been received to a telegram that the Soviet consul had promised to send to the embassy .
 A guard outside the consulate went inside and returned with the message that the telegram had been sent but no reply had been received . The telegram was sent to the consulate in New York City, New York, but was not answered .
 Lee left Mexico City by bus by bus on Wednesday, October 2 . Lee's visit was a failure, Lee left the country by bus .
 At the U.S. customs station in Laredo at 1:30 in the morning of October 3, he was seen “gulping down” a banana .
 A customs official reassured him that he would be allowed to take it into the U.S. and did not have to eat so fast . He was told he would not be allowed into the United States and not to eat fast .
 By 2:30 on the afternoon of October 3, Lee was in Dallas, only one week and one day after leaving New Orleans . Lee left New Orleans on October 1, one week after his departure .
 He had spent perhaps $100 on the trip, but its cost to him could not be measured only in money . The trip was not only money, but it was the experience itself, he said .
 He had wanted to deploy his shooting skills in behalf of a tiny, embattled country that surely needed him . He wanted to use his skills to help his country .
 Cuban consul said people like him were harmful to the cause of revolution . Instead, he was told by no less than a figure than the Cuban Consul that he was harmful .
 If he ever had real thoughts of moving to the Northeast and becoming a political activist, those thoughts evaporated now . If he had thought of moving there and becoming an activist, that's now gone .
 He filed a claim for the last of his unemployment compensation checks, and announced that he was once again looking for a job . He went straight to the offices of the Texas Employment Commission, filing a claim .
 He then went to the YMCA, the same Y where he had stayed one year before, and spent the night there . He registered as a serviceman so he would not have to pay a membership fee .
 Next morning he went to Padgett Printing Corporation in response to a newspaper advertisement . He applied for a job as a typesetter in the composing room . The next day he returned to work as a typeetter .
 The plant superintendent who interviewed him said he was “well dressed and neat” and “made a favorable impression” on the foreman . The interview was conducted by the plant superintendent .
 Gangl was inclined to hire him, especially since he already had experience at Jaggars-ChilesStovall . Gangl: "I'm glad to have this experience, especially with this experience." Gangl says Gangl will continue to work at the firm .
 She was very happy to hear his voice and relieved beyond measure that he had not gone to Cuba . She was also relieved that he did not go to Cuba.
 Marina explained that Ruth had just given blood at Parkland Hospital in case it was needed during the baby's birth . She said she was not up to the long drive to Dallas and was not able to go to hospital .
 Lee hitchhiked and got a ride all the way to the Paines’ house with a black man . Lee says he got the ride with a man who was black . Lee: "I’m not afraid to hitchhike. I’ll be happy to
 Marina stood in the bedroom and stared at the prodigal who had come home to her . Marina was stunned to discover her son had come back from the dead .
 He described his shuttling from embassy to embassy, how each one told him he had to wait and wait, and see what the other one did . The whole time he had been worried about running out of money, he said .
 He was especially vociferous about the Cubans—“the same kind of bureaucrats as in Russia.” He said they were “the [Cuban] bureaucrats as well as the [Cubans] in Russia .
 Marina thought he seemed happy, his spirits vastly improved over what they had been before he went to Mexico . Marina thought that his spirits were better than before he left Mexico .
 Ruth left them alone as much as she could and even tried to keep June out of their way . Ruth and June were separated from each other for a year .
 Lee told Marina about his adventures in Mexico City, and she got the impression that, apart from his one great disappointment, he had enjoyed his stay there .
 All weekend he showed the greatest solicitude toward her, trying to get her to eat more, especially bananas and apples, to drink juices and milk, things that would strengthen her .
 Lee asked if Marina Marina could stay with him until he found work . Ruth drove him to the bus station at noon on Monday, Lee asked for help .
 Against her wishes he kept milk in her refrigerator and ate sardines, peanut butter, and bananas in his room, another thing she did not like . She did not want him to eat bananas, bananas or bananas .
 He used her telephone to fuss and scold at someone in a foreign language . He used the phone to talk to someone in the foreign language.
 He was in and out during the daytime and at home all day on Friday, disrupting her nap . Most bothersome of all of all, he was in the daytime during the day and all day Friday .
 Mr. Bledsoe said he wanted his room cleaned and clean sheets put on his bed . He also said that he wanted to see clean sheets on the bed of his room .
 He insisted that he was not discouraged; he had only just started looking for a job . He insisted he is not discouraged, but that he is looking for work .
 Ruth gave Lee his first driving lesson; and when she asked him to plane down a door for her, he removed it from his hinges and took real pleasure in doing a good job for her .
 Ruth wrote happily to her mother afterward that her husband “added a needed masculine flavor” to the household . He played with her little boy, Chris, and watched football on TV; and, as Ruth wrote, ‘added a much-needed masculine flavor .”
 For the second weekend in a row not a single harsh word passed between Lee and Marina . The pair were reunited for the second time this weekend .
 He showed affection for Marina and June and seemed to want to find a job and provide for them . He seemed to show affection for the couple and wanted to look after them .
 She was encouraged by his concern for her and the new baby . She felt that the weight of his interests had shifted away from politics toward family life, a sign that he might be growing up .
 Marina looked on her husband as a mere boy, who had married too soon and had a series of childhood diseases to go through before he arrived at maturity . For Marina, she looked on him as a child who had to deal with childhood diseases .
 Now, perhaps, he had been through them all and the two of them could start making plans for a peaceful life together .
 Lee’s terrible fragility, and each, in a different way, drew back from probing too far . But each of them sensed Lee's terrible fragilities, and drew back .
 Ruth stepped all around Lee’s prickly places and points of special vulnerability . Ruth stepped in to take on the role of Lee in the book .
 She tried not to see Lee’s darker side, she said . ‘Out of loyalty to Marina and her marriage, and out of her own great quality of charity,’ she said. ‘I’m not sure what I’ve done, but
 Michael, it is true, did try to draw him out and soften his bitterness . Michael tried to draw out his bitterness, but it was not enough, he said .
 Encountering a solid wall of rejection, Michael gave up and later blamed himself for having done so too soon . Michael's story is the story of a young man who was rejected by his family .
 Lee could not have tolerated a real relationship with Michael or anyone, and so overwhelming was Michael's respect for the privacy of others that he honored Lee’s right to turn him away even in his own house . Lee could have turned him away, but Lee could’t have
 Marina had trained herself to accept a great deal in Lee and had a huge stake in blindness to the rest . As for Marina, she had trained .
 She must have been considerably taken up with the new life to which she was about to give birth to .
 She continued to be concerned most of all with the eternal question of whether Lee loved her . And she continued to worry most of her life about whether she loved Lee .
 Ruth failed to realize her ‘own great power over” Lee, Ruth later pointed out, she failed to .
 Marina failed to observe that far from being better after his trip to Mexico, Lee was worse . What Marina, like everyone else, failed to . observe was that far . from being . better after . his trip, Lee is worse .
 All his life he had been close to an invisible border that separated reality from fantasy in his mind, and now he was closer than ever to slipping over into a world made up entirely of fantasy .
 "More than ever he inhabited a world of delusions held together by the frailest baling wire," he said . More than ever, he said. "More and more than ever"
 Animallike, he knew that he must keep his delusions hidden or, like an animal, he would be caught . He knew he had to hide his delusions .
 Living alone five days a week with no one to talk to, he was not exposed to the scrutiny of those who knew him . The strain was off him of keeping his inner world out of sight .
 In a world of women who were exhausted by the rituals of child rearing, he escaped for hours on end in front of the television set . And on weekends, he was able to escape from the world by watching TV .
 His hosts, the Paines, were creatures of exquisite sensibility who shrank from touching his weak spots . The Paines are creatures of . exquisite . sensibility . His hosts . shrank . from touching him weak spots.
 All through October it was as if the little household in Irving was perfectly geared for no other purpose but to help Lee keep his inner world whole . Lee's family was there all through October .
 Mr Truly called Mr Truly “sir,” and said he had come straight from the Marines . He was “quiet and well mannered,’ called him ‘sir’
 Mr Truly liked that because it very often happened that a young man came to him right out of the service, got on his feet working at the depository, then went on to better things . "Mr Truly" liked that .
 Mr Truly told him that while he did not have a permanent opening he could offer him a temporary job at $1.25 an hour . Mr Truly also offered him a $1,25 per hour job at Mr Truly .
 Lee accepted the job and said he needed the job badly to support his family . Lee is expecting a second child any day . Lee accepted gratefully .
 Mr Truly told him to report for work the next day, October 16, at eight o’clock . Mr Truly said he was going to be at work at 8 a.m.
 When Lee called Marina that night, it was with a boast in his voice, as if to say that they only had to take one look at him at the depository and they could not turn him away . “They just hired me,” he said .
 He told Marina that it was “good to be working with books,” and that the work was ‘interesting and clean” as many of his jobs had been .
 Mr Truly liked Mr Truly a great deal, and the other men were nice to him, too . Mr Truly was nice to Mr Truly, too, and he liked him very much .
 Lee’s birthday fell on Friday, the 18th, his third day on the new job . Marina and Ruth prepared a surprise birthday party for Lee on Friday .
 Michael was there, and Ruth had brought wine, put decorations on the table, and baked a cake . Ruth had also brought wine and baked the cake . Michael was also there .
 When they carried in the cake and sang “Happy Birthday” he was so “nervous and touched and selfconscious,” Marina remembers, that he could not hold back the tears . Marina: He was so nervous and touched that he couldn't hold back tears
 Lee counted less than twenty-four candles on the cake when he counted his twenty-fourth birthday . Lee counted the candles on his birthday cake, but there were less than 24 .
 Lee said that he would like a special present for his wife . They drank more wine, joked a little, and then Lee asked for a special gift .
 The rest of the evening he trailed Marina everywhere, asking if she felt any pains . He trailed her everywhere and asked if she had any pains. Marina said yes .
 He told Marina that he was sorry to put her through such a ordeal and he would never do it again . He said he would be sorry to have put Marina through such an ordeal again . Marina said she would never be allowed to see Marina again .
 Next day he was up bright and early scanning the secondhand ads in the newspaper . Next day, he was out looking for secondhand adverts in the paper .
 Contrary to reports, she had not asked him for a washing machine . Contrary to later reports, he had not been asked for washing machines . She had asked for the washing machine, according to reports .
 To her it was another sign that he valued her and might really be willing to settle down and put his family life first . To her, she said it was a sign he was willing to put his life first.
 She curled up on the floor with her head in his lap and dozed . They ate a banana together, and later she curled up in the floor .
 Every now she felt him sit up straight and strain toward the television set, greatly excited . Every now, after that after that he sat up straight, he looked forward to the set .
 One was Suddenly, starring Frank Sinatra, about a plot to kill the president of the United States . Another was Suddenly , starring Sinatra . The two films were released in the 1980s .
 In the film Sinatra drives into a small Western town where the president is due to arrive by train, debark, and get into a car that will drive him into the High Sierras for some mountain fishing . Sinatra is a mentally unbalanced ex-serviceman who
 Sinatra finds a house overlooking the railroad station and seizes it, subduing its occupants . Sinatra seizes the house and subdues its occupants. Sinatra found the house in the middle of the night .
 He leans out of a window and gets the railroad tracks into the crosshairs of his rifle sight . The train tracks are seen in the crosshair of the rifle sight of the train .
 Sinatra is killed in the end of the film, but it chugs through town without stopping . Sinatra was killed by a plane carrying Sinatra .
 The movie stars John Garfield as an American who has come to help the cause of revolution in Cuba . Based on the actual overthrow of the Machado dictatorship in Cuba in 1933 .
 He and a tiny band of cohorts plot to blow up the whole cabinet, including the president, at a single stroke . The plot is based on a plot involving the president and his cabinet members .
 The plot fails and Garfield dies, but the people rise up to overthrow the dictatorship . Garfield dies . The people in Cuba rise up against the dictatorship and overthrow it .
 Marina remembers the movie’s end—people were dancing in the streets, screaming with happiness because the president had been overthrown . Marina remembers people dancing in streets, celebrating the overthrow of the president .
 It was the only time he showed any interest in Cuba after his return from Mexico . It was only the first time he had shown interest in the island nation since returning .
 Ruth made a Chinese supper on Sunday, and Marina started feeling sick the moment she saw it . Ruth made the meal for the first time .
 Marina did have labor pains later in the evening, and she got ready to drive with Ruth to Parkland Hospital . But she did not give birth to the baby girl .
 Ruth sat with Marina until she was ready for the labor room . She sat with her until she gave birth to her first child .
 She drove home and found that Lee had put the children to bed and had gone to bed, too . Then she drove home to find that he had put them to bed . Lee had gone home and put the kids to bed.
 Ruth thought he was not yet asleep, but he did not come out of his room to ask for news . Ruth thought his light was on and Ruth thought she thought he wasn't yet asleep .
 Ruth sat by the telephone, called the hospital, and, shortly after eleven, was told that Marina had been delivered of a baby girl . Ruth was the only person to call the hospital to say Marina was having a baby .
 Lee’s light was out by then, and Ruth, taking her cue from him, did not wake him with the news . Ruth, like Lee, didn't wake him up, and he didn't want to wake him .
 He returned to Irving that afternoon with Wesley Frazier but was reluctant to visit the hospital . He returned with Frazier but seemed reluctant to go to the hospital that day .
 Ruth guessed that he was afraid to go lest someone at the hospital find out that he had a job and charge him with expenses of the birth . She guessed that someone would have to charge him for the birth of the baby .
 Ruth told him that the hospital already knew he had a job; she had been asked the night before at the admissions office and had told the truth . Ruth said she had told him the hospital had already told him about the job . She said the hospital was already aware of the fact that
 He asked Marina if she had had any stitches or anesthetic and praised God that she had not needed either . He praised her for not needing any stitches and anesthetic .
 If it was a boy, David Lee was to be David Lee . Lee had promised that in the choice of a girl’s name he wouldn’t interfere . If a girl was named David Lee, Lee would have been David Lee himself .
 Marina had put her baby's name down on the baby's certificate . But he now asked Marina what name she had put down on her baby’s certificate . Marina said she had not put down the name on the certificate .
 She had chosen “Audrey Rachel” for Audrey Hepburn and “Rachel” because Ruth had a niece called Rachel and Marina liked the name very much . “Ruth’s choice was ‘Audrey’ and ‘Rachel’ for
 Marina and Lee continued to live apart to save money . But from the outset the baby was called Rachel, and Rachel is to this day .
 "H Lee" was installed in a rooming house at 1026 North Beckley Street, in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas . He and Marina had lived there before .
 Earlene Roberts; or the other roomers noticed ‘Mr Lee’ at all, it was for his extreme apartness . Earlene . Roberts .
 Not every evening, but once in a while, he joined the other roomers and watched television . He joined the others to watch television once or a while .
 "He might sit there as long as thirty or forty minutes and not speak to anyone," he said . He might sit in the room for up to 40 minutes, not speaking to anyone, he added .
 He switched to English if anyone happened to be nearby, but no one was fooled . "No one is fooled," he said. "I'm not fooling anyone."
 She thought his effort to cover up the Russian was foolish . She did not understand what he was saying, and she thought it was foolish, she said .
 During the week Lee was alone in his room all evening, every evening, and he never, in the five or six weeks he was there, had a visitor . Lee was left alone in the room every evening . Lee never, during the week, had any visitors .
 Johnson, the landlady, estimates that he spent 95 percent of his evenings alone in his room . He spent the other 5 percent of those evenings watching television .
 Johnson came to notice that this particular roomer drank half a gallon of "sweet milk" a day . Johnson: "I'm not surprised that this roomer was a big fan of sweet milk"
 Except for weekends, that was the only change in his lonely and austere routine . The only change was to weekends, he said .
 He wrote several orders on his clipboard, found the books, then brought them to a first-floor room where the orders were processed . The orders are processed in a first floor room .
 "He paid attention to the job, did not spend time talking to the other men, and did his work by himself," says the author of the book .
 Mr Truly would ask how his new baby was, and Lee’s face just broke wide open into a smile . Lee would ask Mr Truly how his son was when asked how his baby was .
 'Two or three times he came in with raisins or a bunch of grapes and ate with the other men,' he said . 'He came in to eat with the others,' he added .
 Most days Lee made a point of getting to work early and reading newspapers that had been left in the domino room the day before . Lee was one of the first to get to work at the end of the day .
 One of the men, Bonnie Ray Williams, noticed that Lee did not read about sports, as the others did . Lee was not a sports fan, but he was a fan of the sport .
 In October of 1962, Lee had been living in a rooming house that has never been identified but was probably on Beckley or North Beckley Street, the very same area in which he was living now . Exactly one year before, in October of that year, Lee was living in
 Then as now he had been living alone to save money, he had no family with him to ground his fantasies in reality . Now he has no family to ground him in his fantasies .
 It was during that earlier period in Dallas that he may first have thought of killing General Walker . General Walker may have been killed in Dallas .
 The autumn may have been a troubled time for Lee's life, especially in October and November . Lee's most important events in his life, mostly sad ones or events that signified failure, were clustered in October or November .
 Lee's father would have been in a position similar to that of his own father had he been alive when Lee was born . And now there was something else, the birth of Rachel, which added to the burdens of Lee .
 She was a girl following a girl, while Lee had been a boy following a boy, but in each case a child of the opposite sex had been desired . Lee was a boy followed by a girl .
 Lee’s father had done to him by dying before his birth, Lee was to do to Rachel shortly after hers . Rachel was to be married to Lee shortly after her birth .
 Lee's thoughts may have been, but it is clear that now that he was settled, with a job, a place to live, and the baby’s birth out of the way, he had time for politics again .
 On Wednesday, October 23, only two nights after his first glimpse of Rachel in the hospital, he went to a right-wing meeting at which General Walker addressed thirteen hundred people . General Walker gave a speech at the meeting .
 Marina remembers that Michael attempted to draw Lee out on the subject of politics . Two nights later, at the Paines’s’, Marina recalls that Michael tried to ask Lee about politics again . Marina says Michael was trying to get Lee to talk about politics .
 He sensed that Lee needed an older brother or a friend, and he tried to reach out to him, he said . He sensed he needed a friend or brother or brother and tried to help him out .
 Michael knew that Lee called himself a “Marxist,” and yet he had turned his back on Russia . Michael knew he called Lee a "Marxist," but he called himself “a Marxistist”
 He refused to talk about a better world that might lie ahead but only about what was wrong with the world today . The world is not going to be better, he said, but what is wrong with it .
 Michael kept asking how the changes Lee wanted were to come about—and Lee never answered . Lee kept asking Michael how he wanted the changes he wanted to make to his home .
 Michael inferred that Lee had given up on changing things peacefully, since he never mentioned any sort of peaceful, evolutionary change he might favor . Lee never mentioned how peaceful he might have been .
 He did not consider it worthwhile ‘fussing around’ trying to change anything, he said . He said it was not worthwhile “fussying around” trying to make changes .
 Michael was certain that Lee’s opinions, and his way of clinging to them, were founded in his emotions, but he had no success in probing those emotional roots . Michael said he was certain . Lee's opinions were founded . in his own emotions .
 "Something in Michael resisted understanding Lee emotionally, and he finally gave up exploring this side of his nature," he said . "In fact, something in Michael resists understanding Lee," he added .
 Michael sensed that, except for June, ‘people were like cardboard’ to Lee, and this repelled him . Lee was fascinated by the idea of people being like cardboard, he said .
 He was tall, slender, sensitive, sensitive and with gray, sad eyes that seemed to light up only when the talk turned to aerodynamics . He was taller, slender and sensitive, with gray gray eyes .
 Even Michael’s mind appeared to be airborne; he had been curious about everything all his life . Michael had always wanted to know everything about everything in his life; he was curious about all things .
 It was Michael’s gift to think originally, to look at things in a way no one had thought of before before . Michael says: ‘I’m looking at things I’ve never seen before. It was a gift to Michael to think original, to
 "He was an inventor, and he especially loved to invent things that expressed the beauty, the harmony, the wholeness of life," he said .
 As a boy of ten, hearing that there might one day be an energy crisis, he tried to invent a car that would run on a minimum of oil . As a child, he wanted to create an oil-powered car that ran on minimum oil .
 By the time he was a teenager, he was building a hydrofoil boat . Next, it was gliders, and by the age of 16, he had already built hydrofoils . His next step was to build a glider .
 At the time he and Lee met, Michael was working on new concepts in helicopter design . Michael and Lee were working together on a helicopter design team .
 It was his dream to quit his job, live in an old barn, and design an airplane so cheap, functional, that people could own it the way they own cars . The airplane was designed to be so cheap that it was so functional, so functional .
 Michael hoped that with so many people flying over national frontiers, borders might be wiped out entirely . A visionary as well as a scientist, Michael hoped to see borders wiped out .
 Michael came from a family of visionaries and eccentrics with roots reaching deep into the New England past . Michael was born in New York, New Hampshire .
 The families that produced him, the Paines and Forbeses, had fortunes derived from the China trade, railroads, and the telephone company . Consciences hammered out of guilt.
 Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote that one’s place in life can be redeemed by good works . Some of the best, perhaps, shuddered at the word ‘aristocrat,” but they were aristocrats and they knew it, he says .
 Michael’s grandfather, George Lyman Paine, was a renowned clergyman, a low church Episcopalian, who had run for state office in Massachusetts as a socialist . Michael Paine's grandfather was a high-profile clergyman .
 Michael's father, Lyman Paine, was an architect who was also a political activist . Michael’s father, Michael, was also an architect .
 He had seen his father only half a dozen times before he reached the age of 20, and yet he loved him devotedly . He had only seen him only half-dozen times before reaching the 20th .
 Each in these three generations of Paine men had in his own way come back to the Emersonian conviction that it is a necessity for every individual to do as his conscience requires .
 Lee didn't consider that his son Michael, a physicist at Bell Helicopter, might have a security clearance . Michael's father had been a Trotskyite, and his father was turned down for higher clearances because he was a member of the Communist Party .
 "It was characteristic of Michael that he, too, did not consider it and, indeed, would have scorned to do so"
 Michael was accustomed to thinking in abstractions, but as an inventor he was also at home with facts . Michael was a great inventor and inventor of his own inventions .
 "No sooner had he thought of a category than his mind blazed with exceptions and defiances," he said . And he never lumped things into categories, for no sooner had . thought of . categories, he said. "No matter . had to think of categories, his mind
 He was at home with nothing but categories, and into them he stuffed every fact or observation he came up with . "He stuffed everything or observation into categories," he said. "He was at least home with no categories, no matter what came in his mind."
 The category he clung to hardest was the “exploitation of the worker” under capitalism, he said . The category was hardest, and he insisted on hardest, was the worker exploitation under capitalism .
 Lee admitted that exploitation existed everywhere, but he insisted that in the Soviet Union at least the state reaps a profit . Lee said that in a capitalist society only the employer gains . Lee admits that exploitation exists everywhere .
 Under capitalism, all institutions, churches, schools, schools and everything exists to exploit the working class, he said .
 Each is a part of an interlocking structure that is interested only in maintaining itself in power . Each is part of a structure that only wants to maintain its power, the author says .
 Michael tried to argue with Lee by pointing out that there are other values beside material ones . Michael said that there were other values besides material ones. Michael also said that the value of life is important .
 These, too, and not just politics and economics, affect the way men look at things and the way they organize their lives, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "These are things that affect men's view of things"
 He insisted that the church, all churches, are merely an arm of the state, and their function is to keep people blind . He said that all churches are merely arm of state .
 Marina detected a nastiness and anger in Lee’s tone that she had not heard from him in months . Marina did not understand what they were saying, but she detected an anger in his tone . Marina had not been in contact with Lee for months and had not seen him
 They were so polite that she thought, with some surprise, that they must really like Lee . They were polite and she thought they must like her .
 The Paines were polite, but that night, and other nights, too, they got angry at Lee’s dogmatic was of arguing . Lee's dogmatics were of arguing, but the Paines got angry .
 He refused to listen to logic and facts, and when he was up against a fact that appeared to refute what he believed, he repeated the same old arguments as if that was all there was to it . The president "reflected to logic" and "rejected facts"
 Michael tried to check himself and felt, with some shame, that he showed his anger more openly than Lee did . Michael felt shame that Lee showed more anger than Michael did .
 He could tell, of course, that Lee was very angry, too, saw that his hands were even trembling . But it looked to him as if Lee was a fellow who had had had a good deal of practice at keeping his feelings under control .
 After that evening, Ruth gave up trying to talk to Lee about religion or politics, but Michael did not . After that night, Ruth and Michael decided not to talk about politics or religion again .
 Michael, a liberal, wanted to understand the workings of the rightwing mind . Michael wanted to learn more about rightwing thinking .
 He was interested in better communication between “right” and “left,” what little ‘left” left” he could find in Dallas, Texas . He was also interested in improving communication between the two sides .
 Lee told Lee that he went to meetings, too, first one group and then the other . Lee said he was a member of the first group, then the second, the second group .
 It was a meeting of the American Civil Liberties Union, a liberal organization to which he and Ruth belonged . He and Ruth attended the meeting at the time .
 He wanted to “make him a little happier” and help him see that the gulf between what he desired and what might actually be achieved was not so unbridgeable as he supposed, he said . He said he wanted to "make him happier"
 He also wanted to give Lee a sense of participation, a feeling that he, too, could be effective in bringing about change in quiet ways, he says .
 Michael said Lee spoke “loud and clear and coherently” out of keeping with the mood of the meeting . Lee spoke intelligibly, Michael said . Michael said later that Lee spoke "loud" and "coherently"
 President Kennedy was doing a “real fine job” in civil rights, Lee said . Lee said Kennedy was “doing a real fine job,’s name came up, with what Michael said was a certain, special emphasis .
 Michael was the son of a Trotskyite who had tried to shield him from knowledge that could hurt him later . Michael had learned not to pry, not to ask another man outright what his opinions might be . Michael's father tried to protect him from the knowledge he might need later .
 He was curious as to whether Lee might be a Communist, but he preferred to guess for himself from such signals as Lee chose to send out rather than ask him directly . Lee was curious about whether he was a Communist .
 He showed Michael a copy of the Worker and said you could tell what ‘they’re wanted you to do if only you read between the lines . Michael says you can tell what 'they' wanted to do with the Worker .
 Lee asked Michael whether, in his opinion, one of the men at the meeting was a party member . Now Lee asks Michael whether he thinks one of those men was a member of the party . Michael says he doesn't think one of them is a member .
 Neither Lee’s judgment nor his way of going about things seemed to be those of a Communist . Neither Lee's judgment nor the way he went about things were those of the Communist Party .
 Michael explained what the ACLU is all about . Michael explained the ACLU's role in the ACLU .
 He told Lee that its sole purpose was to defend civil liberties—free speech and other rights of the individual . Lee: "The only purpose of the organization is to defend the individual's rights"
 Lee was amazed that any organization could exist merely to defend a value, as Michael put it later, not to fight for a political objective . Lee: "Any organization can exist simply to defend its value and not fight for political objectives"
 Lee remarked firmly that he could never join an organization like that—it wasn’t political enough . Lee said that he would never join such an organization . Lee: "It wasn't political enough. It was political enough"
 Lee confessed to Michael, exasperated, that he could not fit him into a category . Another time Lee confessed that he couldn't fit him in a category, he said, "I can't fit a category" Lee: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next
 He wasn’t a Communist or a capitalist or a socialist or a Bircher or anything Lee could lay his hands on . Lee wasn't a Communist, but a capitalist, capitalist or socialist . Lee was a great friend of the late President George W. Bush .
 Michael has never seen what Lee wrote, but he guessed from what Lee said to him that he did not believe in the goodness or dignity of man . To this day Michael has . never seen . what Lee . wrote, he guessed .
 Lee felt, to the contrary, that the majority of men are evil, conniving, and stupid . Lee felt that the most of men were evil and conniving . Lee said he felt that men were stupid and evil .
 Their condition needs changing, yet they are fooled by the powers that be . Their condition must be changing, but they must be fooled, says the author of the book .
 Change, if it is to occur, is rotten and yet, paradoxly, strong because everything -- the church, power structure, the educational system -- is all bound together to maintain things exactly as they are . Thus change, if you want to change, it is rotten, yet,
 Because of capitalism’s impermeable strength, peaceful change is impossible, says Julian Zelizer . "Peaceful change is not possible," he says . "Because of capitalism's impermeability, it's impossible to change," he writes .
 And he had tried to become a revolutionary by going to fight for Castro, he says . And he tried to be a revolutionary, he said. He had been fighting for Castro .
 Michael was unable to piece together the whole of Lee’s ‘logic’ at the time, but he was able to do so later on . Now knowing any of this, Michael says he can’t piece together what Lee said was his "logic"
 The most the individual, acting alone, could do was to commit an act that would help destroy society not because of any sense it contained, but because of its symbolic meaning . Thus the most individual could do is to commit a crime that would destroy society, not to destroy society .
 Lee had not yet followed his logic to its conclusion either, and he had no inkling that history was on the point of giving him an opportunity to act on it . Lee had no idea history was about to give him a chance .
 His logic, his experience since the Walker attempt, and his entire life, all were pointing him in the same direction . But his logic and his experience all pointed him toward a decision to strike another violent blow, this one aimed at neither the right nor the left, but simply at the
 Lee approved of and admired the man who happened to stand at the apex of American political life . Lee approved and admired Lee, who was at the height of his political life. Lee's approval of Lee's admiration for Lee came to light .
 The better that man was, the more effective at making capitalism workable and attractive, then the more devastating the blow to capitalist society would be. But the better man is, the better he is, then he would be, the worse it would be .
 Lee's stoicism was a quality that people had been noticing about him since his high school days and even now were noticing about his stoicism at work . Lee had a stoicism that people noticed about him at work, his stoicness .
 Lee reminded Michael of Lawrence of Arabia holding his finger to a match . During their discussions of October 1963, there were moments when Lee reminded him of Lawrence . Lee reminds Michael of nothing so much as Lawrence . of Arabia .
 Lee seemed to be gritting his teeth and bearing pain. That was how Lee seemed . Michael seemed to Michael, gritting and bearing . pain .
 Michael calls Lee's actions a "duck-blind situation" in which he was unforeseeably granted a chance to alter the course of history . Lee, having despaired of peaceful change, would be able to act in only one way, Michael says .
 He must not allow such kindly, personal feelings as he might harbor for the victim to stand in his way . The victim's feelings will not stand in the way of his own life, he says .
 Lee saw this clearly one day when he mentioned to Lee that the qualities he believed in most profoundly were diminished by violence . Lee said he believed that his qualities he most profoundly believed in were diminished in violence .
 Michael interpreted Lee's silence as disagreement . Lee did not answer, and Michael interpreted it as disagreement. Lee was silent for the entire time .
 Lee did not perceive that Lee himself was capable of acting violently, he said . Lee was not the only person to act violently, Lee said, but he was a violent person .
 It is natural that it was the intellectual side of Lee that Michael, an intellectual himself, was best equipped to grasp . Michael, a man of reason, failed to perceive that Lee’s ‘reasons’ were mainly on the surface . Michael failed to see that Lee
 Michael Jackson resisted probing any deeper into the depths of his thoughts . But some inexplicable inner principle in Michael resisted probe any deeper . Michael Jackson's life is inextricably unpredictable .
 He did not take the step that followed and see that Lee was irrational as well . Lee's actions were irrational, but he did not see that he was irrational, as well.
 She realized that he was ‘primarily an emotional person’ and saw that while he talked of ideology and philosophy, he acted, and reacted, emotionally . She said she realized that while she was “primarily a . emotional person,” she saw that .
 She was not only charitable in her judgments but a devoted pacifist . But she, like her husband, was charitable in his judgments and pacifist in her own life .
 During the summer he, too, had discussed with a friend whether Lee might be capable of violence . Lee's friend says he had discussed the possibility of violence with him during the summer .
 The Oswalds’ belongings were stored in the Paines’ garage . Michael was constantly moving Lee’s “camping equipment” from place to place because it was in the way of the drill press and other shop tools .
 The “camping equipment” was tied up in what Michael calls a “greenish rustic blanket,” and despite himself he realized that the bundle was too heavy, and the shape not quite right, to be camping equipment .
 Michael wondered about the bundle, suspecting nothing definite but simply that the bundle was not what it was said to be; and he was tempted to peek inside .
 Whatever it was that Lee had in that mysterious bundle, he had a right to keep it in Michael’s garage . Lee's right to have it in the garage, Michael says, but whatever it was .
 Lee was on his good behavior at the Paines’’s, and he treated Marina better there than at any time since the two of them left Russia . Marina was on her good behavior, and she was on good behavior .
 He brought his dirty laundry to the house each weekend for Marina to wash and iron, and he often refused to wear a shirt she had just ironed on the grounds that she had failed to do it exactly right .
 He would put on a baby face and complain in baby talk that he couldn’t eat because Marina had forgotten to give him a fork and a spoon . Or he would pretend to be a baby .
 He never once got up to fetch for himself or help a wife in the final stages of pregnancy, nor when she had just had a child and was nursing it . He was never up to help his wife when she was in the last stages of her pregnancy and nursing her child .
 Sometimes Lee finished eating ahead of the others and simply got up, left the table, and went into the living room to watch television . Lee often finished eating before the others . Sometimes Lee would finish eating before going to watch TV .
 He refused to eat what Ruth cooked for them and demanded immediately afterward that Marina fix his favorite Russian dish, pan-fried onions and potatoes . Sometimes he refused to like what Ruth had cooked for him .
 Sometimes she did, and sometimes she did not, fix him his pan-fried potatoes . "Sometimes she did," she said, "Sometimes I did not," he said .
 Lee spent more time watching football this season than ever before . Lee spent most of his football season watching football .
 Even though Lee had a job, he still did not contribute to the household expenses . Lee had to contribute to his family's living expenses .
 Ruth admits Lee was never very gracious, but he did try to stay out of her way . Ruth admits that Lee tried to keep her out of trouble .
 Anything she asked him to do, like gluing together Junie’s training chair, he did gladly . Anything he asked her to do was done gladly .
 Lee was saving money so he could get an apartment for himself and Marina . The Paines understood that Lee wanted to save money so that he and Marina could get a home . Lee is saving money to get the apartment for Marina and Lee .
 Michael never resented that he was supporting Lee's family, his wife says . They had no thought of his contributing to the expenses, she says .
 Marina was a companion to Ruth and a help to her with her Russian . As Michael looked at it, he said: 'As Michael looked on it, Marina is a companion'
 Lee and Marina had no big fights during the weekends they were together at the Paines’s . Nothing that caused them to stop speaking, just spats . Lee's relationship with Marina ended after a series of disagreements .
 Whether Lee loved her or not was a major topic in her weekday conversations with Ruth . Ruth had now become close and confidential. Lee's relationship with Ruth had become so close .
 She wanted Ruth to see Lee in all his guises so that she could get her opinion on this most crucial of questions . Ruth wanted Ruth's opinion on Lee in her own way .
 Lee’s attitude toward Ruth, however, had taken a turn for the worse after he came back from Mexico . Lee's attitude towards Ruth has taken a bad turn after he returned from Mexico.
 He said it was ridiculous for “such a long, tall, stringbean” to jump around and dance with her children, as Ruth did . Ruth did. He said she was a ‘long, tall’, ‘stringbean’
 Marina knew there were times when Lee hated and despised a woman simply for being a woman . Then, too, she knew there was times when she knew she was being bullied by Lee . Marina knew Lee hated a woman because she was a woman.
 He felt that way toward her sometimes, and she could see that he felt the same way toward Ruth . She could see him feel that way .
 Lee realized Ruth’s kindness was genuine — she wanted nothing from him . After that, apparently, it dawned on Lee that Ruth wanted nothing . Lee now believes that Ruth's kindness is genuine .
 Marina, who can be reticent with the confidences of others, now told Lee a little more than before about the Paines’ marriage . Marina told Lee that she now feels more confident about her marriage .
 She told him of an occasion when Michael had left for supper, then left, and Ruth cried . She said: 'He left and she cried. She cried'
 Michael Paines left home shortly after his second child was born, Marina said . Marina said Michael had not wanted children right away and had left home soon after the birth .
 Lee thought it was a man’s obligation once married to want his wife and children . Lee: "Once married, you have to want your wife and your children"
 He was indignant at Michael for having married without wanting children . Michael's father said he was 'indignant' at Michael's decision to have children .
 He condemned Michael for coming home, eating supper, and seeing his children just like a married man, then leaving . And he condemned Michael's actions, saying he left the children alone .
 Marina’s disclosures caused Lee to be more sympathetic toward Ruth and less so toward Michael . Marina's disclosures had other side effects as well . Lee was more sympathetic to Ruth than Michael .
 He regularly asked Marina, over the telephone and on his arrival for the weekend, how Ruth and Michael were getting along . But now he regularly asks Marina over the phone and on the weekends, how she was getting along with him .
 He even gave signs of awareness that he and his family might be in the way in the modest, one-story ranch house . He said Ruth and Michael might need privacy in which to work out their problems .
 He was sorry for the Paine children, too, especially the boy, Chris, Chris . He actually tried to make up to them for the fact that their father did not live with them . He said he was sorry .
 He started playing more with Chris, who was two and a half, than with June . Thus, he started playing with Chris more often than June .
 Marina was jealous for June and asked why he played so much with Chris . Marina said she was jealous of June's love for June .
 In spite of small spats, the relationship between Lee and Marina continued to be “unusually good,” in Marina’s words .
 Marina remembers him on the floor in front of the television set with a pillow between his legs and Rachel on the pillow . Marina remembers how he sat on the couch with his wife and daughter on the TV set .
 During the commercials, if she wasn’t asleep, he talked to her in Russian . He would talk to her during commercials .
 We’re strong because Mama gives us milk and not a bottle that’s either too hot or too cold . We're strong because we’ve never been too cold or too hot, they say . We have no choice but to have a bottle of milk, they
 He proclaimed that his baby was getting prettier every day . He was delighted with them all and proclaimed that he was getting better .
 There he dropped into the mail a membership application that he had picked up at the October 25 meeting of the American Civil Liberties Union . He had attended the meeting he had attended with Michael Paine .
 He took it in his name and Marina’s, a sign that he expected that by the end of the year they would be living in Dallas . He said he expected to live in Dallas with Marina and his wife in the fall .
 He listed as nonprofit organizations entitled to receive mail at his address . Fair Play for Cuba Committee and the American Civil Liberties Union are among those entitled to mail .
 Lee asked for information about how to contact the party when he moved to Northeast . Arnold Johnson, information director, had long ago answered Lee’s letter from New Orleans .
 Lee’s new letter, postmarked November 1, was a continuation of the earlier correspondence . Lee's new letter was postmarked Nov. 1 . Lee: "I’m sorry for what happened to me. I’ll be happy for you."
 He announced that he had not moved north after all but had settled for the time in Dallas . He announced he had moved to Dallas, Texas .
 He went on to report that he had been to a right-wing meeting “headed” by General Walker on October 23, and to a meeting of the ACLU on the 25th . He said he had also been to meetings with the ACLU .
 A day or two earlier, they had come home from their errands to be told by a neighbor that a strange man had been asking for them . A neighbor had told them that a stranger had asked for them. A day later, they'd come home to find a stranger .
 She noticed that Ruth took the news calmly and that her conscience was clear . But she noticed that she had a good conscience and that she took the decision calmly .
 Marina did not worry much about the visit, even though the man had said to Mrs. Marina . Therefore Marina didn't worry about the man's visit .
 Marina was using Ruth’s hair dryer to beautify herself for Lee's arrival . Ruth was doing jobs around the house when Lee reappeared . The children were sleeping when the children were asleep .
 She greeted him cordially, asked him in, and the two sat in the living room talking pleasantries . She asked him to ask him to sit down and talk to him again .
 Hosty said that unlike the House Un-American Activities Committee, the FBI was not a witch-hunting organization . Hosty: Unlike the H.A.C. Committee, unlike the . House Un .American Activities . Committee, Hosty says, unlike . the . FBI
 Ruth did not know where Lee was living, but it was in Dallas somewhere, and she thought it might be Oak Cliff . Ruth does not know if Lee is still living in Oak Cliff, Dallas .
 Hosty assured her that it was not the FBI’s way to approach an employer directly . Hosty told her that the FBI would not be trying to approach the employer directly.
 Ruth softened, told him where Lee was working, and together they looked up the address of the book depository in the telephone book . Ruth softened and told him that Lee was a good friend .
 Hosty showed his credentials to host the show . Hosty was frightened and a little repelled when Hosty introduced himself and showed her credentials .
 He saw that she was alarmed, was aware that she had lately had a child, and tried to calm her . He saw her alarmed and was aware she had recently had a baby . He said: "I'm sorry. I'm sorry."
 He explained, with Ruth translating, that he was not there to embarrass or harass her . He explained that he did not want to embarrass her .
 If Soviet agents try to recruit her by threatening her or her relatives in Russia, she had a right to ask the FBI for help . But if she was threatened, she should ask for help, she says .
 She liked this plumpish, pleasant-looking dark-haired man who was talking to her about her rights and offering to protect her . She liked him .
 No one had given her so much attention in a long time, much less offered to protect her rights . "No one has given her such a lot of attention in long time," she said .
 Hosty remarked that from what he had read in the American papers, he thought Castro was a threat to the interests of the U.S. Hosty said Castro is a threat . Hosty also said that Castro was not a threat for the United States .
 Hosty said he knew of Lee’s activities passing out pamphlets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans . Hosty asked whether Lee was doing anything similar in Dallas, Texas .
 Marina begged Hosty not to interfere with Lee at work . Marina begged him not to meddle with Lee's work .
 Hosty had to get back to the office; and since he did not have a second man present (as is the FBI custom during an interview), he was not eager to see Lee . The New Orleans office had jurisdiction over the case until it was established that Oswald had a residence in
 The bureau did not want to give away to him either what it knew of his trip or the techniques by which it had acquired knowledge . The bureau was reluctant to give details of its knowledge to him .
 Hosty wrote out his name, office address, and telephone number for Ruth to give to Lee . Ruth gave Lee his office address and phone number . Lee's office is located in New York City .
 Ruth was sure Lee had nothing to hide, she expected that he would go straight to the FBI himself . Ruth expected that Lee would have nothing to do with the case . Ruth was certain Lee would be going straight to FBI .
 He wanted to know everything—what Ruth had said, how long the man stayed, and what he had said . The man was a man who had been in the hospital .
 Marina explained that she had not understood much, and Lee scolded her . Lee scolds her for not understanding much of what she said .
 Marina was astonished at how nervous he had suddenly become, and at the effort he was making to conceal it . Marina had been astonished at the fact that he had become nervous .
 Ruth described their conversation and handed Lee the slip of paper with Hosty’s telephone number and address . Ruth described the conversation with Lee and handed him the slip-of-the-paper . Lee then handed Lee a copy of Hosty's telephone number .
 She had heard that fear of the FBI was typical of many people coming out of Russia, especially if they were Russian, she said . She said she had heard of people coming from Russia fearing the FBI .
 To reassure them and show that she was not afraid, she told them of her experience during World War II, when her brother and many of his friends were conscientious objectors . To reassure her, she said: "I'm not afraid. I'm not scared"
 The FBI was visiting the neighbors and asking about her brother and his friends . Ruth had been only a high school student, but she realized that she was being visited by the FBI . Ruth was only a teenager when the FBI visited the neighbors .
 So far from threatening their rights, she concluded that the FBI had protected them . The FBI had not threatened their rights .
 Ruth was certain that Lee was not an agent and knew nothing of interest to a foreign power . Ruth was sure that Lee had nothing to do with a foreign state . Ruth said Lee knew nothing to be interested in a foreign country .
 It seemed clear to her that he was “neither bright enough nor steady enough to have been recruited” by anyone, she said . She said it seemed clear that he wasn’t “bright enough” nor ‘steady enough’ to be recruited
 She thought by far the best thing he could do was go to the FBI office, preempting their initiative, and tell them everything they wanted to know . Since he had nothing to hide, she said he should tell the FBI .
 He was sad and subdued throughout supper, and he scarcely spoke a word all evening long . He scarcely spoke at all night long .
 For the first time since his return from Mexico, there was no sex at all between them that weekend, not even the limited sex that had been possible since Rachel’s birth . The first time they had sex was no longer possible .
 Marina could tell that he was straining to catch every word, yet at the same time trying not to betray his nervousness . Marina was trying to listen to him, but he seemed nervous and nervous .
 He put diapers in the washing machine for Marina, hung them on the line, and tried to carry on his family life as usual . He hung the diapers in a washing machine .
 During the afternoon he watched a football game on television, and his spirits seemed to improve . During the day, he was able to watch a football match on television .
 Marina was instructed to study the car with care, note what color it was, what model, and write down the license number . Then he drew Marina aside and instructed her that the next time the FBI came she was to study it with care .
 They might send a different agent, he explained, but the car would still be the same . The car will still be sent to the White House .
 She could see that he was calculating at great speed, trying to think of everything, yet at the same time hide his anxiety . She could also see that she could see him thinking of everything in his thoughts .
 For the rest of the weekend Lee was withdrawn, taken up with thoughts of his own . His elation was momentary, however, and for the rest the weekend was withdrawn . Lee's elation is momentary .
 Mr Hosty's visit had wrought an astonishing change in Lee's relationship with her . She knew he was only doing his job, but at the astonishing change he had wrought in their relationship .
 Everything between them had been wonderful, or nearly wonderful, for a month . Everything was wonderful for them, but they'd never been together again .
 Lee went to work on Monday morning, and on Tuesday, November 5, Hosty came again . Lee went back to work, and Hosty showed up again on Tuesday .
 Lee was found dead at the home of Ruth Paines in Fort Worth, Texas . Lee's wife Ruth had Ruth's address, but Ruth was able to find Lee's at the Paines' home .
 Ruth met both men at the doorstep and said that Lee had been there over the weekend but she had not gotten his address . Ruth met Lee and said he had not been there since the weekend . Ruth said Lee was there but she did not know where Lee lived .
 Hosty asked Ruth whether in her opinion there might be anything wrong with Lee mentally . Hosty also asked Ruth if there might have been any problems with Lee's mental health .
 She answered, in a light way, that she did not understand the thought processes of anyone who claimed to be a Marxist .
 Marina appeared toward the end of the visit, and both Ruth and Hosty were surprised to see her .
 News of his first visit had upset Lee very badly, she said . She appealed to him not to come again because news of first visit upset Lee badly .
 Ruth had thought, while she and Hosty were talking, that Marina was in her bedroom taking care of Rachel . She had thought that she was looking after her daughter, Rachel .
 She slipped out of the bedroom, into the kitchen and dining area, and around the house . It could have been while Hosty and the other agent were at the doorway before they came in, they say .
 She had no trouble finding Hosty’s car, and without the smallest feeling of being in a hurry, she walked around and around it . “I am a sneaky girl,” she laughs .
 Once Hosty had gone, she wrote the number on a slip of paper and left it for Lee on their bureau . Hosty left the number for Lee to put it on the bureau . Lee left Hosty's number on her bureau .
 Ruth thought it might be better to wait until the weekend, and Marina agreed . Ruth and Marina decided to wait for the weekend to get married .
 Marina said that through Ruth he had explained to her that if anybody from the Soviet Union or the United States harmed her or tried to use against her the fact that she was from Russia, she had a right to ask the FBI for help . Marina said she had been told by Ruth that
 She was angry at Lee for ruining her good spirits and refusing to believe the favorable things she had to say about Hosty . Hosty was angry that Lee had ruined her spirits and refused to believe what she had said about her .
 Lee was angry at her because she failed to remember every detail and had forgotten to warn Ruth in advance that she was not to say anything to Hosty . Hosty was angry that Lee had not warned Ruth not to tell Hosty about her plans .
 Marina’s recollection that Lee then went straight to the kitchen and quizzed Ruth, who was fixing dinner . It is Marina's recollection of the incident in which she was quizzed by Ruth .
 After that he found Marina in the bedroom and started pumping her all over again, he found her in the bed again . After that, he went back to the bedroom .
 He treated her as if she were untrustworthy and had no understanding of how important the whole matter was, she said . He said she had no idea how important it was .
 If the Soviet embassy gets wind of it and you agreed to let this man protect your ‘rights,’ then you’ll really be in for it . The Soviet embassy will get wind of this if you let him protect your rights .
 At supper Lee questioned Ruth again, and this time she saw more clearly than the previous weekend just how upset he was . Lee questioned her again and she saw him clearly .
 Lee complained that he felt “inhibited” by the FBI and hated being bothered all the time . Lee said he felt "inhibited" by the federal government . Lee: "I hate being bothered. I hate being in the FBI"
 Marina decided that she must be a fool indeed not to have understood the seriousness of the whole affair .
 Lee was making a mountain out of a molehill, part of a part of her thought . But another part kept telling her that Lee was wrong, she said . Lee is a good guy, she says .
 She was tired of the way he was always blowing things up out of all proportion and trying to make her suspicious as suspicious as he was himself . She decided to take a break from him .
 Lee asked Ruth if he might use her typewriter . The next day, Saturday, he asked her if he could use it . Ruth's typewriter is now being used by Lee .
 Ruth carried Junie in her high chair over beside him, where he could keep an eye on her . Ruth assented, and as he began typing she carried her over to him .
 When she came near, Lee quickly covered up the paper written in longhand that he was typing from . Lee covered up his writing from when she approached him and quickly covered it up .
 The Oswalds and the Oswalds drove to the Texas Drivers’ License Examining Station in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas . About eleven that same morning, after Lee had finished typing, all seven of them went to the station .
 Lee wanted to apply for a learner’s permit, get a license, and then buy a car . He wanted to qualify for better jobs so he could get better jobs . Lee: "I want to make sure I can get a good job"
 Ruth bought a few items for her children and Lee bought rubber pants for June and Rachel . The seven then trooped into a dime store, where Ruth bought some items .
 On the way home in the car, Lee was as cheerful as Ruth had ever seen him . Lee was cheerful again, Ruth said .
 She understood that whatever he had written that morning had calmed him after his fright of the evening before . She understood .
 He calmed calmed after ordering her to obtain the license number . He calmed again after he took the number off their bureau .
 Ruth left the house to vote after lunch, and Lee, cutting up a little again and behaving like a naughty child, said, “Hurry up, Marina.” Lee .
 Marina fried some potatoes and onions mixed with flour and eggs, and for once it was a success .
 When there was a break in the football game, Lee shepherded the children down the street to buy popsicles . Lee's children were playing football at the end of the game .
 Chris Paine ran on a little ahead, and Lee was afraid that he would end up under a car . Lee was worried that he might end up in a car accident . Chris Painain ran on ahead of Lee, but Lee was able to keep going .
 He caught Chris, smacked him on the bottom of the bottom, and carried him the rest of the way . Chris caught Chris on the end of the run .
 After the football game he got down on all fours, allowed Chris to ride on his back, and played “Horsey” on the living room floor . After the game he let Chris play "Horsey"
 The two of them enjoyed it greatly, and Marina could see that her husband still was dreaming of having a son . The two-year-old mother-of-two was delighted to discover her husband had a baby .
 Marina, in bed, begs Lee to give up any thoughts of going back to Russia . It started on a playful note, with Marina in bed begging Lee to go back .
 Lee turned tender and was more frank with her than he had ever been before . Suddenly Lee became tender and more frank than he'd ever been with her . Lee was shocked to find out what had happened to him .
 Neither of them had said much to the other about the lives they had led before they met, for what each had been seeking in marrying the other was a new life .
 Marina finally told Lee that as a teenager in Leningrad she used to go around cold, hungry, and threadbare, delivering telegrams during the New Year’s season .
 She had hardly ever mentioned Petya and Tanya, her brother and sister, or her stepfather, Alexander Medvedev . She hardly mentioned her brother or sister .
 Lee had told Marina even less, but tonight he wanted to talk about every woman he had ever cared about before he met her . Lee had never told Marina about his past relationships with other women .
 The first had been in Japan while he was stationed there in the Marine Corps. He was stationed in Japan during his time in the Marines .
 She had been thirty-four years old, nearly twice his age, but she looked much younger than she was . She was nearly twice her age when she died . She looked younger than he was .
 He threw her over, he said, after she had taught him something about sex and he realized that she wanted to marry him . He said he threw her after she said she wanted him to marry her .
 The next one had been thin, but she had had a great many lovers, and he was afraid of catching venereal disease . He was afraid he would catch it .
 The third had cooked for him, and he saw more of her than anybody else . He saw her more often than anyone else . She was the third person to cook him .
 The girl in the red dress was Marina, of course, but he did tell her a little about the others, especially Ella Germann . Ella was the girl he had asked to marry him. Marina was Marina .
 He added that he was grateful to Marina because she had never thought he was a spy . He said he was 'grateful' for Marina's support . Marina said she never thought she had ever been a spy.
 He told her that of all the women he had known, she was the only one he ever loved . And he told her she was one of the only ones he had ever known .
 She went to the living room, and there, on her desk, lay the handwritten note Lee had been typing from the day before . Lee's handwritten note was found on the desk of her husband .
 She had no idea to whom these words were addressed, but she knew they were not true . She of all people knew they weren't true .
 She was not accustomed to reading other people’s letters without permission . She was accustomed to read others' letters .
 Lee was using her typewriter for his lies, and she felt, in a way, that she had the right . She felt, she said, "I was using my typewriter to write for my husband's lies"
 Dear Sirs: This is to inform you of events since my interview with Comrade Kostine in the Embassy of the Soviet Union, Mexico City, Mexico, Mexico .
 I was unable to remain in Mexico City indefinitely because of my Mexican visa restrictions which were for 15 days only . I was able to stay in the country indefinitely because I had a 15-day visa restriction .
 Marina Nicholeyeva is now living in Dallas, Texas, with her real name Marina . She returned to the U.S. after applying for an extension of her visa .
 The FBI is not now interested in my activities in the progressive organization FPCC, which I was secretary in New Orleans Louisiana since I no longer live in that State . The FBI has visited us here in Texas, the FBI has also visited us in Texas .
 FBI agent James P Hasty warned me that if I attempt to engage in FPCC activities in Texas the FBI will again take an “interest” in me . Hasty also warned me if I tried to engage with FPCC in Texas .
 Agent suggested that my wife could "remain in the United States under FBI protection,” that is, she could defect from the Soviet Union . This agent also “suggested’s that his wife could “remain . in the U.S. under FBI
 Had I been able to reach Havana as planned the Soviet Embassy there would have had time to assist me . But the stuip Cuban Consule was at fault here I am glad he has since been replaced by another .
 She wondered what sort of man she was giving shelter to, and she saw immediately that he was a good deal ‘queerer’ than she had supposed . She saw him as a "queerer" than she'd supposed .
 The letter sounded to her less like that of a spy than of someone who was trying to make an impression on someone else who was a spy . The letter was written by someone who wanted to impress someone else, she says .
 It contained statements she knew to be lies, weird language like ‘the notorious FBI,” references to Mexico, and a false name . It contained, in any event, statements that she knew were lies .
 Ruth hurriedly made a copy of the letter, stuffed it in an envelope, and shoved it deep into a corner of her desk . The shower was running; Ruth hoped that Lee might be in it, and she hoped he might be .
 If anybody from the FBI came that week, she would hand it over right away, for she wanted to be rid of the thing . She said she would give it to the FBI, but she wanted it to be destroyed .
 Ruth was convinced that the FBI must know a lot about Lee, more than Hosty had let on . Ruth believes that Hosty must have known a lot more about Lee than she thought .
 She therefore expected that the FBI would know what to make of her discovery . She expected that she would be able to tell the FBI .
 She put the original of the letter back where she had found it, right in full view on the desk . Meanwhile, she put it back where it lay all day Sunday as it had lain Saturday .
 Michael was at home and had occasion to step over Lee while he was lying stretched out on the floor . Michael was home at the time when he stepped over Lee .
 He thought he was being rude, stepping over Lee that way without even trying to make small talk . Lee thought it was rude to step over Lee without even making small talk.
 He had given up trying to build a bridge to Lee or understand him because Lee seemed to block it somehow . But he gave up trying . He said he'd given up . Trying to build bridges to Lee .
 Michael thought it was a shame that they should be there, two men in the same house, and be unable to talk to one another . Michael said they should not be there .
 He did not resent Lee lying on his floor, watching his television, and crowding his house a bit . Lee was not resenting Lee's presence at his home, he said .
 Lee felt that for a man who professed to be a revolutionary, Lee had an awful lot of time on his hands . But he did feel that for the man he was trying to be revolutionary, he had a lot to do . Lee said he felt that Lee's time was wasted
 To be a revolutionary, Michael thought, is a perfectly good and valid thing . To be revolutionary, he said. Michael thought . Michael said, 'To be revolutionary is a completely good thing'
 If Lee wanted to be a revolutionary, he ought to go out and be one, he should go out, he says . Lee: "I'm not a revolutionary. But if Lee wants to be, he's a revolutionary."
 In the evening she decided to rearrange the living room furniture, and she asked Lee and Michael to help . She asked them to help her rearrange furniture .
 She saw Lee’s letter still in full view on her desk . Preceding them into the room, she saw it still on the desk . Lee's letter was still in view .
 She popped it inside the folding front and the three of them moved the furniture around . The three of the furniture was moved around the room .
 When they were through, she put the letter gingerly back where it had been before . She put it back in the place where it was before .
 At the end of the evening, Ruth was still upset by the letter and knew that it would be a while before she could sleep .
 She sat on the sofa next to Lee, who was watching a spy mystery, hoping to ask him about the letter . She sat next to him as he was watching the spy mystery .
 She did not want him to think that she was watching him, and she was fearful . She was fearful. But she didn't think he was watching her. She didn't want him thinking she was .
 The letter made her think that something was wrong with Lee mentally . Mostly, she thought that something had to be wrong with him mentally .
 She watched the mystery a moment longer, then left him and went to bed . She watched him go to bed, then went back to the bedroom .
 Lee did not have to go to work on Monday . It was the Veterans Day weekend, and Lee didn't have to work that day .
 Ruth Oswald was gone the first part of the day and parked her children with a neighbor, leaving the Oswalds to themselves . Ruth was gone for the day, leaving her children to a neighbor . The Oswalds are still in the home .
 She was sorry he was fussing with the embassy again, but somehow she felt that she was never going to have to go back to Russia . She felt that somehow she had never had to go to Russia again .
 He typed the letter twice before he got it right and had to do the envelope at least four times . He typed it twice before getting it right .
 Sometimes he put the return address where the embassy’s address ought to be and other times he simply left letters out of the address .
 Lee’s letter is similar but not identical to the draft version Ruth had seen . Ruth had also seen a draft version of the letter she had seen from Lee's office .
 In one significant change in the next to last paragraph, he betrayed his newly made promise to Marina that they would never return to Russia . In the final version of this article, he said that he and Marina would not return to the country .
 After Christmas the two of them expected that they would have saved enough money to find an apartment of their own . After Christmas they were hoping to save enough to buy an apartment .
 Marina told him that after all Ruth had done for them, she could and would not turn her back on Ruth and keep their address a secret . But Marina said she would not keep the address secret . She said she could not give the address to Ruth and would keep it secret .
 Marina repeated that it would be a ‘swinish’ trick not to give Ruth their address . Marina repeated she would not give Ruth's address .
 The next morning, Tuesday, November 12, he kissed Marina goodbye while she was still in bed . The next day, he said goodbye to Marina . He kissed her goodbye as she slept in the morning .
 He either left his letter to the Soviet embassy for Ruth to mail along with her letters, or he dropped it into a mailbox opposite the house of Wesley Frazier, with whom he was riding .
 He walked up to the receptionist, Nanny Lee Fenner, looking “awfully fidgety,” with what she later said was “a wild look in his eye” and an unsealed envelope in his hand . She later said he looked “
 He asked if Agent Hosty was in, she said she was out to lunch . Hosty told him Hosty is out for lunch. Hosty said he asked if she was in .
 Hosty had been interviewing the wife of the author without permission, and the author did not like it . Hosty was interviewed without permission by the author of one of the stories .
 He surmised that it might be Oswald or one other person who had been giving him trouble . Oswald or other person might have given him trouble, he said .
 The complaint seemed "innocuous," the kind he got a good many of, and it did not appear to require action . Either way the complaint seemed “innoculous,” the kind of he got many of .
 Oswald’s letter to the Soviet Embassy and his warning note to the FBI are the work of a man who had come a long way in only a few days down the road of his own delusions . Oswald's letter to Soviet Embassy, warning letter to FBI are work of man who
 Oswald had suffered an accumulation of disappointments in the year and a half since his return from Russia . Oswald had lately suffered a serious blow at the hands of Castro’s chief consul in Mexico City .
 FBI Agent James P. Hosty visited the Paine household on November 1 and 5 . Hosty was the first FBI agent to visit the home of the couple . The Paine family had been together for more than a year .
 The FBI is an organization with an exceptional capacity to magnetize, then crystallize, the fears and longings of many people . FBI is indeed, indeed, an organization that magnetizes, crystallizes, many people's fears, longings, many .
 Oswald's feelings toward the FBI did contain an element of longing, did have their favorable side . Oswald’s feelings towards the FBI were not always positive, but they had a favorable side, he said . Oswald's desire to be with the FBI was not always the answer to his
 In a New Orleans jail only a few months earlier, he had asked to see an agent of the FBI, and his request had been granted . He had asked for an FBI agent to visit him in jail .
 The FBI’s attention elated him then, for it was proof of his importance, he said . The FBI was elated by the attention he received from the FBI, which he said was proof his importance .
 Oswald summoned the FBI into his life that summer, two months after he had for the first and only time paid a visit to the grave of his father . For Oswald as for others, the FBI was a symbolic father whose approval and protection he craved . Oswald's summoning of the FBI
 The FBI is coming after him again, and this time, unlike the last, it was the FBI that came after him . This time it was not the first time the FBI had come after him.
 Oswald apparently meant that he was about to suffer retribution for all his sins, both those he had actually committed and those that existed only in his imagination . Oswald believed he was going to be punished for his sins . Oswald was killed by the explosion of a bomb at the White House . Oswald
 It was not simply a loving father who had found him out, but an avenging one . It was the father of a boy who had been found out, and avenged one .
 It was this he had been dreading; it was for this he'd been waiting, all his life . He had been waiting for this moment, all of his life, since he was born . It was the last thing he'd ever seen was this .
 Marina described Hosty’s visits in a teasing, slightly provocative manner, or maybe Oswald merely took her description that way . Oswald felt that his sexual hold over her was in jeopardy, but the visits evidently caused him to feel that .
 Hosty visits held for Oswald could scarcely have lain deeper than it did . The threat that the Hosty visited Oswald could hardly have been greater than it was . Thus the threat that Hosty Visits held Oswald for Oswald was greater .
 It was a threat that was both heterosexual and homosexual in nature, for it entailed the threat of being found out and punished for his ‘sins,” on the one hand, and, on the other, the threat and promise of unification, of being joined with and
 The visits to Ruth and Marina by an obscure agent of the FBI appear to have been linked in Lee’s mind with the forthcoming visit by President Kennedy, which was now only ten days away .
 Hosty was an emissary of the government, his arrival was like a herald, or a precursor, of President Kennedy's . Hosty's arrival was a precursor to President Kennedy’s. Hosty arrived in 1963 .
 Hosty’s status with the FBI made him a sort of stand-in for a father, his visits were a paradigm, an emotional equivalent, of the president . Hosty was a stand in for the president, and his visits to the White House were a kind of stand
 The President’s Visit Ruth Paine had a lot on her mind . Ironically, the visits to Irving by an agent of the U.S. government appear to have been a catalyst .
 Marina was busy ferrying Marina and her children to dental and medical clinics where they had appointments . She was teaching part time and, besides attending to her own children’s needs, she was busy with her children .
 Lee’s presence throughout the long Veterans Day weekend had been a strain on her . Lee: “I’m not sure how long I’ve been here,” she said. “It was a very difficult task to do,’ she said
 Lee’s letter to the Soviet embassy had been discovered by her daughter . She had been perplexed about what to do with the letter .
 The next time he came to the house, probably on Tuesday, November 12, she handed him Lee’s letter . Lee's next visit will be Tuesday November 12 . The letter will be delivered to Lee's home .
 Michael was sitting by the picture window in the living room, gazing outside and reading Time . Michael was reading Time. Time .
 Michael imagined he was boasting of his fictional exploits to some friend . Michael imagined that he was bragging about his exploits to a friend .
 Had he responded, she might have taken the initiative and gone to the FBI herself . "Had he responded?" she asks .
 If Hosty had come by again that week, she would probably have given him a letter . As it was, she did nothing, although Hosty did nothing .
 He was not just an angry misfit; they both suspected there was more to it than that . They both suspected he was more of a misfit than just angry misfits .
 Suppose they had been on better terms with each other and had pooled everything that between them they now knew or guessed about Lee . Suppose they pooled everything together they now know of Lee .
 It was decided that he was not a security risk, and in August 1962, his case was closed . The case was decided not to be reopened .
 The FBI continued to gather such information about him as came its way, but there were no further investigations . No further investigations were made into him .
 As a Soviet citizen, Marina remained of interest to the FBI . As a “pending, inactive case,” she was assigned to Agent Hosty of the Dallas office .
 Hosty learned of her troubled marriage after checking on her whereabouts in March 1963 . Hosty's search for Hosty led to the discovery of her husband .
 FBI kept a check on Oswald, but it was consistently six weeks to three months behind his movements . From that time on, the FBI kept an eye on Oswald . Oswald's movements were consistent six weeks and three months later .
 Oswald was traced to New Orleans, but jurisdiction over his case was transferred to the New Orleans office only in September . Oswald was getting ready to leave for Mexico when he was found guilty .
 Oswald had not yet been transferred from New Orleans back to the Dallas office . Hosty visited Ruth and Marina in the first week of November, but he still did not know where Oswald lived . Oswald's case had not been transferred back to Dallas .
 Hosty was assigned to watch right-wing activists and members of the Ku Klux Klan . Hosty meant to follow up on Oswald when he learned Oswald’s home address .
 Oswald was one of forty or so cases that he was carrying in November, he says . Oswald was a small fish, but as far as he was concerned, he was a "small fish"
 Oswald was a malcontent who defected to the Soviet Union and returned with a Russian wife . There was always the chance that Oswald had been recruited as a spy and posed a threat to the political security of the United States .
 Hosty had accumulated enough evidence to warrant watching him for security reasons, yet there was nothing to suggest that he might pose a threat to the life of the president . Hosty was not found to be a major threat to President Obama's life, according to Hosty's report .
 It never crossed Hosty’s mind to cite Oswald to the Secret Service, the agency charged with protecting the safety of the president . Hosty says he never thought he would cite Oswald as a threat to the president's safety .
 Even if Ruth and Michael had given the FBI Oswald’s letter to the Soviet embassy, the most they might have accomplished was to step up its surveillance of Oswald as a possible security threat .
 Hosty had, in fact, received a note that he suspected was from Oswald, but it did not alarm him or attract his particular attention . Hosty received the note from Oswald but it didn't alarm him, he said .
 Oswald was not known ever to have uttered a threat against the president or vice president . Oswald was known not to have ever threatened to kill anyone in the U.S.
 Oswald’s attempt on General Walker was locked up inside two people, Oswald himself and Marina . Oswald and Marina were the only two people to know the secret of Oswald's attempt to kill Walker .
 During the week following Hosty’s visit to the Paine household, the Secret Service and the FBI were busy with President Kennedy's forthcoming visit . Hosty's visit was the first time Hosty had been to visit the home of President Kennedy .
 The president's visit had been announced on September 13, nearly two months before . Final confirmation that the president was to be in Dallas on November 22 was published only on November 8 . The president will travel to Dallas on Nov 22 .
 The Protective Research Section of the Secret Service investigated possible threats to the president's safety . The threats were, of course, believed to come from the right .
 Final details of the president’s visit were made known only on November 19 . President Barack Obama is scheduled to visit the Philippines on November 20 .
 Hosty was not aware until the night of November 21 that the president was to have a motorcade through Dallas the next day . Hosty did not know until that night that the motorcade was scheduled for the day before .
 It made her realize how hard her life was with Lee, she said . She never had any good times with him, really, really . She said it was hard to get back in touch with him .
 Marina enjoyed little things, like sitting and having coffee with the neighbors, visiting, doing favors, treating other people with decency, she said . Marina enjoyed doing little things with decency .
 She had discovered that there was such a thing as suburban, middle-class American life, and she liked it . She had found out there was a thing about suburban life, she said .
 Lee, with his angry and mistrustful nature, took her to live with him in Dallas . She knew she would have to give it up when Lee took her out of the house .
 They confided the details of their marriages to one another and gave each other much-needed moral support . They had a good time together .
 The pair were not so close that it was a strain for either of them to be with the other all the time . And yet they were not too close to each other all of the time.
 Marina found Ruth had a way of respecting distances and leaving the other person alone . Marina found that Ruth respected distances and left the other one alone .
 She missed him during the week when they were apart, but minutes after he appeared on the weekends there was friction again, she said . The couple's relationship has been strained for months .
 She hoped to prolong her stay at Ruth’s until after the holidays, and build up her bargaining power with Lee .
 Maybe if she stayed away long enough, he would make concessions and not force her to give up her other friends, she would stay away from him . Maybe she could stay away for long enough .
 Marina could not bear to let that happen, to lose touch with what was decent and sane in her life . Marina was determined to keep her sanity intact . She was determined not to let it happen again .
 Marina simply would not do to Ruth what Lee had forced her to do her emigre friends the year before —cut her off . She would not allow Ruth to be cut off . Marina would not be forced to do the same thing she had done to Ruth .
 Marina was not going to turn her back on Ruth Paine . After all that she had done for her, Marina decided to stay with her friend .
 Marina expressed the worry that was nibbling at her in a way that was disconcerting to Ruth . Ruth was worried that Marina was worried about her daughter's fate .
 When she moved to Dallas, Marina meant to give Ruth her address, but she had to give her new address .
 Marina was surprised by the remark . Not knowing Marina’s train of thought, she said, ‘Marina’ was surprised .
 Lee called on Friday, November 15, at lunchtime, to ask if he could come out that day . Lee called the police station on November 15 to say he wanted to come out .
 Marina said it was the birthday of Lynn, the Paines’ little girl, and they were going to have a party the next day . Marina added that it was going to be Lynn’s birthday .
 Marina does not know whether Lee acceded as readily as he did because he no longer liked Michael Paines . Marina doesn't know whether he respected the Paines’ privacy and thought they ought to have a chance to be alone .
 Marina says Lee did not get angry or withdrawn, as he did when his feelings were hurt . Marina says that Lee didn't get angry when he was hurt, but he did get angry .
 Lee liked to be alone, Marina recalls . Marina recalls that on an earlier weekend either he had stayed in Dallas until Saturday, giving as a reason, or pretext, that he was looking for a job in photography .
 This weekend, he gave none of his familiar signs of feeling rebuffed . This weekend he gave no signs of showing signs of being rebuffed.
 She apologized for being unable to take him to get his learner’s permit the next day . She said she was sorry for not taking him to the school next day.
 She told him he could go back to the Driver’s Station in Oak Cliff and take his test without a car . But she told him that he can go back and take it without the car .
 She urged him not to stay alone in his room the whole weekend but to get out and take a walk in the park . She also urged him to stay away from his room in his hotel .
 He claimed that he had been to the Driver’s Station, but there was a long line ahead of him and he was informed that his turn would not come before closing time . He claimed to have visited the Driver's Station but was told there was not enough time .
 He told Marina that he had taken her advice instead and sat in the park . He told her he had gone to the park to sit with her instead .
 Lee called that night again, this time, to ask if the children were enjoying the party . Lee called the children again, asking if they were enjoying it . Lee: "It's not a party. It's a party."
 She wanted to ask what he was going to do the next day, but she refrained . She refrained from asking him what he planned to do .
 Lee’s landlady said he never left his room for more than a few minutes all weekend except to carry his laundry to the Washeteria across the street . Landlady: Lee never left the room to leave his room to carry laundry . Lee's landlord said he
 Lee’s reading that weekend is a matter of enduring curiosity, but he almost certainly read a good deal about the visit . President Kennedy's visit to the U.S. was to take place the following Friday . Lee's reading may have been a good read about President Kennedy�
 The atmosphere in Dallas was so hostile to the president that there had been some question as to whether he ought to come . Although the visit had been announced two months before, there was some question about whether he should come .
 Adlai Stevenson had been struck and spat upon by a right-wing crowd armed with placards that had been stored in the home of General Walker in Dallas, Texas .
 The police had lost control of the crowd, and there was widespread doubt as to whether they could cope with a visit by President Kennedy . The police were overwhelmed by the crowds .
 In the wake of the Stevenson affair, the mayor called upon the city to redeem itself . In the aftermath of the incident, the city's mayor called on the mayor to redeem himself .
 Police Chief Jesse Curry claimed that local police would be in charge of arrangements to protect the president . The police were stung by all the criticism, and statements by Chief Curry began to appear .
 Lee had contempt for Dallas police ever since they missed him by a long mile following his attempt on General Walker . Lee may well have laughed that scoffing laugh of his; for he, too, had nothing but contempt for the Dallas police . Lee had nothing to say about the thoroughness
 The Dallas Trade Mart might be chosen as the site where the president would have lunch the following Friday, November 15 . Lee was leaving work at the time of the announcement that the president might have lunch .
 The Times-Herald reported that the presidential party was likely to “loop through the downtown area, probably on Main Street,” on its way to the Trade Mart . On the next day, Saturday, the paper said that the party would likely loop through downtown downtown .
 If Lee saw the story, it would have been his first hint that the motorcade might come close to the building in which he worked . Lee saw it would be the first hint he might have seen the story . Lee: "It's not a surprise that this is happening"
 Lee was on the front pages with the Kennedy visit that weekend . The Kennedy visit was another story in which Lee was interested .
 President Kennedy made the Barghoorn case the centerpiece of what was to be his last press conference . Two days later, on Thursday, he made the case centerpiece of his last public appearance .
 The president asserted vigorously that Professor Barghoorn was not a spy . He broke off cultural exchange negotiations with the Soviet Union that were in progress until he was released . President broke off the cultural exchange .
 On Saturday, November 16, Dallas dailies featured on its front page an AP story reporting Barghoorn’s release, together with the White House announcement that the presidential motorcade would loop through downtown Dallas .
 Lee told Marina about Barghoorn’s arrest, apparently over the telephone, shortly after the story broke on November 12 . Lee said he had read about it in the newspapers and heard about it on the radio as well as the radio .
 First Powers and now Barghoorn were accused of being spies, both were imprisoned in Soviet jails . Both attracted worldwide publicity, and both touched the politics of the presidency .
 Lee felt that he, too, had been trapped inside Russia, but he was different from Powers and Barghoorn in that no publicity surrounded his name, and no one had come to his rescue . Lee felt he was trapped in Russia but no publicity surrounding his name .
 On Sunday, November 17, Lee failed, uncharacteristically, to call Marina Marina . Lee failed to call her on the day of her death .
 Marina was helpless with a telephone dial, so it was Ruth who made the call . Marina was unable to make a call, so Ruth made the phone call .
 She dialed the number Lee had given her weeks before while they were awaiting Rachel’s birth, and a man answered . Lee had been given her the number weeks before .
 She was tired of Lee’s attempts to cover up the fact that he had lived in Russia, she said . She said: ‘I'm tired of it, she’m tired of him trying to cover it up,’ she said. ‘She was
 It wasn't the first time she had felt caught between ‘two fires,” loyalty to Lee and a conviction that what he was doing was wrong . It wasn’t the first .
 Marina did not want to talk to him, but Ruth said she could not tell Lee that his own wife refused to speak to him . Ruth and Lee were married for more than 20 years .
 Lee started right off by addressing her as devushka or “wench,” a word that in Russian has such an insulting ring that a man might use it to a servant, perhaps, but not to his wife . Lee started off by using the word "devush
 When spoken by a husband to a wife, it suggests that everything is over between them . It is often said to be the end of a marriage relationship .
 Lee started to scold Marina in as ferocious a voice as she had ever heard . Marina was scolded by Lee in the most ferocious voice she'd ever heard. Lee was furious with Marina .
 Until their argument on the telephone, Lee and Marina had been on good terms . The significance of this quarrel seems to have lain in its timing, after Hosty and before Kennedy Kennedy .
 Lee had been living under an alias since October 14 because of his fear of the FBI . Lee was living under the alias because he feared the FBI would find him . Lee has been living in the alias since Oct. 14 .
 With Ruth in on the secret as well, it would be no time before the FBI tracked him to his lair . The FBI would be able to track him to the lair .
 Any falling out with Marina was bound to have an amplified, and destructive, effect on Lee . Most significant of all is the Hosty visits and their shattering impact on his emotions . Lee's relationship with Marina is bound to be amplified and destructive .
 She, too, was furious—furious at her discovery that Lee had an alias and was again living a lie . She was furious at the discovery that she had been lied to .
 Marina had been continually anxious since their arrival in the United States . After the string of surprises Lee had been springing on her ever since their arrived in the U.S. Marina was continually anxious .
 Despite her hopes of a more peaceful life, she had not, since Walker, had not had an easy moment . She had hoped for a peaceful life .
 It did not now cross her mind that he might be up to his old tricks, to anything like a new Walker attempt—that was too frightening even to think about—but it obviously meant no good .
 The route of the presidential motorcade was published in Dallas for the first time . Both Dallas papers, the Morning News and the Times-Herald, published the route .
 Lee learned of the route either on Tuesday, November 19, the day it was published, or Wednesday, November 20, when he might have entered the domino room first thing in the morning and read the announcement in the previous day’s paper . Lee may have learned of route
 Whenever he learned of it, it was the most important day of Lee’s life, he said . Lee's death was the 'most important day' of his life, Lee said .
 He now knew, if he had not pieced it together from the weekend’s reports, that history, fate, blind accident—call it what you will—had placed him above the very route that John F Kennedy would take .
 Seven months earlier, before his attempt to kill a leader of the American right, he had composed a document predicting a ‘crisis’ that would destroy capitalist society forever . The document predicted a “crisis of capitalism’s capitalism forever .
 Without his having been able to foresee it, the opportunity had now been vouchsafsafed to him, of all men, to deal capitalism that final, mortal blow . The opportunity was now being offered to him .
 He would strike it not at the right or left, but, quite simply, at the top . And he would strike at the left or the right, he would say . And that's how he struck it .
 The announcement of the president’s route was the last in a chain of 12 or 15 events without any one of which Lee might have approached his decision in a very different frame of mind . Lee's decision to take the president's route is the last of many events, including the
 The first of these events, curiously, appears to have been the attempt on Nikita Khrushchev’s life in Minsk while Lee was living there in January 1962 . Lee was also living in the Minsk in 1962 .
 Lee’s failure to receive any sort of punishment on his redefection to the U.S. later that year was one of several reasons . Lee was not punished for his role in the death of Lee, who was killed in 1998 . Lee's death was the first time he
 Marina’s letter of January 1963 to Anatoly Shpanko bore a resemblance to President Kennedy . Still another was a letter to her former suitor, Anatoly, who in her eyes and possibly in Lee's as well, resembled Kennedy .
 There had been the failure of Lee’s attempt on General Walker and the heightened sense of immunity that he carried away from that episode . Lee had been carrying on the immunity he had been given after his failed attempt on Walker .
 When Lee had moved to New Orleans, there was the murder, in June 1963, of Medgar Evers, in a town nearby, and only a few hours after a speech by Kennedy . Lee's death was the first of two black men to be murdered in New Orleans .
 William Manchester’s book, comparing Kennedy to a president who had been assassinated; and the death of the Kennedy baby at a time when the Oswalds, too, expected a baby . Then there was the passage in William Manchester's book comparing Kennedy .
 Lee realized that prison could be an excellent forum from which to proclaim his political ideas . Lee’s brief incarceration in New Orleans, during which he had two enjoyable conversations with Police Lieutenant Francis Martello . Lee: Prison could be a great forum to proclaim ideas from prison .
 Lee’s visit to Mexico and his failure to obtain a Cuban visa, which, curiously, may have turned Castro into a negative constituent . And there was the fiasco of Lee's visit to . Mexico and failed to . obtain a . Cuban visa . The fiasco of . Lee�
 Lee may have wanted to show Castro what a good fighter he had missed out on . Far from wanting to fight for Castro, Lee may now want to show him, as he almost always did after he was dealt a rebuff, what he has missed out .
 Agent Hosty visited Marina Marina during the month of November 1963 . The visits were the most shattering of Marina's life . Marina was the victim of the visits by Hosty .
 Lee’s wildly disproportionate anger at Marina was a symptom that, while he was able to cope, just barely, with the demands of his life on the outside, he was on the point of coming apart within . Lee was unable to cope with Marina's anger, but was able
 Lee was "like a rifle that has been loaded and cocked and ready to go off," Lee's widow says . Lee was like a gun that has a loaded and fired, she says. Lee himself was like he was ready to kill himself .
 He had been placed in a situation in which he had an opportunity to alter the course of history . Now, suddenly, unforeseeably, he had a chance to alter history . He said: "Now, suddenly ... he had been put in a position where he could alter the
 On Wednesday, November 20, at about one o’clock, a small but seminal incident took place at the book depository .
 Warren Caster, a textbook company representative who had an office in the building, went to Roy Truly’s office to show off a pair of purchases he had made .
 Caster proudly drew from their cartons two rifles, one a Remington .22 and the other a sporterized .30-06 Mauser, which he had bought to go deer hunting . Caster says he bought the rifles for his son .
 Truly picked up the Mauser and, without cocking it, lifted it to his shoulder and sighted it . Truly picked it up and put it to the shoulder .
 If anyone should accuse him later of keeping a rifle there, he had a pretext . "He had to have a pretext," he said. "I'm not going to be surprised," he added .
 Each time he had been nervous and irritable for weeks in advance, each time he suffered convulsive anxiety attacks at night, and each time had lost weight .
 Lee was seven pounds above his lowest New Orleans weight, a certain indication that he had not been worrying or preparing anything momentous . Lee was even seven pounds higher than his lowest weight, an indication of not being worrying .
 He did not telephone Marina, make up with her, and go out to Irving to fetch his rifle at a moment when bringing it into town would be far less conspicuous than it would be later in the week . He didn't go to Marina's home to fetch the rifle .
 It appears certain that Lee’s decision was an impulsive one, not only because the route had been announced at the last minute but because the deed was so momentous . Lee's feelings about it apparently so ambiguous that if he had had time to prepare he might very possibly have
 When he dressed that day and left that day, he did not take his pistol with him, as he is likely to have done had he made his mind up and realized that he would need his revolver for self-defense .
 He broke his routine that morning that morning in a way that suggests he was coming to a decision . On the other hand, he did not break his routine, suggesting he was about to decide .
 Instead of making breakfast in the rooming house, as he generally did, he went across the street to the Dobbs House restaurant and treated himself to a special breakfast . The author of the book, "Dobbs House," is a former rooming host .
 He complained that his eggs were cooked “too hard,” but he ate them anyway . He complained about the eggs, but ate them .
 At last, after his arrival at the book depository, Lee took a decisive step . Lee: "I'm going to take a big step, and I'm not afraid to do so"
 He sought out Wesley Frazier, who lived near the Paines with his sister Linnie Mae Randle, and asked for a ride to Irving that afternoon . Frazier lived in Irving, Texas, with Randle's sister . Frazier was one of the painters' last two men .
 Marina was in her bedroom with Rachel late in the afternoon when Lee arrived unexpectedly . Lee was in the room with Marina and Rachel at the time of the incident .
 He had not called her ahead of time, and ostensibly they were still angry at one another because of their fight over Lee’s alias . The pair had not been able to get back in touch .
 Marina tried to leave the bedroom, but he blocked the door and would not let her go until she allowed him to kiss her . He blocked her out of the bedroom and wouldn't kiss her until she let him kiss her again .
 Marina left the bedroom and went outside to bring the children’s clothes in off the line . Marina then went to the bathroom to wash clothes off the children's clothes .
 Lee went to the garage for a few minutes, then the two of them came inside and sat on the sofa folding diapers . Lee and his wife were folding diapers in the living room when they got home .
 Lee, Marina and Lee went out to buy groceries . The car was filled with groceries, and Lee, followed Marina, went to help .
 Marina lingered outside and apologized to Ruth for his unexpected arrival . He picked up a load of groceries and went in the house, while Ruth went to the kitchen .
 He used the expression so often that Ruth paid no attention to his extraordinary casualness . He used it so often he used it as a reference to baseball games . Ruth paid attention to the use of the expression .
 Marina thought it was odd that Lee, who was so very interested in politics, was unable to tell her anything about the president’s visit .
 Lee went out on the front lawn and played with the children until dark . The Paine children, the neighbors’ children, and June. June. Lee . Lee .
 He hoisted June to his shoulders, and the two of them reached out to catch a butterfly in the air . June was June's first child in the U.S.
 Lee spoke with all the children in English, then turned to Marina and said in Russian . Lee spoke to all the kids in English .
 Lee asked Marina for the third and last time to move in to Dallas with him, she says . Marina says Lee asked her to move out of the Dallas home for the last time with him .
 His voice was now very kind, quite different from what it had been in the bedroom . His voice now sounded very different from that of his in the bed .
 Once again he said that he was tired of living alone and seeing his babies only once a week . He said he is tired of seeing his children once or twice a week and living alone .
 If he had come again the next day and asked, of course I would have agreed. If he'd come again, he'd have agreed, he said .
 Lee enjoyed being in a position where he had to win her over, persuade her, prove again that he loved her and that she was not utterly at his mercy . But she enjoyed being . Lee for once had to convince her that he . loved her again .
 He had given her a horrible scare with his alias, and she wanted to teach him a lesson . She wanted to take him to justice .
 Lee told Ruth, as he had Marina, that he had been to FBI headquarters, tried to see the agents, and left a note telling them in no uncertain terms what he thought about their visits . He told Ruth and Marina that he'd been to the FBI headquarters and tried to visit
 She thought that he was “a brave rabbit,” and this was just another instance of his bravado, she said .
 Ruth bathed her children, then read to them in their bedroom for an hour . She read to her children in the bedroom for the hour .
 He cradled Rachel in front of the television set and got her to sleep, while Marina put away the toys . Marina put the toys away and got Rachel to sleep .
 Lee went on watching television, a movie about World War II, and Marina went in to do the dishes . Marina went into the kitchen and Lee watched a new movie about the war .
 Despite the banality of the evening, there was an undercurrent of tragedy, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The film is based on the book, which is based in New York City .
 Marina was no longer angry at Lee over his use of an alias, although she still could not understand why he bothered to bother with such childish games . In the kitchen, Marina was engaged in her tasks .
 He now has no need for ‘curtain rods,” but earlier in the evening he had spent time in the garage . He now had no need to “curtain rod’s”
 Marina was still at the sink when Lee turned off the television set, poked his head in the kitchen, and asked if he could help . Marina was standing at the kitchen sink at the time, but Lee was still there .
 Ruth was aware of Lee padding back and forth between his bedroom and the bathroom getting ready for bed . Ruth was also aware that Lee was getting ready to get ready to bed .
 It was about ten o’clock, an hour earlier than was usual for him before a workday . He was going to bed at 10:30 a.m. before he left for work .
 Ruth went to the garage and painted blocks for her children for half an hour or so . Ruth painted blocks in the garage for half a hour .
 Someone had been there before her, left the light on, and moved a few things around . Someone else had also been there, and the light was on .
 She supposed that Lee had gone there to fetch some clothing, for the weather was turning cool and the Oswalds had their warm clothes in the garage . The Oswalds' warm clothes were in the car garage, she said .
 When she returned to the living room, she and Marina sat on the sofa, folded more laundry, talked of nothing in particular, and said good night .
 She sat in the tub for an hour, “warming her bones” and thinking about nothing in particular, not even Lee’s request that she move in to Dallas . Lee: "I'm not going to move in, but I'm going to live in Dallas"
 Lee was lying on his stomach with his eyes closed when she crept into bed . Lee had been sleeping in the bed when he was asleep .
 Marina still had pregnancy privileges; that is, she was allowed to sleep with her feet on whatever part of his anatomy they came to rest . She still had pregnant privileges .
 Lee was not asleep, and suddenly, with a sort of wordless vehemence, he lifted her leg, shoved her foot hard, then pulled his leg away . Lee pulled the leg away from her .
 She realized that he was sleepless, tense, and she believed he was so angry at her for refusing to move to Dallas right away that it was no use trying to talk to him .
 Lee usually woke up before the alarm rang and shut it off so as not to disturb the children . Lee usually wakes up before his alarm rings and shuts it off .
 On the morning of Friday, November 22, the alarm rang, and he did not wake up . He was found dead at the scene of an apparent suicide .
 He did not kiss Marina, as he always did before he left in the morning . But he kissed her before leaving, and she always did kiss Marina .
 He got as far as the bedroom door, then came back and said, “I’ve left some money on the bureau.” He got out of the room and left money in the bureau .
 Marina realized that there had been several small, out-of-the-way occurrences during Lee’s brief visit . Marina later realized that she had noticed a few things in the days and weeks that followed .
 He had played much longer than he usually did with Junie out of doors the day before . He had been playing out with his son out of the house .
 It seemed to Marina, looking back, that there had been a farewell quality to his playing, something valedictory almost, in the way he reached out for the falling oak wings . Marina: 'It seemed to . seem to be a farewell'
 His being unable to tell her anything about President Kennedy’s visit had been out of character, to say the least . He said: “And his being able to tell [his wife] anything about it had been unusual .
 He had been angry and tense in bed that night, and it was nearly morning before he fell asleep . He was angry, tense and tense, but eventually fell asleep.
 Marina supposed he was just angry at her for refusing to give in to him . He was angry that she had refused to give up on him . Marina supposed that he was angry because she refused to comply with him .
 There was the odd circumstance of his telling her not to get up to fix his breakfast . There was also the odd circumstances of telling her to get out of bed .
 He told her with unaccustomed gentleness to buy everything she and the children needed . Then there was his telling her to buy her and her children needed. Then there were his gentle gentleness telling her everything she needed .
 When she got up that morning, she found the extraordinary sum of $170. When she looked into the bureau, she saw the money .
 Twice after his arrival in the afternoon, he had tried to kiss her and she had turned him away . Marina also remembered that twice after he arrived in the evening he tried to .
 It was only on the third try, when he had his arm around her, that she relented and allowed him an obligatory kiss . She relented only after he had been around her for three tries .
 He had tried to be tender with her, and she had been obdurate with him . He tried to try and be tender, but she had refused to listen to him .
 Linnie Mae Randle was standing by her kitchen sink when she saw Lee coming from the Paines’ house carrying a long brown package . That, for Marina, was the key . Lee was Lee’s killer, Marina Randle says .
 He walked up to her brother’s car, opened the right rear door, and put the package on the back seat . The package was placed in the back of her brother's car .
 Randle went back to the sink, looked up a moment later, and there, staring in at her through the window, was Lee . Lee. Randle. Lee. Lee . Randle .
 Lee Frazier was waiting for his ride when he was found by his brother, Wesley Frazier . She called to her brother to tell him that Lee was waiting to his ride .
 Frazier noticed a long brown package extending halfway across the back seat of his car . Frazier noticed the package in the rear of the car .
 He asked Lee what it was, and Lee mumbled something about curtain rods . Lee said it was curtain rods, but he didn't know what it meant .
 Lee got out of the car first, picked up the package, and walked to the building ahead of Frazier . Frazier usually walked from the lot together, but this morning Lee walked ahead .
 Charles Douglas Givens, who waited each morning for Lee to finish reading in the domino room, noticed that Lee did not go to the room that day . He waited for Lee's finish before going in to read the papers himself . Charles Douglas
 Lee went about his job of filling orders, and sometime between 9:30 and 10:00, he and another order filler, James Jarman, were on the first floor in a room filled with bins . Lee and Jarman were working in the room at the time .
 Lee was at the window, Jarman joined him, and Lee asked what the people were gathering on the corner for . Lee asked Jarman what he was looking for, and Jarman said, "I'm not sure what I'm looking for"
 Jarman, who had only just found out himself, said that the president was supposed to pass by . Jarman said that he only just discovered that he had been invited by the president .
 President Kennedy’s plane, Air Force One, landed at Love Field at 11:40 that morning . President Kennedy's plane landed at the Love Field that morning on June 25, 1963 .
 Vice President Johnson, whose plane had landed a few moments before, was there with Mrs. Johnson . Vice President Lyndon Johnson's plane landed moments later .
 There was a welcoming ceremony before the Kennedys boarded the presidential limousine for the drive through Dallas . There was also a welcome ceremony .
 The limousine was a specially designed Lincoln convertible equipped with a bubble top . The bubble top was attached to the car . It was the first of its kind to be driven by a Lincoln convertible .
 The weather was clear, and the president had asked to have the bubble removed . The president asked for the bubble to be removed from the White House .
 At the book depository, Charles Douglas Givens, Bonnie Ray Williams, and three other men were laying a new plywood floor on the sixth floor of the building . The men laid plywood on the floor .
 Williams saw Lee on the east side of the sixth floor but paid no attention to what he was doing . Lee was arrested in connection with the shooting, police say .
 There were Scott-Foresman books on that floor, and he could have been filling orders . Scott-foresman could be filling orders, but he could be on the floor .
 At 11:45 or 11:50, the five men who were laying the floor broke for lunch . The five men laid the floor for lunch at the end of the day .
 They headed for the west, or rear, side of the building, got on the freight elevators, and raced each other to the ground floor . They headed to the west .
 Givens realized that he had left his jacket, with his cigarettes in it, on the sixth floor . Once he was on the ground floor, he realized that his jacket had been left on the other floor .
 He was on the sixth floor now, not the fifth, when Givens saw him at the elevator gate . He was walking toward the elevators from the southeast corner, the corner overlooking the route the motorcade was scheduled to take .
 Lee was carrying his clipboard, but he did not have any books in his hand . Lee did not appear to be filling orders at the time of the incident .
 The men who were laying the new floor had moved a lot of heavy cartons from the west to the east side of the sixth floor . The new floor is being laid on the west of the building's west .
 The southeast corner window, in particular, was totally shielded from view because cartons had been stacked around it in a crescent . The southeast window, one of the windows, was completely hidden from view .
 There was a good deal of excitement about the motorcade among the men at the book depository . The motorcade was the first to arrive at the depository in Texas .
 In order to watch, a lot of people took their sandwiches outside and ate in front of the building . A lot of them took sandwiches outside to watch .
 Harold Norman and “Junior” Jarman went outside but then decided that they would get a better view from inside . Norman Norman and Junior Jarman decided to go inside for the better view . Norman and "Junior" Jarman then decided to get inside for a better
 They went to the rear of the building and took an elevator to the fifth floor . They then took a walk to the back of the elevator to take a walk .
 Bonnie Ray Williams had eaten his lunch—chicken, Fritos, and a bottle of Dr. Dr. Water . Meanwhile, Bonnie Ray had eaten chicken, Dr. water, and some of his favorite snacks . Williams: "It's a great day for Bonnie Ray"
 Pepper Pepper is located by the third or fourth set of windows on the south side of the sixth floor of the building . Pepper was killed by a helicopter crash in the early 1960s .
 He could see nothing to the east of him because the cartons were stacked up so high . The cartons stacked up were stacked so high that he could not see east of the city .
 He thought there was nobody there, and he wanted someone to watch the motorcade with. But he thought there were nobody there . He wanted someone there, but there was no one there, he said .
 Norman and Jarman were found in the southeast corner windows of the fifth floor . He went down a flight of stairs and found the men .
 The presidential motorcade had left Love Field just before noon . The procession of cars drove rapidly through the thinly populated outskirts of Dallas .
 The crowds were large and enthusiastic when the motorcade reached downtown area . Crowds were enthusiastic at the end of the parade .
 The president’s limousine traveled along Main Street, turned right on Houston, and headed toward the intersection of Houston and Elm Streets . The president's limo was driven by the president's motorcade .
 Bonnie Ray Williams and Harold Norman saw the president raise his right hand as if to salute or brush back his hair . Just then, from their lookouts at the southeast corner windows of the fifth floor, they saw him raise his hand .
 People started dropping to the ground in fright after hearing a loud bang . Then there was another sound, and out on Dealey Plaza people started to drop to the floor in fright .
 The president’s car lurched forward, and there was a third sound right after the second . The president's car was driven by the president's wife .
 Two of the three men on the fifth floor saw the president slump, or “lean his head,” but they did not see any more . Two men said they saw no more of the president slumped or lean his head .
 The second shot, it sounded like it was right in the building, the second and third shot, he says . But he says, “the second shot ... sounded like the first shot,” the second shot .
 The floor above was bare boards with daylight showing between them . Norman and Jarman saw dust in Williams’s hair . The floor below was nothing but bare boards .
 Harold Norman heard the most because of his location in the southeast corner window of the fifth floor . Harold Norman was heard most because he was in a southeast corner of the window .
 The bare floor only 12 or 14 feet overhead acted as a sounding board . The bolt action of a rifle clicking three times, and the thump, thump of three expended cartridges dropping to the floor .
 None of the three wanted to go upstairs for fear of being shot to death . None of them wanted to leave the room for fear they might be shot to the death .
 The crack of a rifle appeared to have come from the crack of the rifle, onlookers say . They looked out the window and saw everyone, people, policemen, running toward the opposite side .
 "We assumed maybe somebody was down there. But since everybody was running, you know, to the west side of the building, towards the railroad tracks," she says . "We thought maybe somebody might be down there," she adds .
 No one had seen him that morning as he carried his brown paper package to the window, removed the rifle, assembled and loaded it . No one saw him carry the rifle past the window .
 No one saw him toss the empty sack into the corner where it was later found . The empty sack was found in the corner .
 He arranged a book carton and two smaller cartons as a gun rest in front of the window . Nor did anyone see him as he arranged the gun rest .
 He sat on another carton and waited until the president’s car came into view . The president sat on a carton as he sat on the carton .
 At the moment of the final, farthest shot, President Kennedy was about 88 yards away . Kennedy was 88 yards from President Kennedy at the time .
 Through Lee’s four-power telescopic sight, he appeared to be only 22 yards away . Lee's telescopic camera appeared to have been at least 22 yards from the target .
 Lee crammed the rifle, scope up, on the floor between cartons that were stacked up just before the entrance to the stairway . After firing his last shot, Lee moved rapidly from the front to the rear of the sixth floor and crammed the scope .
 Baker had lately been deer hunting, and he was certain that the shot was from a high-powered rifle . Baker had been hunting deer hunting in recent months .
 He looked up and saw pigeons scattering from their perches atop the building . The pigeons were seen scattering from the perches of the building.
 He raced his motorcycle to the building, dismounted, and pushed his way to the entrance . He then pushed his bike out of the building and into the building .
 Roy Truly, who identified himself, and the two men ran for the elevators in back of the room . Truly identified himself as Truly . The two men then went for the elevator in back .
 Truly and Baker reached the second-floor landing, Baker caught a glimpse of someone in the lunchroom . Baker caught the glimpse of a man in a lunchroom in his office .
 Revolver in hand, he rushed to the door and saw a man twenty feet away walking to the far end of the room . The man saw the man walking away from the door . Revolver was in hand .
 Truly was on his way to the third floor, missed the patrolman, and ran back to see what was delaying him . Truly was going to third floor when he missed a patrolman .
 Lee Oswald's revolver was pointed straight at Baker . Baker was confronted by Lee Oswald, who had a revolver pointed at him . Lee Oswald was killed by a single bullet shot at Baker in the head .
 Robert Reid, a clerical supervisor, had watched the motorcade from the front of the building . The motorcade was the first to arrive at the Capitol .
 When she heard the shots, she ran back inside, hoping that none of the employees was going to fall under suspicion . She said she ran inside the building hoping that no one would be hurt in the shooting .
 Lee entered her office from the opposite, or lunchroom side, where there was a Coke machine . Lee was entering her office on the second floor when she was killed . Lee entered the opposite side of the lunchroom, where the machine was located .
 Lee crossed the second floor, walked down the stairs to the ground floor, and left the building by the main entrance . Lee said, "I don't know why I'm leaving the building today"
 Lee thought he was from the Secret Service but may have been Robert MacNeil, a reporter for NBC . A crew-cut young man dashed up to ask where he could find a telephone . Lee said he thought he might have been from NBC .
 Lee pointed to the building and told the man that he thought he could find a pay phone inside . Lee said he was going to find a phone in the building . Lee pointed out the building to the man and said he could use the phone . Lee was arrested and charged with trespassing
 Mary Bledsoe, his reluctant landlady during the week of October 7, as he passed her to take a seat in the middle of the bus .
 He was dirty, he had a hole in his right shirtsleeve, and the buttons had been torn off his shirt . "He was dirty," he said, "and he was dirty"
 Traffic was in a hopeless snarl, and in four minutes the bus had gone only two blocks . In four minutes it had gone two blocks, the bus was in hopelessly slow traffic .
 Lee slipped out of the front, not neglecting, as he went, to pick up a transfer to another bus bound for Oak Cliff . Lee slipped into the front of the bus to get a transfer from the bus . Lee's bus was headed to Oak Cliff, Dallas, but he
 He had so far tried two means of escape that he had used after the Walker attempt, his own feet and the bus . He had tried two ways of escape after Walker's failed attempt .
 Four blocks from the place where he left the bus, he went up to a cab that was standing near the Greyhound Station . He was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 The driver, William Whaley, was about to get out to buy himself a pack of cigarettes . The driver was killed by the crash in which he was driving a car . Whaley was killed in the crash .
 Elderly lady stuck her head in the window past the passenger and asked the driver to call her a cab . Just then an elderly lady stuck in the passenger's window and asked for a taxi .
 Everything around them was in turmoil, sirens wailing, police cars crisscrossing in all directions . Police cars were seen in the chaos as they tried to control the situation .
 He handed the driver $1 for a 95 cent fare, got out of the car and closed the door . He handed him the $1 fare .
 It was about a six-minute walk, or a five-minute trot, to Lee’s rooming house at 1026 North Beckley . Lee was about six minutes from his rooming home in Beckley.
 He picked up his pistol and a jacket and was zipping up his jacket as he went out the front door . He was zipped up the jacket and went into the house .
 President John F Kennedy was pronounced dead of a massive injury to the head . Just a few moments before, at Parkland Memorial Hospital, he had been pronounced dead . President Kennedy died from a massive head injury at the hospital .
 Roy Truly and Patrolman Baker complete search of book depository . Roy Truly had completed search of the book .
 They had looked through every floor except the sixth and had inspected the roof, especially the west side of the building . Mr Truly thought the shots had come from the roof .
 Truly saw policemen in clumps taking down the names of men who worked in the building . When the two men returned to the first floor, they saw policemen taking down names of those who worked there . Truly saw the men's names being taken down .
 Lee Oswald was missing from the scene of the assassination . Lee Oswald had been in the crowd at the White House in Washington, D.C. He was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy in September 1963 .
 Truly had Oswald on his mind because he had seen him just a few minutes before in the lunchroom, and now he was not with the other men . Truly had seen Oswald just minutes before, but he had never seen him again .
 Oswald’s supervisor asked if he had seen him . Quietly, he turned to Bill Shelley, his supervisor, and asked him to see him . Oswald was Oswald's assistant at the time .
 Truly picked up a phone and called the warehouse where the job application forms were kept . The warehouse is where the application forms are kept . Truly says he picked up the phone and went to the warehouse to check out the job applications .
 Truly walked over to the chief of the Dallas Police Department, who was standing a few feet away . Truly walked up to the police chief of Dallas, Texas, and shook his hand .
 Chief of the homicide bureau of the Dallas Police Department appeared to be occupied by the stairway . Fritz, chief of the police department's homicide bureau, was found dead in the shooting .
 Truly told Fritz that he had a boy missing and handed him a slip of paper on which he had written Oswald’s address in Irving, his telephone number, and description . Truly then handed him the slip-of-paper with Oswald's address and his description .
 Three empty brass cartridges had been found by the southeast corner window of the sixth floor . The cartridges were found by a southeast corner of the 6th floor .
 Fritz Fritz left the building almost as soon as he heard about the missing man . Fritz left almost immediately after hearing about the disappearance of the man .
 Over his police car radio he had heard about the shooting of the president and a description of the suspect, which had been broadcast four times . Over his car radio, he heard about his car .
 Tippit spotted a man who bore a resemblance to the description . About 1:15, nine-tenths of a mile from the rooming house at 1026 North Beckley, spotted the man .
 When the police car was nearly grazing the curb, the man stopped . Finally, when the police vehicle was nearly grazed by the curb he stopped . The man was arrested after the incident .
 He leaned into the car, rested his arms on the open window ledge on the far side from Tippit, and the two men exchanged a few words . The two men then sat in the car for a few minutes .
 Tippit opened his door, climbed out slowly, and walked toward the front of the car . Meanwhile, Tipperit climbed out of the vehicle slowly .
 He was at the left front wheel when the other man pulled out a revolver and fired . The other man, who was near the windshield on the right, pulled out of a revolver .
 He hit the patrolman four times, and Tippit instantly fell to the ground, dead . The patrolman hit him four times and he died instantly .
 The gunman ejects the empty cartridge cases from his pistol and reloads as he goes . The gunman started away in a trot, ejecting the empty cartridges cases from the pistol .
 An automobile repairman, Domingo Benavides, was parked in his pickup truck fifteen feet away when he heard three shots . He saw the gunman empty his gun and toss the shells into some bushes as he jogged away .
 Benavides went to the fallen patrolman and, using Tippit’s radio, reported the shooting to police headquarters . The officer was shot in the head, killing him and wounding him .
 Bystanders had also seen the shooting and the fleeing gunman . Police radio noted a similarity between descriptions of the man who shot Tippit and the suspect in the Kennedy shooting .
 Police cars began to arrive in the area of the Tippit slaying while, eight blocks away, Johnny Calvin Brewer was in his shoe store listening to the radio . Brewer was eight blocks from the crime scene .
 News came over the radio that a policeman had been shot in Oak Cliff . The president was shot, and news of the shooting was broadcasted over the air .
 Brewer heard sirens approach and, looking up, saw a man duck into the lobby of his store and stand with his back to the street . Brewer: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was an accident"
 As the wail of the sirens faded, the man looked “scared,” “messed up” and as if “he had been running .” He peered over his shoulder, made sure the police car had gone, then turned into
 He asked Julia Postal, the cashier, whether she had sold a ticket to the man who had just entered the theater . Postal says she sold the ticket to a man who was just entering the theater at the time . Postal: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I
 Brewer and the usher checked the exits to make sure that none had been used . Brewer and an usher scanned the audience to ensure that none of the exits were used . The usher and Brewer then scanned the crowd to ensure the exits had been closed .
 Fifteen police officers converged on the Texas Theatre, alerted that the suspect in the Tippit shooting might be there . Shortly after 1:45, 15 police officers converge on the theater .
 Brewer stepped on the stage and pointed to the man who had ducked in without paying . Brewer was joined by several policemen and the police .
 He was sitting by himself in the orchestra near the back of the orchestra, near the right center aisle .
 He stopped abruptly when he came to the man and told him to get on his feet . The man stopped abruptly and told the man to get up and get up .
 McDonald was grabbed by two or three officers, and in the scuffle he wrenched the revolver away . McDonald wrenched his revolver away from the revolver .
 He was driven to police headquarters and arrived in the basement about 2:00m. He was taken to the basement of police headquarters . He was later driven to the police headquarters in a van .
 There were reporters milling around in case a suspect in the president’s murder should be brought in .
 He was asked if he would like to cover his face as he was taken inside . He was then taken to the hospital where he was treated for his injuries .
 Captain Will Fritz of the homicide bureau returned to police headquarters from the City Hall office where he had been checking on Lee Oswald . Oswald was missing from the book depository .
 One of the officers pointed to the man who had just been arrested at the Texas Theatre . The man was arrested at a Texas Theatre in Texas, Texas .
 Lee’s asking her to move into Dallas with him so insistently, her refusing . Her refusing, his practically kicking her in bed, is her refusal to move in . Lee asks her to live with him .
 Marina watched a rerun of a breakfast Mr Kennedy had attended in Fort Worth . Marina watched the re-run of the breakfast he had attended . Marina said: "I don't think it's a good day for me"
 Ruth went into the kitchen to fix lunch, and Marina went to her room to get dressed . Ruth went to the kitchen and Marina was getting dressed .
 Ruth ran into the bedroom, very pale, and said that someone had shot at the president . Ruth was very pale when she came to the president's bedside and said he was shot at her . The president was shot in the head by a woman in the White House .
 Ruth listened closely, then said the president had been taken to the hospital . Ruth listened to the president's words and said he was taken to a hospital .
 She wondered what Ruth would think of her crying for a man who was not even her president . She wondered if Ruth would have thought she was crying for the president .
 Lee’s unannounced visit the night before, his shrugging and saying he knew nothing about the president's visit . Lee said he didn’t know anything about the visit, but said he was surprised by it .
 Marina hid the fear that had seized her; she did not want to reveal it to Ruth . She hid it to avoid revealing it to her .
 She merely thought they knew someone in the building, close to the event, who would give them a first-hand account . She said they thought someone would be able to tell them about the event .
 Neither Ruth nor Marina realized that the place where Lee worked was on the president’s route .
 When she was certain Ruth could not see her, she crept into the garage, to the place where Lee kept his rifle wrapped in paper inside a blanket . Lee kept the gun wrapped in a green and brown wool blanket of East German make that he had bought in Russia . The blanket was
 Marina had been looking for parts to June’s baby bed three weeks earlier . Marina had rolled back a corner of a blanket and spied the rifle’�s wooden stock .
 It was lying on the floor, below, and parallel to, a window in the garage . It is lying below the floor below, below the window in a garage .
 Marina did not touch the blanket, but it looked exactly as it had before . Marina said she did not want to touch it again, but she was happy .
 Marina felt as if a weight had been lifted from her. Thank God the rifle was still there, Marina thought. Marina thought .
 She wondered if there was really ‘a second idiot’ in Dallas, anyone else crazy enough to think of such a deed . Yet she wonders if there is really “a . second idiot in Dallas’s Dallas .
 Despite the blanket’s reassuring contours, she was unable to compose herself . And so, in spite of the blanket's reassuring contour, she couldn't compose herself.
 She was sitting on the sofa next to Ruth when the announcement came over television that the president was dead . Ruth was sitting next to her when she heard the news .
 A little later an announcement came that someone had been captured in a movie theater . Someone was captured in the theater . The incident happened in a theater in New York City .
 An hour after the president’s death, the doorbell rang . An hour, or a little less, after the death of the president, it was announced .
 They were from the sheriffs office and the Dallas police, they said, and showed their credentials . They said they showed credentials from the sheriff's office and Dallas police .
 Ruth’s first clue that Lee might be linked in any way to the events of the day was that he might have been involved in the murder . Ruth's first clue was that Lee may have been linked to any way with the events that day .
 They spread out all over the house, ‘turned the place upside down,” Marina recalls . They took everything they wanted, even records and photographs, belonging to both the Oswalds and the Paines .
 Marina felt like a sleepwalker, and it was hard for her later to remember what she did, or how she managed to move at all . Marina felt as if she had somehow managed to walk .
 She was aware that her hands and feet were cold, and her face covered with cold sweat . But she was also aware that she was aware of her hands, feet and face were cold .
 They were in civilian clothes, and they seemed to be wearing special insignia on the underside of their lapels . The men were in military uniforms, but they were also wearing insignia .
 Ruth, meanwhile, was telling the officers what she believed to be the truth, that Lee did not have a rifle . Ruth told the officers that Lee had a rifle, and that she believed it was not Lee's .
 She told Ruth that Lee did have a rifle, and it was inside a blanket . She said Lee had a rifle inside the blanket, but it was in the blanket .
 Ruth stood on the blanket in an instinctive gesture to protect Marina, Marina . Forgetting her Quaker faith, her pacifism, her impeccable truthfulness, Ruth stood in the blanket .
 Marina Oswald said Lee Oswald did have a rifle, and it was inside the blanket, she said . At the same time, paradoxically, she faithfully translated to the officers exactly what Marina had said .
 The blanket looked exactly as it always had, as if there were something bulky inside . The blanket was always there, but it looked like it had something inside .
 Marina shook all over, trying not to show her fright, as an officer stooped down to pick it up . Marina shook as she tried to keep it from her face .
 Marina says it was again one of those moments when kaleidoscopic and inexplicable occurrences suddenly clicked into place . Marina: "For Marina, it was another one of many moments that suddenly clicked place"
 She knew now why Lee had told her to buy ‘everything’ she and the children needed, why he had left without kissing her good-bye . Lee had said he wanted to buy "everything" she and her children needed .
 In the cafeteria at Bell Helicopter that noon, Michael had been talking to a co-op student about the character of assassins . Michael was talking to the student about his role as an assassin .
 Just then a waitress came over and told them the president had been shot . Just then, the president was shot .
 He noticed a group of people clustered around a transistor radio and went to join them . Then he noticed a few people were clustered around the radio and joined them . He said: "It's a good thing to say goodbye to the radio"
 He was unable to hear anything, but he realized that the waitress had not been joking . He realized that he was not joking .
 He was, after all, one of the few people who stood in a position of friendship to Lee . He was one of those few people to stand by Lee's friendship .
 He was trying to assemble a vibration meter, and his fingers trembled so badly that he couldn't put in the screws . He was unable to put the screws in .
 Michael knew that in principle Lee was not against violence . On the other hand, Michael knew he knew that Lee was against violence. Michael also knew that he knew Lee wasn't against violence, but that he was against it .
 Michael did not consider such a murder automatically out of the question. And so did Michael do not consider it automatically out the question . And so Michael did . Michael says he would like to see his son's body in the light of his memory .
 Michael was carrying on this inner dialogue, but a report came over the radio that shook him a little more . Michael: "It's a good thing to see that the world is changing, and it's a bad thing to hear from the radio"
 News reports came over the radio that the police were chasing suspects all over town . News reports of the police being chased around town . Police chased suspects around the town .
 He was arrested in a part of town far away from where he worked for the random killing of a police officer . And now he had been arrested in part of the town .
 George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt were at a reception at the Syrian Embassy in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, when they heard that President Kennedy had been shot in their home city of Dallas .
 As they drove away from the reception, they wondered who on earth the assassin might be .
 Marina and the Paines were under suspicion at the time of the incident . Marina and her husband's wife, Marina, were accused of being under suspicion . It was plain that every one of them, Marina and The Paines, was under suspicion.
 Police refused to let Marina change, refused to allow her to use bathroom with the door closed . Ruth protested, but the police said they would not let her change .
 Soon she was outside the house, with no idea how she got there, and she was shaking all over with fright . She was shaking with fright when she was finally able to walk out .
 Michael suddenly realized what had become of the “camping equipment” he had held in his arms . The rifle was being held up in front of Marina, Michael said . Michael then realized that the rifle had been missing .
 Marina was truthful in her inability to identify the rifle, but she was in a quandary over what she might be asked next, and what she ought to reply . Marina was not sure if she would be asked what she would say next .
 She had no idea Lee was charged with shooting a police officer; she had never even heard the name Tippit . She had never heard of Lee's shooting spree . Lee's mother says she was shocked to learn she had been charged with the crime .
 She was aware only that Lee was suspected of killing President Kennedy . She had no idea whether or not he was guilty of the killing .
 Marina thought that his arrest might be a provocation or a misunderstanding . The facts appeared to be against him, but then, Lee was always in trouble, and Marina thought it was a provocation . Marina thought Lee was in trouble .
 Whatever she did, she did not want to add a scintilla to any evidence the police might have against him . She was not sure if she had any evidence against him.
 Marina mistakenly assumed Lee Lee was as likely to be put in the electric chair for an attempted murder as for murder itself . Marina mistakenly thought Lee was likely to die for attempted murder .
 She was told that he was upstairs being interrogated and she could not see him that day . She said she could only see him because he was being held under investigation .
 Ruth had been offended and angered by the way the police officers had burst into Ruth’s house, ransacked everything, routed them out, and brusquely carried them off as if they were criminals .
 At the police station she felt badly frightened, and she expected to be arrested any second . She said she was scared of arrest and was worried she would be arrested .
 Even if your husband were innocent, they would arrest you until it was straightened out . Even if you were innocent they would have arrested you until they were straightened up .
 Police were much nicer than they had been at Ruth's . Now, inexplicably, the police were nicer than at Ruth’s . Police were nicer at the time .
 One officer offered to get her coffee, and another offered help with the baby . Another offered to help her get coffee .
 He was not harsh with her and did not try to twist her answers or catch her out in a lie, she said . He did not lie to her, but she was not caught out of a lie .
 Marina saw Marguerite Oswald, Lee’s mother, after the police finished questioning her . Marina was questioned by the police about Lee Oswald's mother .
 It was the first time Marguerite had seen Rachel . She had not known that Marina and Lee had been expecting a second child .
 She does not remember whether they ate, or what they did, or who did the cooking . She doesn't remember what they ate or who cooked .
 It was overrun by reporters who wanted to talk to Marina, Ruth, and Marguerite . It was overwhelmed by reporters wanting to speak to Marina and Ruth .
 Ruth was defending Marina’s right to speak, but Marguerite would not allow it . Ruth defended Marina, saying she was defending her right to be able to speak .
 Marina, without being told, understood her reason -- money . Then she told Marina that neither of them should talk to the reporters, and Marina understood it .
 Marina remembers watching Lee being led through a corridor at the police station . For a while they had the television on, Marina watched Lee being taken away from the police . Marina says Lee was taken into custody at the time of his arrest .
 June's baby book was left behind by the policemen, who had left it behind . She found it in the bedroom she found June’s baby book, which police had left behind .
 In it were two small photographs of Lee dressed in black and wearing his guns . In it was also a set of photographs of him dressed up as a man .
 Marina thought they were two copies of the same photograph . Not looking at them closely, Marina thought it was two copies . Marina thought she was looking at the same photo .
 She took them out of the baby book carefully and, in the privacy of the bedroom, showed them to her mother-in-law . She then took them to the bedroom and told her mother in-law how much she loved them .
 She shook her head, meaning that Marina was not to show the photographs to Ruth, or tell her anything about them . Ruth was not allowed to show Marina the photographs .
 The police had left another of her possessions behind . She happened to glance at the bureau and saw that, again by a miracle of oversight, she had been left behind .
 It was a delicate little demitasse cup of pale blue-green with violets and a slender golden rim that had belonged to her grandmother . The cup belonged to a little girl whose grandmother had died of cancer .
 It was so thin that the light glowed through it as if it were parchment . The thin material was thin enough to cover the surface of it .
 Lee never took his wedding ring off, not even on grimiest manual jobs . Lee's wedding ring was never taken off, even when he was doing manual work . Lee never wore it off even during his grimiest jobs .
 Before they went to bed that night, Ruth and Marina had a talk in the kitchen . Marina and Ruth went on to talk about their relationship .
 Marina said that everything she had ever heard about the Kennedys came from Lee . Marina said she had been told everything she'd heard about her family's history .
 If he had minded translating articles about them or telling her what he knew about the president, she was sure she would have known it . She was sure he would have been able to translate articles or tell her about them .
 Lee suggested that they get an apartment together in Dallas soon, Ruth said . Only the night before, she told Ruth, Lee had suggested they get a home together . Ruth said Lee had told her they should get a Dallas apartment soon .
 She knew nothing about American law, the long trials and appeals that might take years in the courts . She had no idea what the law was in the U.S. and she knew nothing of American law .
 She thought that it would be over in three days and that Lee would be electrocuted . Lee thought that she would be able to get through the ordeal . She thought it would end within three days .
 She thought she would have to testify and would be committing a crime if she failed to tell everything she knew . She thought it would be a crime to fail to tell all she knew about the case .
 Lee is charged with murder in the death of a woman in 2008 . Lee is accused of killing the woman he was charged with her murder . Lee has been charged with the murder of the woman in the case against him . Lee was convicted of murder in 2008, but prosecutors say he was
 Marina Marina did not know if Lee was guilty, although the signs seemed to point that way . Marina said she was not sure if Lee is guilty, but the signs were pointing to that .
 Marina thought he would love being in the spotlight and would use it to proclaim his ideas . Either way, Marina thought, he would like to be seen in the public spotlight . Marina said he would use the spotlight to proclaim ideas .
 "He would talk about Marxism, Communism, and injustice all over the world," he said . He said: "I'm not afraid to say anything about Communism, Communism and injustice"
 If Lee was guilty, then within three days he would be strapped in that chair and be dead . Lee would have been strapped to the chair and he would have died in three days . Lee is accused of killing himself in the first place .
 The following morning, Saturday, November 23, reporters whisked Marina, Marguerite, and the children from the Paine house in Irving to the Hotel Adolphus in downtown Dallas . Life magazine whisked the family from the house to the hotel where they stayed .
 Marina and Marguerite were told they could see Lee at Lee's memorial . Lee was the first to be allowed to see Lee .
 Marina convinced herself that Lee was innocent after all and that he was under suspicion merely because he had been to Russia . Marina had now convinced herself she was innocent .
 She could not reach out to him or kiss him because a glass partition separated them . She was separated from him because of the glass partition .
 Marina folded the photographs of Lee dressed in black with his rifle and revolver . She tucked them carefully inside her shoe . Marina had folded them up and tucked them in her shoe.
 She had them there that very moment, and she wanted to ask Lee what to do with them . "She had them at the very moment," she said, "and she wanted them there very moment"
 From his tone Marina understood that he was warning her to say nothing . Marina understood his tone as he warned her to do nothing .
 His words were the old Lee, full of bravado, but Marina could tell by the pitch of his voice that he was frightened . Marina was able to hear from him again, but she was afraid .
 She saw fear in his eyes, and the tears started rolling down her cheeks . She saw his fear in her eyes, she said, and she saw the tears .
 Lee had tears in his eyes, too, but he did the best to hold them back . Lee talked for a few minutes with his mother, who also cried in tears .
 The guards stood behind him now, ready to take him away, yet trying to give them an extra minute . The guards were ready for him to be taken away, but he gave them the extra time .
 She was telling him that he could count on her not to say anything that would betray him . She told him that she would not betray him. She was saying that she wouldn't say anything .
 He got up and backed out of the room, edging toward the door so that he could see her until the very last second . He backed out and backed away from the door .
 She knew that had he been innocent he would have been screaming to high heaven for his ‘rights,” claiming he had been mistrusted and demanding to see officials at the very highest levels, just as he did before .
 For her the fact that he was so compliant, that he told her he was being treated “all right,” was a sign of his guilt, she says . For her, he was compliant, she said. For her it was because he was treated ‘all right
 Lee seemed to be closing in on himself like a sea creature, a contented mollusk or a clam, trying not to show what was inside . Lee seemed like a happy clam trying to keep his eyes shut .
 After the Walker affair, when he failed at what he had set out to do, he had remained keyed up and tense until the ‘Nixon’ charade 11 days later somehow relieved him of strain .
 Marina sensed in him a glow of satisfaction that she had not seen there before . Marina sensed a glow in him that she'd not seen before . She sensed in her husband's satisfaction .
 She thought that he was glad he had succeeded, and yet at the same time sorry . She thought he was happy to succeed, but also sorry for his actions .
 In spite of his obvious satisfaction, it seemed to her that he was also carrying a burden of regret heavier than he, or anyone, could bear .
 He was on the edge of tears all the time they were together and barely holding them back . He was barely holding the tears back .
 He did not want to break down and show himself, or his fear, to the police . He said he didn't want to show himself and his fear to police .
 Marina saw that Lee’s act had failed to lift off him the inner weight he had with him all the time, nor had it made him any happier . And while much of his anger was spent, Marina saw . Lee's act had not lifted off him, nor made him
 He had looked at her, altogether uncharacteristically, with supp supplication in his eyes . He had been looking at her with supplication, she said . He looked back with suppositionless eyes .
 As she, Marguerite, and the children left the city jail, she was pelted with questions from reporters . As they left the jail she was greeted by reporters .
 She had not had much sleep, and she was not accustomed to having policemen and reporters around her . She had been in the middle of the night and had not been able to sleep .
 She felt that everyone must be looking at her with hatred because of what Lee had done . She felt she was being looked at with hatred for what had happened .
 "That was one of the heaviest things to bear, her feeling that the world was against her," she said . "And that was one the heaviest thing to bear"
 Marina had less idea than most people what had happened to her husband since they had said good-bye on Friday morning . Isolated by language; not seeing television much; busy, she was nursing Rachel .
 She did not know that in the very vicinity where they had lived, the previous spring, a patrolman had stopped him, and he had shot the patrolman dead . The patrolman was shot dead .
 Until then, she knew only that her husband was suspected of killing President Kennedy . She knew only about her husband's suspected killing .
 Fritz returned to police headquarters to discover that the man he was looking for was already there . Fritz did not waste a moment. He returned to the police station to find his victim dead .
 Oswald was questioned in his glassed-in office on the third floor of the Police and Courts Building . Oswald was the only person to question him in his office . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 Fritz had been trying for months to obtain a tape recorder for the homicide and robbery bureau . Fritz was trying to get the recorder for months . Fritz says he has been trying to find a way to get a recording of the crime scene .
 Oswald’s twelve hours of interrogation that weekend comes from the notes and memoranda of those who happened to be present . The only record of Oswald's interrogation is from those who were present at the time . Oswald was interrogated for 12 hours .
 There were seven or eight men moving in and out of the room, but no one was there the entire time . No one was in the room at the time of the shooting .
 If Fritz was called out to interview a witness or give an order, others picked up the questioning . If Fritz called out, he was called to interview witnesses or give orders .
 He refused a lie detector test, appeared to anticipate questions that might incriminate him, and declined to answer them . He refused to answer questions about his conduct .
 Oswald learned that one of the FBI men was James P. Hosty . Hosty was one of Hosty's victims . Oswald's calm failed him at 3:15 p.m. ET .
 Hosty accused Hosty of twice “accosting” his wife . Hosty became “arrogant and upset” during the interview, Hosty said . He said Hosty twice accused him of two counts of "accost" his wife. Hosty
 Hosty then asked if he had been to Mexico Ctiy, and Oswald’s composure deserted him again . Hosty asked Oswald to say he had gone to Mexico . Oswald's composure deserted again as Hosty quizzed him on the matter .
 By 3:00m. on Friday afternoon, it became known that a suspect had been apprehended . Fritz’s office and the entire Police and Courts Building was in uproar .
 Guards virtually gave up trying to check press credentials after reporters from all over the country clamoring to get in . It was a policy of the Dallas police to be accessible to the press, but now, with reporters from Dallas, from all across the country, clamoring for access .
 Jack Ruby was seen at 11:30m. on Friday, and again at a midnight press conference in the basement . He was also seen at a nightclub operator named Jack Ruby, who was seen twice on Friday .
 The place was a tumult of reporters and cameramen, cables and tripods and television lights . It was the chaos of reporters, cameramen and cameras .
 Oswald was led from Fritz’s office to a basement assembly room for police lineups . Oswald was taken to the basement of Fritz's office several times that day . Oswald had been in the basement for lineups for police .
 He did not complain to the police about the way they were treating him, only the press . By curious contrast, he did not say to the press about how they were treated .
 Gregory Olds, president of the Dallas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, when to the jail to see if he wanted a lawyer . Olds did not know that Oswald was a member of the ACLU .
 Oswald had been informed of his rights and had so far declined counsel, says Olds . Three people —two police captains and Justice of the Peace Johnston —assured Olds that Oswald had not yet declined counsel . Olds: Oswald has been told his rights .
 Oswald was taken to the basement for a press conference, and Olds decided to attend . Olds attended the press conference shortly before midnight . Oswald was later taken to a hospital where he died .
 Oswald was asked at the press conference whether he had killed the president . Oswald was also asked if he had done the same thing .
 Oswald could have been Oswald’s way of saying that he had tried to kill the president and this was the first he knew he had succeeded . Oswald's actions were the first time he knew that he'd succeeded, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was brought again before Justice of the Peace Johnston and formally arraigned for the murder of John F Kennedy . Oswald was arraigned on Saturday at 1:36 p.m. Oswald was charged with JFK's murder .
 Oswald said he did not know Abt personally, but he had defended ‘victims” charged under the Smith Act . The Smith Act made it a crime to advocate violent overthrow of the government . Oswald said Abt was the man he wanted to defend .
 Oswald lacked a telephone number or address for him . Fritz explained how to place the call and trace Abt even though Oswald lacked an address . Abt was traced to Oswald .
 Oswald tried to reach Abt. Oswald at 1:40m., just after his visit with Marina, just after visiting Marina, he tried to call Abt . Oswald's visit to Marina came at 1.40m. just after Marina's visit .
 He answered that he had not, then courteously thanked Fritz for allowing him to use the prison phone . Fritz said he had been allowed to use his prison phone, then thanked Fritz .
 He gave her the numbers he had obtained and told her to call after 6:00m. when long-distance rates went down . He told her she should call when rates dropped at 6 a.m.
 In a word for word repetition of the call he had just made, he asked her again to call Abt. He asked her to call him again, repeating the same thing .
 Ruth was stunned—stunned by his gall, his assumption that her friendship for him would not have been affected by what had happened . He assumed that she would go right on helping him just as she always had . Ruth was shocked by his assumption .
 Like Lee, Ruth did try to reach Abt, and like Lee, she failed . Appalled and angry though she was, Ruth tried to call Abt and failed .
 H Louis Nichols, president of the Dallas Bar Association, appeared in the office of Police Chief Jesse Curry on Saturday morning . He appeared at 5:00 p.m. on Saturday .
 Curry was relieved to see Nichols and led him immediately to Oswald’s maximum security cell on the fifth floor . Curry led him to Oswald's maximum security .
 He stood up to greet Nichols, and the two men talked on a pair of bunks three or four feet apart . The two men sat on bunks on a bed four feet away from each other .
 Oswald said that was the man he would like to have represent him. Well, Oswald said, that is the man that he would want to have represented him. Oswald said he wanted to represent him . Oswald said: "I want to represent me."
 Oswald said he belonged to the ACLU and would like someone from that organization to represent him . Oswald also said he wanted to represent someone from the ACLU . Oswald said the ACLU should represent him in any way .
 He asked Nichols to return the next week to find someone of his choosing . If he failed to find a lawyer, he might ask the Dallas Bar Association to find him lawyer .
 Nichols and Curry left the cell area together wondering aloud whether Curry had an obligation to reach Abt, wherever he was . Oswald had not asked Nichols, Curry, or Fritz to do it for him .
 Oswald’s choice of Abt, together with his remarks to Nichols, appears to bear out Marina’�s belief that her husband had every hope of making his a political trial, a forum for his ideas . Marina‘s belief was that he would either proclaim his
 Oswald made many statements about his actions on November 22 that the police already knew to be lies . Oswald also made many false statements about the events of that day . Oswald was questioned by the police at the time .
 President Bush lied about the manner of his flight from the Depository Building . He lied about how he left the building, and lied about his departure from the building . The president lied about what he said when he left .
 He said he was in touch with the Soviet embassy and received Soviet newspapers and magazines . Not only had he lived in Russia for three years, he said, but he had contact with the embassy and Soviet newspapers .
 Oswald appears to have talked more freely to Hosty than anybody else . Whenever he could, Oswald steered his interrogators toward politics, he steered them toward politics .
 Once again, as when he had shot at General Walker, he was trying to establish himself as a hero of the left . Once again he was . trying to . establish himself . as . again, he shot at . General Walker .
 Only one of the old constituents was missing, or rather, was George de Mohrenschildt . He was distinctly less important in November than he was in April .
 De Mohrenschildt still mattered to Oswald, but he appears no longer to have been what he was before . He appears to be the person for whose approval, above that of everyone else, Oswald had done the deed . Oswald had been the man for whom he had approval .
 Not that any of Oswald’s “constituents’ approved what he had done or would have come to his aid . Not that none of Oswald's ‘constituent’ would have approved of what he did . Oswald was not a member of his �
 Oswald knew little more about them than he had conjured up in his imagination . They were constituents only in Oswald’s head, and he was only in his head . Oswald knew nothing more about the people he thought of .
 Oswald denied having killed anyone . Oswald was willing to expatiate about politics to his interrogators . Oswald denied killing anyone .
 He had not shot “any of them,” he said, adding that he did not know Governor Connally had been hit . He had been aiming at someone else, he said .
 Oswald outwardly, and steadfastly, denied killing John F Kennedy . Oswald, while giving hints, in his own way, as to the truth, gave hints . Oswald denied killing JFK Kennedy .
 He doubted that U.S. policy toward Cuba, Cuba, would change as a result of the assassination . He had his own ideas about national policy .
 Marina, Marguerite and the children were moved from the Hotel Adolphus to the Executive Inn Motel, near Love Field . The children are staying at the hotel near the airport .
 Marina dealt in her own fashion with the bothersome photographs of Lee . That evening Marina dealt with her own way of dealing with the photographs .
 She removed them delicately from her shoe, tore them in two, placed them in an ashtray, and lit a match to them . She then tore them up in two and lit them in ashtrays .
 She was unaware that other copies had been found by the police among their belongings in the Paines’ garage .
 Lee had already been confronted with enlargements at the police station . Lee was already confronted with enlarged enlargements by police officers .
 He said he had never seen the photographs before, admitting that they showed his face but with a different body . Adding to his other lies, he said he did not see them before .
 She telephoned Ruth that night, explained carefully where Lee had left his wedding ring, and asked Ruth to keep it for her . Lee asked Ruth, who had been married for more than 20 years, to keep the ring for her.
 President Obama was speaking Russian at the time of his last call to the White House . But this time, unlike his two calls in the afternoon, he was talking Russian .
 It was, “Marina, please,” the same abrupt words in which he had always asked for her . ‘Marina’ was the last word he asked for . It was "Marina," he said, the same .
 He asked Ruth to convey a message to Marina, in strong terms, that he wanted her at Ruth’s. He asked her to convey the message to her, and she said, 'Yes'
 As Ruth understood it, he wanted Marina in a predictable place, wanted to know her whereabouts every second, so that she would be available to him at any moment he might try to reach her . He wanted her to be at a predictable, predictable place .
 Chief Jesse Curry decided to move his prisoner to the county jail the next day . That night at the Dallas Police Department, chief Jesse Curry moved his prisoner . Curry: "I'm not sure what happened to him, I'm sure it's a bad mistake"
 His decision was in keeping with the police department’s practice of transferring prisoners who have been charged with felonies from the city to county jail .
 Secret Service agent, Forrest Sorrels, asked Curry to make the transfer at an unannounced hour, possibly during the night . The transfer was made at the request of an agent, for unknown reasons .
 No definite time was announced for the transfer, but he told waiting reporters that they would not miss anything if they were there by ten in the morning . No definite transfer date has been announced .
 Oswald was transferred to Washington D.C. on Sunday, November 24, at 11:10 am., after another interrogation that lasted longer than expected, Oswald was ready to be transferred . Oswald was taken to the U.S.
 The shirt he was wearing when he was arrested had been sent to a crime lab in Washington . He had only been wearing a T-shirt when arrested .
 Some hangers with his clothing were handed in to Fritz’s office . The officers selected what they considered the best-looking shirt for him to wear .
 No, he said, and insisted on wearing a black pullover sweater with jagged holes in it . He insisted he was wearing it because it was too tight .
 He was now dressed, as he had been in the photographs taken by Marina, all in black— black trousers and a black sweater . Marina had taken the photographs of him in black .
 Oswald refused to enter the jail again, as he had done on entering the jail two days earlier . Oswald refused, as again, on entering into the jail . Oswald had refused to leave the jail until he was released .
 Oswald was taken to the basement of the police station where he was to step into a waiting car . Oswald was accompanied by Captain Fritz and four detectives .
 The basement and ramps leading out of the building were crowded with reporters and cameramen, three television cameras, and nearly a hundred policemen . Nearly a hundred police officers were also present .
 Oswald reached the basement at 11:20m. and was promptly led to the exit . Oswald was taken to the basement of the building at 11.20m . Oswald had been in the building for more than two hours .
 A few minutes earlier, Jack Ruby entered the Western Union office on Main Street, a block from the police department . Ruby was carrying $2,000 in cash and a .38 caliber revolver . Ruby had entered the western Union office carrying $3,000 and a revolver .
 At 11:17 he sent a money order for $25 to one of his nightclub strippers in Fort Worth, Texas . He left the Western Union office, and headed for the police department . He sent the money order to a stripper in a nightclub .
 He walked down the Main Street ramp toward the basement without impediment . He walked along the Main St. ramp to the basement .
 Ruby was known to some of the officers, and he was not even noticed . Because of his demimonde life, Ruby was not noticed by others .
 Oswald walked through the door toward the car that was waiting for him . Oswald walked with Captain Fritz and the four detectives .
 Jack Ruby stepped out of the crowd and fired a single, point-blank shot into Oswald’s abdomen . Ruby fired the shot in the abdomen of Oswald . Ruby was killed by a single bullet fired at Oswald .
 Oswald met Secret Service agents at a Howard Johnson’s motel halfway between Dallas and Fort Worth . Oswald met the Secret Service agent at 10:30 that morning .
 The Secret Service had recruited Peter Gregory, Marina and Lee’s first Russian-born friend in the U.S., to act as interpreter . The four of them drove to the Executive Inn Motel, where Marina, Marguerite, and the children had spent the night .
 Robert decided to move the family to a farm owned by his wife's parents outside Fort Worth . Marguerite appeared to be unhappy, and Robert moved them all to the farm . Robert's wife was unhappy, but he decided to keep the family .
 As he was loading their belongings into his car, one of the Secret Service men came up to him . The Secret Service said they were going to take him to the airport . He said he was surprised by the reaction .
 He asked Secret Service men to drive them to his in-laws’ farm and left immediately . He left immediately for Parkland Hospital .
 The family thought they were going to the county jail when they were taken to a motel . Peter Gregory was arrested in the hotel room at the end of the night .
 Agents said they could not go right away and drove them around for hours . The agents said they couldn't take them to Marina Marina for hours before they left .
 Lee was taken to the hospital with serious injuries, Marina said . Marina was told she was in a 'serious' condition . Lee was later taken to hospital .
 Marina remembers that the house was beautiful, that everyone was quiet and kind to her, and that Mrs. Marina remembers how she was treated by everyone .
 Marina sensed that it might be a few days before she returned to the Paines’ . She telephoned Ruth to ask her to gather together some of her clothing, some of the children’s things, Lee’�s wedding ring, and money he had left
 When she was back in the living room, Peter Gregory came up to her, and Marina could tell from his expression what he was going to say . Marina could hear what he said to her .
 Rachel was only four weeks old and June just learning to walk when she died . Her children, too, were orphans . Rachel was just 4 weeks old .
 There would be an angry crowd outside the hospital, and she had no right to risk the children, she said . She was told she had 'no right' to risk risking her children .
 She did not wish to place him in danger, but she and Marguerite were agreed . The pair agreed that he should stay with her .
 Doctors at the hospital were kind, but they did not want Marina to see Lee . Marina was taken to the hospital by a family friend, Marina says .
 Marina wanted to see the wound that had killed him, she had to see it, but he was covered by a sheet . Marina saw the wound but was unable to find out what had happened .
 From Parkland Hospital the Secret Service drove all of them to a new hideaway, the Inn of the Six Flags, near Fort Worth . The Secret Service took Robert and his family to a hideaway .
 Word had come from the attorney general, Robert Kennedy, and the new president, Lyndon Johnson, that the Secret Service was to protect the Oswald family .
 Within an hour the inn was an armed camp, with men patrolling outside armed with carbines . The inn was armed camped outside with armed men .
 Although agents brought her food, she only smoked and drank coffee . Although the agents solicitously brought food she only drank and smoked .
 All afternoon and evening they were not allowed to watch television or see the newspapers . The children were also banned from seeing the television or reading the newspapers.
 One cemetery refused even to countenance the suggestion that they sell Robert a plot for his brother’s body .
 A funeral director took up the search and finally found a cemetery in Fort Worth, Texas . Funeral director: "It's been a long way to find a cemetery for a funeral"
 The office of the National Council of Churches in Dallas asked two Lutheran ministers to go to the inn and offer help . The office asked two pastors to go and offer assistance .
 The funeral was arranged for four o’clock Monday afternoon, and the minister reluctantly agreed to officiate .
 Marina heard that President Kennedy’s funeral was being shown on television on Monday morning . Marina heard the funeral being broadcast on television . Marina says she was devastated by the loss of her husband's life .
 She whispered to Robert that she wanted to watch, and he switched on the set . Robert switched on to the set.
 She left to attend Lee’s funeral at the end of the day . Watch the moment she did, right up to the moment .
 Oswalds arrived at Rose Hill Cemetery in Fort Worth to find it, too, heavily guarded . Police were stationed all along the fence that surrounded the burial ground . The Oswalds' burial site was also heavily guarded by police .
 They realized with a shock that all they were to be allowed was a hurried service at the grave . They were shocked to discover that they were only allowed to attend the grave at the time of death .
 Without the family’s knowing it, a group of reporters who were covering the funeral volunteered . The funeral was held in New York City .
 Lee's body was carried down from the chapel to its grave . It was they who, even before the Oswalds arrived, had carried Lee’s body down . Lee's family carried him down from chapel to grave .
 The Lutheran minister who had promised to officiate would not be there after all . Word arrived that the Lutheran minister had not been there at all .
 Louis Saunders of the Council of Churches in Fort Worth had driven out on his own to Rose Hill Cemetery to see if he could help the family . A minister named Louis Saunders drove to the cemetery to find out what happened .
 It was the Reverend Saunders who pronounced the simple words of Lee’s funeral ceremony .
 Marina’s first hint that in the life ahead of her she did not have to be an outcast . It was Marina's first hint she had a life of her own . Marina's life was the first hint of her future .
 Marina expected to go on living at Ruth Paine's after Lee's funeral . Lee’s funeral is expected to take place at the end of the month .
 He decided that if Lee had indeed killed President Kennedy, then these tall Eastern stringbeans, whom he had never heard of as being friends of his brother, must be behind it somehow . He had taken one look at Ruth and Michael Paine at the Dallas police station on the afternoon of
 The Secret Service men who were assigned to protect Marina seconded Robert’s advice . Marina Marina was invited by the Secret Service to attend a private party .
 Ruth and Michael were active in the ACLU, an organization many Americans considered left-wing . Ruth was not under suspicion, they said, but she and Michael had been active in it .
 Michael was under a special cloud, the nature of which was not made clear, but that seems to have derived from the fact that his father had once been a Trotskyite . Michael's father was once a member of the Trotskyite.
 Marina was allowed to understand that if she wished to remain in the U.S. she had better put distance between herself and the Paines . Marina's daughter was allowed . to understand .
 Marina turned her back on Ruth Paine in one of the first acts of widowhood . She had sworn she would never do .
 Marina was incommunicado, living at the Inn of the Six Flags Motel . Ruth took to the Dallas police station with two books in Russian that Marina had often used and that Ruth thought she might need .
 One book was on baby care, the other a book of household advice . The book was also a book on cooking and sewing advice .
 Two Secret Service agents confronted Ruth with a Russian-language note that had been found inside one of the books . They accused her of having tried to convey a secret message to Marina .
 Lee left a note for Marina on the night he tried to shoot General Walker . The note proved to be the one left for her by Lee on December 5 . Marina was confronted with the note .
 Marina had previously decided not to say anything about the Walker attempt, and she had forgotten the note entirely . Marina had decided to forget the note .
 She was distraught by Lee’s death and felt that she ought to be all the more on his side since he was dead . She was still distraught by his death .
 She freely admits to being “tricky” with the FBI in those days . Robert Oswald says that from the outset the FBI was “extremely hostile” toward her .
 She would be a witness against him if she had to be, but only where she thought it really mattered . She would testify against him in court only where it really matters .
 Marina had no choice but to add to the weight of evidence against her husband . The note adds to the evidence against Marina's husband .
 She then blamed Ruth for the fact that she had been compelled against her wishes to go into the Walker affair, and she used this as a rationalization for having severed their communications .
 The barrier of guilt became so high that Marina was unable to take steps to mend the breach between them, although it would have eased her conscience to do so . Marina's guilt became too high that she couldn't take steps .
 Ruth felt that Marina had not dealt squarely with her; she ought to have told her, while she was living in her house, about the Walker attempt, the trip to Mexico, and the rifle in her garage . Ruth for her part felt that she should have told Marina about the trip
 Ruth said she would not have changed her behavior toward the Oswalds . She said knowledge of these things would have altered her behavior . The Oswalds were killed in 1963 .
 Still, Ruth missed Marina’s friendship and would probably have repaired the breach if she could have . Still, she missed Marina's friendship and probably would have repaired it .
 Marina was on edge with women who were a little older than she, even though she needed them, and she held against Ruth the fact that she had no faults . Marina was always wary of women who are older than her .
 Marina was not at ease with flawless people and was certain that eventually she would lose their good opinion . Marina was certain she would never be able to live with the flawless people again .
 Marina has said she herself ‘suffered’ over Ruth’s unhappiness with Michael . They confided completely in each other about their marriages, if not about other things .
 "She and Ruth were a real source of moral support to each other during the spring and fall of 1963," she says . "And she and Ruth ... were a really good friends," she adds .
 Despite the very large differences between them as human beings, there was more to their friendship than Marina at first allowed herself later to admit . Despite the differences, there were more to Marina's friendship than she initially thought .
 Marina would have preferred to keep Walker affair a secret, she says .
 Less than a week after the assassination, she was confronted with copies of the photographs she had taken of Lee with his rifle . She was confronted by copies of photos she took of Lee's rifle .
 Marina was very much aware that she had destroyed the same photographs, not knowing that there were other copies in the Paines’ garage, and at first she denied knowing anything about them . Marina was not aware of the other copies .
 She was assured that nothing she said about the photographs would be held against her . She also realized that unless she told what she knew, someone else might be unjustly accused of having taken them . She was then assured that .
 Marina also denied any knowledge of Lee’s trip to Mexico, although soon afterwards she told what she knew about that, too, too . On November 29, 1963, and again on January 17 and 22, 1964, she also denied that she knew of the trip .
 She explained her reluctance on this score by saying that she continued to hate the FBI for pestering her . In her bad moods she could not refrain from showing it .
 Marina said she had been hoping to save up a morsel or two as a special surprise to tell the Warren Commission on her first appearance before it in February .
 Lee’s threat to kill Nixon was still another matter on which Marina held out . Lee threatened to kill President Nixon, but she held out until Nixon's death .
 Robert says that she first mentioned it to him on January 12, 1964 . At first she forgot all about it, since it had led to nothing, and Robert says she forgot it . Robert: "At first, I thought it was a waste of time. At first, she forgot
 Marina’s feeling that she ought to protect Lee was fading, and it was not long before she also told about the Nixon episode . Marina's feeling for her husband to protect her was fading and she told her story .
 By default she moved first to the home of James Martin and his wife and children, and he became for a time her business manager . She moved to Martin's home, where she lived with his family and children .
 Marina received film, magazine, and book contract offers from all over Europe and America . Kindhearted Americans simply sent her money in the mail . She received film and magazine offers, and received money in mail .
 Marina moved briefly to Robert’s, then to the Fords’ and finally, using the money that had been sent to her and that she had received for interviews, she bought a modest home of her own in the Dallas suburb of Richardson .
 Marina’s fears that she would be sent to prison for failing to prevent the assassination, omitting to go to the police after Walker, and burning the photographs of Lee . For months she remained afraid that she still might be sent back to Russia .
 She had always behaved toward the Soviet embassy in Washington in filial fashion and had even sent the embassy a New Year’s card from herself and Lee at the end of 1962 .
 She was puzzled and hurt that no one from the embassy came forward to offer sympathy and ask her how she was bearing up . Now that she, a daughter of the Soviet Union, was in trouble, she was puzzled .
 Marina did not see why her own government would have nothing to do with her . Marina said: 'I don't see why my own government wouldn't want to help me'
 Marina’s understanding of the human factors was clear, she said . If she was at a loss to understand the political realities that surrounded her, Marina said .
 Lee Oswald's widow never could bring herself to be angry at Jack Ruby . Lee Oswald’s widow wrote a letter to the prosecutor asking, as Lee Oswalds widow, that his life be spared .
 There had been too much killing already, and the taking of one more life would not bring anybody back . Not Kennedy, nor Tippit, nor Lee. Not Lee, nor Kennedy. Not Kennedy. Lee . Not Lee. Lee. Kennedy .
 Marina hated what Lee had done to President Kennedy and Officer Tippit, and she worried about their widows and children . Marina hated Lee's actions .
 She went to painful lengths not to blame Lee for what he had done to her, leaving her, a Russian who was unable to speak English, alone, in a suspicious if not hostile country, almost untouchable .
 The most she could bring herself to say was, “Lee had a right not to think about me.” She said she didn’t want to talk about herself .
 Marina in the early days was like a person in the eye of a storm, with wreckage around her on every side, but in the poorest position of anyone to assess what had happened . Marina in her early days, she was in the poor position to assess her situation . Marina was like
 First, the shock was too great, and the event itself, the president’s death and her own involvement in it, too immense and too improbable to absorb . The president's death is too great to absorb, and his involvement in his death is also too improbable .
 Second, she was alone in her bereavement, for the man she was mourning was the nation’s Number One enemy, a man whose very name caused embarrassed silence to fall across any room she happened to be in . She was also alone in mourning, as was the man whose
 Marina's grieving simultaneously, in an utterly personal way, over both the president and his assassin . Finally, she was also grief-stricken over President Kennedy, the nation's Number One martyr, and there was something strange and out of kilter in Marina’s grieving .
 Marina was at odd angles to reality, and there was no way of being with her continuously without joining her in the upside-downness of her world .
 When I first met her in June of 1964, the air around her was still thick with Texas promoters in their black suits and two-tone Italian silk shirts, proposing deals in which they would exploit Marina and she, her predicament .
 One offer was that she would be paid to tour the country with Lee’s body . Lee's body was found in a pool of blood in the back of his skull .
 Marina's proposal fitted so perfectly her own low view of herself, this proposal, and others that were equally outlandish, did not offend her nearly as much as they might have .
 She liked Wallace Heitman, the FBI man who came most frequently to see her and treated her like his own daughter . She liked him much more than his FBI man .
 Marina never did surmount her fear of the FBI, and any visit from one of its agents, even Mr Heitman, made her feel sick all day ahead of time in apprehension . Marina was never able to surmount the fear of FBI agents .
 The endless questions she was asked had mostly to do with “hard’s evidence . Besides, the endless questions were mostly about ‘hard” evidence .
 Marina had to come to terms with the questions that were peculiarly hers, questions of the emotions and guilt and responsibility . Such questioning was of no help to Marina in coming to terms . Marina: "Such questions were not of any help"
 Marina had critics, especially among her former Russian friends, who thought that she did not behave with sufficient dignity, or as if she felt her proper share of responsibility . Indeed, the lengthy hours of interrogation tended to submerge the very difficulties that were troubling her the most .
 Marina became wild, taking only fitful care of her children, and spending as many waking hours as she could on escapades with boyfriends and neighbors . She was soon a favorite at a Dallas nightclub called the Music Box .
 She was unable to absorb the notion that, as a helpless and pretty Russian widow with two children, there was a reservoir of sympathy for her among the American people .
 Marina would have been driven to destroy a good public image if she had suspected that she had one . She would be incredulous if she'd known this and would have destroyed a good image . Marina would be 'insane' if she knew she had a public image .
 As it was, she courted scandal and apparently wanted to plummet into danger and disgrace . She wanted to carry everyone she knew down with her . She courted disgrace and wanted to take her own life .
 Marina, better than anyone, understood the downward spiral in her behavior . Marina was lacking not the insight but the will to arrest it, she said .
 "Once again her opinion of herself was so low that she simply could not risk placing herself in a position in which she would have to sustain the world's regard," she said .
 Marina had reason to fill her waking hours with activity, for her dreams when she was asleep were harrowing . During that year of 1964, Marina's dreams were harrowing. Marina was haunted by nightmares .
 Sometimes she was looking for Anatoly, but once she found him he might turn out to have the character of Lee . Sometimes she found Anatoly again, but sometimes she always looked for him .
 In one dream she dragged him up a marble staircase and shoved him into an elevator to get him away from a mob that would have killed him . In another dream she pushed him into the elevator to escape a mob .
 Lee, with his old nonchalance, seated himself on the grass to drink a cup of tea . Once, when they had been running from a crowd, Lee sat down for a drink with a cup .
 Marina was unable to speak to Lee in her dreams, or he to her . For more than a year after he died, perhaps because she was angry at Lee, yet unwilling to blame him for abandoning her .
 Marina had a dream dream in which Lee told her in Russian that he loved her, and Marina was able to answer . Lee told Marina in a dream that he said in Russian he would love her, Marina said yes .
 Marina's trouble was that long after Lee was dead she loved him and wanted him back . Marina’s trouble, of course, was that she still loved him long after he died .
 Her most prized possession was a miniature straw donkey that he had brought her from Mexico . Her father brought her a straw donkey from Mexico that he brought her home .
 In June 1964, seven months after Lee died, she had a terrible shock . She suffered a heart attack in June 1964 . She died seven months later in a nursing home .
 Marina had watched as Lee wrote the diary in Minsk and had listened to him as he sang the theme song from High Noon . Marina had also listened to Lee sing the High Noon theme from the film .
 She had not read the diary, and even after Lee died nobody told her the contents . Even after Lee's death nobody told the contents of the diary .
 Lee had written that he had married her to get even with another woman . Only now she learned what he had done to get her back .
 Marina had known about Ella Germann and had even seen her, but she had never had any inkling that Lee’s motive in marrying her had been to avenge himself on Ella .
 It was as cruel a blow as any she had suffered, for it caused her to question the validity of every one of her private memories . Above all, Lee had loved her the best he knew how .
 For two months after publication of the diary she did not mention Lee’s name if she could help it, and she never did speak of him in the same way again . So great was her hurt and humiliation that for two months she didn't mention Lee again .
 It was as if she was afraid of speaking, even privately, about moments of tenderness between them lest suddenly it be proven it was proven that Lee had never loved her at all .
 Marina’s view of Lee, and of the two of them, had been altered forever . Marina's view of her and Lee had been changed forever .
 Even his bringing her breakfast in bed, his great indulgence and one of which she had been proud, now appeared not to have been proof of Lee’s love, but merely insurance against that far-off day when, intending to slip out and kill someone, he would not
 Putin's plan to send her back to Russia fell into place, too, as did his plan for sending her back .
 Marina saw she had been only a pawn that Lee moved across the chessboard of his life merely to make his travels easier . Marina saw that she was merely a pawn in his life .
 She was convinced that anyone who could use another so could not, ever, have loved that other person . She said anyone who used another could never have loved another person .
 Her awareness hurt her the more because it fitted so exactly the abased view of herself that she had had all along—that she was nothing . Her awareness of herself hurt her more because she had always had a view of her nothing .
 Marina has never, on her own account, been as angry at him as I think she has a right to be . Luckily for Marina, she did grow outraged at Lee, although she has never been as outraged at him .
 Lee had once had a sense of right and wrong but then lost it, she said . Lee's mother said: 'I asked her if Lee had ever lost it. I asked if she had once lost it' She said Lee had a 'sense of right, wrong'
 Only egotism, anger at others on account of his failures, and inability to understand his mistakes, can be attributed to his own mistakes . "Egotism and anger are the only things to blame for his failures," he said .
 Lee's act had in part “a political foundation,” she says . She refused to accept that Lee gave any thought, ever, to the good of anyone but himself .
 Marina was stuck with her Russian ‘brother’s keeper’ mentality that if your “comrade” commits a crime and you have failed to prevent it, then you are as guilty as he . Marina was left with her “brother's keeper” mentality
 Clearly, she felt guilty that she had failed to report Lee to the police after Walker . She felt that guilt so strongly that it obscured such feelings of responsibility as she might have had on any other score .
 Had he been convicted of the attempt, he might have been in prison in November, and Kennedy would have been saved . Kennedy's life was saved .
 Marina did not berate herself for her refusal because she had had no idea what Lee was planning . As for November 21, the evening before the assassination, when Lee asked her to move with him to Dallas, she said, "I don't berate myself for my refusal"
 She did not have a clue that she and a pair of curtain rods were being weighed in his mind against the president of the United States and a rifle .
 Had she had any hint, not only would she have agreed to move to Dallas, she would have locked Lee in the bathroom and called the police, Ruth would have called the cops, she says . Ruth would not have kept Lee in her bathroom .
 He knew how to get his wife back when she ran away from him one year before . He wanted her back in time for Thanksgiving at Robert’s on November 22, 1962 .
 Had Lee, on November 21, 1963, genuinely wanted Marina back, he knew how to arrange it . Had Lee genuinely wanted her back, it was the telephone call in advance, a little cajoling, believable tenderness .
 Marina might have felt guilt, and that was on the matter of her former suitor, Anatoly . Anatoly was a former lover of Marina's and Anatoly.
 Marina often spoke about her feelings for Anatoly and the president and observed that they looked alike . During our conversations Marina often mentioned that Anatoly looked like her .
 She had not, she said, mentioned the resemblance to Lee, and evidently it did not occur to her that by her talk of Anatoly she might unintentionally have given Lee a shove, one of a good many he had .
 Marina, attuned to the world of unconscious motives as she is, failed to perceive this . It is strange that Marina failed to realise this, she says .
 There is an indication that, at some level, perhaps she did understand . But there is also a hint that perhaps she didn't understand what happened .
 Marina was unable to recollect Anatoly’s surname throughout our seven months of interviews . Throughout our interviews, Marina couldn’t recollect the surname of Anatoly .
 She had written to him, surname and all, in January of 1963 . Yet she had thought of marrying him, and she had written him .
 A few weeks after we finished work she remembered it and telephoned from Texas to tell me the name . She called it a few weeks later and said it was a great story .
 But her guilt feelings, if any, on this point, appear to have remained buried and unconscious to this day .
 She knew after April 1963 that Lee was capable of killing and was “sick,” but she did not know what to do . Lee was ‘sick’ and ‘capable of killing’, she says .
 She blamed herself for having married him when he was still too young for the responsibility . She blamed her husband for being too young to be responsible for his actions .
 Lee had appeared to be getting better from the middle of July until the visits of Agent Hosty in November . Lee was hospitalized in New Orleans in July, but has since been released .
 Later, she blamed herself bitterly for her failure to be “strict” enough with him . She blamed herself for not being strict enough with her husband .
 Ruth Paine, who had been a witness to the last weeks, took a still kinder view . She said: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sure what I think about it."
 A Dallas woman in whom Marina was to confide afterward agreed with Ruth that ‘immature’ as both of them had been . Lee and Marina had their good times, and there had been ‘much good” in the marriage, she says .
 I have often asked Marina Lee whether Lee might have been capable of joining with an accomplice to kill the president . I have also asked Marina whether Lee may have been able to join forces with a accomplice . Lee's wife, Marina, says she has been asked whether Lee is capable
 "He could not have acted in concert, accepted orders, or obeyed any plan by anybody else," he said . Nor could he have accepted orders or accepted orders from anybody else, he said. He said .
 Marina gives the reason Marina gives is that Lee had no use for the opinions of anybody but himself . Lee had 'no use for anyone but himself', Marina says .
 Lee acted on impulse and first thought seriously about killing the president only a day or two before he did it, Marina says . Marina: Lee acted upon impulse and thought seriously only a few days before he killed the president .
 Those who knew Lee have altered their sense of him over the years, and as they read about plots to kill Castro, gangland killings, and cover-ups by the FBI and the CIA, they wonder whether Lee might not have been part of a conspiracy after all .
 She has not heard all the conspiracy theories by any means, but she is humorous, commonsensical and nearly always incredulous at those that do come her way .
 A year ago, I told Marina about another rumor, a rumor that there had been “two Oswalds,” or possibly more, one in Russia, another, or perhaps several, in America . Some of these “Oswalds” together accomplished the assassination
 Marina, who is usually quick with a retort, took a few seconds to absorb this . Marina was not quick to respond to the comments .
 Marina is encapsulated by time, her perceptions virtually unjarred by the events that happened after her assassination . Perhaps more than anyone whose life was brushed by the assassination, Marina's perceptions are unjarged by time .
 Today she lives outside Dallas on a seventeen-acre farm, with cattle on it, with her husband Kenneth Porter, whom she married in 1965 .
 They were divorced in 1974, but they continue to live together as man and wife . They were married in 1974 .
 Kenneth loves life on the farm, and he is an expert mechanic, “one of the best,” Marina says . Marina: "Kenneth is a great mechanic, one of the very best"
 He is a handsome man, and a devoted stepfather, a fact that Marina values greatly . Marina, after her own difficult childhood, values him greatly .
 Marina has retained all her old intuitiveness and candor, and these qualities mark her relationships within the family . She enjoys excellent communications with her 11-year-old son, Mark Porter .
 She has a vegetable garden, Kenneth has built her a greenhouse for her ferns, and she grows such trees and flowers as she can in the scorching Texas sun . Kenneth has also built a greenhouse to help her keep her plants alive .
 Marina dreams of Russia more often than she used to, and she begs Kenneth to take her some day to a place where she can see birch trees again . Kenneth says he wants to take Marina to a birch-treeed place in Russia .
 She thinks about her stepfather, Alexander Medvedev, who is alive and remarried and living in Leningrad, Russia . And more than she used to, she thinks about him more often .
 She especially misses Petya and Tanya, the brother and sister in Leningrad whom she has no hope of seeing again . She misses them all but misses them, and she has never seen them again .
 Her life since the assassination, as before it, has not been an easy one . But her life since her assassination has been not as easy one, she says .
 Marina ascribes her discontent to her lifelong feeling that she was “special” The feeling that caused her to marry Lee is the reason for her discontent .
 Someday, she says, she hopes she will feel better about herself, will feel that she is worth something . Someday she hopes to feel better .
 Marina, Kenneth, Marina, and the children receive constant jolts from the past . No matter how obscure the lives that they try to lead, Marina's life is constantly jolted from past .
 George de Mohrenschildt committed suicide after proclaiming to a foreign journalist that he had conspired with Lee Oswald to kill the president . Marina was shocked by the suicide .
 George and Lee had not seen one another for seven and a half months prior to the assassination . There was no truth to this—George and Lee were not in contact for seven months . They had not exchanged letters or exchanged letters .
 While she was married to Lee, it was she whom they apparently liked better at first, and later on they preferred Lee .
 Marina Marina's goading helped drive Lee to kill the president, Lee's aides say . But they never seemed critical of her until a year or so after the assassination, they say .
 Marina dreamt that George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt committed suicide in her dream . She dreamt they committed suicide 13 years later, and 13 years before they actually died .
 She agrees with friend, Samuel Ballen, that George represented sunshine and life and warmth to Lee . George represented life and life to Lee, she says .
 She does not go as far as Ballen, who felt that if George had been in Dallas in November 1963, the assassination might not have taken place . But she does believe with Ballen that George had, on the whole, a good influence on Lee Lee .
 Lee thought George said something prompted Lee to shoot at General Walker, but she thinks it was not intentional . Lee's widow says she thinks George said prompted Lee's shooting at Walker . She says she is certain that it was intentional .
 He of all men would have thought it ‘uncivilized’ to foist his views on anybody else, much less to do so by killing . He had lost his own birthright by violence, and would have been appalled by his actions .
 George showed no sign of feeling guilty about his relationship with Lee Kennedy long after Kennedy was dead . Lee was Kennedy's lover .
 A friend who visited him in Haiti shortly after the assassination reported, “George went around planting his seed in many women’s . A friend said he “planted his seed into many women.”
 He had failed to pull off the big coup in sisal or oil that he had counted on . He had hoped for a big success in oil and sisal production .
 His book on his Central American adventures had been refused by several publishers . His book had been rejected by many publishers .
 Having spent his life among tycoons, he had never been able to earn as much as he felt he needed, he said . He said: 'I'm not sure how much I need'
 They divorced, but they went on living together, estranged from everyone they knew . They divorced and went on to live apart from everyone else . They still live together .
 Jeanne had a job, while George taught French at a small black college in Dallas . Jeanne was able to get a job and George was a French teacher .
 His sole remaining tie to the once-familiar world of the rich and famous was his link with the Kennedy assassination . Lee Oswald's emeritus “stray dog,” Lee Oswald, was his and Jeanne’s ‘stray . dog .
 A decade or so after the assassination, George started to feel guilty in retrospect, his relationship with Lee assumed even greater importance in his mind than it had had in reality . A decade later, as his spirits sank into depression, he felt guilty .
 He berated himself for friendships he had lost and opportunities he had tossed aside, said that his life had been a failure . "I berated myself for friendships I had lost," he said. "I'm not a failure," he told CNN.com .
 He had been an ‘idiot,” he said, to act in a joking and cavalier fashion in his appearance before the Warren Commission . He said he was an 'idiot' to act cavalierly before the commission .
 He was worried about the people he had injured, especially Lee Oswald and the young rancher, Tito Harper . And he was worried that Lee Oswald had injured him, especially .
 He was seized with guilt over whether something he had done or said, something “childish” and “sophomoric,” might have influenced Lee in what he did . Lee was seized by guilt over what he said or said .
 Ballen, who had not seen de Mohrenschildt in years, came away from their meeting feeling sad . Ballen: "I'm not going to be able to go back and forth to see him again"
 He invited him to come to Santa Fe and offered him the kind of rough, outdoor work that seemed likely to help George the most . He invited George to come and work outdoors .
 Lee liked President Kennedy, but Lee liked him, she says . Lee was a fan of President Kennedy . Lee died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 He frequently said for the United States at this moment of its history, Kennedy was the best possible leader, just as Khrushchev was for Russia . He said that for the U.S. at this time of its . history, he frequently said .
 Lee agreed with Marina when she pointed out how handsome the president was . Marina said he was handsome .
 He agreed without the special edge of reserve that told her he was thinking something else . He agreed, moreover, without the . special edge that told . her that he agreed, but it was not his .
 When the Kennedys’ baby died in the summer of 1963, he had been as upset as she . He had been devastated by the loss of his baby .
 She felt it again when the rifle proved to be missing from the Paines’ garage . She saw guilt in Lee’s eyes when she visited him in the Dallas police station . She felt the guilt again when he found the rifle missing .
 It was nearly a year before she accepted Lee intended to kill Kennedy . But she could not understand Lee’s motive, and could not accept his murder plans .
 She came closer to accepting his intention at the beginning than she was to do later . Indeed, she came closer . to accept his intention than she would later accept it .
 Marina gave it as her opinion that Lee's act had had a ‘political foundation’ Marina said Lee had wanted to make himself famous . Marina also said that Lee wanted to become famous, and that he wanted to be famous .
 On her second appearance, in June of 1964, she again gave it as her view that Lee killed the president . But mentally she kept the reservation that perhaps he had meant to kill Governor Connally instead .
 She didn't mention this because she thought that the commission did not care to hear her speculations . She did not mention it because she didn't think that she wanted to talk about it .
 Marina threw the commission into confusion by testifying that Lee had liked the president so much, she thought it must have been Connally he was aiming at . Finally, in September 1964, shortly before the Warren Report was to be issued, she threw the report into confusion .
 After her last appearance before the commission, some Secret Service men took Marina to dinner . The Secret Service took her out to dinner with her .
 President Kennedy had been sitting directly behind Connally at the time of the first shot . This was no longer the case by the time the final, fatal shot was fired . Connally was killed by a single shot fired by President Kennedy .
 The man who fired the final shot could only have been aiming at Kennedy . The final shot was likely to have been fired at Kennedy.
 Marina accepted the fact that Lee not only had killed the president, as she had thought all along, but that for some reason that she has difficulty compassing to this day, he had actually intended to do so . Marina accepts that Lee intended to kill the president .
 The day before the assassination, Lee had done everything in threes . It went back to November 21, the day before, when she was to recall later, she said . She recalled how Lee did everything in three days before his assassination .
 That afternoon he tried to kiss her three times, and the third time she reluctantly acceded . The third time he kissed her, she reluctantly gave him permission .
 Marina knew that her husband attributed an altogether magical significance to the number three and was obsessed by it . Marina knew her husband was obsessed with the number 3 .
 She remembered that one year earlier, on November 11, 1962, when the de Mohrenschildts took her away from Lee because of his violence toward her, then, too, he had begged her three times not to leave him, but after the third time he gave up .
 The previous summer, he had written the number “33,” to signify that he was the thirtythird member of his fictitious chapter . J. Hidell’s previous summer had written ‘33’ to signify he was a member of the fictitious chapter of the
 In Minsk he played music from the opera every night and, while listening to his favorite aria, he fell into a reverie . He imagined that he was the hero, Hermann. Hermann .
 Hermann Hermann thought that his life was determined by the powers of fate and was obsessed by the number three . Hermann was a Russian Guards officer during the 1820s, during the Russian Revolution .
 Avid for money, he obtained what he believed to be the secret of three cards that, played one after the other, would win him a fortune at the gaming table .
 Hermann played the three cards, staked his love and his whole life on them, and lost . Hermann's love and the life of his life depended on the cards, and he lost .
 Marina believes that on the evening of November 21 Lee was again seized by the fantasy that he was Hermann . Marina believes Lee may have been inspired by the memory of Hermann Hermann in the days before .
 He asked her three times if he might kiss her and if she would move in with him to Dallas . That's why he asked her if he would kiss her, three times before she moved in to Dallas.
 Marina thought about it, the more she had to conclude, although she came to it reluctantly and with pain, that Lee had not fully made up his mind what he was going to do when he came to see her that evening, but as a result of what passed between them, he
 Or perhaps he had made up his mind and asked her to veto his decision . Or perhaps she had already made up her mind . Or maybe he had already decided .
 He was begging her to move in to Dallas with him so he would not have to go through with the terrible deed . He said she would move in with him if he did it .
 She, by refusing what he asked of her, failed to save him from his fate . She refused to help him, and she failed to do so .
 Marina had no way of knowing what Lee was thinking, for he had given her no hint . Lee had given Marina no hint of what he was thinking .
 It was her ignorance, and her helplessness before it, that she was to ponder afterward . She was helpless, but she had nothing to do .
 If Marina can be said to have failed Lee, it is not, as some people thought later, that she ought to have known what he was thinking and sent him frivolously to his death . It is not that Marina should have known he was going to die, it's not that
 It is rather that she, too, was fated—by her lifelong conviction that she was unworthy and by uncertainty over his affections—to refuse his request . It is not that she refused his request, but that she had a lifelong conviction .
 To such a man, the uncanny selection of a route that would carry the president right under his window could mean only one thing . It could be a mistake for the president, but it's not surprising that he chose this route .
 Fate had singled him out to do the dangerous but necessary task that had been his destiny all along and that would cause him to go down in history . Fate had chosen him to carry out the task that would be his destiny .
 If Lee really felt this way, then Marina’s power on November 21 was not great, since he was destined to put his questions to her in such a way that she was bound to refuse . Lee's questions to Marina were destined to be answered by Marina in a way she
 Lee was more than Pushkin’s Hermann, playing a role marked out for him by fate . Lee played the role of Hermann in the first half of his life . Lee's career was marked out by fate.
 "He was a Marxist, and as a Marxist he was also enacting a part that had been determined ahead of time," he said . He was also playing a part in the role of a Marxist .
 Marxism is a determinist philosophy, which says that the course of history is decided in advance . Such choices as an individual may make have little to do with the outcome of the outcome, he says .
 According to Marxism, it made no difference what Lee did on November 22 . History would grind on and turn out in more or less the same manner anyhow, anyhow .
 Lee was a poor Marxist in another way as well, for Marxist philosophy repudiates the kind of terroristic act he had in mind . Lee was not a Marxist, but a Marxist philosopher repudiated the idea of terror .
 According to his Marxism, history would be moved forward by his deed and the Marxist cause would be advanced . And according to his Marxist Marxism, according to him, history was moved forward .
 Lee chose not one but two determinist philosophies by which to live and to die . It is ironic, yet in keeping with Lee’s rigid nature, that he had chosen two determinist philosophies . Lee chose one of the two philosophies: ‘Living and Dying’
 According to one, he was Pushkin’s Hermann, who staked his life on the toss of three cards . According to the other, he is the implacable engine of history, and according to another, he's the implacentable engine .
 Lee Harvey Oswald had no choice but to do what he did . Oswald was the fatalist and the implausible Marxist . Oswald had to do as he did.
 'It happened that the two roles came together at the same moment, demand the same thing of him. It happened that it happened that he came together, he said . He said: 'It's a good thing that he did'
 "He did not go around killing every day, nor was he capable of it all the time," he says . But he says he was not capable of killing all day and was not always killing .
 Lee was insane enough so that he needed to kill someone and coherent enough to succeed . By chance, the president’s visit came at a moment when Lee was sane enough to kill a person . Lee was not so coherent that he was able to kill anyone .
 Everything that had ever happened to Lee Oswald could have happened it exactly the way it had, his whole life could have been exactly what it had been, and it would not have made any difference . Lee Oswald's life would have been the same as his life had been and he could have
 President Kennedy could have come and gone from Dallas in perfect safety . President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in March 1963 .
 Lee's fate, duty, and historical necessity had come together in this time and place and singled him out to do the deed . The choice of a route that would carry the president past his window could only mean only one thing to Lee —fate, duty and duty . Lee's
 The tragedy of the president’s assassination was its terrible randomness . The tragedy was the randomness of Obama's assassination . The president's assassination was a terrible random act of randomness.
 There was the tension between determination and accident, fate and chance . There was also a tension between fate and fate .
 For the assassin there appears also to have been a conflict between love and duty . And for the assassin, there appears to have also been a struggle between love .
 Lee saw the president as a social and historical evil that had become his duty to destroy . Lee saw him as an evil that was a social, historical evil . Lee said he had to destroy the president in order to keep his life alive .
 Lee had not created his opportunity, and some respects he did not relish his task . But Lee did not create his opportunity . Lee had created his chance, and it was not his first job .
 He did not leap to a decision immediately upon learning the route, and as late as the evening before, he gave a veto power of some sort to his unknowing wife . He gave her veto power the night before .
 He acted like another hero of his, Will Cain, the sheriff in the movie High Noon, who stands up to a band of outlaws, alone, because it is his duty . Yet he went ahead despite his doubts, and in so doing he acted like Will Cain .
 Lee may have felt that he had something in common with Will Cain, whose song he had sung so many times in Russia, and whose refrain was “Do not forsake me, oh my darlin’ ” Marina had heard again and again as Lee was writing his
 Lee left his wedding ring behind when he said goodbye to Marina at the Paine house on the morning of November 22 . Lee left the ring behind at the end of his visit to Marina .
 Marina and the family “love” she represented, Marina says . It was a stunning repudiation of Marina’s family ‘love’ she represented. Marina was devastated by the decision .
 Lee was angry after his wife rejected him the night before . Lee's actions were an act of retaliation for her rejection of him . Lee had always been angry about the rejection of his wife .
 It was a way of dissociating Marina from the deed he was about to commit and the guilt he would incur for it . Marina was the reason he wanted to commit the deed .
 It was a way of showing his scorn and relegating her, too, to the everyday herd of men and women who would be too stupid and cowardly to understand the great and heroic deed he was performing for their sakes . And it was the way he showed his scorn .
 Lee’s leaving his wedding ring was an elegant gesture of contempt, an equivalent of Will Cain tossing his sheriffs badge in the dust . Lee's leaving his wife's wedding ring is an elegant move of contempt . Will Cain's tossing his sheriff's badge is the equivalent of tossing
 He is saying that the people for whom he has risked everything, love and life itself, are not worthy of what he has done for them . He said that he is not saying that he risked everything to save his life .
 He would have been diminished as a man if he had failed to do it, he said . But their unworthiness did not alter his duty, and he would not have failed it .
 Lee did not want to lose Marina, just as Cain does to lose Amy . Yet Lee did want to keep Marina, as did Cain . Cain does not want the loss of Amy .
 Twice on the day after he shot the president, Lee begged Marina not to forsake him . Lee begged her to return to her house so that she would be available to him at whatever hour he might call .
 Lee saw himself as Will Cain, he may also have expected his personal drama to end the way High Noon does . Lee's personal drama may not have ended in the way it did .
 Cain wins back the love of his wife . Cain earns the thanks of the townspeople and wins back his love . Cain not only earns the help of the people, he also earns the love .
 There may have been still another voice speaking to Lee before the assassination and telling him what he ought to do . John F Kennedy may have spoken to Lee Lee before his assassination .
 Kennedy’s book is addressed to the ordinary citizen, and its subject is political courage . Kennedy's book, "The Courage of Courage," is published by Harper Collins .
 Lee apparently took its message to heart, both as a citizen and as a great man he supposed himself to be . Lee read the book in the summer of 1963, when he read it in summer 1963 .
 Kennedy, in the book, defined the man of political courage as the one who will do the thing he knows in his heart to be right . Kennedy defined the political courage of a man who knows the truth .
 Oswald's words may have been in his head when he took aim and fired on November 22 . Oswald may have used the words, or words very like them, in his firing range . Oswald was shot in the head by Lee Oswald in the early hours of that day .
 In addition to the conflict between love and duty and the polarity between accident and determinism, there was something else at work . The tension, the attraction, that the assassin felt for his victim, was the tension .
 Of all the bonds between this assassin and the victim, perhaps the strongest, perhaps, lay in a similarity the two of them shared . The two shared a similarity: a similarity to each other, the assassin said .
 Oswald and Kennedy were attracted to death, and both had tempted it often . Both had tempted death often, but both were drawn to it . Oswald was fascinated with death .
 Oswald had tried suicide at least once and had made a murder attempt that could easily have led to his own death . Oswald had made an attempt to commit suicide at the time of his death .
 One of his fictional heroes, Will Cain, had placed himself in a position from which he could barely escape alive . Will Cain is one of the world's most famous fictional characters .
 Another, Hermann in ‘The Queen of Spades,’ had stabbed himself to death . Hermann was one of two characters in the series . Another had killed himself .
 Even more frequently than Oswald, Kennedy had placed his life at hazard . Kennedy had often placed his own life at risk . Kennedy's life was at risk more often than Oswald's .
 He was a reckless driver, and often taken a risky charter flight in foul weather so as not to miss a political appointment . He was reckless driver. He had often taken charter flights to avoid missing a meeting .
 During World War II in the Pacific, he was known not merely for his bravery but for the frightening, and some said needless, risks he had taken with his own life, with his PT boat .
 I have a rendezvous with Death At some disputed barricade, When Spring comes back with rustling shade And apple blossoms fill the air . But I’ve a . rendezvous . At midnight in some flaming town, And I to my pledged word am true, I shall
 Kennedy, on the morning of his death, actually pantomimed an assassination attempt that he thought could have been carried out against him the evening before . Kennedy thought the attempt could be carried out on the night before his death .
 Kennedy exuded fatalism, a ‘come and get me’ air, a fatalism . As greatly as he enjoyed life, and as much as he helped others to enjoy it, he also helped others enjoy it . Kennedy was known for his humor .
 Oswald, with his own fatalism, may have been peculiarly attuned to pick this up . Oswald's fatalism may have picked up this up, and he may have had his fatalism picked up .
 The Kennedy fatalism was a profound matter, with implications for others besides Oswald . Kennedy's fatalism has implications for other people besides Oswald, author says . "The JFK fatalism" was profound matter .
 President may have been attracted to death, in part, because he had already lost his beloved older sister and older brother in tragic air accidents . The president may have already lost both his older siblings in tragic accidents .
 "All of this had been publicized a good deal and had become part of the family mystique," says the author . "It was a good thing to do, but it was a big mistake," she says .
 In becoming part of the mystique, it had also become a family taint . But it had become a taint for the family .
 In 1963, the Kennedys had had more than their share of untimely deaths . Already, in 1963, it was as if the Kennedy family had had their own share of deaths .
 Each of these heightened the association in the public mind between the Kennedys and death, each made the taint greater, and each increased the vulnerability of the rest of the family .
 Oswald's stability was as fragile as Oswald’s, even a tenuous connection with the president could have strengthened some half-conscious association between the president and death . Oswald lived only two hundred miles from where Medgar Evers was murdered a few hours later .
 The death of the president’s newborn son in August, at a time when Oswald, too, was hoping for a son, may further have strengthened the association . Oswald's son's death may further strengthen the association with the president .
 Marina has said that her husband was upset by the Kennedy baby’s death, and it was on that day that he became engaged, for the first time, in a pro-Castro street fracas and was tossed into jail .
 Lee Oswald was fascinated by death, President Kennedy was fascinated with death, and of the ties between them in Oswald’s mind, this was the greatest of all . Lee Oswald, Lee Oswald and President Kennedy were both fascinated by the death of the day .
 For President Kennedy, like Lee Oswald, was a young husband and father . Lee Oswald was like Lee Kennedy, a young man and a young father . Oswald was the son of President Kennedy .
 At the time of his election, he was handsome and in his early forties, his wife was thirty-one and beautiful, and they had been married only seven years . They had only been married for seven years.
 It was obviously true of Kennedy, as is not always the case with an older president who has been married for many years . There were infant children as proof of an ongoing sex life .
 Both the president and his wife had, moreover, an extraordinary capacity to project themselves into the yearnings and fantasies of millions . Some of these fantasies were sexual, and some were sexual .
 Their photographs were frequently displayed on the covers of movie magazines, which exist to exploit such fantasies . Their photographs often appeared on the cover of movies magazines .
 The Kennedys had close ties with Hollywood . Members of the family were seen constantly with film stars and other celebrities .
 The symbolism surrounding such celebrities also tends to be sexual . The presence of the Kennedys in their company contributed to a dangerous eroticization of the presidency . The symbolism of such celebrities often tend to be erotic .
 The Kennedys’ life in the White House was more visible than that of any First Family before them . Television was part of it, too, for it made the Kennedy's life more visible . Television also made it more visible, too .
 Both of the Kennedys appealed powerfully and intimately to men and women in every age group and every walk of life . People who did not ordinarily think about politics or see their own lives reflected in that of the First Family . Because of these elements and, above all, because of the
 They were young, twenty-two and twenty-four years old . They read eagerly about the Kennedys in every fan magazine they could peruse during their evening strolls past the newsstands .
 They speculated without surcease about every facet of the Kennedys’ lives . They speculated about everything from the family's lives to their own deaths .
 Since she was a goddess, Marina thought that perhaps Mrs. Marina could be a goddess . Marina decided to adopt a new name for herself, Marina said .
 President Kennedy was “cold,” and that the president might need extra warmth in his life, she says . She says that a less perfect, more earthy woman such as she herself might provide .
 Marina seems only to have been thinking what many American women thought . In thinking thoughts such as these, Marina seems to be thinking what she thought .
 President Kennedy was a physical reminder of the suitor she wished she had married . She was unusual, perhaps, in that he was the president she wished to marry .
 Unlike other women whose daydreams about the president were innocuous, she was married to a man who happened to be capable of killing . And she was unusual in that, unlike other women, she had a daydream about a president .
 Oswald's feelings are difficult to surmise, but Marina confirms that neither he nor she had heard rumors of the president’s affairs with women, nor of his Addison's disease . Marina confirms she and Oswald had no knowledge of rumors of president's affairs . Oswald’
 They thought the Kennedys were just another couple such as they were, raised to the thousandth power of beauty and success . They thought they were just a couple such a they were .
 He was a considerate husband in one respect, let his wife decide how many children they would have . He let her decide if she wanted to have more children .
 Oswald thought he was protecting "Jackie" from a sexually exigent Catholic husband, Oswald thought . Oswald despised religion, but may have been protecting his wife from her Catholic husband . Oswald shot the president in the head in September, killing him and his wife .
 It is possible that the act of assassination was enhanced by the fact that Jacqueline Kennedy would be there, that she would see it . Oswald was performing the “deed of unheard-of prowess” that he was performing for her sake, says historian .
 The number of letters to the president increased by 50 percent during the early weeks of the Kennedy administration . In a book published in 1961, Baughman stated that the letters to President Kennedy increased 50 percent .
 There was an unusually large pool of potential assassins for this particular president . President Barack Obama has a history of assassination attempts .
 There was another aspect of Kennedy’s special vulnerability that enhanced his appeal as a victim to Lee Harvey Oswald . There was also a special vulnerability to Kennedy, says historian John Avlon .
 It lay in the many roles he played as a man, as a member of the Kennedy clan, as head of the First Family, and as president of the U.S.
 There was something in Kennedy for nearly everyone . He was vibrant and handsome . His age and his age gave him an across-the-board appeal .
 There was scarcely any American who could not see something of himself in this president, or who did not want to . President Barack Obama has been a divisive figure in America .
 Countless men and women saw in him someone in their own lives who had been close to them, or someone they would like to be close to . Countless people saw him as someone they wanted to be with them .
 Kennedy had two living parents, unusual thing for a president, and there must have been many older men and women who looked on him as a son, or as the son they wished they had had . Also, Kennedy had been a president .
 The children of such people could have been jealous of the president . And the children of those who were jealous of him, he said .
 John Kennedy was one of a large brood of brothers and sisters . There must have been some among the population who viewed him as the fantastically successful older brother whose achievements they could not compare .
 Others must have envied him his upbringing in a loyal and close-knit family . Still others must have envy him his close and loyal family .
 There was only one family in America that was famous for having enough children to rouse up a football game at any moment . The Kennedys were famous for their large family of children . The family is famous for being able to have enough children at any time .
 Oswald appears to have envied the president not only the ebullient boyhood that was in such contrast with his lonely one, but he envied him his job . Oswald wanted to be president, and at the very age, forty-three, at which Kennedy had attained the office
 He wanted his ‘son,’ the son he did not yet have, to be president . Moreover, he wanted his "son, a son he didn't yet have," he said . He said, "I wanted his son, a president, to become president"
 Oswald identified not only with the president but with Joseph P Kennedy Sr., “founding father” of the dynasty . This, again, appears to have been a case in which Oswald identified himself with President Kennedy Sr. Oswald was a member of the Kennedy family .
 President Kennedy was not an accidental victim, Lee Oswald's assassin says . Lee Oswald shot President Kennedy to death in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 . Oswald shot Kennedy to the head in the head with a single bullet to his right side .
 Despite the huge element of chance, Kennedy was a highly determined target . Oswald might well have proved to be so to some other assassin than Oswald . Kennedy was determined target, and Oswald might have proved so to someone else .
 Oswald’s motives were immeasurable in its importance . Oswald's motive for the assassination was immeable in his own life, the author says . Oswald had a darker side that entered into Oswald's motives, he says .
 "We as a nation are a family, with the president as our symbolic father, or head," says President Obama . "We are a nation, with a nation as a family," says Obama .
 The president is not only a father, but to some he is a combined parent, embodying elements of the mother as well . What is only beginning to be understood is that the president is also a father .
 He is therefore in a position to magnetize the emotions of those who have had particularly strong feelings about either or both of their parents .
 It is perhaps a strain on the imagination to see President Kennedy, with his virile masculinity, in the role of a symbolic mother . President Kennedy is perhaps the most powerful person in the world to be seen .
 It was family lore that Kennedys are in politics to ‘serve,” to give of themselves unstintingly and asked nothing in return . But there was something motherly about his presidency, for it was something momly .
 President Kennedy emphasized this by working full time for the country and giving back his salary to the Treasury . President Kennedy gave back his full time salary to Treasury .
 He created the Peace Corps, so that young Americans could devote part of their lives to helping the less fortunate . And he created it so young people could spend their lives helping others . The Peace Corps was created to help young people in the United States .
 In all these ways, the president stressed the giving, caring, motherly aspect of his office . The president stressed that his office should be seen as a mother .
 Public figure who appeals to the good in men stirs in them visions of altruism and exhorts them to be better than they are . Such a leader appears to touch a chord in his followers that renders him especially vulnerable to their disappointments . And this is the beginning of an answer
 He had been disappointed in the mother who, he felt, let him down so egregiously while he was growing up that he came to feel deeply wronged by her, he said . He said he was disappointed in her, but she had been a good person .
 He had been disappointed by the father who let him down by dying before he was born . And he had had a father who died before his birth .
 It was not President Kennedy’s fault, it was his danger, that he stood in a position to magnetize the emotions of a Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald had had very little love in his life and his feelings toward both his parents were so richly compounded of hate .
 Oswald apparently was one of Oswald's associations with the president was too deep, too charged emotionally, too much to bear . To some, the memories and associations that this president stirred were too deep .
 President Kennedy died because he had, as man and symbol, become so many things to so many men . He died because of his role as a symbol and symbol of his legacy .
 Marina was conceived in December 1940 when the worst of the purges were over and before the war with Germany began . Marina was born in 1941 and is now a museum in New York .
 This had made it harder for her to guess the reasons for her father’s disappearance, she said . This had led to her father's disappearance .
 The best estimate appears to be that he was a late victim of the Great Purges of the 1930s .
 To an outside observer, Marina does resemble Princess Mary, who was moody, intelligent and flirtatious .
 Pechorin bears resemblances to the man Marina was to marry, Lee Oswald . Marina was married to Lee Oswald, the man she married to .
 Marina indignantly rejects any comparison between Pechorin and the man she married . Marina insists that she is not the same person as her husband . Marina says she is happy with her husband's success in Russia .
 He destroyed Princess Mary and others, but through his destructiveness he found himself, she admires him for this . She admires her for this. He destroyed her and others .
 Oswald, on the other hand, failed to find himself through his destructiveness, and for this she holds him in contempt . For this, she holds Oswald in contempt, she says . Oswald, she writes, "failed to find his own self-destructiveness," she writes .
 Marina married her Pechorin or created him, perhaps unfairly perhaps, in her later life . Marina's later life might wonder if she married her husband or created Pechorn .
 As many as 20 percent of her classmates, children born during the late 1930s and early 1940s, may also have been illegitimate . The pain of learning that she was illegitimate was in no way eased by the fact that, according to published Soviet sources, as many .
 Letters to the author from Richard E. Snyder, February 9, 1969, January 6, 1970, and December 2, 1976 .
 Conversations with John A McVickar, Marie Cheatham, Richard E Snyder, and Edward L Keenan .
 Interview of the author with Lee Harvey Oswald in Moscow, November 16, 1959 . Oswald had been in Moscow with Oswald in November 1959 . Interview with Oswald was conducted in Moscow .
 He was stationed at Cubi Point at the beginning of those ‘two years,” and it is not inconceivable that at this base or at one of the two other U-2 bases at which he was stationed .
 Oswald told many lies and was reticent with all the Americans who spoke to him in Moscow—Snyder, Aline Mosby, and myself. Oswald was very reticent . Oswald told a reticent, says Snyder .
 We thought he had arrived in Russia shortly before the scene at the embassy, and at the time of my interview, I assumed he had been in Moscow two weeks, not a month . As a result of this, we thought he'd been in Russia just before the embassy scene .
 Oswald's suicide attempt was not known until after he was dead and his ‘Historic Diary’ was published . Only Rimma Shirokova and Soviet officials knew of his suicide attempt .
 I have been asked by Warren Commission lawyers and others since 1963 whether I detected any signs Oswald was being manipulated by outsiders . I was asked by lawyers since 1963 if I detected signs that Oswald was manipulating by outsiders, he says .
 In 1959 travel arrangements to the USSR could be timeconsuming and complicated . Travel arrangements to Russia were difficult to arrange .
 If the would-be visitor went to the Soviet Embassy in one European capital, it might take four days to obtain a visa . In another city, the embassy might take three months to respond to a visa request . In still another city there might be no reply to the request at all
 Oswald was either evasive or mysterious in his replies when asked how he learned to enter Russia and defecting . Oswald's answers to the questions he asked were evasive and mysterious . Oswald says he learned the mechanics of defecting from Russia from Russia .
 Oswald was, to a degree I found shocking, responding only to signals from within . His own strong impression at the time was that, far from being manipulated from the outside, Oswald was not being manipulated . Oswald was responding to signals only from within, he says .
 Rather than being alive to, or stimulated by, his new environment, he was at pains to seal himself off from it . He was not happy to be alive to the environment, but he was happy to close himself off .
 The feeling he gave was that he was . wholly occupied by his inner preconceptions and by promptings from within, and that he did not want to be bothered by outside forces or facts .
 Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, refused because he lacked a security clearance . Ambassador Charles Bohlen tried to have his thirty-day employment extended, but the secretary of state refused .
 Neither before nor since have I been employed by any agency of any government. Neither before or since have been employed in any government .
 Nosenko was a KGB officer assigned to Intourist in Moscow in 1959 . Warren Commission memoranda based on CIA and FBI interviews with him in 1964 . CIA, FBI interviews conducted in 1964.
 The KGB’s interest in Oswald was therefore “practically nil” and, when he was sent to Minsk in January, 1960, the KGB office there was merely told to keep a “discreet check” to make sure that he was not a �
 Khrushchev was known to be personally and politically close to Furtseva . If he could be linked to handling of the Oswald case, he might then be made to suffer political damage in aftermath of Kennedy assassination .
 Khrushchev did, in fact, fall from power less than one year after Kennedy’s death . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Khrushchev may have entrusted some very high party body with seeing to it that the Spirit of Camp David was implemented, or not sabotaged, by his own bureaucracy .
 If something of the sort occurred, then Mme Furtseva would have been a logical choice to have supervised the handling of ‘humanitarian” cases, writes Alexander Nekrassov .
 Khrushchev returned from the U.S. in early October 1959 and quickly departed on a trip to the Soviet Far East . The trip was part of a tour of the Soviet Union's Far East.
 It would have taken a few weeks for a new policy in handling Americans to be established . The new policy would have been established by the White House .
 Oswald was told that he would have to leave the USSR on October 21, and he attempted suicide that day . Oswald tried to kill himself that day after he was told he had to leave Russia .
 On October 28, only one week later, he was interviewed by four new officials who, according to him, apparently knew nothing about his case . The new officials interviewed him only a week after his arrest, he says .
 It is possible that Oswald was the beneficiary of blind luck in his timing . Oswald's suicide attempt itself was sufficient for his case to be bucked to a higher level and decided .
 Oswald was not admitted to the hospital until the next day, Thursday, March 30, and was discharged on April 11 . According to Soviet hospital records, Oswald was admitted on March 30 . Oswald was discharged from the hospital in April 11, according to hospital records .
 The internal passports carried by Soviet citizens for travel inside the USSR are of three types . The passports carry a passport to travel in the USSR .
 Oswald carried the so-called stateless passport, which Oswald carried, for the foreign resident who has not become a Soviet citizen . The passport is for citizens of foreign countries who have permission to reside in the USSR . It is for those who may, or may not, have retained citizenship
 Ilya Prusakov appears to have been confused even for an official like Ilya . Confusion therefore appears to be possible even for a senior Russian official .
 A small but interesting example of disarticulation of the Soviet bureaucracy may be seen here . The Soviet bureaucracy is a small part of the world's largest bureaucracy .
 Oswald was asked whether he was still interested in acquiring Soviet citizenship in January . Officials at OVIR, the Office of Visas and Registration, inquired whether Oswald still wanted to become Soviet citizen .
 OVIR in Minsk had at least a hint that he was thinking of leaving Russia . The Russian president is thought to be planning to leave Russia .
 The following month, February of 1961, he wrote the United States Embassy in Moscow asking to have his passport back and stating his desire to go home . He wrote the U.S. Embassy in February of that month asking for the passport back .
 His Soviet “Red Cross” subsidy was immediately cut off, an indication that his letter had been intercepted . The appropriate agency in Moscow, probably the KGB, probably knew his intentions .
 No effort was made to dissuade either of them from applying for marriage to Marina . Two months later, when he applied at ZAGS, still another official agency, to marry Marina, he applied .
 Usually, when a Soviet girl applies to marry a foreigner who is not a Soviet citizen and who may leave the country some day, strong pressure is brought on the girl not to go through with the marriage, and permission is often denied .
 It was generally supposed in Minsk that Oswald was already a citizen or was on his way to becoming one . That the Oswalds were permitted to marry is a sign that it was generally a sign of Minsk . The Oswalds' marriage was a sign they were already citizens .
 In some instances, spelling and punctuation have been corrected for the sake of clarity . In others, such as this one, they have been left as Oswald wrote them . In quoting correspondence and other writing by Oswald, some of the writing has been corrected .
 Oswald traveled to Moscow without official permission, a requirement for every foreigner traveling from one city to another . Questions have been raised about the ease with which Oswald traveled without permission . Oswald was traveling from Moscow to Moscow in 1961, when he was assassinated .
 Oswald was watched, but he was not under heavy surveillance . The answer seems to be that while Soviet controls are strict, they are far from perfect . Oswald was not watched by heavy surveillance.
 He appeared reluctant to make the trip without authorization, yet his friends may have advised him that he could do so with impunity . He may have been advised by his friends to go without authorization .
 The agent for Aeroflot, the Soviet airline, simply did not bother to ask whether he had permission to travel . But speaking reasonably fluent Russian and dressed in his working clothes, he probably bought it himself . He probably bought the plane himself .
 Their success depends a great deal upon chance — who they are, where they are and where they're, and the vigilance of local officials . The success depends on chance —who is, where, where and where, and of course .
 If they get caught, they will be sent back to the city from which they came . The worst that usually happens is that they are sent home to their homeland .
 Oswald also took his chances at the Hotel Berlin, where he had lived for about two weeks in 1959 . Oswald had lived there for two weeks before his assassination .
 The girls at the front desk remembered him, and since he presented Soviet documents instead of a foreign passport, it did not entail a great risk for them to assign him a room . The girls remembered him and he was assigned a room at the hotel in Moscow .
 Oswald telephoned, asking her to come to Moscow, and on the morning of July 10, she went . Oswald was in Moscow when he asked her to go, and she said yes .
 Lee Oswald to Robert Oswald: “I assume the government must have a few charges against me, since my coming here like that is illegal.” Letters of Lee Oswald and Robert Oswald were written by Robert Oswald in 1961 . Oswald: If I can get the government to drop charges
 Marina laughed on hearing this particular statement of her husband’s and remarked that without an ulterior purpose he would never have said any such thing .
 Marina remembers only one visit to the embassy, on Monday, July 10, and she thinks that both sets of interviews, hers and Oswald’s, were completed that day . Marina: "I think that both of the interviews were complete that day" Marina says she and Oswald were
 The expedition must have taken place on Saturday or Sunday, August 19 or 20, 1961 . The letter was dated Monday, August 21, 1961, so the expedition was likely to have occurred on August 19-20 .
 Later he admitted that he had actually been initiated into oral sex much earlier, by an older woman in Japan . He said he had been initiated by a woman in the country .
 A fragment of the aria was found among Oswald’s belongings after the assassination . After the assassination, a fragment of Oswald's aria is found among his belongings .
 Oswald's handwriting, in Russian, contains omissions, mistakes, and indecipherable phrases . It is in Oswald’s handwriting, and it contains omitting, mistakes and omitting omissions . Oswald's handwritten notes are in his handwriting .
 Oswald had indeed performed a deed of “unheard-of prowess,” Marina thought that he had done it to impress Rimma . After the assassination, Marina again thought that she had thought it was an attempt to impress her mother .
 It was an unconscious attempt to repress the fear that he had done it to impress her . It was a thought that may have been an unconscious .
 Oswald did, as Marina suspects, associate the opera, and the aria, with Rimma . It is quite likely that when he first saw The Queen of Spades in Moscow, Rimma went with him as his interpreter .
 Only later did she remember that she had been hospitalized because of gas fumes on a bus . Only later she remembered that she was hospitalized due to a bus accident .
 Oswald was so impressed by the demolition of Stalin’s monument in Minsk that he wrote the second of the two essays he composed in Russia . Oswald was inspired by the destruction of Stalin's Minsk monument .
 I was in the Soviet Union the following summer and heard rumors about an attempt in Moscow, Stalingrad, Sochi, and Kislovodsk . Khrushchev was grazed on the arm and slightly wounded, and another that the bullet missed the Minister of Finance, Zvere
 Khrushchev left Minsk for Sochi and did not reappear in public for three weeks, a good sign that an attempt on his life had occurred . In fact, he did not appear in public until he left for Sochi . The former Soviet leader was not in the news for three
 This is hard to believe, since the wingspan of the U-2 was so enormous that almost anyone would have seen instantly that its mission was aerial reconnaissance . The U.2's wingspan was so large that it would have been mistaken for a reconnaissance mission .
 Oswald claimed in a letter to Robert that he “saw” Powers in Moscow at his trial . Oswald claimed he ‘saw’ Powers at the trial . Powers was in Moscow when he was accused of espionage .
 Oswald defected to the U.S. at the time of his defection, would have recognized him at the trial . There were American reporters and embassy officials who had seen Oswald . Oswald's defection trial was held in New York City .
 Oswald probably ‘saw’ Powers on television in Minsk . The trial was televised in Russia, and Oswald probably "saw" Powers .
 After lengthy interrogation by military, intelligence, and government officials, he was allowed to go back to civilian life . He was allowed back to normal life after lengthy questioning by military officials .
 Powers noted that Oswald at Atsugi had access to all our equipment . Powers said in an interview with the Times of London on April 20, 1971, Powers noted further that Oswald had access .
 Oswald was stationed at three U-2 bases at which he was stationed . It is impossible to say how much he learned about the aircraft at the three bases . Oswald died at the age of 92 in September 1945 .
 Oswald later did show himself to be accomplished at picking up on his jobs’ extracurricular information that he was not entitled to have . Oswald's job was to keep information narrowly confined at some bases, and Oswald did . Oswald was an accomplished reporter .
 It is conceivable that at least after the Philippine period , he wanted to acquire classified information that he could trade for Soviet citizenship .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin was offered radar information from the moment he arrived in Moscow . But despite offers of radar information which he made, the Russians were not impressed . The Russian president was not impressed with the offer of radar data .
 Oswald arrived in the Soviet Union at the time of his arrival . At about the time, the Russians had tried, and failed, to bring down a U-2 .
 They tried, and nearly succeeded, on the next U-2 overflight in mid-April 1960 . They nearly succeeded in the next overflight .
 The U-2 is a U.2 that has a maximum flying altitude or cruising altitude . The U.S. has not been able to shoot it down, but it has been unable to do so .
 Powers’ allegations to the contrary, the best guess remains that the Russians knew all they needed to know about the U-2 from various sources . Oswald, a former Marine Corps private with the lowest security clearance, was at no time viewed as a possible purveyor of needed information
 All the Soviet decisions regarding Oswald appear to have been made on negative grounds . The CIA described five other defector cases that occurred within a year or two of Oswald’s . All five received quicker answers and better treatment than Oswald .
 Some experts on Soviet affairs have noted that, had the Russians received information of value from Oswald, their treatment of him would have been different from the very first day . Some experts say that if the Russians had received information from Oswald they would have treated him differently .
 Russia would not have allowed him to languish in Moscow hotels, within reach of Western reporters, for two and a half months before deciding what to do with him . They would have not allowed him languished in hotels .
 They would probably have accorded him slightly better treatment than he received, a chance to study fulltime, for example, rather than a job as a factory hand .
 "They would not have allowed him to leave the country—ever. Lastly, and conclusively, they would have not allowed him out of the country," the author says .
 This they could have accomplished by granting him Soviet citizenship, which would have made him effectively their prisoner . They could have given him a “stateless passport,” as they did, and then either refused outright, or simply declined any answer when he requested an exit visa .
 Oswald would not have dared to go home had he given the Russians information of value but would have clung to the sanctuary he had . Oswald, of course, wouldn't have dared go home if he gave the Russians info .
 There has been confusion that the Oswalds were debriefed in a CIA "safe house" in Holland before leaving for the U.S. As a result of the confusion, there has been speculation that they may have been held in a safe house .
 Oswalds’ documents make clear that they left Moscow on a two-day train trip on June 1, 1962 . They crossed the border at Brest into Poland on June 2, crossed into Poland, entered West Germany and Holland on June 3 . They sailed on the Maasdam
 Marina’s lament that all the shops were closed on the one day they were there fits the documentary record . Thus they could have stayed in Holland only one night, Sunday .
 The Highest Stage of Capitalism, and possibly Engels’s ‘Anti-Diihring,” were at least familiar with their contents . The Highest St. of Capitalism was published by Engels .
 Sources Affidavit of Edward John Pic Jr. Jr., Vol., 82; Report of Dr. Texas, 1962-1963 . Report of Texas Governor Edward Johnson Jr.
 John Pic learned while he was growing up that his father did contribute to his support . His mother told him constantly that the amount was not enough, only $18 a month . John Pic says his father contributed to his family financially .
 Pic was not disabused of his other illusion, that he had been the cause of his parents’ divorce, until years later, after the Kennedy assassination, when he was thirty-one years old and read about his parents in Life magazine .
 Testimony of John Edward Pic, Vol., 19; Robert Oswald, op. cit, 33; Warren Commission Report, 671 . Warren Commission report: Oswald's testimony to the Warren Commission . Robert Oswald was assassinated in November 1945 .
 John says he was bitterly hurt when his mother forced him to leave school . However, according to John, he was bitter hurt when he was forced out of school .
 He testified he and another agent, Arnold J Brown, staked out the house and waited down the road in a car . He testified that he and Arnold J . Brown waited in the car .
 Fain: Lee did not object, and he climbed into the back seat of the car . Fain says Lee didn't object to the move, and Lee sat in the car with him . Lee was not harmed, according to Fain, but he was taken into custody .
 Marina recalls that Fain came to their door, and that recollection seems more likely to be correct, since it was her first contact with the FBI . Marina recalls the effect on her husband was vivid and she remembers it in detail .
 Fain paid many calls in a year, and his recollection may have been fuzzy . Fain, on the other hand, paid many such calls in the past year .
 Fain seems to have been wrong about the time he and Brown spotted Oswald coming home . Fain also seems to be wrong about when he said Oswald was coming home from the scene .
 Oswald was probably not at 5:30, as he reported, but a few minutes after 4:30 . Oswald got out of work at 4.30, the hour at which he was likely to have left work .
 The interview probably lasted for an hour and a quarter, from 4:45 until 6:00, FBI report says . The interview is likely to have lasted for about an hour, a quarter .
 Of the informants whose hearsay remarks are used in this paragraph, one was anonymous . The third had been governess to Dorothy Pierson de Mohrenschildt . The author's informants are anonymous .
 Letters from Samuel B Ballen to the author, June 18, 1968, and February 4, 1972, respectively . Ballen: "I love you. I love you" Ballen. You love you."
 Marina’s menstrual period started on January 11, and she could have been fertile on the 26th . She could be fertile on January 26th, when she was fertile .
 Rachel was born on October 20, weighed nearly 7 pounds, and was said to be full term . Rachel is now a healthy 7-pound baby .
 Marina remembers no other occasion around this time when she failed to take precautions . Marina says she has no other time in her life when she fails to take precaution .
 Letter from Major General Edwin A Walker to the author, postmarked May 15, 1974 . Walker: "I am a hero of the day" Walker was killed in the Vietnam War .
 Gladys A Yoakum to the author, April 6 and May 6, 1973, and May 24, 1975 . Gladys to the writer: "I love you. Gladys" Gladys .
 Oswald subscribed to the Hughes campaign . Time magazine, to which Oswald subscribed, had a story about the campaign in September 1962 .
 Those who concede Oswald’s link to the letter but believe that he lacked the skill to write it . There are also those who believe Oswald lacked skill to make the letter .
 Oswald had the capacity to write the letter, although it would have been filled with errors of spelling and punctuation that do not appear in the published version . But from other writings he has left behind, there is no doubt that he had the ability to write it .
 The Militant does not have the original, and the editors are unable to say whether the letter arrived in typed or handwritten form or whether Oswald was the author .
 The present managing editor has, however, carefully explained the paper's policy in handling letters . He has been careful to explain the paper’s policy .
 The Militant has among its readers an unusually high proportion of poor people, working people, and even prisoners . It is a “longstanding policy” to edit for “syntax, grammar, spelling,” as well as to add transitions, it says .
 The editor commented that his paper probably edits a good deal more heavily than most . The editor said he probably edited a lot of the papers .
 Oswald worked Saturday until 4:00 pm on the weekend of March 9-10 . He must have taken the photographs on Sunday, March 10 . Oswald took the photos of a large building in the background of the photos .
 Oswald's time sheet on March 12 is evidence that he probably lied sometimes about his hours . Oswald’s time sheet shows that Oswald probably lied about his time . Oswald is accused of lying about hours .
 This appears to have been the case, for the order was imprinted on Klein’s cash register March 13 . The order was placed on the register of the store .
 Oswald probably lied when he signed in at 8:00 a.m. Oswald's post office window opened only at 8 p.m., Oswald probably used to sign in at the time of the day . Oswald was the only person who signed in to the post office .
 He did not want Robert to come when Marina was alone and learn from her the facts of his treatment of her, he said . He said he wanted Robert to learn from Marina's treatment .
 He didn't want Robert to see the revolver on its shelf and the clutter of maps and photographs in his “office” and possibly guess his plan . He didn’t want Robert’s father to see his son's plan . Robert: “I’
 Oswald had some insight into himself and may have understood that he was like a gun that is loaded, cocked, and about to go off . Oswald may have known that Oswald was like he was about to shoot .
 If someone else came by for whom he harbored strong emotions-and he had strong feelings for both Robert and his mother- he might kill that person instead . But if someone else . came by and he harboured strong emotions, he may kill someone .
 Since neither weapon was sent by insured or registered mail, the dates of arrival have to be guessed at . Neither weapon nor weapon has been sent by registered mail .
 A pistol shipped by REA Express from Los Angeles on March 20 and a rifle sent by mail from Chicago on the same day could both have arrived on the 25th . Each would have traveled at the rate of one time zone per day and each city was at a distance of five time
 Oswald dated two successive days, Monday and Tuesday of that week, as March 25 . Oswald's time sheets dated two consecutive days, on his time sheets . Oswald had a clue to the importance of the date of that day .
 REA Express no longer exists, but in 1963, the Dallas office was at 2311 Butler, near Love Field . The office was located in 1963 .
 Former REA officials say office hours varied from city to city, depending on business . REA office hours vary from office hours to office hours depending on the business .
 In Boston, packages could have been picked up at the REA office at Logan Field twenty-four hours a day . In certain other cities, offices were open until 8:00 pm., and in others again, they closed much earlier .
 Letters from Gladys A Yoakum to the author, April 6 and May 6, 1973; May 24, 1975 . Gladys wrote: "I love you, Gladys, love you and love you"
 This is probably the most significant document Oswald ever wrote, revealing both his emotions and his political ideas . The document reveals both emotions and political ideas in Oswald's account .
 The document was written before the Walker attempt, the document looks forward to Oswald’s own future . Oswald's own future was also captured in the document .
 "It gives a better idea than anything else he wrote of what appears to have been his conscious purpose in killing President Kennedy," he writes .
 It has been stated that Sunday, March 31, 1963, was overcast and that conditions were not bright enough for Marina to have taken photos of Oswald with his guns .
 Love Field Observatory is 5V£ miles northwest of downtown Dallas, Texas . There were high thin clouds during much of that day, but there would have been no difficulty taking pictures .
 Oswald may have wanted to be fired, but there is no evidence that he thought of it . There is also another reason Oswald may want to be shot, although there is not evidence he thought it .
 On the day after shooting General Walker, he would be the most hunted man in Dallas . It might have been dangerous for him to show up for work . He would have been most hunted in Dallas, Dallas .
 He had never missed a day at work, and failure to show up might have been dangerous, too . On the other hand, he'd never missed work, but he had never done it .
 Walker had been fired from his job and knew that he would be making his attempt on Walker within a few days . Walker had already been fired and knew he was going to make his attempt .
 Marina and June might soon need help, and once he had been at the Paines’, he saw that they were in a position to help and might be disposed to do so . The Paines' house is in the midst of a crisis .
 Marina has said that “from the moment he met Ruth, Lee think only how to use her,” Oswald told Marina that they had “friends” who would help . Oswald said in his “Walker note” only a few days later, Oswald said they
 The one time he was completely on his own was, interestingly, while he was working at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, October 12 to April 6 . He did not need help during that time, and it was October 12-April 6 .
 It's uncanny that the Paines should have entered his life, together, on April 2, one day after he was fired . It is uncanny that he should have been fired a day after that .
 The Warren Commission investigated bus routes, practice sites, and places where ammunition could be bought . It did not put forward a definite theory about where or when Oswald practiced . Oswald practiced in the days before the assassination .
 Warren Commission Report, 192; Testimony of Sergeant James A Zahm, Vol. 308 . Warren Commission report, 192, and Testimony from Sgt. Zahm . Zahm was a member of the U.S. National Guard .
 Robert Oswald, who taught his brother how to shoot and had a similar Marine Corps record, noted that his marksmanship was only “average” when the two went small-game hunting in the summer of 1962, after Oswald’s return from Russia, because he was unfamiliar
 Robert believes he is capable of the feats attributed to him . Robert believes that he could perform the feats he has been attributed to .
 Oswald may have practiced only on April 3 and 5 . He could also have practiced all or part of April 7 to 10 . Oswald could have practiced April 7 or 10 .
 Both de Mohrenschildts remembered that this episode occurred during their visit to the Oswalds' apartment on Saturday night, April 13 .
 The rifle was not found in the apartment on April 13 . Swaldald dug it up only on April 14 .
 Jeanne remembered under cross-examination (Vol., 315) that April 13 was not her first visit to the Oswalds’ apartment . Jeanne said she visited Oswalds' apartment several times before .
 Marina would not have shown the rifle to anyone after her husband's attempt on Walker’s life . It is extremely unlikely she would have shown it to anyone else .
 She was afraid of him and, certainly after April 10, would not have referred to him as ‘my crazy husband” in his presence or his hearing, as would have been the case had the episode occurred as late as April 13 . She would have called him "my crazy
 Major General Edwin A Walker was killed in August 1975 . Walker was the first major general to be assassinated in the U.S. Army to carry out the assassination of President George W. Bush . Walker died at the age of 65 .
 It is possible Oswald made up the story about the church announcement . Oswald may have made it up, and even likely, that he made it all up .
 Oswald, who had been stalking the neighborhood, may have known this already . Oswald may have been stalking a neighborhood in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald described an announcement of the sort Oswald described has been found in either of the major Dallas dailies for that week . Oswald's description of the incident has not been found .
 Oswald could have been looking for their new apartment that night . General Walker left Dallas on February 28 . Oswald could be watching General Walker, who left Dallas .
 Marina was a close relative of anyone suspected of a serious crime against the state is as liable for the crime as the suspect, whether or not the relative knew of the crime either before or after it was committed . Marina was growing up in Russia, where an infamous 1934 law provided that a
 The atmosphere created by this and other laws appears to have affected Marina from the moment she learned of her husband’s attempt on General Walker . Marina's husband attempted to kill General Walker, but was killed by a bomb blast .
 Marina appears to have felt that she was as guilty as he was . She had neither known of his attempt in advance nor approved of it later, Marina said .
 Conversations with Marina Oswald Porter and her testimony in the Warren Commission Hearings, Vols. 5, and 11; and conversations with Katherine Ford, Declan P Ford, and Samuel B Ballen .
 Walker bullet was never traced definitely to Oswald’s rifle, not even after the Kennedy assassination . Walker bullet never found to be Oswald's rifle, even after JFK assassination .
 Walker later denied the police theory that he moved his head at the last minute and accidentally saved his own life . Walker denied that he had accidentally saved himself from being shot dead .
 He believes that Oswald fired a nearperfect shot . Contrary to his own early testimony, he believes Oswald fired near perfect shot . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 He was well inside the room, facing out, “a side shot with a frontal angle,” he says . He says he was well in the room and facing out .
 Firing under nighttime conditions, Oswald was at the mercy of the lighting . The angles of light and shadow, distorted by the lenses of his sight, could have thrown off his aim . Oswald was not the only person in the world to fire a bullet .
 He appears to have had a perfect bead on his target, but with light flooding the room outside as well as in, he was unable to see the window frame .
 The bullet was flying straight at Walker when it hit strips of window casing and was deflected . Walker was hit with the bullet when the bullet hit the casing and deflected into the air .
 Walker at first thought that a firecracker had exploded directly above his head . Walker initially thought that the explosion was a result of an explosion . Walker thought it was an explosion, but it was not an explosion.
 He saw the hole in the window frame, felt bits of wood and glass in his hair, and saw bits of copper casing in his arm . Then he saw the holes in his window frame and felt bits in the hair and hair . He then saw a hole in a window frame .
 The present code was not in effect in 1963, however, when it was in effect . It gave a spouse immunity from being convicted for a crime committed by his or her partner . The code then in effect gave a spouses immunity .
 A description of the bundle, the way the photograph was placed in it, and the inscription was given to the author by Pat S Russell, Jr., de Mohrenschildt’s attorney, in a telephone conversation on April 21, 1977 . A copy of the photograph, with
 Some have questioned the authenticity of de Mohrenschildt’s ‘find,’ suggesting that he placed the inscriptions there himself . The inscriptions are believed to have been placed by de Mohranschildt .
 Marina was staying with Ruth Paine in Irving, Texas, in May 1963 . Oswald was in New Orleans at the time of the shooting .
 Marina does not drive a car and has no recollection of returning a bundle to the de Mohrenschildts .
 Oswald had all the family's belongings with him to New Orleans, except for Marina's clothes and the baby's things . Oswald, however, had taken all of the family’s possessions with him with him . Oswald had taken the baby and Marina's clothing with him, but Oswald
 Oswald's package appears to have been mailed by Oswald from New Orleans . Oswald is believed to have mailed the package to Oswald in New Orleans, Louisiana . The package was sent from Oswald's New Orleans home .
 Oswald may have handed out pro-Castro leaflets before the Walker attempt, not after, on April 8, 9, or 10, or after, hoping perhaps to be picked up by the Dallas police before he could take Walker’s life . Oswald is believed to have given out
 Given his intense preoccupation with his plan, however, it is more likely that he demonstrated after the attempt . Given his preoccupations with his plans, he may have demonstrated after his attempt .
 Oswald requested the pamphlets were sent on April 19, according to a letter found in the F.P.C.’s files . A notation at the bottom of the letter indicates that the pamphlet was sent on that date . Oswald's request was later found in F.C
 Marina later remembered that she had seen Nixon in newsreels while she was living in Leningrad and that in 1959, in Minsk, she had watched the famous Khrushchev-Nixon ‘kitchen debate’ in news reels .
 Lee's aunt, Lillian Murret, uses identical words to explain Lee’s fights in Vol. 119 . Curiously, Lee‘s aunt, Murret uses identical language to explain her nephew’S fights in the book .
 Marina’s stay at the Paines’ from April 24 to May 10, 1963 . Ruth apparently had already raised with Michael the idea of offering Marina a haven . Michael's idea, as spelled out here, actually developed during the summer .
 Marina wrote to Ruth in July, when she and Lee were living together in New Orleans . Lee had reproached her bitterly for even considering driving northeast with Ruth on vacation . He gave it as another example of Marina’s disloyalty to him, she wrote .
 Marina added that it was one of the main bones of contention between them that summer . Marina said it was a 'bone of contention' between the pair during the summer .
 Lee borrowed $30 or $40 from his uncle to make a first rental payment on his apartment . Lee borrowed the money to make his first payment on the apartment .
 In a speech on April 19, 1963, President Kennedy predicted that “in five years’ time” it was very likely Castro would no longer be the ruler of Cuba . In the long run, the U.S. would be seen to have contributed to the result .
 The Kennedy administration was engaged in assassination plots against Castro, the author says . The speeches suggest that not only Robert Kennedy and others high in the administration were aware of these plots, he says .
 At the time, however, no one read these speeches in that light, the public question was whether there would be a second U.S. invasion . The speeches were made in the context of a possible invasion of Iraq .
 Oswald knew nothing about any U.S. assassination plots against Castro, but was worried about an invasion . Oswald was worried that an invasion was imminent . Oswald had no knowledge of any assassination plots but worried about invasion .
 A reason Oswald borrowed the Payne biography may be another article in the Militant, this one by William F Warde on 5 of the April 29, 1963 issue .
 Oswald's desire to read about Mao may have kindled Oswald’s desire to go to China . The possibility of Castro going to China may have inspired Oswald to read Mao's book about Mao .
 Oswald saw himself as that kind of man, or else he wished to become so . Either Oswald or Oswald wished to be so, or he wished he had been Oswald . Oswald was a man of honor, but he was not Oswald .
 Oswald’s interest in Castro may have been spurred by Castro's own triumphal tour of Russia . Castro's writings in the Militant were published at the time . Oswald's interest in Cuba may have prompted Oswald to travel to the island .
 They included an editorial titled “Passport Curb Revived,” April 29, 1963; an unsigned story, “Travel to Cuba Arouses Inquisitors’ Ire,’ May 13, 1963 . “HUAC Continues Anti-Cuba
 Letter from Leo J Kerne, director, New Orleans Charity Hospital, to the author, March 15, 1965 . Kerne was director of New Orleans Hospital .
 So close are southern Louisiana and Mississippi in geography and feeling that New Orleans is often called the southern capital of Mississippi .
 His forged vaccination certificate and leaflets were printed with the wrong address . But when he fashioned this stamp, he evidently reversed the two final numbers by mistake .
 Kennedy’s pregnancy was announced during the week after Easter, which was on April 14 . Kennedy is expecting her first child .
 Oswald was looking at photographs of the president and his wife, Marina, in the ten-day period before Oswald left Dallas for New Orleans . Walker and Marina were looking at photos of the couple in the 10 days before Oswald's departure .
 Kennedy attending church services in Palm Beach, Florida, to see if the pregnancy was visible . Kennedy attended church services to check out if she was pregnant .
 Marina describes a photo of the type she describes appears in Time magazine's September 20, 1963 issue .
 The Oswalds, who subscribed to Time, would have received this issue in the last days before Marina left New Orleans for Dallas . Marina Oswalds would have been traveling to Dallas, Texas, when she was killed .
 Marina says that she kept leafing through Time, if this was, indeed, this issue, and coming back to the photograph . Marina says she kept trying to find out if it was this issue of Time .
 Marina decided that, warped as her husband’s mind was already, Manchester had unwittingly warped it even more . Reading these and other passages of the Manchester biography after the assassination, Marina decided to decide .
 Manchester was Jacqueline Kennedy’s chosen chronicler of the assassination . She refused to grant an interview to Manchester, even though he was her chosen author of the book . Since the country had lost its president, and she her husband, she was so angry and upset that she refused
 Oswald ran a real risk of being caught in the false references he gave and other lies he told on application forms . Oswald ran the risk of getting caught in his false references, other lies on forms .
 He assumed that no one would check up on him, and he gave his fantasy free rein . But he evidently assumed that he would . He gave it free rein.
 Paper trail includes job applications and unemployment compensation forms . The paper trail is helpful to understand his fantasies, the author says .
 His anger and contempt had now given way to other feelings, he said . He was still trying to strengthen his links to the party on the very last night of his life .
 Oswald said he had telephoned the city editor of the New Orleans Times Picayune-States Item before his demonstration of August 9 and August 16 . Oswald said that he had gone in person to the city room at 2:00m. after the Trade Mart demonstration .
 William Stuckey to the author, April 16, 1976, wrote a letter to author . The author's book was published in 1976 . The book is based on the book, "Stuckey"
 The FBI’s contact with Stuckey at this stage does not appear in FBI reports on its surveillance of Oswald in New Orleans as published in the twenty-six Warren Commission volumes .
 Butler was never called as a witness before the Warren Commission nor asked to give a deposition . Butler, in a strange omission, was never asked to testify before the commission .
 For once, Oswald had been caught in a misrepresentation, and for the moment, he showed himself chastened and willing to change course . Oswald was caught in misrepresentation and for once, he was chastened .
 If he had been caught oftener in his lies, or if he had suffered a good scare after his attempt on General Walker, his armor of omnipotence might have suffered a dent or two .
 Oswald's dry-firing in New Orleans was the only time he is known to have handled his rifle . Oswald is believed to have shot Walker in April before the shooting of Kennedy .
 One question is whether he pulled the trigger rapidly and at high speed, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm not sure if he pulled it rapidly," he says .
 Another question is whether he took the metal barrel and wooden stock apart when he cleaned it up . Another question: Whether he took it apart when cleaning it?
 She remembers that he oiled and polished the rifle often and put it back in the closet . But she so disliked the sight of it that she watched as little as she could . She says she watched him oil and polished it often .
 Another question is whether he had a bench or some other sturdy rest to which he could clamp the rifle as he sighted it . Another question: Whether he had some sturdy rest or a bench for the rifle .
 Oswald was then practicing to fight for Castro, not preparing for a particular murder . Oswald was not preparing to commit a murder, not for a specific murder .
 The FBI had no regular mail cover on Oswald following his return to the U.S. Oswald was found to have returned to the United States . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 It therefore had no idea of the extent of his contacts with the Soviet embassy or with domestic organizations on the left .
 Testimony of Charles F Murret, Vol. 187, and Lillian M. M. Murret's testimony of Lillian Murret . Testimony: "Lillian M." Murret"
 The controversy arises from a statement by a woman named Sylvia Odio that a man resembling Oswald, and using the name “Leon Oswald,” visited her in Dallas on the evening of Wednesday, September 25, in the company of two anti-Castro Cubans to discuss a
 Her statements were taken seriously by some staff lawyers for the Warren Commission and checked extensively during the Commission’s investigations and later by conspiracy theorists . Her statements have been taken seriously in the past by some .
 Oswald had no reason to be in Dallas in September 25 . He could have kept appointment, kept appointment and gone to Mexico City by bus from New Orleans .
 Twiford remembers that she received the call sometime between 7:00 and 10:00m. on the evening of the 25th, and she assumes that it was a local call . She assumes that the call was from a local location .
 Her recollection could be in error, for Oswald probably did not arrive in Houston until nearly 11:00m. that evening . Oswald probably arrived in Houston at around 11:30m. Oswald could have arrived at around 12:30am .
 Or he may have made the call about 8:10 a.m. from Beaumont, Texas, a stop en route to Houston from New Orleans . He may have been on his way to Houston, Texas .
 There is no evidence that Oswald traveled by air either to or from Houston . Oswald was not known to have traveled to Houston or Houston .
 Oswald had told Ruth Paine that he had a contact who might help him find a job in Houston . Oswald had been looking for a job at the time of his death .
 He did have a Houston contact, Twiford, but it was a political contact and had nothing to do with a job, he says .
 Marina came across several items of Oswald’s which had not been previously confiscated . On August 27, 1964, I was present when Marina came up with Oswald's items . Marina was present .
 A portion of his return bus ticket was included in a booklet called “This Week—Esta Semana” The booklet included a schedule of events for the week September 28-October 4 in Mexico City .
 On the booklet, “Esta Semana,” he had written his own name in full, both in Latin and Cyrillic, and added a doodle . It proved on close inspection to be a tiny, fancy, old-fashioned-looking dagger, drawn
 Soviet defector Yury Nosenko says decision was made by the KGB in Moscow to deny Oswald a reentry visa . Oswald was denied a visa to re-enter the Soviet Union .
 Oswald gave the name of George de Mohrenschildt as a reference . On this job application, October 4, and on another, October 10, he said he was applying for a job . Oswald's application was published on October 4 and October 10 .
 On October 15, the Texas Employment Commission got a call for twelve to fourteen baggage handlers from Trans Texas Airways at Love Field . Ironically, the call came from the Texas employment commission .
 The job was permanent and paid $310 a month, $100 more than Oswald would earn at the depository . Oswald's salary was $310 more than his salary at the depot .
 Oswald was considered a good prospect, and the employment commission called him at the Paine house two days running, October 15 and 16 . Oswald's employment commission was called to his home . Oswald died of a gunshot wound to the head .
 The second time, the person answering the telephone said that he had a job, and he was crossed off the list . The person answered the phone the second time and said he has a job .
 Oswald had been considering killing the president as early as mid-October, this is the job he would have taken, students say . Oswald's itinerary at that date was that he would be landing and leaving at Love Field, the one thing sure about the president’s .
 Oswald was not thinking about killing the president at this time, but doubt that his failure to try for this job is evidence . Oswald's failure to kill the president is evidence that he didn't want to kill him, says historian John Sutter . Oswald was killed in September of that time
 I do not know who happened to answer the telephone at the Paine house, a neighbor or babysitter, perhaps . I cannot say how Lee missed this opportunity at a higher-paying job .
 Oswald was crossed off the list for the Trans Texas job on October 17, his second day of work at the depository . The affidavit of Robert L Adams, the employment officer who called the house, makes clear that Oswald was cross-off .
 If he had followed up on the Trans Texas job, it seems likely that he would have considered it even though he liked the job he had, because it paid $100 more a month and was permanent, not temporary .
 Audrey Hepburn, who played Natasha in the ItalianAmerican film version of War and Peace, was in private life married to Mel Ferrer who played her betrothed in the same film .
 Marina thought Ferrer bore a resemblance to her former suitor, Anatoly, in Minsk, and to President Kennedy . Marina thought he resembled her ex-suspect Anatoly Ferrer, who she thought resembled her .
 Testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams, Daniel Arce, Roy Sansom Truly, and Daniel Sansom truly testify . Testimony to be heard in the book, "Truely Truely"
 In August 1964 Marina came across several of her husband’s possessions that the Secret Service had accidentally failed to confiscate . Marina's husband's possessions were found by Marina in August 1964 .
 The date, of course, is coincidence, yet it underlines an impression that autumn was a time of unhappy events in Oswald’s life . The date of the assassination is coincidence .
 It is ironic that of all people it was Michael Paine, who considered himself a failure with people, who thought his father was a genius at drawing others out but despaired of ever being able to do so himself . Oswald’s intellectual justification for the assassination of President Kennedy
 He did so, with brevity and clarity, in two of his three appearances before the Warren Commission . He said he did so during two of the three appearances .
 Paine’s summary might have presented the American people not with the whole of his motive by any means, but with a rational component . Paine's summary of Oswald's beliefs might have been based on what Oswald thought he was doing .
 An extrapolation by the author from her views and those of Michael Paine . The author's views are an extrapolation from those of Paine's views .
 Marina has been criticized for failing to tell Ruth Oswald that Oswald had his rifle in her garage . Marina was criticized for not telling Ruth that Oswald's rifle had been found in the garage .
 Marina did not know Ruth’s feelings about weapons until midNovember . Ruth said she refused to buy toy guns for her children, Marina said .
 She didn't know that the Paines were pacifists, or exactly what this meant . Even then she did not know that she was pacifist .
 Marina did realize that Ruth would not want the gun in her garage, and she still kept her silence . But Marina did know that Ruth wouldn't want a gun in the garage . She still kept silent .
 Her reasoning was that it was safer, especially now that they were back in Dallas, for the gun to be with her than in the rooming house with her husband . Her reasoning is that it is safer to have the gun with her, especially since they are in Dallas .
 I have based the account of Hosty’s visits on November 1 and 5 and Oswald’�s reaction to them on the testimony of James P Hosty in Vol. and in the U.S. House of Representatives Judiciary Committee . I have also based a conversation with
 The three principals differ on the time at which the November 1 interview took place . The duration of the second interview and where it took place, where Hosty parked the second time, and where Oswald parked the third time .
 I have tried to reconcile the versions with an eye to the effect of the Hosty visits on Oswald. Oswald. I have been trying to do this with the help of Oswald. It is not the first time I have seen the two sides of the story .
 Hosty testified before the House Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, op. cit, 145 . Hosty said Hosty was a member of the House of Representatives, a Democrat, a Republican, and a Democrat .
 This information was not revealed in Hosty’s testimony before the Warren Commission . Hosty testified before the commission in 1998 .
 Marina still does not know that the question of how she got the license number is a matter of acute debate among students of the event . As of this day, so many years after the assassination, Marina still doesn't know that .
 Police say she could not have seen license number from her position inside the house . They say that she could have seen the license number .
 Hosty says Marina Marina could easily have taken down his number as he drove slowly up and down the street before and after the interview . In his testimony before the House Hearings, 163, Hosty said he thinks he parked in the Paine driveway .
 Marina went outside and studied the car. Neither he nor anybody else realizes that Marina went out to look at the car . Marina's car was parked in the back of the house.
 Oswald had told Marina that he wanted to find another job, in photography . Oswald had said that he liked the job he had, while he liked it, he wanted another .
 He did not want Ruth to learn about this, because she had helped him find his job . He didn't want to hurt her feelings . Ruth helped him get his job and he didn't think he would hurt her .
 He told Marina that one Saturday he would stay in Dallas and look for photographic work . Still, he told Marina he would go to Dallas to look for work .
 Marina thinks that this was the weekend and that he came to Irving only on Saturday, November 9 . Marina thinks he came for the weekend, but she thinks he only came on Saturday November 9. Marina thinks this is the weekend .
 Ruth's recollections preclude this and establish that he came on Friday, November 8 . Ruth’s recollections show that she came on November 8.
 Michael Paine does not place him definitely at the dinner table on Friday, November 1, and it's barely possible that he stayed in Dallas until Saturday, November 2 . Paine was in Dallas, Texas, on November 1 .
 The weight of evidence is that he arrived in Irving about 5:30m. on Friday, November 1 . But again, the weight of the evidence suggests he was in Irving, Irving, on November 1 at 5.30m .
 Marina’s confusion about the dates may result from the fact that the Hosty visits were, because of their impact on Oswald, by far the most traumatic event in her married life since Walker . Oswald's visit to Marina may have been the most traumatizing event in Marina's marriage
 Oswald was thinking of another job . Oswald was not wedded to the book depository site . Oswald had been thinking of a job at the time of the shooting .
 Ruth Hyde Paine, Vol. 394, and conversation with Ruth Paine on November 23, 1964 . Paine was a member of the Paine family . She was married to Paine's daughter, Alice Paine .
 Oswald exonerated the Soviet embassy in Mexico City and blamed everything on the Cuban consul . Oswald blamed the Cuban consulate for the attack . Oswald was the only person to blame for the assassination .
 According to defector Yury Nosenko, it was the Russians who were to blame for his troubles . The KGB in Moscow had decided to refuse him a visa, he says .
 Oswald knew that the Cuban consul in Mexico City, Senor Asque, had been replaced . Questions have been raised about how Oswald knew the new consul was replaced .
 Oswald’s last visit to the consulate, September 27, was closeted with the man who was to replace him when Mrs. Mrs. Oswald died . On the last visit, Asque was with Oswald, the man to replace Oswald .
 Michael R Paine, Vol. 412, and conversation with Michael Paine in 1973 . Paine was a member of the Paine family . He is the son of Paine's wife and father of one of the world's most famous women .
 Marina said he had to do the envelope “ten times,” but in conversation with the author she said it was more like four times . In her testimony before the Warren Commission, Vol., 45, Marina stated that she had to use the envelope ten times .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of the best of your friends and family to the gallery .
 No one in the Dallas office of the FBI in November 1963 recalls on what day the note was delivered . No one remembers when it was delivered to the FBI .
 Fenner’s memory and other evidence suggest that it was delivered on the earliest possible date, November 12 . Fenner is believed to have delivered the book on November 12, 2012 .
 This was false, for he knew of Hosty’s second visit when he wrote the embassy, and he only learned of that visit on Friday, November 8 . Hosty visited the U.S. on November 8, 2012 .
 Oswald left the note on Tuesday, November 12, was the first day Oswald could have left it . Because of the long holiday weekend, Tuesday, Nov. 12 was the only day Oswald left a note . Oswald's note was left on November 12 .
 He would have to have been severely upset to go to the FBI offices at all . The FBI is investigating whether he was upset by the incident .
 Hosty picked a time when he could be almost certain that Hosty would be out . In fact, Hosty chose a time to be out, and it was almost certain he would be . Hosty is out .
 The question has arisen whether he delivered it during the week of the assassination itself . The question is whether it was delivered during that week of November 18 .
 Oswald would not have called attention to himself by going to FBI headquarters with such a note at a time when he was thinking of killing the president . Oswald is unlikely to call attention to his actions at the time of his assassination .
 Fenner's recollection that the note was delivered ten days before the assassination in itself is evidence that Oswald was not yet considering the act . Fenner’s recollection that . the note . was delivered 10 days before . the assassination .
 The FBI was then severely blamed for having ignored Oswald as potentially violent . Oswald was later found to have been a potential threat to the public .
 James Hosty's description of the way the note was folded inward, with the writing inside, is in contradiction with Mrs. Mrs. Hosty’s description . Hosty: “James Hosty.”” Hosty described the way he folded the note inward
 It appears almost certain that Hosty’s account is correct and that Oswald never made any threat of violence . Hosty's account is almost certain . Oswald never threatened violence .
 Hosty would surely have tried to confirm the identity of the writer, Hosty said . Hosty has never been in touch with the writer of this article .
 Hosty was confronted at the FBI office by Special Agent in Charge J Gordon Shanklin with the note Oswald had left several days earlier . Hosty had been interviewing Oswald in the Dallas County Jail .
 Hosty received a note from Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald . Shanklin asked Hosty about the circumstances in which he had received the note . Hosty said he visited Oswald and Paine at the time .
 On Shanklin’s orders Hosty dictated a twoto four-page memorandum setting forth all he knew . Hosty gave the memorandum, in duplicate, to Shanklin, who read it to him .
 Shanklin summoned Hosty between 2 and 4 hours after Oswald’s death on November 24 . Hosty was the last person to be summoned by Shanklin after Oswald's death . Shanklin called Hosty four hours after his death .
 Hosty recalls that Shanklin was standing in front of his desk and that he reached into a lower right-hand drawer and took out both the memorandum and Oswald’s note . Hosty: Shanklin reached into the drawer and reached in for the note .
 Shanklin asked Hosty whether he had destroyed Oswald’s note and the memorandum . Hosty assured him that he had. Hosty told Shanklin that he did .
 Ruth Paine had given Hosty Oswald’s draft of his November 9-11 letter to the Soviet embassy . She gave another FBI agent the copy she had made in her own hand on November 10 .
 Hosty and the second agent, Bardwell Odum, told Shanklin about the letters, and again, from his remarks, they thought he was ordering their destruction . Hosty: "They thought he [Shanklin] was ordering them to be destroyed" Hosty says he
 Hosty’s testimony makes it appear that his answers on an internal FBI questionnaire were subsequently falsified either by Shanklin or by someone in FBI headquarters in Washington to admit “poor work” in the Oswald case . Hosty's testimony appears to have been falsified by
 Hosty received letters of censure from J Edgar Hoover, placed on probation, reprimanded for his Warren Commission testimony, and demoted to Kansas City . Hosty was demoted from Kansas City, Kansas City. Hosty also received probation, was reprimanded, and reprimanded .
 Years later a promotion that was recommended for him was blocked by Clyde Tolson, chief deputy of J Edgar Hoover . Years later, a promotion was also blocked by the Hoover .
 FBI agent who had anything to do with Oswald case in 1962 or 1963 was censured, transferred, demoted, or barred from promotion . Shanklin received several letters of commendation from Hoover .
 Hosty recommended that the case be reopened in March 1963, after it had been closed for several months . Hosty had recommended that Oswald be re-opened after he saw that Oswald might warrant looking into . The treatment of Hosty appears extraordinary, since it was he who saw Oswald might
 The statements of several witnesses before the House Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights were at variance, particularly those of Hosty and Shanklin . Hosty, Shanklin and Hosty were among the witnesses .
 Shanklin under oath denied that he had told Hosty to destroy the note and did not recall the rest of the incident as Hosty recounted it . Shanklin said he did not remember the other part of the story .
 Members of the subcommittee warned Shanklin that he might be exposing himself to prosecution under federal perjury statutes . Shanklin, who is now retired, is facing prosecution for perjury charges .
 Oswald realized that the U.S. government was engaged in actual assassination attempts against Castro . Oswald didn't put two and two together in either April or September, he says . Oswald was not aware of the government's involvement in the assassination of Castro .
 Castro hero-worshipped Kennedy in spite of the assassination plots, of which he was aware . Interviews with Jean Daniel, foreign editor of the French newspaper L’Express, who was acting as an informal intermediary for President Kennedy .
 Oswald never felt animus against Kennedy because of his Cuban policies . There is no evidence that such animus played any part in his decision to kill Kennedy .
 Oswald gave every appearance of having lost interest in Castro by November 1963, and to have shot Kennedy for totally different reasons . To the contrary, Oswald appeared to have had no interest in the Castro .
 Hosty said that he was carrying twenty-five to forty cases in November 1963 . But in 1975, he said he had been carrying forty to fifty cases . Hosty testified before the House Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights .
 News of the Barghoorn affair was printed in Dallas papers near, or next to, stories about President Kennedy’s visit . In the Daily Texan of May 13, 1964, the late Helen Yenne showed how .
 Yenne suggested that Kennedy may have hated Kennedy for ‘loving’ Barghoorn in a way that he did not “love” him . Yenne said the Barghon case could actually have triggered the assassination .
 Yenne, who was unaware that Oswald ever actually mentioned the Barghoorn case, was brilliant in spotting the significance of the affair .
 Publicity about Professor Barghoorn continued in newspapers, on radio, and on television through Wednesday, November 20, at which time the exact route of the Kennedy motorcade through Dallas was known .
 Some writers on the assassination have alleged with cruel inaccuracy that Barghoorn told Kennedy in the Oval Office following his release that he was a spy . Some writers have alleged that Kennedy told him he had been a spy in the White House .
 He never met President Kennedy and never saw him in the Oval Office—that week or any time . Moreover, he never saw President Kennedy in the White House .
 Marina said she asked Lee to buy her washing machine and that after he agreed, she told him not to bother but to get something for himself instead . Marina said Lee agreed to buy a washing machine for himself, but told him to buy it for himself .
 The story arose that the Oswalds had a fight over a washing machine on the night of November 21, and that this was a pivotal event . The story was widely circulated among newspapermen and lawyers for the Warren Commission .
 Marina says each time the subject of a washing machine came up, it was Lee who raised it, not Marina, she says . Lee was the person who raised the subject, Marina says .
 Marina and Lee had admired a secondhand car that Michael had just bought for $200 . Michael bought the car on the long Veterans Day weekend weekend of November 9-11 . Marina had admired the car, and Lee bought it for just $200.
 Oswald may have waited nine days to tell Marina in person that he had been to the FBI . He may have feared the Paines’ telephone was being tapped, according to the book .
 He had not, after all, signed the FBI note, and as long as he did not mention it over the telephone, the FBI would not know for certain who it was from . The FBI would only know if he mentioned the note to the FBI over the phone .
 Testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams, Vol. 175, Vol., 175, and Vol. 192 . Harold Norman, 192, was a member of the jury .
 Robert Oswald was critical of the Warren Commission for its reliance on experts and its failure to consult him about his brother’s capabilities with a rifle . Robert Oswald taught his brother to shoot and was familiar with his special qualities as a marksman .
 Robert states that “Lee had very rapid reflexes” and was “much stronger than he looked,” adding that he had “unusual strength in his hands” Robert says that Lee's forearms were powerful and well developed .
 Oswald never fired his rifle between April 10 and November 22 . So far, it is known that Oswald never shot his rifle .
 Oswald’s dry firing in New Orleans, working the bolt, manipulating the trigger, and aligning the sight, would have been extremely helpful, Zahm and others have said . Oswald's dry firing would have helped him identify any errors in trigger manipulation, they say .
 Testimony of Marrion L Baker, Vol., 252, and Roy Truly, 225 . Testimony from Roy Truly and Marion Baker .
 The description came from a steamfitter, Howard Leslie Brennan, who watched the motorcade from a retaining wall facing, and just across the street from, the southeast corner of the book depository .
 Brennan twice saw a man, the same man, in the sixth-floor corner window . Brennan said he saw the man in the window twice . Brennan says he saw him twice in the same window .
 Once, Brennan watched him sit sideways on the window sill, thus seeing the man from the waist up . Once, before the motorcade’s approach, Brennan saw the man sitting sideways on a window sill . Brennan watched the man sit sideways and see him from waist up in the
 He appeared to be standing, resting against the window sill, holding the gun in his left hand and against his right shoulder . He was seen holding the weapon against his shoulder and holding it against the shoulder .
 Brennan estimated that he took a couple of seconds to aim and fire, then drew back and paused for a second, as if he had hit his mark . Brennan estimated he took the two seconds to fire .
 Brennan saw everyone, including the police, running in the wrong direction, toward the west side of the building . Brennan says he saw everyone running the wrong way around . Brennan: "I'm not sure what's going on, but I'm sure it's a mistake"
 He went to a policeman in front of the building and was taken to Forrest Sorrels, a Secret Service man who was parked in front in a car, and then to the sheriffs office . He was then taken to the sheriff's office .
 The description of the man he saw in the window went out on police car radios . At 12:45 m. m. , the description of him was given by police officers .
 Tippit stopped and questioned Oswald . Oswald's description of Oswald's actions prompted him to stop and question him . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 That night, Brennan refused to identify Oswald positively in a police lineup as the man he had seen that day . Brennan later identified Oswald as the one he saw that day, but refused to do so .
 Once Oswald was dead, Brennan felt the danger was over and he could safely identify him as the man he had seen in the window . Brennan was able to identify Oswald as a man he saw in a window .
 Testimony of Michael R Paine, Vol., 424, and Vol., 449, and . 472 . Raymond Frank Krystinik, Vol. 472, testified in the trial . Paine's testimony is included in his memoirs .
 The question has arisen whether de Mohrenschildt might have been working for the CIA in Haiti, and from there might have played a part in the assassination . Because of his friendship with Oswald, the question has been raised whether he might have worked for CIA .
 CIA first established contact with de Mohrenschildt in December 1957, Helms memo says . CIA established contact after he returned from a mission in Yugoslavia for the IIC .
 The CIA had several meetings with de Mohrenschildt at that time and maintained “informal, occasional contact” with him until the autumn of 1961 . The CIA was in contact with him for several years .
 de Mohrenschildt’s remorse over the ‘frivolity’ of his behavior toward Oswald, to some it appeared that it was more serious, resembling that of Ivan Karamazov . Some said it was similar to Ivan's remorse toward his father’
 In psychoanalysis the number is frequently taken to be a castration symbol . The number is taken as a symbol of castration .
 The German historian Hegel, the forerunner of Marxist philosophy, believed the forward movement of history is determined . Still another example, one closer to Oswald, perhaps, is the “thesis, antithesis and synthesis” by which the historian Hegel believed . Oswald is the son of
 Sung in the Stanley Kramer production, High Noon, lyrics by Ned Washington, music by Dmitri Tiomkin, copyright 1952 .
 Much of the suspense in High Noon is created by the ticking of a clock that hangs on the wall of a railway station . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 In “The Queen of Spades,” too, there is a clock, and the hands move from twelve midnight to 12:25 . In ‘The Queen Of Spades’s’, the hands are moved from 12:12 midnight to midnight .
 The first shot was fired at President Kennedy a few seconds after 12:30m . President Kennedy was hit by a single bullet fired at him at 12.30m.
 Jacqueline Kennedy would witness Oswald’s act, but there was a real danger that he might hit her accidentally . Not only would she witness Oswald's act, she would also be hit by him accidentally .
 David Rothstein of Chicago suggested in conversation with the author on May 4, 1971, that Oswald’s willingness to risk hitting Mrs. Kennedy was a risk . Rothstein: Oswald's willingness to hit Mrs. Lee Oswald's wife was a mistake .
 Vladimir Nabokov is the author of a new book, "Vladimir Putin's War of the Cold War" The book is published in Moscow and London, Russia, and is translated from Russia .
 The following three articles are of special value to the author . The author of this article provides the most recent version of the series of articles published in this edition .
 The German version of this article was translated from the German version by James Strachey . It is published in the German edition of this year's edition of The World Series .
 Dallas Morning News, Dallas, Texas, February-April, 1963, is published by Dallas-area newspaper . It was published in 1963 .
 National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence Report to President Lyndon B. Johnson . Report: Report on the causes and prevention of violence was released in 1964 .
 American Psychiatric Association meeting in Washington, DC, May 1-4, 1971, not delivered .
 In addition to the above, Warren Commission documents declassified between 1965 and 1977 have been used in the book .
 Reports of the FBI, U.S. Department of State, Treasury, Secret Service, Central Intelligence Agency, most of which are numbered . Internal memoranda exchanged among members of the Warren Commission .
 Among those who have helped me, there is one to whom I owe everything, my husband, George McMillan, for his love, his confidence, his sacrifices .
 There are two other persons without whom whom I might not have completed this book. There were two other people without whom ... this book might have been completed .
 Wyeth Jr. of Harper & Row, whose fastidiousness and gentleness I treasure, is a friend of Mr. Wyeth's .
 I should like to thank John Leggett, who helped bring this book into being, for his work .
 I wish to thank Marion M Johnson, of the National Archives, for help impeccably rendered over the years .
 David C Davenport gave Marina and me a haven during the unquiet weeks of September and October 1964, just after the Warren Report was issued . And his cousin, David C. Davenports, who gave Marina a haven, has been unflagging in his loyalty .
 Others who gave Marina and me valued help in 1964 were Declan P Ford, Jerome Hastings, Pat S Russell Jr., and Bette and Bill Slack .
 Samuel B Ballen, Michael Ralph Paine, Ruth Hyde Paine and Richard E Snyder. Paine died at the age of 95 .
 Professor Frederick C Barghoorn, David W Belin, Dr. Dr. David Belin and Dr. Frederick Barghororn have all been generous in answering questions .
 John K Lattimer, John A McVickar, Professor John Mersereau, Robert Oswald, the late Francis Gary Powers, Edward L Ramsell, Dr. John L. Ramsell and Dr. Robert Oswald were among those who died in 2006 .
 I should like to thank Professor John H Mansfield of the Harvard Law School for two 1965 memoranda pertaining to Marina Oswald’s deportability and to the question of her criminal liability under Texas law in 1963 . Benjamin B Sendor for a memorandum on the Texas penal code in 1963
 Lee and Marina’s use of Russian in conversation with each other casts on their relationship . Khrushchev's policies during the 1959-1963 period are discussed in the book . Lee's relationship with Marina may have been strained by their use of language .
 Marina Oswald was interviewed by members of the psychoanalytic community . Marina Oswald's interview was conducted by a psychologist and psychoanalyst .
 Since none has seen the final product, I prefer to thank them anonymously . Since none of the people have seen the project, I would rather rather thank them anonymous .
 Irving Kaufman of Newton, Massachusetts, was kind and generous . He says he's grateful for the kindness of people who helped him out of trouble .
 I should like to thank Brad Leithauser, Mary Jo Salter, and Carol Watson for the very special gifts they brought to this book .
 I thank Edward Crankshaw, Robert J Kore-old, Colgate S Prentice, and Strobe Talbott for their help and encouragement . And I thank Robert Kore-Kore-Korea, Robert Prentice and Colgate for their support .
 "I thank my brothers, Stuart and Coit Johnson, and my sister, Eunice Campbell, for their love," she says . "And I thank them for their support," she adds .
 I thank Marina Oswald Porter for her complete cooperation, for her loyalty, and for the enormous trust that she has placed in me . Finally, I thank her for her completely cooperation and loyalty, she has said .
 Priscilla Johnson McMillan graduated from Radcliffe College with a master’s degree in 1952 . She went on to work for Senator John. John.
 In 1959, she was working as a reporter in Moscow when she interviewed Lee Harvey Oswald, who was trying to defect to the Soviet Union . She was working in Moscow at the time .
 In 1964 she befriended Marina Oswald and spent many months at her side, conducting hundreds of hours of interviews . She collected the primary source material that would become the foundation for her magisterial book .
 She would spend another 13 years researching and writing before publishing Marina and Lee in 1977 .