 Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for 1400 anti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba . Exiles landed in the Bay of Pigs + met by 20,000 Cuban troops armed with tanks and weapons .
 For: USA can still destroy the USSR so the USSR would never use these missiles . For: U.S. would still destroy these missiles so the US could never use them . The missiles were designed to destroy the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 USSR had lied about Cuban missiles to do nothing would be another weakness . Surgical Air Attack: Immediate attack to destroy nuclear bases . Would destroy missiles before they're ready to use . Destruction of sites cant be guaranteed .
 Attack would inevitably kill Soviet soldiers and to attack without advance warning was seen as immoral . Attack was seen to be seen as an act of war against the Soviet Union . Attack without warning was considered immoral .
 All out invasion by air and sea for: Would get rid of the missiles AND Castro Against: Would guarantee an equivalent Soviet response . Diplomatic pressure: To get the UN or other body to intervene and negotiate . All-out invasion by sea would guarantee a similar Soviet response to Castro's
 A ban on the Soviet Union bringing in any further military supplies to Cuba, enforced by the U.S. Navy . Would show the United States is serious but not a direct act of war . It would avoid conflict against: If the USA was forced to back down, it would be
 If he had missiles on Cuba, he could agree to remove them in return for some U.S. concessions . If he has missiles, he may agree to some American concessions .
 Designed to see how strong the U.S. really were whether they could back off or face up . Designed to be a test of America's strength in the world .
 Krushchev was concerned about missile gap between the USSR and the USA that he would seize any opportunity he could to cose it . The Soviet-U.S. missile gap was so big that he seized any opportunity to seize it . He would seize the chance to seize the opportunity
 Khrushchev wanted the Americans to find them and be drawn into a nuclear war . Missiles were genuinely meant to defend Cuba . Cuba stayed Communist and highly armed but the nuclear missiles were withdrawn under UN supervision .
 The Cuban crisis highlighted the weakness of their case because such intervention wasnt worth the high risk . Such intervention was not worth the risk, the Cuban crisis highlights the weakness .
 A Communist Cuba was an inconvenience to the USA but a nuclear war would be the end of civilization . Ho Chi Minh was a communist supported by China . A nuclear war was the end to civilization .
 In 1960, he set up the National Liberation Front in South Vietnam which started a guerrila war to take over South Vietnam from Diem and his American supporters . In 1960 he started the guerila war against Diem's supporters in Vietnam .
 The Americans called the NLF guerrillas the Vietcong and supported Diem with military advisers and money . Diem's government in Vietnam was overthrown by the National Socialist Party .
 Diem's government was corrupt and unpopular by 1963 most of South Vietnam's rural areas were under Vietcong control the ARVN couldn't defeat them . The United States supported a military coup which murdered Diem and put a military government in South Vietnam .
 In August 1964 sailors on the United States warship USS Maddox in the Gulf of Tonkin claimed they had been attacked by N.Vietnamese torpedo boats .
 The Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin resolution allowing President Johnson to take direct military action in retaliation . The resolution was passed by the Congress allowing the president to take military action .
 China had fallen to Communism and America had fought in Korea to contain the spread of Communism . Containment China fell to Communism . America fought to contain China and Korea .
 Vietnamese could not resist communist infiltration by the Vietcong without help without help . They were ill-equipped local militia who more often were killed asleep in their defensive positions .
 Operation Rolling Thunder massive bombing campaign against N.Vietnam . 0,000 U.S. troops sent to fight in Vietnam. 0,500 U.N. troops were sent to Vietnam.
 CIA started Operation Phoenix, arresting, interrogating and killing suspected Vietcong activists . General William lured the NVA to attack a force of American troops at Ia Drang 1968: CIA started operation Phoenix .
 NVA launched the Tet Offensive capturing a number of towns in S.Vietnam in 1968 . NVA captured several towns in Vietnam during the Tet offensive .
 North Vietnamese lost 45,000 men including many officers + their morale was damaged . North Vietnamese also lost many of their morale .
 America won the Tet Offensive, but realized that they would never defeat the Vietcong . 9 of 15 Vietcong Tactics: Fought a guerrilla war, ambushing United States patrols . Setting booby traps and landmines and planting bombs in towns .
 Forced peasants to leave Vietcong-controlled areas and made them live in defended strategic hamlets in loyal areas . Forced peasants out of their homes and forced them to live in defensible hamlets . Also forced peasants to move from loyal areas to defensible areas .
 This created immense opposition and allowed Vietcong infiltrators into loyal areas . This created opposition to the Vietcong and allowed them to infiltrate loyal areas. This created enormous opposition .
 American troops sent on patrols then supported by air and artillery when attacked . U.S. troops were supported by aircraft when attacked by enemy forces .
 This demoralized soldiers, who realized they were being used just as bait . The soldiers realized they had been used as bait, and were demoralized . This demoralizes the soldiers .
 The United States escalated the war launching attacks into Cambodia and Laos to pursue the Vietcong hiding there . Johnson ordered an end to American bombing of North Vietnam . Richard Nixon began Vietnamisation pulling United States troops out but giving financial support to the ARVN .
 Henry Kissinger worked out a peace agreement with the N Vietnamese President of South Vietnam . President of Vietnam refused to sign so N Vietnamese pulled out of the talks . Henry Kissinger's peace deal with South Vietnam was a success .
 Richard Nixon mounted huge bombing raids on N Vietnam until the N Vietnamese were forced to sign . Nixon's bombing raids forced the N. Vietnamese to sign a treaty .
 He told the President of South Vietnam had had to make peace whether he agreed with it or not . He told President of Vietnam had made peace with South Vietnam whether he disagreed with it .
 Atrocities such as the massacre at My Lai undermined the moral authority of the United States to continue the war . Extensive media coverage brought all the failures and horrors of the war into U.S. homes . Extense media coverage of the failures brought all of the horrors of
 Cost of war meant Johnson had to cancel his Great Society programme of reform . Cost of the war meant the Great Society was cancelled .
 War was opposed by Martin Luther King and by America's black community . Wealthy white men could avoid draft by going to university or to Canada . Young black men were twice as likely to be killed . Americans left Vietnam in 1973 .
 Vietnamese had to fight wars against Cambodia and China before their independence was secured . Vietnam fought for independence from Vietnam in the early 1950s and 1960s .