 Dr. F Robert van der Linden Curator of Air Transportation and Special Purpose Aircraft, National Air and Space Museum . Dr. Robert van Der Linden is curator of the Air & Space Museum's Flight of the World Series .
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the copyright owner .
 AMERICA DRAWN INTO VIETNAM MAR 1959-DEC 1964 46 Introduction 48 Timeline 48 Timeline 28 The Cold War America's opposition to spread of communism . America drew into Vietnam in 1959 .
 A FRENCH AIRCRAFT DOWNED at DIEN BIEN PHU i 52 . The Viet Cong Roots and organization of the guerrilla movement . A French aircraft was downed at the site .
 Role of soldiers from Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, Philippines, and Thailand . Role of soldier from Australia and South Korea .
 Attacks on United States combat bases at Con Thien, Dak To, and Khe Sanh . Attacks on U.S. combat bases in Vietnam .
 U.S. media has been critical of the war effort in Iraq and Afghanistan . The United States has been involved in the war in Afghanistan .
 United States aims to help South Vietnam achieve self-defense, self-government, and self-development . U.S. has been involved in Vietnam's civil war with the communist regime .
 Decline in morale and discipline in sections of U.S. Army and Marines . U.N. Army, Marines, Army and Air Force have seen a decline in morale .
 North Vietnamese ports are blocked with mines laid by the United States Navy . The U.S. Navy has laid mines in North Vietnam ports .
 United States Congress turns against providing financial support for the war . U.S. Congress votes to end the war in Iraq .
 While America prospered and its influence spread around the globe, it faced a daunting challenge . America faced a difficult task to overcome .
 Despite suffering massive human and economic losses, the Soviet Union also sought to use its newly found power to extend its influence . The Soviet Union sought to spread its contrasting tenets of communism abroad in a challenge to the United States .
 In 1949, communist forces seized control of China while the Soviets exploded their first atomic bomb, ending America's nuclear monopoly . In 1950s, China became the first country to have its own nuclear power .
 Fearful of mutually assured nuclear annihilation, both east and west settled into an uneasy Cold War . East and west were at risk of nuclear annihilation .
 Cold War frequently erupted into indirect military combat, through the use of proxies . The Cold War often erupted into direct military combat through proxy operations .
 Indochina fought successfully for their independence from France in the 1950s . The United States, communist China, and the Soviet Union parried to an uneasy truce in Korea .
 The peace was short-lived as Vietnam was divided between the communist north and the capitalist south . The peace in Vietnam was between communist and capitalist Vietnam .
 Tensions rose until open conflict once again broke out in the early 1960s, this time with the United States entering the fray to counter Soviet influence in the region . The U.S. entered the fray in the 1960s .
 America's involvement increased just as long-brewing social revolution erupted in the U.S. America became involved in the social revolution in the United States in the 1930s .
 As more advisers and then combat troops were sent to support South Vietnam, many American citizens began to openly question the nation's involvement in a foreign war . Social issues needed to take precedent when so many pressing social issues were needed, he says .
 This tumultuous internal conflict was openly expressed as protests, all set against the backdrop of an increasingly unpopular war . The war is being fought in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the U.S. is losing ground in Iraq .
 Searing images of death and destruction filled television screens during the evening news . The images further fanning unrest and seismic social upheaval within America's diverse society .
 This book takes the reader on a carefully crafted journey through the maze of events that became the war in Vietnam . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a British journalist .
 Remarkably thorough and extraordinarily well-illustrated, this book provides a wellwritten analysis through an American lens . It does not hesitate to tell the story, no matter how difficult or painful .
 It is an excellent and highly readable synopsis of a very complicated era . It is a very complex and very complicated war. It is the best way to describe a complicated era and a complicated war .
 A purple smoke flare marks the landing spot for an incoming medevac helicopter after a battle in A Shau Valley . Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum curator of Aeronautics .
 The First Indochina War would win Vietnam its freedom from colonial oppression, but also lead to a dangerous rift between North and South . The war ended in a victory for the North and the South, ending colonial oppression .
 Soldiers of the Third Regiment of the French Foreign Legion stand to attention outside their headquarters in Lang Son in 1950 . Soldiers were taken to the streets of Lang Son to fight for their country .
 A decisive Viet Minh victory at the Battle of Route Coloniale 4 saw French units abandon Lang Son . French units abandoned Lang Son later that year . The battle was a major French base at Cao Bang .
 n the 19th century, France conquered Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, creating the colony of French Indochina . The colony was created by France in 1959 .
 French maintained colonial rule in Vietnam until World War II . Indochina was occupied by the Japanese during WWII .
 At the war's end, the communist-led Viet Minh declared Vietnam independent, but France strove to retake control of its colony . At the end of the war, the Communist-led Vietnam declared itself independent .
 After prolonged fighting, Viet Minh guerrillas defeated the French in the First Indochina War . They inflicted a final humiliation at the battle of Dien Bien Phu .
 North Vietnam was under communist rule, while South Vietnam was backed by the U.S. North and South Vietnam were under communist control .
 Angkor Wat in Cambodia displays the splendor of the medieval Khmer Empire . The 12th-century temple complex is the largest temple complex in the world .
 Dien Bien Phu brought French rule in Indochina to an end in 1954 . The siege brought the end of French rule of the region to a standstill .
 Vietnamese troops opposed to French rule mutiny at Yen Bai, but the uprising is swiftly crushed . The uprising was swiftly crushed in 1930s .
 Vietnamese Catholics and French Catholic missionaries are persecuted for their participation in a revolt against Emperor Minh Mang . They were persecuted for participating in the revolt . Vietnamese Catholics were persecuted .
 A French expeditionary force invading Tonkin (northern Vietnam) defeats Chinese ""Black Flag" irregulars at the Battle of Son Tay . French forces invade Tonkin in 1883 .
 Emperor Duy Tan is deposed and exiled by the French after he attempts to lead an anticolonial revolt in Vietnam . The French deposed him and exiled him .
 Determined to resist foreign influence, he persecutes Vietnamese Catholics . Vietnamese Catholics are often persecuted for their beliefs .
 French establish a protectorate over Tonkin and Annam, which is ratified by the Treaty of Tientsin . A Battle of Son Tay, 1883, was fought between French and Vietnamese and Chinese forces .
 With France having been defeated by Nazi Germany in Europe, the French allow Japanese troops to use bases in northern Vietnam for their war against China . The French allow the Japanese to use their bases in Vietnam .
 Flo Chi Minh and his colleagues found the Viet Minh movement to fight against the French colonialists and the Japanese occupation of Vietnam .
 Japanese troops take over Indochina from the French, declaring Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos independent . Vietnamese, Cambodians, Laos and Vietnam declared independent .
 After French warships shell Viet Minh forces in Plaiphong, they attack Flanoi, starting the First Indochina War . The war started December 19, 1946, with the fall of Vietnam .
 Armed by Communist China, the Viet Minh take the offensive, attacking French outposts on Vietnam's northern border . Armed by the Chinese, the Vietnamese take on the French in 1950 .
 The Viet Minh launch an offensive against French defenses in the Red River Delta, which is defeated with heavy losses . In a speech in September 1945, Ho Chi Minh addressed the French in Hanoi .
 The Geneva Accords divide Vietnam at the 17th parallel . The State of Vietnam controls the South, with the Viet Minh controlling the North .
 King Norodom Sihanouk abdicates his throne to stand for election as prime minister . Cambodia's prime minister was elected in 1955 .
 After defeating Bao Dai in a referendum, Diem proclaims South Vietnam to be the Republic of Vietnam . Diem names himself as the president of South Vietnam .
 President Diem addresses the United States Congress during a state visit to the U.S. State of Vietnam .
 France carries out an in-depth assault on Viet Minh-held areas of northern Vietnam in Operation Lorraine . The operation was part of the French invasion of Vietnam in 1952 .
 Prime Minister Diem crushes the powerful Binh Xuyen criminal organization in Saigon . Diem was prime minister of Vietnam from 1955 to 1961 .
 Indochina War Medal, first awarded in 1953, was awarded in November 1953 . Cambodia and Laos declared fully independent of French rule in October 1953 .
 Dien Bien Phu falls to the Viet Minh after eight weeks of fighting . The fall was a shattering blow to French morale . The battle lasted for eight weeks .
 The deadline for nationwide elections to reunify Vietnam, one of the terms of the Geneva Accords, passes with no elections held . No elections were held in 1956 .
 Ngo Dinh Diem becomes prime minister of Vietnam, under the presidency of former emperor Bao Dai . Ho Chi Minh admits serious errors were made in a communist land reform program that provoked rural uprisings .
 Dien Bien Phu comes under attack from Viet Minh infantry and artillery surrounding the base . The base was attacked by the Vietnamese army in March 1954 .
 U.S. officials in South Vietnam express concern about repressive nature of Diem's regime . Diem regime's repressive nature and mounting opposition to the government in the countryside .
 Geneva Conference opens with the goal of creating peace in Korea and Indochina . North Vietnamese politburo decides to support and promote and promote guerrilla uprising in South Vietnam .
 The movement of about one million refugees from North to South Vietnam is completed . Many of the refugees were Catholics .
 Further wars enabled the Vietnamese to expand southward . By the start of the 19th century, they occupied much of the same territory as modern-day Vietnam .
 In the 19th century, France seized control of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia to create French Indochina . At the height of European imperialism, the French seized control .
 Vietnam had a history of resistance to foreign domination and France found its rule fiercely contested . However, the Vietnamese had a long-standing resistance to French domination .
 Flowever, the emperor's successors turned against the Catholics, and wanted to limit French involvement in the project . Flowever's successors wanted the French to limit their involvement, and turned against Catholics .
 In 1858, the persecution of Catholics gave a pretext for the French to invade Cochin China, an area of Vietnam that included Saigon and the Mekong Delta . The French invaded the area in 1858 .
 The major European powers carved up the world between them, taking advantage of their military and technological superiority . European powers were convinced of their cultural supremacy .
 The French established themselves in Cochin China in 1864 . Cochin was declared a French colony by the French in 1863 . France extended its protection over the entire region .
 The nearby kingdom of Cambodia was weak, and accepted French control in exchange for defense against its neighbor, Siam . Laos and Cambodia were weak, but the French took control .
 Vietnam resisted French pressure for further concessions, eventually calling on China for aid . Vietnam alone resisted pressure from the French, calling on the Chinese to help .
 In 1883, France launched a sea and land offensive in Tonkin, the northern heartland of Vietnam, to force the Vietnamese imperial government to accept a French protectorate . France launched the offensive in 1883 to force Vietnam to accept it as a protectorate of Vietnam .
 Vietnamese forces inflicted heavy losses on the French Expeditionary Force . Assisted by Chinese irregulars known as the Black Flags, as well as by Chinese regular troops, the French suffered heavy losses .
 In 1885, China made peace with France at Tientsin, and although armed resistance continued in some parts of Tonkin, the Vietnamese government had no choice but to acknowledge French control . In 1887, the union of Vietnam, Annam, Cochin China, and Cambodia was
 Vietnam, as it had been prior to the French takeover, was split into three . Vietnam was taken over by France in 1940 . Vietnam is now one of the world's largest economies .
 The division of Vietnam also had historic justifications . Imposed in order to make it easier for the French to control .
 Cochin China had only been settled by Vietnamese peasants relatively recently and had not come under the rule of a Vietnamese emperor until the 19th century . Cochin . China had not been ruled by an emperor for more than a century before .
 Vietnamese people had a strong sense of national identity, and many were unhappy with these divisions . Many were unhappy that these divisions were created in Vietnam . Nonetheless, the Vietnamese people still have a strong national identity .
 Administration of Indochina was headed by a governor-general . Governor-general reported to the Colonial Office in Paris . Administration was based in the French capital .
 Traditional rulers retained their thrones, yet had little real power . They were readily dismissed if the French found them insufficiently subservient . Meanwhile, traditional rulers retained thrones .
 The Vietnamese emperor still had his court at Hue and his mandarins (high-level bureaucrats) exercised some authority in Annam, but even there the French ran the show .
 In line with their ""civilizing mission,"" the French opened schools to educate the children of the Vietnamese elite in French culture, introduced new medical treatments, built roads and railroads, and introduced new crops .
 The main function of the Vietnamese in the French imperial system was to work as exploited laborers on Frenchowned rubber plantations or in mines . However, the Vietnamese were not allowed to work in French owned plantations or mines .
 The colonial system paid for itself through customs duties and heavy taxes on salt, alcohol, and opium . The Vietnamese were encouraged to use opium, which was a key source of revenue .
 After 50 years of colonial rule, the French population of Indochina numbered only 40,000 . Some 80 percent of the population were soldiers or officials . The French population in Vietnam was about 40 percent French .
 This minority governed an area with a population of 23 million, who were mostly peasants . The majority of the population of the area was mostly peasants, mostly from peasants .
 Even the small number of educated Vietnamese were left in no doubt of their second-class status .
 The French found they had very few allies in Indochina . When a crisis came, the French found themselves with few allies . The French had to rely on their allies to survive .
 France introduced postage for Indochina from the 1890s . It was the first country to introduce postage stamps to the region .
 Later stamps often depicted local scenes and people in traditional dress . This stamp, issued in 1904, was inspired by France, but later stamps often depict local scenes .
 Vietnamese opposition to French rule showed itself in sporadic revolts through the early 20th century . Vietnamese nationalists in waiting for French rule .
 The ruthless oppression by the French colonial police forced most nationalists to operate in exile, including the young revolutionary Ho Chi Minh . Most nationalists operated in exile during the French occupation of Vietnam .
 Nazi Germany took control of France in June 1940, thereby transforming the situation in French Indochina . The situation in France was drastically transformed by the Nazi Germany takeover .
 The colonial administration there was cut off from support or reinforcement from Paris . The French colonial administration was in disarray .
 The last emperor Bao Dai was crowned ruler of Annam (central Vietnam) in 1932 . He was the last emperor to rule the country .
 The French saw him as a figurehead for French colonial power, but he harbored his own aspirations to lead Vietnam to independence . Bao Dai was one of Vietnam's traditional rulers .
 The French had little contact with local people, except as servants . The French were kept out of contact with locals, except for servants .
 Despite living in Indochina, they maintained strictly Western lifestyles and customs . This photograph of officials and their wives from around 1900 shows them living Western lifestyles .
 France ruled its Asian colonies with an iron fist, quickly quashing any nascent signs of nationalism . After France ruled it's Asian colonies, it quickly quashed any nascent nationalism .
 Revolt and Resistance Vietnamese nationalists strove time and again to organize uprisings in the face of French oppression . Vietnamese nationalists were inspired by the 14th century .
 After the Japanese occupied French Indochina in 1941, the communist-led Viet Minh seized the chance to create a nationwide movement for independence . After the war, the Vietnamese seized the opportunity to become independent .
 Formerly an independent country, Vietnam was colonized by France in the 1880s .
 Resistance to foreign domination was organized by Vietnam's traditional governing elite . Resistance to this foreign domination initially organized by the country's traditional government elite . Vietnam's government has been in decline for decades .
 The overthrow of the Qing Dynasty in China and its replacement by a republic in 1912 led many nationalists to abandon monarchism . Flowever .
 The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the founding of the Moscow-based Communist International to encourage revolution worldwide brought a radical element to Vietnamese anticolonialism . The Communist International was founded in Moscow in 1917 .
 Vietnamese soldiers in the French colonial army staged a fruitless uprising at Yen Bai in February 1930 . The uprising was an uprising by Vietnamese soldiers against the French government .
 The Vietnamese communist movement, headed by Nguyen Ai Quoc, later known as Ho Chi Minh, was also based in China until the Chinese Kuomintang government turned against the communists in 1927 . The Vietnamese Communist Party was also located in China .
 The party patiently extended its clandestine influence among Vietnamese workers and peasants . But it was a small movement, in no position to challenge the French regime . The party was no stronger than the French government .
 The German occupation of France in June 1940 shattered French prestige and left French Indochina exposed to pressure from Japan . Japan had been fighting a war in China since 1937 .
 In September 1940, Japanese troops invaded French Indochina, based nationalist movement that would attract support from all strata of Vietnamese society . The movement was created by the Japanese government in 1940 .
 Their declared objectives were the defeat of the ""fascist Japanese"" and their ""French accomplices"" and the independence of a democratic, progressive Vietnam . Their declared objective was the defeat .
 Rival Vietnamese nationalist groups enjoyed more support from the Kuomintang, but it was the Viet Minh that built a network of clandestine cells .
 On March 9, 1945, fearing an Allied invasion of Indochina, the Japanese carried out a coup against the French authorities . The French authorities were overthrown by the Japanese in 1945 .
 Easily overcoming the French army, they announced the end to the colonial era . Easily overcome the French, they defeated them in a landslide .
 Vietnamese nationalists Vo Nguyen Giap and Ho Chi Minh were leading figures in the founding of the Viet Minh independence movement in 1941 . Cambodia and Laos were declared independent under their Revolutionary comrades . Vietnam's independence movement was founded in 1941 by Ho Chi-Minh .
 Both were dedicated communists loyal to the Comintern . They were both dedicated communists, loyal to Comintern.
 The defeat of Japan by the Allies in August 1945 left a power vacuum in Indochina, enabling the Viet Minh to occupy Hanoi . The victory of Japan in 1945 left the Allies with no power in the region .
 His government enjoyed widespread support in Vietnam, but the French were determined to reestablish their rule in Indochina .
 F rench authorities imposed severe restrictions on their Vietnamese subjects, denying them freedom of speech and the right to form political parties or trade unions . The Vietnamese people were denied the right of speech or to form a trade union .
 Ngo Dinh Diem expressed his desire for independence through movements whose leaders were based abroad . With little scope for political action, nationalists such as future South Vietnamese president, future president expressed their desire to become independent through movements .
 In the 1920s, Nguyen Thai Hoc founded the Vietnamese nationalist party Vietnam Quoc Dan Dang in China . In the 1930s, the party was founded by Vietnamese nationalists .
 VNQDD was a republican movement modeled on China's own nationalist party, the Kuomintang . The party was a nationalist party modeled on the country's own national party .
 In February 1930, the VNQDD encouraged colonial army troops at Yen Bai, in northern Vietnam, to mutiny against their French officers . In 1930, they encouraged colonial soldiers to mutine against French officers in Yen Bai .
 French repression was swift, and Nguyen Thai Hoc was among the rebels executed . Nguyen Thoc was one of the rebels to be executed in France .
 During World War II, the Japanese sent troops into Indochina carrying Japan's ""Rising Sun"" flag .
 The occupying forces left Vietnam's colonial system in place, including its army and police . The Japanese effecting a military occupation of Vietnam that was barely resisted .
 The humiliation of the French, and other Europeans in Asia in Asia, encouraged Vietnamese nationalism . Nationalist strategy encouraged by humiliation of French .
 By offering to attack the Japanese in Indochina, nationalists could pitch for the backing of the Allies at war with Japan, including Kuomintang China and the United States . The U.S. and China could also pitch for support of the allies at war .
 Ho Chi Minh and his communist colleagues founded the Viet Minh Doc Lap Dong Minh (League for the Independence of Vietnam) in 1941 . In 1941, in a remote area on the border with southern China, they founded the Vietnam Liberation Party .
 Their intention was to create broadmonarchs, as were Annam and Tonkin under Vietnamese emperor Bao Dai . Annam, Tonkin and Annam were created under Bao Dao Dai in Vietnam .
 In the absence of French troops, Giap's Viet Minh guerrillas were now able to operate in the Viet Bac region, north of Hanoi . Giap was able to take control of the region after the fall of France .
 Wary of the Japanese, however, the Viet Minh bided their time, and made few raids upon the occupying forces . The Vietnamese were wary of Japanese forces, biding their time .
 They eagerly anticipated a Japanese defeat, which would finally mean the possibility of Vietnam achieving genuine independence . The Japanese defeat would be the first step towards Vietnam's independence .
 Many details of his career are obscure, both because he lived the clandestine existence of a revolutionary activist for many years . His actions have been mythologized for the purposes of propaganda .
 There is no doubt that he deserves to be recognized as the father of modern Vietnam . Yet, there is also no doubt he deserves recognition as Vietnam's father of Vietnam .
 His family lived in Annam, the area of central Vietnam where the Vietnamese emperor still exercised nominal authority under French protection . The Vietnamese emperor was still exercising nominal authority .
 Like most members of Vietnam's traditional Confucian scholarmandarin elite, his father deeply resented foreign domination . Like most Vietnamese, he deeply resents foreign domination.
 Ho attended the Quoc Hoc lycee in Hue, Vietnam, designed to educate select Vietnamese children in French culture and civilization . Ho attended a lycey designed to teach select Vietnamese kids French culture .
 Instead of joining the colonial administration as expected, Ho set off to see the world . At around the age of 21, Ho decided to set off on a tour of the world to see more than 100 countries .
 Worked his passage on ships as a kitchen hand and took on casual menial jobs to support himself . Spent time in the US, Britain, and France .
 After World War I, he became politically active, joining a group of Vietnamese nationalists in Paris . He unsuccessfully petitioned statesmen at the Versailles peace conference to apply their principles of self-determination to Vietnam .
 The establishment of the world's first communist state in Russia split the international socialist movement . Marxist training was part of Marxist training in Russia .
 Left-wing activists everywhere faced a choice between social democracy and communism . Leftists everywhere faced choice between left and communism, says author . Leftist activists faced choice of social democracy versus communism .
 Ho Chi Minh led the Vietnamese struggle for independence from French colonial rule in the First Indochina War . His commitment to political struggle was absolute .
 By the time of America's war in Vietnam, weakened by age and illness, he had become largely a figurehead .
 He frequently changed the name of the party organization in order to obscure his unswerving communist affiliation . His marriage to a Chinese woman in the mid-1920s was a secret affair .
 Vietnamese leader in Confucian tradition, embodying virtues of age and wisdom . This name represented a deliberate decision to present himself as a national leader in the Vietnamese Confucan tradition .
 The move bore fruit after Ho's opportunistic declaration of Vietnamese independence in 1945 . Ho declared Vietnam's independence from Vietnam in 1945, which was declared by Ho's government .
 The majority of the Vietnamese people readily accepted Ho as their legitimate leader . The French were confused by his apparent moderation when he traveled to France for negotiations .
 His alliances with noncommunist nationalists always ended in their exclusion from power and often their summary execution . His alliances always ended up being excluded from power .
 Ho presided over a state that left no room for individual freedom and ruthlessly imposed its system on a reluctant peasantry . Ho was the leader of North Vietnam from 1955, when he ruled the country from 1955 .
 He was still leader in 1959, when the North Vietnamese politburo took the decision to resume war to achieve the goal of a united communist Vietnam . He was superseded by Le Duan in 1960, when he was still in charge .
 Ho continued to have some influence on the conduct of the war until 1965 . After that he was largely a figurehead, he played a part in advising North Vietnam's peace negotiators . Ho's influence was largely limited until 1965, when he died in 1968 .
 The simplicity of his personal habits and his absolute lack of corruption sustained an image of purity and dignity that won respect among his people . His simplicity of personal habits won him respect among the people .
 The Ho Chi Minh Museum at Kim Lien, near Ho's birthplace, celebrates the Vietnamese leader's life . Ho was a leader of Vietnam's anti-communism movement in 1964 . The museum celebrates Ho's life in a museum near his birthplace .
 May, 1890 Born in the village of Hoang Tru in Nghe An, central Vietnam, son of an official at the imperial court . Son of an imperial court official . Died in May 1890 .
 II 1911 Leaves Vietnam for France, later traveling worldwide on merchant ships . Later travels around the world, including on ships .
 In 1919, he takes the name Nguyen Ai Quoc and publishes an appeal for Vietnamese rights . II 1919 In Paris, he becomes a Vietnamese national and publishes a book in Vietnam .
 HO CHI MINH’s house in HANOI, where he lived from 1958 UNTIL HIS DEATH 11 1941 . Returned to Vietnam and founds the Viet Minh independence movement .
 Ho Chi Minh visits French capital in summer 1946 for talks on his country's independence . The Vietnamese leader visited the French capital for talks with the French government in 1946 .
 French agreed on a path to limited self-government, but this was not enough to satisfy nationalist aspirations . The French agreed to limited government, but not enough for nationalist aspirations, the French said .
 In March 1945, Japanese troops occupying Indochina declared Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia independent . The war broke out in Vietnam, Vietnam and Laos .
 In August 1945, Japan was defeated by the Allies, including the U.S., Britain, China, and France .
 In September 1945, Viet Minh leader Ho Chi Minh declared Vietnam independent, establishing a government with popular support . JAPAN SIGNS the INSTRUMENT OF SURRENDER, 1945 .
 The French were not prepared to accept the loss of their colony and declared war on the Viet Minh . However, the French did not want to lose their colony in Vietnam .
 In 1945, the Viet Minh movement was already solidly embedded in the Vietnamese population, with a network of cells in towns and villages .
 The Viet Minh's guerrilla force increased its strength in the Viet Bac region north of Hanoi . It was aided by agents of the American OSS (Office of Strategic Services), the forerunner of the CIA . The OSS had seen the Vietnamese as a useful ally in America
 The Viet Minh adopted the red flag with a gold star as its banner in 1940 . The red flag was adopted as a rallying symbol by the South Korean government .
 Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the country's independence in 1945 . It became the official flag of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . Ho Chi-Minh kept his limited forces intact for a future bid for power .
 atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki had left Vietnam without any effective authority in place . Vietnam was left without effective authority after the atomic bombs left no effective authority .
 The Viet Minh took advantage of this power vacuum, raising its flag from one end of the country to the other in a general insurrection . The Viet-Minh took over the power vacuum and raised its flag .
 Ho Chi Minh declared the independent Democratic Republic of Vietnam in Hanoi's Ba Dinh Square on September 2, 1945 . Vietnam was declared an independent state in 1945 .
 Emperor Bao Dai bowed to the evident will of the people and abdicated . He gave his blessing to the new government . The abdication of Vietnam's traditional ruler is a victory for the people .
 French bombarded the city from sea and air, forcing the Viet Minh to withdraw from the port . The city was occupied by the Vietnamese government in the early 1950s .
 On December 19, on the orders of General Giap, the Viet Minh launched an attack on the French garrison in Hanoi . Responsibility for the final breakdown of the peace is disputed .
 Ho Chi Minh's government withdrew from the city to fight a guerrilla campaign . When this failed, the government withdrew and fought a guerrilla campaign .
 The French were at first able to restrict the Viet Minh guerrillas to remote border areas . The communist victory in China in 1949 gave the Vietnamese the support of a powerful neighbor .
 At the same time, the Viet Minh leadership openly aligned itself with the communist side in the global Cold War . At the time, it was in Vietnam at the time .
 In June 1949, the French installed former emperor Bao Dai as head of the state of Vietnam . Vietnam was given a degree of independence within the French Union .
 V_ Ho was accepted as the country's legitimate ruler by virtually all social groups, including the Catholic Church . The Catholic Church accepted him as the legitimate ruler of Vietnam .
 His government immediately began organizing an administration and set about tackling starvation, which is rife in the countryside . His government has set up a government to tackle starvation .
 The Viet Minh knew that the key to the future lay in the attitude of the wartime Allies . The Vietnamese government was determined to find allies in the war .
 Ho Chi Minh modeled his independence declaration upon the American Declaration of Independence of 1776 in the hope of winning the backing of the United States . The Vietnamese leader modeled his declaration of independence on the 1776 U.S. Declaration .
 The American government, although opposed to colonialism, was anxious to maintain good relations with France and declined to intervene on behalf of the Vietnamese .
 The Allies decided to accept the surrender of Japanese troops in Vietnam . The British army would occupy the country south of the 16th parallel and China would occupy to the north .
 The Chinese allowed Ho Chi Minh's government to remain in place . The British saw it as their duty to facilitate the restoration of French rule . The Chinese were no friends to French colonialism .
 Aided by the British, French administrators and troops returned to southern Vietnam in October 1945 .
 Quashing Viet Minh resistance, they regained control of Saigon and other major towns, but guerrillas continued to dominate the countryside . They regained control in Saigon, but continued to fight for control .
 After lengthy negotiations, the Chinese agreed to allow the French to return north of the 16th parallel . The French were allowed to return to the Chinese border after a decade of negotiations .
 French legionnaires land in Indochina in October 1945 . The French returned to Vietnam in 1945 .
 The French expected to reestablish their prewar colonial role in Indochina . First troops under General Philippe Leclerc landed at Haiphong in March 1946 .
 Ho's government, lacking international support, decided to compromise with France . France was proposing self-government within a Frenchruled Indochina Federation . Ho's government decided to compromise .
 Ho Chi Minh traveled to France for negotiations at the Fontainebleau Conference in July 1946 . French determination to block full independence for a united Vietnam was determined to block .
 Tension between the French and Vietnamese in northern Vietnam broke into open conflict in November 1946 . French-Vietnamese conflict broke out into open war in 1946 .
 The value of the U.S. military aid provided by the United States to the French in Indochina in 1951 rose to $785 million by 1953 . After violent incidents in Haiphong, the (j"" yirA MILLION The value 4) H"") of
 I n revolutionary guerrilla warfare, irregular forces use guerrilla tactics in pursuit of the goals of political and social revolution . I n guerrilla warfare is guerrilla warfare .
 When the Viet Minh embarked on a guerrilla war against the French in 1946, they were following a path already laid out in theory and practice by Mao Zedong's communists in China . In 1946, the Vietnamese were fighting the French with guerrilla warfare .
 Marxist theory had originally anticipated a revolution based on a revolt by industrial workers in urban areas . The Marxist theory, to which communists subscribed, had originally predicted a revolution by urban workers .
 The first description of guerrilla strategy was written by the Chinese general Sun Tzu more than 2,500 years ago . The Chinese general's first description was written more than two centuries ago .
 During the American Revolution, militias employed guerrilla warfare against the British in South Carolina . In South Carolina, militias used guerrilla warfare to defeat the British .
 In 19th-century Europe, Giuseppe Garibaldi and his Redshirts fought a guerrilla campaign to unify Italy . Giuseppoppe Garbaldi fought a guerilla campaign in Italy in the 19th century .
 Resistance fighters in Nazi-occupied Europe employed guerrilla tactics against occupying forces with the support of Britain and the United States . They envisaged a communist revolution resulting from a guerrilla war based in the countryside .
 Mao's theory says guerrillas would establish themselves in remote areas and use propaganda to win popular support among the peasantry . Mao's Mao theory: Guerrillas used propaganda to gain support among peasants . Mao: "Guerrillas will establish themselves and establish themselves"
 Their military tactics would progress from scattered raids, ambushes, and sabotage by small-scale forces to larger-scale operations exploiting the mobility of guerrilla forces . They would use scattered raids and ambushes to exploit their mobility .
 Full-scale military operations with heavy weaponry would allow them to defeat the enemy in the field . Finally, full-scale . operations with . heavy weaponry . would allow the . enemy to defeat them .
 This scenario was broadly enacted in the process that brought Mao to power in China in 1949 . Mao was elected to power by the Communist Party of China in 1945 .
 Vo Nguyen Giap, the organizer of the Viet Minh military rebellion, was reluctant to acknowledge his debt to the Chinese example . His conduct of the war against France and later against the United States clearly showed Mao's influence .
 The Viet Minh's strategic concept of dan tranh envisaged a long-term conflict in which military and political pressure would combine to wear down the enemy . The concept of a long war was envisaged by the South Korean government .
 The Viet Minh organized guerrilla forces at three levels . Giap's strategy was a three-tiered approach to guerrilla warfare .
 Village militia comprised part-time soldiers— peasants who used improvised weapons in clandestine attacks on enemy soldiers or officials in their locality . Village militia consisted of part-timers, peasants and peasants . The militia was formed by peasants in their local villages .
 The main-force guerrillas trained with the best available arms at remote bases in mountain and jungle areas . They are ready to be deployed for major operations .
 The point of a guerrilla strategy was to allow a weaker military force to triumph over a stronger enemy by avoiding a direct trial of strength until conditions were advantageous . A guerrilla strategy is to avoid a direct battle against a strong enemy until conditions are advantageous .
 Giap mostly chose his occasions for battle wisely, attacking exposed outposts or ambushing forces on the move . The Viet Minh always tried to ensure their own troops understood the reasons for fighting .
 The great strength of the Viet Minh lay in its understanding of the importance of morale and political commitment in war, says historian . Vietnam's great strength lay in understanding of morale, political commitment, he says .
 They aimed to demoralize the French and win the support of the Vietnamese people . The French were defeated by the French in 1944 .
 This was relatively easy, as the vast majority of the population hated French rule . The majority of French rule was based in France, but the majority hated it .
 Viet Minh propaganda always stressed nationalism, with no mention of communism . Most Vietnamese had no knowledge of communism, which most Vietnamese had never known .
 By the early 1950s, the Viet Minh had control of large areas of Vietnam . Planning an operation General Vo Nguyen Giap briefs his officers on the details of a planned engagement at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 .
 Despite an apparently relaxed style of command suitable to guerrilla forces, Giap demanded absolute discipline and obedience to orders . Giap's style was similar to that of guerrilla forces and demanded absolute obedience and obedience .
 Left-wing groups such as the Red Brigades in Italy, the Baader-Meinhof gang in Germany, and the Tupamaros in Uruguay identified themselves as urban guerrillas . The groups have been linked to the rise of urban warfare in the past .
 In the 1980s, the link between guerrilla tactics and left-wing ideology was broken . In the 1990s, it was clear that the link was not between left and right-wing .
 The U.S. backed Contras using guerrilla tactics against the left-wing Sandinista government in Nicaragua . Muslim Mujahideen fighting Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 In the 21st century, guerrilla warfare has been associated with Islamic jihadists operating in Iraq, Afghanistan and Iraq . Thea pp r ° ximate number of Viet Minh guerrillas in 1952 .
 French troops operating in Vietnam that year . French troops in Vietnam . taxes and rice .
 Even in areas supposedly under French control, the Viet Minh often operated freely at night, carrying out terror attacks against officials and soldiers . Even in parts of the country under French rule, they often carried out attacks at night .
 The success of the Viet Minh campaign, culminating in the humiliation of French troops at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, encouraged other would-be revolutionaries to take up arms .
 French faced a fresh guerrilla campaign mounted by nationalists in Algeria, which would lead to Algerian independence in 1962 . Just as they were admitting defeat in Vietnam, the French faced defeat in Algeria .
 In Cuba, Fidel Castro's guerrillas overthrew President y Fulgencio Batista in 1959 . In South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem's regime was overthrown by the Castro-led guerrilla warfare .
 By 1965, Castro's erstwhile companion Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara had launched a call for further guerrilla uprisings as part of a worldwide campaign against American imperialism . By 1965 he had called for further guerillas against American imperialists .
 The Viet Minh and their successors, the Viet Cong, had helped a military strategy turn into a hazy project for revolution across the world . Vietnam's military strategy turned into a vision for revolution in Vietnam .
 Fidel Castro led a successful guerrilla campaign to take power in Cuba in 1959 . MAO ZEDONG, PROBLEMS OF WAR AND STRATEGY, 1938 Revolution in Cuba . Fidel Castro's guerrilla campaign in Cuba was successful .
 First Indochina War fought between French Expeditionary Force and Viet Minh guerrillas from 1946 to 1954 was a brutal attritional struggle . The war was the first of the Cold War and convinced the U.S. of the urgent need to combat revolutionary communist forces .
 The French were able to hold the major cities but suffered heavy losses defending outposts in territory dominated by the guerrillas . The French lost control of some of the most of the country's major cities to the guerillas .
 French generals believed the Viet Minh could be eliminated in a single punitive action in 1946 . French generals thought the Vietnamese were eliminated in one punitive action . In 1946, French troops were in Hanoi fighting in the capital, Vietnam .
 Taking the offensive in 1947, they forced the guerrillas to take refuge in the remote northern border region, but failed to destroy them . They forced them to flee the area, but did not destroy them in 1947 .
 Until 1949, the Viet Minh remained a manageable problem for the French until 1949 . The communist victory in China that year changed the situation .
 In September and October 1950, General Vo Nguyen Giap ordered offensives against French fortified bases along the Chinese border, from Cao Bang to Lang Son . The French bases were attacked by the Vietnamese army in the 1950s and 1950s .
 All the outposts were overrun or abandoned and the French withdrawal turned into a rout . The French withdrawal became a rout and the withdrawal was a success .
 In the following year, Giap launched offensives in the Red River Delta, threatening Hanoi and Haiphong . In the next year, he launched offensive operations in the region . Giap became increasingly confident in the aftermath of the victory .
 The French repulsed the attacks with artillery and air bombardment, including the use of napalm . The French used napalm, an incendiary bomb .
 After World War II, the French hoped to reassert their great power status in China . They hoped to re-establish themselves as a great power in the country .
 After the war, France sought to regain its colonies, rebranding its empire as the French Union . However, after the war the French Empire was rebranded as a French Republic .
 They wanted to keep overall control while granting limited self-government . The U.S. House of Representatives wanted to stay in control of the state .
 An American-supplied tank leads motorized infantry along a dike in the Red River Delta . French column on the move .
 Groupements Mobiles was vulnerable to ambush by more flexible Viet Minh infantry . Restricted to roads, French columns were vulnerable to ambushes by the enemy .
 This was awarded to members of the French Expeditionary Force that served in Indochina, 75,000 of whom died . The medal was given to soldiers who served in the war . The French war medal was awarded in 1945 .
 The force included French Legionnaires and colonial units in addition to regular troops killed . The force was part of a French Legionnaire, colonial units, and included colonial units . It was the first time the French troops had been involved in a major attack in France .
 French operations in 1952 showed their inability to inflict serious damage on Viet Minh areas . However, a series of French operations showed them not to inflict significant damage on the area .
 They could not block supply routes from China or stop the guerrillas from invading neighboring Laos . They were not able to stop the rebels from invading Laos or neighboring Laos.
 On the whole, the French Expeditionary Force fought well . United States support on the whole .
 The Foreign Legion and troops from France's African colonies figured prominently in the French army .
 From 1950 onward, the French received increasing military aid from the United States . The U.S. had identified the Viet Minh as a communist threat .
 They expanded the Vietnamese National Army, serving the notionally independent state headed by Bao Dai . They also expanded the idea of an independent state of Vietnam .
 In some areas, militias controlled by Catholic bishops or by the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao religious sects held off the Viet Minh .
 Even in government-controlled areas guerrillas carried out terrorist attacks . The Taliban carried out attacks on government-held areas in Afghanistan .
 With no prospect of victory, the French began to search for a way to withdraw from Indochina . The French were forced to withdraw after the war broke out .
 Geneva Conference, intended to negotiate peace in Korea and Indochina, opened in April 1954 . Geneva Conference was intended to discuss peace between Korea and Vietnam .
 French troops were already under siege by the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu . By then, French troops had already been under siege .
 French flag replaced by the flag of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . Majority of Vietnamese people supported the Viet Minh .
 The Russian Revolution of 1917 created the Soviet Union, a communist state committed to fomenting world revolution . The Soviet Union was committed to creating a world of revolution .
 In World War II, the Soviet Union fought as an ally of the U.S. and Britain against Nazi Germany . The Soviet Union was a major ally in the fight against the Nazis in World War Two .
 After the war, relations between the Soviet government and its former allies deteriorated rapidly . Relations between the Soviets and former allies worsened rapidly after the war .
 Lines to mark zones of occupation by Soviet and Western forces became fortified borders between communist and anti-communist blocs . Lines were lines used to mark areas of occupation . Lines became a fortified border between the Soviet and West .
 Soviet nuclear device tested in Novaya Zemlya on October 30, 1961 . J Nuclear deterrent A Soviet nuclear weapon was tested in the Soviet Union .
 Fear of the destructive power of nuclear weapons forced America and the Soviet Union to avoid full-scale conflict with one another . Fear of nuclear warfare forced the two countries to avoid nuclear war .
 From the late 1940s, the U.S. set out to block the spread of communism worldwide . The Cold War began in the 1950s .
 The struggle between the French and the Viet Minh was transformed from a local colonial conflict into part of a global confrontation . In this Cold War context, the struggle was transformed into a global conflict .
 The aim was to prevent the spread of communism and Soviet influence, which was seen as a direct threat to U.S. national security . It was also seen as an attempt to prevent Soviet influence in America .
 The ""Truman Doctrine"" was followed by a series of events that brought the United States into an openly hostile confrontation with the Soviet Union known as the Cold War . The Cold War was the result of the communist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia .
 The explosion of the first Soviet atom bomb, in a remote area of Kazakhstan in August 1949, made this a confrontation between nuclear-armed powers . It was the first atomic bomb to be detonated by the Soviet Union .
 China embraces communism after the installation of a communist government in Beijing . Poster from 1950 shows the Chinese people welcoming the government .
 China's membership of the communist bloc was a major setback for America in the Cold War . America feared a similar response from the Chinese in the 1950s fearing a similar reaction .
 Korea taught American strategists the principle of ""limited war" in order to prevent the conflict widening into a world war . Korea taught U.S. strategists how to restrict operations to prevent a war .
 The United States did not use nuclear weapons and did not attack China, even though American and Chinese soldiers were fighting in Korea . The U.S. didn't use nukes and didn't attack China in Korea, but did attack China .
 The communist victories in China and the Korean War had an immediate impact upon American policy toward Indochina . The communist victory in China in the 1950s and '60s had a huge impact on American policy .
 In 1948, ethnically Chinese communist insurgents launched a guerrilla campaign against British and Commonwealth troops in the British colony of Malaya . Once Mao was in power in Beijing, an open connection was established between the Viet Minh in Vietnam and the communist .
 The Malayan communists lacked popular support and had no friendly neighbor to supply them with arms . However, the Malayan communist party was not supported by the majority of Malayan citizens .
 Although the communist campaign continued until 1960, it was eventually defeated by counterinsurgency tactics . The U.S. later used the same strategy in Vietnam, with less success .
 Mao Zedong led the communists to victory in the Chinese Civil War . While American fears about communism were turning into full-blown paranoia, the Korean War was a success .
 This dramatic development shifted the focus of American attention from Europe to Asia . This dramatic change shifted the . focus of . America's focus of attention to Asia shifted to Asia.
 China's neighbor Korea had been divided into Soviet and American zones of occupation . At the end of World War II, China had been occupied by Russia and the United States .
 The Soviet zone had become communist North Korea, while the pro-American dictator ruled South Korea .
 When North Korean forces invaded the South in June 1950, the United States led a large-scale military intervention under the banner of the United Nations . The U.S. repulsed the North Korean invaders, repulsing them .
 The Korean War was to have an enduring effect on America's approach to the later Vietnam War . The Korean war was to influence the American approach to Vietnam War.
 Douglas MacArthur ordered his troops to advance into North Korea after the defeat of the North Korean invasion . American General Douglas MacArthur was the first American to enter North Korea in Korea .
 China responded by sending its army into Korea, massively escalating the conflict . UN forces drove the UN forces back again, driving them back again . China responded to the situation by sending an army into North Korea .
 During the Vietnam War, the Americans would always rule out an invasion of North Vietnam, contribution to the containment of communism in Asia . The Americans always ruled out a North Vietnam invasion of Vietnam .
 The French were allowed to concentrate upon their own anticommunist struggle . While other allies of the United States sent troops to fight in the Korean War, the French were not involved .
 America could never be wholly comfortable with supporting a European colonial power trying to maintain its empire . America, however, could never support a British colonial power . America would never be comfortable supporting a British empire .
 It set up the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam, officially to observe French use of U.S. military equipment, but in practice beginning a creeping United States engagement in the country .
 By the early 1950s, commitment to the Cold War had begun inexorably to draw the U.S. into Vietnam . The Vietnam War was a major source of tension in the United States .
 Soviet Union leader NIKITa Khrushchev led Soviet Union guerrillas in June 1956 . Soviet Union and China were involved in the fight against Soviet-backed rebels .
 Guard of honor welcomes U.S. troops to South Korea during the Korean War . First Indochina War fought at the same time as the French and the Viet Minh .
 More than 35,000 U.S. soldiers died in the Korean War . The Korean War was supported by the United States .
 The first deliveries of American military equipment to the French in Indochina arrived in June 1950, shortly after the Korean War .
 Geneva Conference in 1954 tried to secure peace deals for Korea and Indochina . In American eyes, the war in Indochin came to be seen as France's war in Vietnam . In U.S. eyes, it was seen as a French war effort .
 The U.S. backed Ngo Dinh Diem as ruler of South Vietnam . North Vietnam became a communist state under Ho Chi Minh .
 After six years of fighting in the First Indochina War, the French realized that they could not defeat the Viet Minh . The French were defeated in Vietnam in March 1959 .
 By 1953, the French government began to look for an honorable way of withdrawing from Indochina . The French government was looking to withdraw from the region .
 General Henri Navarre was appointed French commander in Indochina in May 1953 . He had orders to preserve his forces rather than pursue a military victory . General Navarre had orders that he would not pursue victory .
 French forces besieged at Dien Bien Phu fought with outstanding courage but could not avoid defeat at the hands of a superior enemy . J French defeat at a major set-piece battle under unfavorable circumstances .
 French General Henri Navarre established a base at remote Dien Bien Phu in fall of 1953 . The base was inside Viet Minh-controlled territory, near Vietnam's Laotian border .
 His objective was to disrupt Viet Minh supply lines to their forces in Laos . He wanted to disrupt their supply lines in Laos, Laos .
 On November 20, three French parachute battalions dropped into Dien Bien Phu and secured the area . The area was secured after some sharp fighting .
 Viet Minh commander Vo Nguyen Giap ordered substantial infantry forces with artillery to move toward Dien Bien Phu . Giap was eager to escalate from guerrilla operations to full-scale battle .
 In November 1953, French troops parachuted troops into Dien Bien Phu to establish a fortified base . Instead of withdrawing, they used the parachute drop to establish the base .
 Called Operation Castor, the attack overwhelmed Viet Minh soldiers on the ground . The attack was called 'Operation Castor' by the Vietnamese government . It was the first time the U.S. troops were attacked in Vietnam .
 Foreign Legionnaires, colonial soldiers from North Africa, and elements of the Vietnamese National Army . Vietnamese soldiers were also involved .
 Facing them were 50,000 Viet Minh supported by 105mm and 155mm artillery . Facing the enemy was a large group of troops . The battle was fought in front of the enemy troops .
 The first Viet Minh attacks rapidly overran two French forward positions codenamed Beatrice and Gabrielle . The attacks were the first of two French attacks in the war .
 The intensity of the Viet Minh artillery barrage astonished the defenders, whose counterfire proved ineffectual . Counterfire proved to be ineffective .
 By March 17, the airstrip was unusable and resupply had to be by parachute . The airstrip had become unusable by March 17 . Resupply was by parachute for the first time .
 French government sought U.S. assistance to avoid disaster . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government sought help from the United States .
 A plan was devised for a fleet of 60 U.S. B-29 bombers to attack Viet Minh positions . The plan was based on a plan devised by the United States in Vietnam .
 Only Americans to take part were civilians flying transport aircraft . The only Americans to participate were Americans flying transport planes .
 On March 13,1954, the Viet Minh opened the fighting at Dien Bien Phu by capturing a key French hilltop outpost, codenamed Beatrice . The besieged garrison continued its heroic resistance, unable to evacuate its wounded and The Vietnamese advance .
 Viet Minh infantry overwhelmed the French defenses. increasingly short of munitions . The French were forced to withdraw from their forces in Vietnam .
 Fresh reinforcements parachuted in, but antiaircraft fire rendered air operations perilous, as did the onset of the monsoon . The monsoon also made it difficult for the British troops .
 In a classic siege technique, the Viet Minh dug trench systems toward the French perimeter, until close enough to overcome the defenses by infantry assault . In the French capital, the French army fought back from the start of the war .
 On May 7, the shattered remains of the French fortified camp fell to the Viet Minh in hand-to-hand combat . The shattered remains were the remains of a French fortified base in Vietnam .
 In eight weeks of fighting, about 2,000 soldiers on the French side had been killed . In the same period, about two,000 French soldiers on French side were killed .
 The battle had been even costlier for the Viet Minh, with an estimated 8,000 killed and twice that number wounded . The battle was even more costly for the Vietnamese .
 Giap had inflicted such a humiliating defeat upon France that any continuation of its colonial rule in Indochina was unthinkable . He poured thousands of troops into the Dien Bien Phu base, hoping to inflict a major defeat on the Viet Minh if they chose to attack .
 Navarre assumed the Viet Minh would have their own supply problems, but Giap had a vast army of laborers to move supplies across country . Navarre had assumed that Giap would have had his own problems .
 The number I UjUUU of soldiers on the French side who were taken prisoner at Dien Bien Phu was the number 4 A AAA . While the French dug trenches and built strongpoints to defend their vital airstrip, the Viet Minh occupied the high 4 AAA AAA
 U.S. ground, installing Chinese-supplied artillery and antiaircraft guns, ground, installed in 1954 . U.N. Korea installed in Korea in 1952 .
 By February 1954, French aircraft flying in and out of the base were coming under heavy fire . The base was attacked by the French Air Force in February .
 By then, France had 11,000 troops in Dien Bien Phu, led by Colonel Christian de Castries . By that time, French troops were in Vietnam .
 15,000 porters carried food and munitions over hundreds of miles of inhospitable terrain on bicycles or on their backs . The day after Dien Bien Phu, political leaders at the Geneva Conference tried to solve the Indochina question .
 An independent Vietnam would be divided at the 17th parallel, with a communist government established in Hanoi in the northern portion . The communist government would be established in the north .
 Fearful of another Dien Bien Phu, the United States deployed much greater airpower . The U.S. deployed much more airpower in Vietnam than in Vietnam .
 The conditions within the besieged base, where shallow trenches provided little protection against constant enemy artillery fire, demanded exceptional powers of endurance .
 Major Paul-Henri Grauwin was head of the mobile surgical unit at Dien Bien Phu . He tended to the injured and dying during the siege .
 In his account he describes the relentless harassment of the French Expeditionary Force by the Viet Minh artillery . One attack following another, almost without stopping, he says .
 The Viet Minh were taking hold of trenches in the north, one yard at a time, and the French were waiting for the final onslaught to take place . The Vietnamese were taking control of the French in the early 1950s .
 During the final week of the siege, it rained all day with no respite and the passages were full of stretchers the entire time . During the siege it was filled with stretchers and stretchers .
 More wounded soldiers wait outside, under fire, in the pouring rain and the mud . Meanwhile, more wounded soldiers waited outside in the rain and mud .
 The Viet Minh suddenly increased their numbers tenfold until they were everywhere . The Vietminh suddenly began to increase their numbers 10fold .
 Rising from the mud and water, they infiltrated passages, trenches, and shell holes . Rising out of the mud, water, and into passages, they entered passages, holes, and shells holes .
 Major Paul-HENRI GRAUWIN was a French doctor at Dien Bien Phu . He was one of the last doctors to die in the conflict in Vietnam . He died in a POW POW POW camp in Vietnam in August 1968 .
 About 4,000 airdropped volunteers reinforced the defenses during the siege . Almost all of the volunteers were either killed or taken prisoner by the Viet Minh .
 Negotiations ended the war between France and the Viet Minh, but divided Vietnam and left its future to be settled by a later, more destructive conflict . Vietnam's future was left to be decided by a war that divided the country .
 Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin's death in March 1953 led to a temporary thaw in the Cold War . Joseph Stalin’s death led to the death of the Soviet dictator .
 The armistice halted the fighting in the Korean War in July 1953 . Improved relations between Soviet leaders and the U.S. and its allies led to the peace treaty .
 Representatives of the Soviet Union, Britain, the United States, and France agreed to convene an international conference in Geneva to negotiate peace settlements in Korea and Indochina in 1954 .
 The United States consented to communist China's invitation to the conference, although they refused to recognize the legitimacy of Mao Zedong's regime . The U.S. refused to accept the legitimacy .
 The State of Vietnam, set up by France in 1949, was represented . Ho Chi Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam was not recognized as legitimate by the Western powers .
 Negotiations on Korea achieved nothing, with the result that it continued to be regulated by the terms of the ceasefire agreed the previous year . The result was that the Korean peninsula continued to remain in the same way .
 The Accords were completed in the early hours of July 21, but the clocks had been stopped to give the impression that it was still July 20— the deadline given by the French prime minister .
 France either had to find a peace deal or escalate the war by drafting high numbers of conscripted troops into Vietnam . France had to either find a deal or find a way of escalating the war .
 On June 18, Pierre Mendes-France, a politician who had long advocated a negotiated settlement with the Viet Minh, was appointed prime minister of France . He was appointed by Mendes France, who had advocated negotiating a settlement with Vietnam .
 Despite their military successes, the Viet Minh were also under pressure to reach an agreement . Despite their success, the Vietnamese government was still under pressure .
 The Soviet Union and China wanted an easing of relations with the West . They wanted to ease relations between the two countries . The Soviets and China did not want to see the West again .
 Geneva Conference assembles representatives of all the states with an interest in the Korean or Indochinese Wars . The Chinese communists in particular needed a period of peace to consolidate their revolution .
 Jhe most effective negotiations were those between France and the Viet Minh. losses in the Korean War. The most effective talks were those .
 China urged Ho Chi Minh to seek a compromise and postpone total victory . Fearing U.S. intervention in Vietnam might prolong the conflict indefinitely, China urged him to seek compromise .
 British Foreign Secretary Sir Anthony Eden also put his weight behind a compromise deal . The British government envisaged the division of Vietnam into North and South from an early stage .
 Geneva Accords, issued on July 21, 1954, separated the warring forces . Geneva accords were issued in response to the conflict in North Korea .
 All Viet Minh troops were to regroup north of the 17th parallel, while the French withdrew to its south . The French withdrew south of the border .
 The final declaration of the conference insisted that the 17th parallel was not to be seen as a political border . The 17-Parallets were not seen as political borders, the declaration said .
 Elections were to be held within two years to unify Vietnam under a democratic government . Elections were also set to take place in the next two years . Elections will be held in two years, Vietnam's first democratic elections .
 Conference delegates included British Foreign Secretary Sir Anthony Eden, U.S. Under Secretary of State Walter Bedell Smith, and French Foreign Minister Georges Bidault .
 The South became the American-backed Republic of Vietnam under Ngo Dinh Diem . Diem became president in 1955 after defeating Bao Dai in a government referendum .
 The Geneva Accords intended to create a democratic unified Vietnam never took place . The nationwide elections called for by the Accords were never held in Vietnam .
 The United States might have been expected to take a leading part in the negotiations, but it did not . The U.S. did not participate in the final Geneva declaration .
 The American Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, more or less boycotted the conference because of his fierce dislike of communists . Dulles' fierce dislike for communists led him to boycott the conference .
 Dulles's deputy, Walter Bedell Smith, did take part, but no great effect . Dulles and his staff were at the center of the scandal .
 Mendes-France reached an agreement through direct talks with the Viet Minh representative Pham Van Dong . In the end, an agreement was reached through direct negotiations . Mendes France and Vietnam are the two countries involved in the negotiations .
 The French insisted on Cambodia and Laos becoming independent on French terms, which sidelined revolutionary movements allied to the Viet Minh . The French refused to accept the independence of the two countries .
 The United States was not a signatory of the Accords; nor was the State of Vietnam, where the nationalist Ngo Dinh Diem had just been appointed prime minister . In Vietnam, the focus was on an immediate deal to end the fighting and ended the fighting .
 By 1955, Vietnam had won its independence, but was divided . Vietnam was divided by the war of the war .
 In South Vietnam, Catholic nationalist Ngo Dinh Diem emerged as ruler with the backing of the United States . In North Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh's regime imposed a communist system .
 Around a million Vietnamese moved from North Vietnam to the South, primarily Catholics . Catholics feared the consequences of communist rule .
 Such qualms were encouraged by propaganda promulgated by the CIA, and justified by the hardline attitude of the communist authorities . The CIA and communist authorities encouraged such qualms, it says .
 About 90,000 people moved in the opposite direction, to the North . Most of them were Viet Minh guerrillas who had fought against the French .
 Many Viet Minh activists covertly remained in the South after partition . Flowever, many of the activists remained in South after the partition .
 The U.S. began to assert its presence in the South well before the French completed their withdrawal . The United States was committed to opposing the spread of communist influence worldwide .
 In 1954, France, facing defeat by Viet Minh guerrillas in the First Indochina War, signed the Geneva Accords . Although the E F O R E signed the Accords, it was not signed by the French .
 The French officially declared Vietnam independent under former emperor Bo Dai . The French declared the country independent under the former emperor of Vietnam .
 Americans did not consider their chances of saving South Vietnam from communism to be high, they took on the task of advising the South Vietnamese government and army . Americans didn't think they would be able to save the country .
 Ngo Dinh Diem was capable of asserting his authority effectively . The main politician they were backing was able to assert authority effectively, they found .
 As prime minister under President Bao Dai, Diem crushed the Binh Xuyen, a mafia-like organization with the status of an independent army . He also cracked down on the militias of the Cao Dai and Hoa Flao religious sects .
 These militias played an important role in politics and had long defied government control . Some members joined remnants of the Viet Minh, although some joined remnants .
 In October 1955, Diem staged a referendum in which he defeated Bao Dai, making himself president of the Republic of Vietnam . No election in Vietnam .
 Diem had no intention of allowing nationwide elections provided for in the Geneva Accords . Neither he nor the United States had ratified the accords, and neither had ratified them .
 The United States was happy to supply money and equipment to a man who had shown he could use it effectively, to suppress troublesome factions and keep communism at bay .
 Diem's successful creation of a US-backed police state in the South was an uncomfortable surprise to Ho Chi Minh and his colleagues . Diem was successful in consolidating power in Vietnam .
 A South Vietnamese postage stamp issued in 1955 shows refugees fleeing North Vietnam . They had counted on the weakness of South Vietnam to allow them to allow the propaganda .
 The decision of many thousands of Vietnamese to move south inspired anticommunist propaganda . unification of Vietnam under communist rule, with or without elections being held, inspired anti-communist propaganda.
 Ho Chi Minh was preoccupied with establishing a monopoly of power in North Vietnam . At first, he was trying to establish a monopoly power in the country .
 North Vietnamese communists sought to take advantage of growing discontent in rural South Vietnam . Noncommunist nationalists fought under the banner of the Viet Minh . They were North Vietnamese nationalists .
 The number of U.S. advisers in Vietnam exceeded 3,000 by early 1962 . Communist party line was drilled into the entire population through propaganda and the use of terror against those who disagreed .
 In the countryside, revolt triggered by the introduction of a land reform program was crushed by force, leading to hundreds of thousands of deaths . Hundreds of thousands died in the land reform crackdowns .
 The North Vietnamese government had the advantage of being perceived as a Vietnamese regime . Yet the North Vietnam government had been perceived as being a regime . North Vietnam's government was perceived as an independent government .
 Confucianism and Buddhism were the main belief systems in Vietnam . Catholics constituted a large minority of about two million Catholics . Catholics were a large majority of the population .
 The Hoa Hao, who followed their own strand of Buddhism, and the Cao Dai, who practiced a syncretist religion, had their own militias, both suppressed by Diem in 1955 . Both militias were both suppressed .
 Ngo Dinh Diem became the prime minister of South Vietnam in the wake of the 1954 partition of the country . He was a controversial figure in his life .
 Diem was a Vietnamese nationalist with a staunchly anticommunist and pro-Catholic worldview . Supported by the United States, Diem supported by the U.S. and supported by Vietnam's anti-communist government .
 The United States would ultimately regret its decision to orchestrate his downfall in 1963 . While his regime saw myriad challenges and instability, the U.S. ultimately regrets its decision .
 Diem was born into the traditional mandarin elite of Annam in central Vietnam . Like his adversary Ho Chi Minh, he was born in a traditional mandarina elite .
 The Ngo family combined Confucianism with Catholicism, a minority belief in Vietnam . The family is believed to be the most influential in the country's history . Ngo's family is one of the most prominent families in the world .
 Diem pursued a bureaucratic career under Bao Dai, the Vietnamese emperor, who ruled in Annam under French control . Diem followed the path of chastity as if he were a Catholic priest .
 Ngo Dinh Diem founded the Republic of Vietnam and became its first president in 1955 . Diem achieved recognition for his outstanding First president .
 Diem used U.S. money and arms to build up and defend South Vietnam . A fiercely independent nationalist, he resisted his allies' influence in matters of policy . He rose quickly through the ranks of the imperial civil service .
 Despite Diem's position, he was a committed opponent of French colonialism . He was an opponent of the French colonial regime .
 In 1933, Emperor Bao Dai appointed him minister of the interior in the Annamese government . Diem proposed the introduction of a representative assembly, which would be a significant step toward self-government .
 Diem remained a key figure in nationalist politics over the next two decades . Diem was recognized as a potential future leader . He was recognized for being a potential leader .
 In 1945 and 1949, he turned down invitations to become prime minister under Bao Dai, in regimes that were compromised by association with the Japanese or the French . He turned down those invitations in those regimes .
 He refused Ho Chi Minh's invitation to join the government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in 1946 . He also refused to join Ho Chi-Minh's government .
 Diem had personal reasons to distrust the Viet Minh, its activists had killed one of his brothers and once held Diem himself under duress . Diem distrusts the Vietnamese government .
 After the outbreak of the First Indochina War, Diem sought to lead a ""third force"" in Vietnamese politics, made up of nationalists who also rejected communism . Diem led a "third force" in Vietnam's politics, led by nationalists .
 The South Vietnamese leader was greeted with enthusiasm as the man who had saved his country from communism . He was greeted by enthusiasm as he was greeted as the country's leader . The Vietnamese leader is greeted as a hero in Vietnam .
 Diem found that the French authorities were unwilling to provide him with protection . He was threatened with assassination by the Viet Minh, but was protected by the French .
 In 1950, he sought safety abroad, first in Europe and then the U.S. In 1950 he sought asylum in Europe, then the United States, where he was found .
 Diem's wife, the de facto de facto "First Lady" of Vietnam, joined Diem in the presidential palace . Diem: "I believe in duty above all.” Diem’s wife: “”
 Another of his brothers, Ngo Dinh Thuc, is the archbishop of Hue . He proved a powerful ally in Vietnam's struggle for independence .
 Diem cultivated support of the Catholic minority, swelled by refugees from the North . Diem also cultivated the support of a Catholic minority in the country .
 Officers in the South Vietnamese forces loathed the rule of Diem's family and his secret police . Overthrow officers in the Vietnamese forces were loathed by the rule-and-secret police .
 He was lucky to survive an air attack on the presidential palace by his own air force in 1962 . The president survived an attack on his own presidential palace in 1962 by the air force .
 Nhu spoke out to mock the martyrdom of Buddhist protester Thich Quang Due . Diem's favoritism toward Catholics further destablized his regime, while the Buddhist Crisis had a catastrophic effect on United States opinion .
 The United States had hoped that Diem would be a bulwark against communism . The U.S. had hoped he would be an anti-communist leader .
 Diem and his brother Nhu were assassinated on November 2 . They were bayoneted and shot in the back of an armored vehicle . Diem was assassinated in November .
 When the French declared Vietnam independent in June 1954, Diem was able to dictate his own terms for accepting the post of prime minister from Bao Dai . Diem's NGO called the U.S. embassy in Washington, Vietnam, Vietnam's ambassador to Washington .
 Diem was quick to oust Bao Dai and stamp his own authority on South Vietnam . He was backed by the Can Lao party and its secret police, run by his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu .
 The U.S. provided plentiful support to a man who seemed capable of saving the South from communism . But their influence over his behavior was limited .
 Proclaiming an ideology of ""personalism,"" Diem built his regime around family loyalty . Proclaimed to be a "personalist,"" he built an ideology around personalism .
 Buddhist monks at a pagoda in Saigon lead a hunger strike to demonstrate against Diem in 1963 . His brother Ngo Dinh Nhu and Nhu's Religious protest Buddhist monks led the hunger strike . Nhu was a member of his brother's protest group .
 Nine Buddhists were killed by the police during the gathering . The gathering was a celebration of Buddha's birthday . Police killed nine Buddhists .
 Resigns after three months when his proposals for reforms are rejected . Resigned after 3 months when he was rejected by the government .
 November 1960 Survives an attempted coup by South Vietnamese army officers . Survives a failed coup by the South Vietnamese government . Survived an attempt to take control of the South Vietnam government .
 Laos was sucked into the First Indochina War and quickly descended into chaos . Cambodia maintained a precarious measure of stability in the 1950s, but Laos was quickly destabilized .
 Cambodia and Laos belonged to the Indian Hindu-Buddhist cultural sphere . Vietnam was shaped by Chinese Confucianism . Cambodia and Cambodia were shaped by Confucanism .
 Cambodia had been the site of the Khmer empire in medieval times, but all that remained of such glories by the 19th century were the ruins of Angkor Wat . Cambodia was once a thriving Khmer Empire, but its ruins were largely abandoned .
 Preyed upon by its more powerful neighbors Vietnam and Siam, Cambodia welcomed a French protectorate in 1863 . Cambodia was once a French colony .
 By 1779, Laos was split between rival kingdoms that were dependencies of Siam . Laos was a kingdom that was dependent on Siam, but was eventually ruled out of control . Cambodia's Angkor Kingdom was one of its last strongholds in the region .
 During the 19th century, Vietnam and Siam fought for control of the region . Vietnam, Siam and Vietnam fought to control the area .
 The French established a protectorate in Laos in 1893 and integrated it into French Indochina in 1898 . A Laotian king remained on the throne in the north at Luang Prabang . A French king remained in the northern part of Laos .
 During their wartime occupation of French Indochina, the Japanese gave nominal independence to Cambodia and Laos under their traditional rulers . J I n the spring of 1945, during their war-occupied occupation of the country, they gave them nominal independence . The Japanese gave the two countries nominal independence under
 King Norodom Sihanouk declared Cambodia's independence from France in March 1945 . King Sisavang Vong followed suit in Laos in April after declaring independence in 1945 .
 In October 1945, French troops, aided by the British, reoccupied the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, and arrested the proindependence prime minister . French troops helped by British troops, helped by French forces, arrested proindependence Prime Minister .
 Lao Issara (Free Laos) movement, headed by Prince Phetsarath, carried out a coup against King Sisavang Vong . Meanwhile, in Laos, the anticolonial Lao-Issara movement carried out an anti-colonial coup against the king
 French forces recovered control of Laos in 1946, forcing Prince Phetsarath to take refuge in Thailand . It was not until April 1946 that French forces regained control of the country .
 France has a policy of political modernization, turning its traditional rulers into constitutional monarchs . France's traditional rulers are now answerable to elected assemblies . In both countries, France and Germany have seen a shift in power .
 In 1949, France granted the two countries greater self-government but continued to control defense and security . France, struggling to recover the base they had in Indochina prior to the war, had given the two nations greater autonomy .
 Thailand provided a safe base both for the Lao Issara and for the Cambodian pro-independence groups of the Khmer Issarak movement . Thailand was also a base for the pro-Cambians of the movement in Cambodia .
 The three princes Princes Boun Oum, Souvanna Phouma, and Souphanouvong celebrate an agreement at Geneva in 1962 that made Laos a neutral state under a coalition government . Although not strong enough to seize power, the three princes were able to take over
 The smiles were shortlived, as the country's civil war and political chaos continued unabated . Organizations established a threatening armed presence in areas of Cambodia and Laos . organizations established a threat to the region .
 Lao Issara mutated into the pro-communist Pathet Lao, led by a member of the Lao royal family . The Lao state of Lao was formed from Issara in the 1970s .
 The Pathet Lao leader's half-brother, Prince Souvanna Phouma, was also originally a member of Lao Issara . In 1951 he took the post of prime minister in the royal Lao government in Lao .
 In 1953, the Viet Minh launched a major offensive in Laos in alliance with the Pathet Lao . The Vietnamese government launched an offensive in 1953 in Laos .
 Part of the French mounted their ill-fated operation at Dien Bien Phu in northwestern Vietnam . It was partly in response to this that the French had mounted their operation .
 Sihanouk became Cambodia's king in 1941, aged 18 . He was Cambodia's first king aged 18. He was also Cambodia's second king .
 He abdicated after independence but continued to lead the country as prime minister and later head of state . Abdicated as head of the country after independence .
 Observing strict neutrality during the Vietnam War, he was overthrown in a US-backed coup in 1970 . Observed strict neutrality in Vietnam War .
 Through the civil war he experienced arrest and exile, before returning to restore national unity in 1991 . Through the subsequent civil war, he was arrested and exiled .
 In 1993, the monarchy was revived and Sihanouk became king for a second time . He was the first king of the country to become a monarch .
 He abandoned his palace in order to launch a campaign for full independence from France . Menaced by Viet Minh-backed Issarak guerrillas and by nationalist politicians opposed to his rule .
 By the end of 1953, France had ceded effective independence to the royal governments in Laos and Cambodia . France bows out in 1953 .
 Cambodia entered a period of fragile peace and mild prosperity, but Laos was not so fortunate . Laos suffered a similar fate as Cambodia did in the 1960s . Laos was the last country to enter a peace zone .
 The Pathet Lao, backed by newly independent North Vietnam, were able to control large areas of the country . They engaged in a civil war with the government, engaging in a series of guerrilla warfare .
 The government armed Hmong mountain tribesmen as guerrillas to fight the Pathet Lao . The government has received increasing military support from the United States .
 Laos was in the frontline of the Cold War in 1960s . Laos was one of the world's Cold War Cold War hotspots . Laos is now home to a thriving democracy .
 It also supported the insurgency by Laotian communist Pathet Lao guerrillas . The government has also supported a communist insurgency in Laotan province .
 A second Geneva Conference declared Laos neutral but had no lasting effect . Laos was declared neutral in 1961-62, but it was later declared neutral by a second conference .
 The United States Air Force subjected eastern Laos, site of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, to the most sustained bombing campaign in history . The U.S. Air Force bombarded eastern Laos during the war . Laos is now a tourist destination in Laos .
 In Cambodia, Norodom Sihanouk strove to maintain his country's neutrality, refusing American military aid . Cambodia's Khmer Rouge was founded by the Khmer Army in the early 1900s .
 He could not stop Vietnamese communist forces from occupying base areas along the border with South Vietnam . However, he was not able to stop the communist forces occupying bases along Vietnam's border .
 The United States poured in arms to the new government and bombed Cambodian border regions . The U.S. bombed Cambodia's border regions and bombed Cambodia in the 1980s .
 Cambodian communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas dominated extensive areas . The country became a battlefield, with the Khmer regime dominating areas . Cambodia was once a major source of conflict in Cambodia .
 The United States trained and armed Hmong mountain tribesmen in remote areas of Laos to fight against the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao guerrillas . The U.S. trained Hmong and armed tribesmen to fight in Laos . Hmong tribesmen fought against the Pathet
 Communist attacks on South Vietnam threaten stability, prompting the U.S. to send in Special Forces advisers to help . The United States has been involved in Vietnam since 1959 .
 U.S. support for President Diem's regime dwindles as it becomes obvious that he has alienated much of the South Vietnamese population . United States support for Diem dwindles in Vietnam .
 The United States Special Forces were sent to small towns and hamlets to recruit and train Montagnard tribesmen for the South Vietnamese Army . The Green Berets were also sent to train and recruit tribesmen .
 In 1963, with Diem's regime losing the guerrilla war and facing protests by Vietnamese Buddhists and chaos on the streets, America backed a military coup in which Diem was killed . The coup took place in which he was killed in 1963 .
 The Tonkin Gulf Incident, a naval clash off North Vietnam, won Congressional authorization for an open-ended escalation of U.S. military involvement in Vietnam . The following year, Congress passed a measure authorizing the U.N. involvement in the war .
 North Vietnamese leadership decided to back a guerrilla uprising among the rural population of South Vietnam . The rural population resented the rule of President Ngo Dinh Diem .
 The Ho Chi Minh Trail was created to carry military supplies from the North to guerrillas in the South . It was created in the 1960s to carry supplies to the North and South of Vietnam .
 John F Kennedy is inaugurated as 35th president of the United States . He is the son of President Kennedy .
 At a summit meeting in Vienna, President Kennedy and Soviet Leader Nikita Khrushchev approve a plan for a neutralist Laos . The plan was approved by the Soviet Union and President Kennedy in June 1963 .
 Kennedy increases funding for South Vietnam to support a counterinsurgency strategy . Kennedy increased funding for the South Vietnam in January .
 The South Vietnamese 32nd regiment is defeated in an attack by Viet Cong guerrillas at the village of Trang Sup, northeast of Saigon . The attack took place on January 26 .
 Laos increasingly becomes a focus of Cold War tension between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Laos is one of the most isolated countries in the Cold War era of Laos . Laos was a focus point of tension with the United States and Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 With the backing of the North Vietnamese politburo, the National Liberation Front is formed as the political wing of the antigovernment insurgency in South Vietnam . Kennedy authorizes a major escalation of American involvement in the country .
 The first American soldiers are killed in South Vietnam in a guerrilla raid on their living quarters at Bien Hoa, near Saigon, in July .
 The first load of arms and other aid from North Vietnam is delivered to the Viet Cong . AUGUST 20 is the first time arms and supplies have been delivered to North Vietnam .
 Democrat candidate John F Kennedy narrowly defeats Republican Richard Nixon in the U.S. presidential election . Democrat candidate Kennedy with Lyndon B Johnson as his running mate .
 Five American soldiers have been killed there during the course of the year . Five Americans were killed there in 2012 .
 At the year's end, there are 3,200 U.S. military personnel in South Vietnam . At the end of the year, there were more than 3,000 American troops in Vietnam .
 JFK assassination headline JANUARY 12 Operation Ranch Hand begins . JFK assassination was JFK's first major assassination . JFK was assassinated in 1963 .
 American aircraft spray large areas of rural South Vietnam with herbicides, chiefly Agent Orange, to destroy vegetation and deprive guerrillas of cover and food . U.S. aircraft sprayed herbicides in rural areas of South Vietnam .
 Viet Cong ambush South Vietnamese infantry and their American advisers at Ap Bac . South Vietnamese troops were ambushed by the Viet Cong on January 2 .
 It is the first major Viet Cong victory over American-supported troops . First major victory over U.S. supported troops .
 North Vietnamese leadership decides in favor of an all-out war to defeat the South Vietnamese government and its American allies . North Vietnam leadership decides to defeat South Vietnam and its allies .
 In the Tonkin Gulf Incident, the destroyer USS Maddox, on a signals intelligence mission, is engaged by North Vietnamese torpedo boats . The incident occurred in the early months of August .
 Vietnamese forces shoot nine unarmed Buddhist demonstrators in Hue, leading to widespread anti-Diem protests by Buddhists . May 8 South Vietnamese forces shot nine unarmed protesters in Hue .
 General Nguyen Khanh overthrows General Minh in a bloodless coup and takes power in South Vietnam . General Khanh takes power of South Vietnam in a bloody coup .
 U.S. Navy mistakenly reports a second naval encounter in the Gulf of Tonkin . The United States Navy mistakenly reported a second encounter .
 U.S. aircraft strike targets in North Vietnam in retaliation for the alleged attacks in the Gulf of Tonkin . The United States retaliated against the alleged attack .
 General William Westmoreland appointed commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam . He was appointed as Vietnam's first American commander in the country .
 Buddhist monk Thich Quang Due burns himself to death in protest at Diem's policies . Due burned himself in protest of Diem policies .
 At the year's end there are 16,300 American military personnel in Vietnam . At the end of the year, there were more than 16,000 American personnel .
 General Maxwell Taylor appointed U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam . Taylor was appointed by President Nixon in 1961 .
 President Diem is assassinated in the course of a military coup approved by the United States . A The Strategic Hamlets program, implemented in 1962, was a success in Vietnam .
 The Viet Cong launch an attack on America's Bien Hoa airbase outside Saigon . Four U.S. personnel were killed in the attack . The attack was the first to hit the base .
 The South Vietnamese government launches its Strategic Hamlets Program . The program is intended to defeat the rural insurgency by protecting peasants from communist influence .
 Johnson is reelected United States president with a landslide victory over Barry Goldwater . Johnson reelected U.S. president in 1964 .
 The U.S. sets up the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam to support South Vietnam against the Viet Cong . The United States set up the military Assistance Command in Vietnam, Vietnam .
 By the year's end, the number of U.S. military personnel in Vietnam is 11,300 . By the end of the year, the United States military personnel will be in Vietnam .
 At the end of the year, there are 23,300 U.S. troops in Vietnam . The American death toll for the year totals 216 .
 U.S. presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy poured aid into South Vietnam to prop up the faltering regime . When it looked as though the Viet Cong guerrillas and North Vietnamese Army could become a serious threat, the United States poured aid in South Vietnam .
 South Vietnam appeared to be prosperous and stable at the end of the 1950s thanks to $200 million dollars worth of military and economic assistance from the United States .
 By 1960, such aid made up as much as 70 percent of the country's total budget, and BEFORE History showed how committed guerrilla fighters could beat a well-trained professional army .
 President Diem hunted down insurgents in South Vietnam . The Central Committee in the North weighed its options . The time is right to fight insurgents in Vietnam .
 Little is being done to improve conditions in the villages where 90 percent of the population lived .
 Le Duan was a former activist in South Vietnam who had taken refuge in the North . He pressed fellow members of North Vietnam's politburo to provide greater support for the insurgents in the South .
 In January 1959, the committee sanctioned the use of force in South Vietnam . As a result of the committee, South Vietnam was sanctioned by the committee .
 It sought to build an effective guerrilla army in the South and supply it with weapons . While not wanting to provoke their opponents, the Americans, by an outright invasion, it wanted to build a guerrilla army .
 Unpopular policies and corrupt practices aided recruitment to the Viet Cong . The Viet Cong were recruited by the government of South Korea .
 This alienated the rural population, driving them into the arms of the Viet Cong . The rural population was driven by the conflict . This alienated them from the rest of the population .
 The province of Ben Tre, in the southern Mekong Delta, was the scene for one of the first uprisings . The province was scene for the first uprising in 1968 .
 As evening fell on January 17, 1960, gongs and bells summoned the locals to rise up against the ruling Diem regime . They took control of their villages from the rapacious landlords .
 During the same month at Trang Sup, a village northeast of Saigon, insurgents fought their way into a South Vietnamese Army headquarters and made off with large numbers of weapons . The same month, a South Vietnam Army headquarters was attacked by insurgents .
 Three crack paratroop battalions surrounded Diem's presidential palace in October . The paratroops were hitherto presumed to be among the most loyal of the South Vietnamese units .
 The attempted coup was only narrowly thwarted by forces still faithful to the president . The president was overthrown by forces loyal to him . The coup was narrowly thwarted .
 Insurgents targeted local officials who had the power to imprison for life or put to death any communist opponent of the regime . The insurgents targeted .
 By the end of 1960, more than 1,400 government officials had been assassinated . More than a million people were killed in 1960s .
 This guide to Vietnam was issued to U.S. personnel serving in South Vietnam in 1962 . Guide to Vietnam issued to United States personnel in Vietnam .
 Its aim was to lessen culture shock and help individuals win the hearts and minds of the Vietnamese people . Its aim is to help individuals overcome culture shock .
 An American military adviser shows South Vietnamese troops how to kill a communist guerrilla with a bayonet . A military art .
 The ARVN had to match their opponents' tactics and learn new combat skills . They had to learn new skills and adapt their tactics to cope with the challenges .
 In December 1960, the National Liberation Front —or the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam — was founded at a conference in Tay Ninh province in South Vietnam . Enter the Viet Cong in December 1960 .
 The United States viewed the NLF as an arm of North Vietnam and called its military wing the Viet Cong—short for Vietnam communists . The NLF's military wing was the Viet-Cong, short for Vietnam communist .
 By then, insurgents had dominated large areas of the Mekong Delta, the Central Highlands, and the coastal plains . By that time, insurgents were in control of large areas .
 Their fighting strength had risen to an estimated 25,000 guerrillas . The NLF's political wing had as many as 200,000 active sympathizers, according to reports .
 Washington responded by sending in more weapons, training, and aid to support Diem . Washington responded with more weapons and training .
 The U.S. Department of Defense issued the document in 1966 . It was sent to Vietnam in 1962 .
 Soviet-manufactured AK-47 rifles replaced carbines with which the Viet Cong were first equipped . Pistol grip grip Soviet-made rifles replaced the carbines .
 The AK-47, often called peasants' rifles, were reliable weapons and produced a tremendous amount of automatic firepower . They were also known as "Peasant's rifles"
 The National Liberation Front—known as the Viet Cong—aimed to overthrow the South Vietnamese regime and reunify North and South Vietnam . The Viet Cong Single short automatic selector switch Ejection port .
 Despite unconventional guerrilla tactics, it was a structured fighting force that amassed plenty of support . Despite unconventional tactics, the U.S. Army amassed a large force of support in Afghanistan .
 Resistance to the new regime was inextricably linked to the previous resistance to French imperialism . From 1965, the Vietnamese government had an operational strength of 7,350 men .
 There were also full-time regional forces under provincial command and part-time guerrilla units . The guerrilla units were used primarily for village defense . Part-time forces were also used primarily to protect villages .
 What the Viet Cong termed cadres were another key element in the insurgents' political and military setup . The Viet Cong called cadres a key part of the insurgency .
 More often than not, they were veterans of the war against the French with years of guerrilla experience behind them . More often, they would be veterans .
 At the start of the insurgency, the majority of cadres were so-called regroupees, who had moved to North Vietnam in 1954 . They had intensive military training and political indoctrination, before returning to the South .
 Former Viet Minh members who had remained in South Vietnam often became active Viet Cong organizers as well . They operated in small cells for greater security, operating in small cell cells .
 He started off as a propagandist for the Viet Minh before quitting the movement to become a farmer in the Mekong Delta . He quit the movement after becoming a farmer .
 He rejoined his former comrades some years later after Diem's troops had tried, but failed, to arrest him . Diem later rejoined the former comrades after he was captured .
 cells of Viet Minh stayed in South Vietnam after the partition of the country in 1954 . They stayed in the Mekong Delta and along the Cambodian and Laotian borders .
 Diem regime christened the forces of the National Liberation Front Viet Cong—short for ""Vietnam Cong-san,"" meaning Vietnamese communists . I t was the Diem . regime that christened forces of Viet Cong .
 The Viet Cong were divided into three operational forces, the main being made up of full-time regulars . The main force was the Viet Cong, which was divided into a three-decade force .
 A 1960s' Viet Cong poster boasts that U.S. patrols, however well-armed, stand little chance of surviving ambush in the jungle . This was divided 52 .
 The propagandists targeted United States ground forces in particular, hoping to lower morale . him formed the nucleus of the National Liberation Front when it was founded in 1960 .
 By late 1962, the NLF had around 300,000 active members and one million passive supporters in South Vietnam . The NLF was one of the largest anti-Vietnamese groups in the country .
 The Viet Cong controlled at least a quarter of the villages in the Mekong Delta . The Vietnamese government was in control of at least one of the largest villages .
 Initially, most new recruits were persuaded to join the Viet Cong voluntarily by recruiting cadres . Recruitment cadres regularly visited rural hamlets to recruit new recruits . The Viet Cong recruited new recruits to join by visiting hamlets .
 One of their arguments was that once they turned 18, boys would be drafted into the South Vietnamese Army anyway . One of them argued that boys would have been drafted anyway if they were 18 .
 As time went on, young men were pitchforked into joining with well-concealed staging areas from which to launch hit-and-run attacks .
 Following the example set by Chinese communists in guerrilla campaigns against Japan, these sanctuaries also served as training grounds and headquarters .
 As the Viet Cong grew in strength, the United States steadily increased its support for the Diem regime . The U.S. steadily increased support for Diem .
 1,000 ARVN troops ferried to attack a Viet Cong stronghold near Saigon in Operation Chopper . U.S. helicopters flown by United States Army pilots ferried the troops to attack the stronghold . The operation was called 'Operation Chopper' in 1962 .
 U.S. tacticians believed they could make it harder for the guerrillas to conceal themselves by clearing the jungle . They cleared the jungle in order to make the jungle harder to hide .
 A Soviet-designed, shoulder-fired grenade launcher, this was effective against armored vehicles and helicopters . CD RPG-2 is effective against vehicles, helicopters and armored vehicles .
 Soviet weapon with distinctive drum magazines was used to lay down fire during assaults and to cover retreats . E RPD machine gun and ammunition drum was a Soviet weapon .
 Based on the easily produced British Sten gun, this model is notable for its double-set triggers . E Homemade machine gun is based on the easy produced Sten .
 Viet Cong forces used machetes to clear paths through dense jungle and for hand-tohand combat when necessary . E Machete was used by the Viet Cong in the 1960s to clear jungle paths .
 These weapons were extremely crude, highly inaccurate, and prone to fall apart after just a few shots . DD Homemade rifle was extremely crude and inaccurate .
 E Punji sticks are simple booby traps made of bamboo or wood sharpened into spikes . They are made from wood sharpening into spikes or bamboo sharpened to spikes .
 Viet Cong guerrillas were capable of producing their own grenades, although many were killed assembling such weapons .
 E RKG-3 antitank grenade can be easily transported in bundles . Easily held and thrown, this stick grenade could be easily thrown . Stick grenade could also be used to carry in bundles.
 Usually made of lightweight cotton, this style of hat has a camouflage pattern . The E Floppy hat is usually made from lightweight cotton .
 This would have been filled with dry rice, tied at the ends, and carried across the back or shoulder . ED Rice carrier would have carried dry rice across the shoulder .
 Bamboo would have been pulled through the ring to provide camouflage . Bamboo and other foliage would have also been pulled into the ring .
 Made from recycled rubber sourced from tire treads, these were dubbed Ho Chi Minh sandals by U.S. troops . The sandals are made of recycled rubber made from recycled tires .
 The men and women who built and used the Ho Chi Minh Trail followed in the footsteps of tribal hunters and the Viet Minh . The Ho Chi-Minh Trail was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 North Vietnamese decided to create the Ho Chi Minh Trail as a means of infiltrating South Vietnam . The North Vietnamese created the trail as a way to infiltrate the country .
 During the war more than one million Viet Cong and North Vietnamese soldiers used its network of tracks . During the course of the war over one million soldiers used the network of trains .
 Mekong Valley, Vietnam, to join Viet Cong detachments at jungle staging posts south of Khe Sanh. Vietnam.
 C olonel Vo Bam masterminded the creation of the supply route known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail . Vo Bam was a logistics expert working in the Ministry of Defense in Hanoi, Vietnam .
 His initial plan was for North Vietnamese infiltrators to make their way stealthily through the narrow demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam, and then follow Route Nine . He sent reinforcements to Khe Sanh and began clearing the area . The plan was based on the idea that the
 The DMZ could be avoided by rerouting the trail down the western side of the Truong Son mountains and through lower Laos .
 Both Hanoi and the Pathet Lao, the communist insurgents in Laos, approved the new route . The Pathet Lao route was approved by both the government and insurgents . Laos is a key ally of Vietnam and Laos .
 South Vietnamese volunteers carry ammunition for the Viet Cong on the Ho Chi Minh Trail . Volunteers carry ammunition to fight for the Vietnamese government .
 Armies of women helped distribute ammunition and weapons shipped to Hanoi from the Soviet Union and China . Armies were used to distribute weapons and ammunition shipped to Vietnam .
 Less well-known than the Ho Chi Minh Trail, it proved crucial to supplying Viet Cong insurgents in the far south of the country . The trail was used to supply insurgents in Vietnam .
 Life on the trail in the early days of the war, the trail was rudimentary . The trail was used by the U.S. Army during the Second World War .
 A North Vietnamese colonel called Biu Tin, traveling the trail in December 1961, recorded a trek lasting three months . During the trek, he had to hack or crawl through the jungle .
 On a later trek, he recorded that some soldiers had lost their way and died of starvation . He also recorded some soldiers died from starvation .
 Travelers also faced venomous snakes, leeches, and dysentery as the war escalated . Travelers faced the demands made on the Ho Chi Minh .
 Vo Barn's Group 559 investigated feasibility of making the trail fit to transport large numbers of troops into South Vietnam in 1963 . Vo Barn had been running the trail since its inception .
 Hanoi took the decision to transform the Trail into a sophisticated logistical network . Colonel Dong Si Nguyen is in charge of construction of the network .
 The trail became a spider's web of crisscrossing and intersecting tracks . Still underway a decade later, the trail was still underway . The trail is still a web of intersecting, intersecting and crossing tracks .
 The name given to the trail by the North Vietnamese, after the mountain range running through Central Vietnam . Thousands of engineers toiled ceaselessly to widen and widen the trail .
 They carved roads and bridges that could handle heavy trucks and tanks . Equipped with modern Soviet and Chinese machinery, they carved roads, built bridges .
 Convoys of vehicles, operating in relay, mostly at night, were soon transporting hundreds of tons of supplies southward . Convoys were soon being used to transport hundreds of tonnes of supplies .
 Battalions of North Vietnamese regulars were assigned to defend the trail's flanks against possible ground attack . Battalions assigned to protect the trail from ground attacks .
 To protect it from bombing, elaborate antiaircraft defenses were set up at key points along the trail . The trail was built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Underground barracks, workshops, hospitals, fuel dumps, and storage facilities were also constructed . Underground barracks and hospitals were also built in the area .
 The number of infiltrators rose, reaching an average of 4,500 soldiers a month by 1966 and 6,000 a month the year after that . In 1966, the number of soldiers infiltrating the country was at an all-time high, reaching a total of 5,000 .
 The North Vietnamese had created one of the great military engineering achievements of the 20th century . Even the U.S. government reluctantly came to realize, what the North Vietnam had created was one of its greatest military achievements .
 Viet Cong transported supplies by any means possible, including by bicycle . The Viet Cong also used bicycles to transport their supplies .
 After each attack, hordes of Viet Cong soldiers and volunteers raced to repair the damage . After each battle, the Viet Cong troops and volunteers repaired the damage in the area .
 Kennedy and Johnson were the original dream ticket for the 1961 election campaign . Kennedy was the youthful energy of Kennedy and the experience of running mate Lyndon Johnson . Johnson was the Democratic team .
 As a young senator, John F Kennedy told the Senate that no amount of military assistance in Indochina could conquer an enemy that had the sympathy and covert support of the people . Kennedy: "No amount of [military assistance] could conquer [Indochina]," he said .
 In particular, he was determined to counter Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's pledge to support communists across the globe in their wars of national liberation .
 "It would pay any price and oppose any foe to stop the spread of communism," says the Communist Party . It would pay 'any price' to stop communism, says the party .
 John F Kennedy was determined to support Diem's regime in its fight against the Viet Cong . He was convinced that South Vietnam was key arenas in ideological war between communism and freedom .
 J ohn F Kennedy won the U.S. presidency in 1960 partly on the strength of pledges to wage the Cold War more vigorously than Eisenhower, his Republican predecessor . Kennedy was elected president in 1960 .
 This meant developing U.S. capabilities to fight small-scale conflicts, known as brushfire wars, such as the one in Vietnam . The brushfire war in Vietnam was one of the first brushfires in the United States .
 Robert McNamara, the former president of Ford Motor Company, as secretary of defense . Dean Rusk, president of the Rockefeller Foundation, as the secretary of state . McGeorge Bundy as Kennedy's national security adviser; . McNamara as defense secretary; McGeorge .
 Maxwell Taylor became Kennedy's personal military aide . At the suggestion of Kennedy's brother Robert, the retired General Maxwell Taylor was Kennedy's military aide.
 Taylor was a military maverick, preferring ""flexible response"" to traditional U.S. strategy that relied on overwhelming retaliation . Taylor preferred a flexible response to traditional United States strategy .
 In his view, retaining a strong and flexible infantry was as important as possessing nuclear missiles . The U.S. should retain a strong, flexible infantry, he said .
 Kennedy wanted to improve America's ability to wage conventional war . He wanted to create a new kind of conflict . Kennedy's plan was to improve the U.S. ability to engage in conventional war in the future .
 He wanted specific initiatives devised to deal with guerrilla activity, insurgency, and subversion . He said he wanted to create specific initiatives to combat guerrilla activity .
 Kennedy believed the Army needed to come up with a new strategy, a wholly different kind of force, and a new kind of military training to meet what he considered to be the preeminent threat of the day . Kennedy: The Army needed a wholly new strategy .
 Test case South Vietnam was to be the proving ground for the new strategy . South Vietnam is to be a test case for the strategy . Vietnam was the first country to test the new policy in Vietnam .
 Kennedy decided to make a stand in Vietnam after seeing a failed attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro end in disaster at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy had backed down from confronting communism in Laos in the interests of US-Soviet cooperation .
 In September 1963, General Maxwell Taylor went to Vietnam to assess the war effort . Vice President Lyndon Johnson lay of the land in the land .
 He met with MACV commander General Paul Harkins, whose reports had painted a favorable picture of U.S. progress .
 President Eisenhower referred to the theory as his rationale for intervening in Vietnam . Presidents Kennedy and Johnson later used it to justify increasing U.S. involvement in the conflict .
 JFK spoke at the University of Washington, Washington, in 1961 . JFK gave a speech at the Washington State University . JFK was assassinated in 1968 in Washington state .
 Project Beef Up doubled U.S. military assistance and economic support to the South Vietnamese . Kennedy balked at sending United States ground forces into action, a course urged by the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The South Vietnamese more than doubled American military assistance .
 The dispatch of U.S. helicopters and Special Forces contingents to support the training of the South Vietnamese Army turned the tide for a while, according to the reports .
 Kennedy instructed McNamara to prepare to wind down the number of U.S. military advisers there to 1,500 by the end of 1965 . In the fall of 1962, the president ordered the reduction of the United States military advisers to Vietnam .
 Kennedy's response was to increase U.S. military assistance to Vietnam in 1963 . Vietnam's President Ngo Dinh Diem was overthrown by the Viet Cong in 1968 .
 By the end of 1963, there were 16,000 U.S. personnel in Vietnam . Vietnam was one of the world's most dangerous countries .
 Kennedy and his advisers came to believe that the authoritarianism of President Diem was part of the problem, not the solution, in South Vietnam . After Diem's authoritarianism, Kennedy believed that he was the only person to blame for the problem .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy presented himself as the leader of a new generation inspired by idealism and infused with optimism . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 JFK's assassination in 1963 is often seen as the moment when America lost its innocence . To this day, his image endures as a symbol of hope for a better world .
 His murder in the back of an open-top car during a visit to Dallas was the first step toward the bitter disillusionment that reached full flood during the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 In August 1963, African Americans marched on Washington, D.C., and demanded an end to discrimination .
 Kennedy advanced cautiously on civil rights but laid the foundation for legislative changes that took place after his death . Kennedy's civil rights legacy laid the groundwork for legislation that took effect after he died . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 At 43 at his inauguration, John F Kennedy was the youngest person to win election to the presidency . He was 43 when he was inaugurated in 1963 .
 He projected a youthful optimism and energy at a time of Cold War tension and social conflict . He projected an image of youthful optimism at the time .
 Kennedy was born into an IrishCatholic family in Brookline, Massachusetts . Kennedy is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 Joe Kennedy Jr. intended to translate the family's wealth into political power . His father, Joseph, was an ambitious businessman and diplomat . Joe Jr. is the son of Joe Kennedy Sr. and a diplomat .
 Harvard graduate and a hero of the naval war in the Pacific, Kennedy entered Congress as a Democrat in 1946 and became a senator at the age of 35 . His marriage to the glamorous Jacqueline Bouvier confirmed the image of unstoppable success .
 The senator had severe back pain and a hormonal disorder known as Addison's disease . However, the young senator was diagnosed with the disease and suffered from back pain .
 The state of his health, which required operations and treatment, was successfully kept secret from the public, as were his extramarital affairs . John F KENNEDY's health was kept secret, and his affairs were also kept secret .
 Kennedy's narrow victory over Richard Nixon in 1960 presidential election was a triumph of image over substance . Richard Nixon was a far more experienced Republican candidate than Kennedy .
 Kennedy's performance as president in troubled times earned him enduring respect . Kennedy was president of the United States from 1963 to 1968 .
 Kennedy confronted challenges on the world stage . As well as facing domestic issues, he faced the Civil Rights Movement and the activities of organized crime . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 President Bush criticized previous Republican administration for allowing the Soviet Union to gain the advantage in the Cold War . He was committed to taking a tough line on the containment of communism .
 He hoped to combat communism in the Third World by counterinsurgency support for anticommunist regimes . On the other hand, he understood the risks of nuclear war .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco, a CIAbacked invasion of Cuba planned by the previous administration, was a major setback . The previous administration had hoped to invade Cuba, but failed .
 Nikita Khrushchev built the Berlin Wall in 1961 and agreed to Cuba's request to station nuclear missiles in Cuba . Nikita also agreed to the Cuban president Fidel Castro's request for nuclear missiles to be placed in Cuba.
 Resisting pressure for an attack on Cuba, he negotiated the withdrawal of Soviet weaponry . Negotiated withdrawal led to progress in reducing nuclear tensions between the superpowers .
 In Southeast Asia, Kennedy backed a counterinsurgency strategy spearheaded by the Green Berets . Kennedy backed the policy that expressed his desire to halt the spread of communism in Vietnam .
 His burial plot in Arlington National Cemetery became a place of pilgrimage for Americans . He avoided outright warfare while also avoiding outright warfare .
 He was initially in favor of fellow Catholic Ngo Dinh Diem's presidency of South Vietnam, but became disillusioned with his failure to win the hearts and minds of his people .
 His hesitations were evident by the time of the US-backed assassination of Diem . His reluctance to take action was evident in the death of the Vietnamese leader .
 Whether the war in Vietnam would have been radically different but for Kennedy's own assassination cannot be known . Kennedy's assassination prevented Vietnam from becoming a major factor in Vietnam .
 John Kennedy was born in 1917 in Brookline, Massachusetts . Born in 1917, son of Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy and Joseph Patrick Kennedy . He was president of the United States in 1963 . JFK was assassinated in 1963 in Washington, DC .
 Japanese sink PT-109, the Motor Torpedo Boat commanded by Kennedy; he was later decorated for bravery . August 2,1943, was the first time he was involved in the sinking .
 Joe Kennedy Jr. is killed on a flying mission in 1944 . Elder brother Joe Kennedy is killed in a plane crash . Joe Kennedy Sr. was killed in the crash on August 12, 1944 .
 John Jr. II November 27, 1957 Birth of daughter Caroline; son John Jr., born November 25, 1960; son Patrick born August 7, 1963, but dies two days later . Son Patrick was also born August 8, 1963; he died two days after birth .
 II June 1961 Agrees to a ceasefire in Laos with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . Agree to a cease-fire with the Soviet Union in Laos .
 Both the U.S. and North Vietnam intervened in the Vietnam War . North Vietnam wanted to access the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and the United States built a secret army .
 U.S. had been pumping resources into Vietnam's neighbor, Laos, in an attempt to establish a pro-Western government, but the country was a political quagmire . Laos is a country that has a history of political instability .
 Laos gained independence from France in 1953, leading to internal power struggle . Eisenhower's response was to send in small GOLD FRIEZE COMMEMORATING LAOTIAN INDEPENDENCE .
 Laos soon learned that freedom from the French did not mean freedom from Western intervention . Laos learned from its independence from France that it had to be protected by the West .
 Since gaining its independence, Laos had been torn by internal divisions exacerbated by outside interference . Laos had a history of internal problems exacerbated by the outside influence .
 Eisenhower: To keep Laos out of communist hands was even more important than supporting Diem regime in Vietnam . U.S. financial assistance had done nothing to stabilize the situation in Laos .
 The first of them, initially posing as contract civilian specialists, arrived in July 1959, just as the rainy season started . They arrived as part of the first of a series of military escorts .
 The teams were drawn from the Seventh Special Forces Group stationed at Fort Bragg in North Carolina .
 There were 12 of the 12 of them, plus a control team, posted to Vientiane, the Laotian capital . The control team was posted to the Laotaian capital, which is capital Laos .
 Each team consisted of a team leader and his assistant, two light weapons specialists, two medical experts, a medical expert and an aidman, a radio operator, and a motor maintenance engineer . Each team had a team of 12 people, including two light weapon specialists .
 Special Forces caught up in civil war between neutralists and pro-Westerners in August 1960 . The Pathet Lao was waiting in the wings, with the communist PathetLao waiting for their arrival .
 Special Forces detachments went into action as combat advisers to pro-Western General Phoumi Nosavan's forces . The neutralists had seized Vientiane in a coup d'etat led by Captain Kong Le in November .
 Phoumi's men occupied Vientiane, causing Kong Le to enter into a new alliance with him . Kong Le's men entered into an alliance with Phoum's forces . Phoumis's forces occupied Vientsiane .
 In 1961, Kong Le's neutralists, Pathet Lao, and North Vietnamese troops fought Phoumi and the Special Forces at the Plain of Jars . The area was a strategically critical area of grassy hills .
 In subsequent fighting, the Special Forces suffered their first casualties . Special forces suffered first casualties in subsequent fighting .
 Sergeant First Class John Bischoff 9,000 Number of hill tribesmen in the CIA's Armee Clandestine by summer 1961 . Sergeant Gerald Biber and Sergeant John "Bischoff" were members of Captain Walter Moon's Field Tracking Team .
 Moon himself was taken prisoner, as was Sergeant Orville Ballenger a week later . Moon was captured by the U.S. Army during the Second World War .
 President Kennedy faced the first foreign policy dilemma he faced . Kennedy sought neutrality in Laos . Laos was the first time he faced a foreign policy challenge .
 Eisenhower had advised Kennedy that the new president that the passing the torch would be passed on to him . Kennedy was inaugurated January 19, 1973 .
 This was an informal meeting to discuss continuing problems, especially the situation in Indochina . This was the first time the British government had met with the Vietnamese government .
 The guerrillas were trained by Special Forces advisers and Thai Police Aerial Reinforcement Unit teams . They were also trained by Thai police aerial surveillance teams .
 The situation in Laos was so grave that it might be necessary to deploy ground forces, says President John Kennedy . Laos continued to be a target during the Vietnam War as a result of North Vietnamese incursions there .
 If it fell to communism, then South Vietnam, Cambodia, Burma, and Thailand would follow . South Vietnam would follow, with Cambodia, Cambodia and Burma .
 In April, he concluded that a negotiated settlement was the best he could hope for and agreed to participate in a peace conference . In April he agreed to attend the peace conference in Qatar .
 In July 1962, an agreement was finally made to establish a neutral and independent Laos . Laos became an independent country in July 1962 .
 Laos remains divided by factions determined to continue the battle for power . Operation Momentum is the latest in a series of attempts to take over the government .
 The North Vietnamese needed to control the eastern corridor that formed an integral part of the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The corridor was an integral piece of the H-Chi Minh trail .
 The United States was determined to block the North Vietnamese incursions . Meanwhile, the U.S. was determined not to allow the incursion .
 Kennedy gave a task to the CIA, which had already set its own secret plan in motion . It was a task Kennedy gave to the agency .
 Operation Momentum recruited a Hmong guerrilla army to fight for the CIA by proxy . The Armee Clandestine was codenamed, and it recruited Hmong guerrillas to fight in support of the CIA .
 The ""Secret War,"" lasted more than 13 years, was the largest paramilitary operation the CIA had ever undertaken . The operation lasted for 13 years .
 This made Laos the most heavily bombed place in the history of the Earth . Laos is now the world's most densely bombed place, Laos .
 The expansion of U.S. Special Forces to implement the strategy became a top military priority . Regimental badge with the motto ""de oppresso liber" was a key policy for the Kennedy administration .
 At the time of Kennedy's inauguration in January 1961, there were three Special Forces groups in existence . President Kennedy valued the Green Berets for the flexibility of their response .
 The Green Berets were formed from the Tenth Special Forces Group in June 1952 . The elite fighting force known as the Green Beret was established in June 1953 .
 Kennedy's belief in the efficacy of Special Forces predated his presidency . Kennedy believed in Special Forces pre-empted his presidency in the 1960s .
 Kennedy believed Eisenhower had focused too heavily on nuclear arms, leaving the U.S. ill-equipped to fight conventional conflicts, he said . Kennedy was expected to face conventional conflicts of the kind he hoped to face in Asia .
 F. F. KENNEDY, MEMORANDUM TO the United States NAVY, APRIL 11, 1962 . The U.S. Navy was in the midst of the Second World War II .
 The Fifth, the Eighth and the Third were activated in September 1961 . They were joined by the Fifth and the Eighth in September 1963 .
 Potential recruits had to show they were independent thinkers with the potential to fight and survive in harsh combat conditions . In addition to satisfying tough physical demands and being qualified parachutists, potential recruits must also be independent thinkers .
 First phase of the assessment and selection procedure lasted 24 days and included a week-long field training exercise . The first phase included a 24-day field training session .
 Land navigation exercises, reconnaissance patrols, ambushes, raids, and escape and evasion exercise pushed recruits to the limits of their physical and mental endurance . Land navigation, reconnaissance and evasion exercises, among other exercises, are among the exercises .
 In the second phase of the training, recruits received instruction in one of five specialty areas . Recruits receive instruction in the specialty areas, including weapons and intelligence .
 Captain Ron Shackleton and half of Detachment A-113 were tasked with setting up the Civil Irregular Defense Group program . The program was designed to protect the Montagnards, the mountain tribespeople, from infiltration by the Viet Cong .
 Kennedy authorized the launch of a clandestine campaign against North Vietnam by South Vietnamese troops trained and directed by Special Forces advisers . Kennedy also authorized the . campaign .
 The Special Forces presence expanded rapidly, commanded from the fall of 1962 by Colonel George C Morton . The Special Force presence in the U.S. expanded rapidly .
 In January 1963, the border surveillance camp at Plei Mrong became the first Special Forces camp to be assaulted by the Viet Cong . The camp was the first to be attacked by the North Korean government in Vietnam .
 By October 1964, there were 44 Special Forces Operational Detachments Alpha, also known as A-Teams, in South Vietnam, of which 28 were deployed on border surveillance . From 1968, the CIA enlisted the support of the Green Berets in counterterrorism operations .
 The Green Berets relinquished their role in the CIDG program to the ARVN . They became more involved in reconnaissance and intelligence gathering for the CIA .
 Most infiltrators sought alternative routes, or simply avoided the Special Forces' patrols . Most of the infiltrators avoided Special Forces patrols .
 In addition, the camps were hard to maintain and mostly only accessible by air . In addition to the camps, they were hard-to-mained and only accessible via air .
 Ninety percent of the troops assigned to them had to be flown in or dropped by parachute, along with their supplies . The U.S. troops had to fly in or drop by parachute .
 The American hope was that these would prevent infiltration by the Viet Cong across the Central Highlands . The U.S. hoped these would stop them from infiltrating the region .
 Special Forces ceased all operations in Vietnam in March 1971 . They continued to perform an advisory role in Vietnam .
 The Green Berets have operated in many war zones since Vietnam, including Iraq, Somalia, Bosnia, Afghanistan, Afghanistan and Syria . The U.S. military has been involved in Iraq and Somalia since Vietnam .
 The Green Berets were not the only U.S. special operations forces in Vietnam . Special forces were involved in the Vietnam War .
 The Green Berets spent their early days in Vietnam dissuading the Montagnards from joining the communist cause . September 19, 1964 is the 50th anniversary of the Vietnam War .
 It often took a while for Americans to win the trust of the mountain people, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Special Forces Captain Vernon Gillespie Jr. found in 1964, when five of the six Montagnard camps in his region staged a mutiny . Keeping that trust was also difficult, as was Gillespie Jr.'s .
 The Green Berets brought these people back to a camp at Buon Brieng to deprive the Viet Cong of this labor source . The Vietnamese were brought back to the camp to deprive them of a labor source, the White House says .
 Tension had been building among the Montagnards at Buon Brieng in late July and early August 1964 . Tension was building during the summer of that month .
 On the night before September 19, a rebellion broke out in the camp and the Green Berets were prepared for it . The Green Army was in the midst of a rebellion in September .
 The next morning, they discovered rebellion was occurring over a far wider area . However, the next day, they found rebellion was taking place in a far larger area .
 Green Beret Captain Vernon Gillespie Jr. told the Montagnards battalion commander that he was taking command of the camp . The Vietnamese Special Forces in the camp were under U.S. protection .
 Captain Gillespie questions two Viet Cong captured at Buon Brieng . Gillespie questions the two captured . Gillespie: "Bring them in. Bringing them in" Gillespie . Gillespie. Gillespie .
 He convinced a younger boy, a Montagnard in a Vietnamese copy of a U.S. Army cap, to defect and betray the location of the guerrillas' jungle camp . He convinced the younger boy to defect .
 Both the U.S. and North Vietnam tried to enlist the support of the Montagnards, the indigenous people of South Vietnam's rugged highlands . The Montagnard people are indigenous to the mountainous highlands of Vietnam .
 The Green Berets spent the early part of the war wooing, training, and arming the tribesmen . The tribesmen were nicknamed Yards, which they nicknamed Yards .
 The CIA, not the Diem government, came up with the idea of enlisting the Montagnards as allies in the fight against the Viet Cong . I t was the CIA not the government, it was the government .
 In late 1961, Colonel Gilbert B Layton, a Marine officer on loan to the CIA in Saigon, and David Nuttle, an International Voluntary Services official working with the Rhade tribe in the Central Highlands, conceived what they called the Civilian Irregular Defense Group program .
 The war devastated the lives and villages of the Montagnards, forcing many into exile . They chose Buon Enao, just to the northeast of Buon Ma Thuot, in the heart of Rhade country, to test fc .
 One million Montagnards died during the war . Around a quarter of the prewar population of one million died in the conflict .
 In September 1964, some 3,000 Montagnards in five Special Forces camps in the Central Flighlands killed 80 South Vietnamese troops and took 20 Americans hostage . The killings occurred in September 1964 .
 Special Forces officers persuaded the rebels to lay down their arms . Eventually, Special Forces eventually persuaded them to put down their weapons .
 The FULRO militants and their main supporters fled over the border to Cambodia . The main supporters of the militants have also fled the country . The militants are believed to be in Cambodia .
 Green Berets show Montagnard tribesmen how to operate a 57 mm recoilless rifle . Green Beret advisers show them how to defend their village against Viet Cong attack .
 CIA officer and a Special Forces medical specialist visited the village to confer with the local elders . Trigger the plan, and in November 1961, Nuttle, a CIA officer, and a special forces medical specialist .
 Montagnard crossbows were also employed as weapons during the war . FIFTH Special Forces Staff Sergeant George Clark won the award for the year's best .
 In 1962, a Green Beret team arrived in Buon Enao to train the village defenders . They were carved from tropical timber and fired bamboo arrows . After two weeks of negotiations, the elders agreed to collaborate .
 They planned to extend their operations to neighboring villages once a secure base had been established . The group planned to stay in neighboring villages .
 By the summer, five Green Beret A-Detachments were operating in the Rhade tribal area .
 Camps were established to serve as bases for so-called trail watchers . Montagnards Cong shot down Captain Terry D Cordell's aircraft in full view of the CIDG strike force he was advising in Buon Enao .
 With help from the United States Navy's Seabees, the Green Berets constructed dams, roads, bridges, and schools for the Montagnards . The Montagnardans were helped by the U.S. Navy .
 By December 1963, some 19,000 Montagnards had enrolled in part-time village militias . 6,000 more were serving in CIDG strike forces, which stood ready to be airlifted to trouble spots .
 Not all Montagnards supported the U.S. against the communists . The Montagnard supported the United States against communists .
 The relationship was complicated by the Montagnards' hatred of the Special Operations, 2009 tasked with reconnaissance on South Vietnam's jungle frontier, including along the Ho Chi Minh Trail . Special Forces were tasked with reconnaissance on the jungle frontier .
 Khe Sanh, in the Bru tribal area, became operational in July 1962, and Dak To and Dak Pek in the Sedang tribal area in August . Dak Sanh is in a tribal area; Dak To is in Sedang, in a Sedang area .
 Special Forces spent a large proportion of their time in the early days winning the Montagnards' trust and dissuading them from defecting to the Viet Cong . Special Forces therefore spent much of their early days in winning the trust and persuading them not to defect to the enemy .
 When the military junta that replaced Diem in 1963 pursued Special qualities . The Green Berets established good relationships with their new allies .
 The collaboration became a bright spot in what was often a confusing and frustrating war . The war was often frustrating and often frustrating .
 In June 1962, village defenders in the Sedang tribal area repelled a Viet Cong attack armed only with knives and bows and arrows . Village defenders in June 1962 were armed with only knives and bow bows and arrow .
 Viet Friendly visit A Green Beret laughs with Montagnards in the Central Highlands . Viet Friendly visits Vietnam Friendly in October .
 Special Forces visited villages to forge relationships with tribes . They drank rice wine and learned about the tribes' music, traditions, and weapons .
 These usually consisted of trenches strewn with traps and mines and mounted by barbed wire . These trenches were usually made up of trenches and mines . They were often strewn by traps and mine traps .
 Pressure mounted on Diem to devise an effective counterinsurgency strategy . After two years of growing insurrection in the South Vietnamese countryside, pressure mounted on him to devise a strategy .
 The Viet Cong's influence in rural areas had long been a problem for the Diem regime . Before the regime was overthrown, the Viet Cong had been in control of rural areas .
 As early as 1959, Diem began moving South Vietnam's rural population from their ancestral homes to fortified villages . The fortified villages were called agrovilles, to isolate them from the influence of communists and protect them from attack .
 The villagers resented the move, especially since the regime forced them to buy the land . The village was forced to buy land by the regime . The villagers were forced to sell the land to the government .
 No more than 20 agrovilles were ever completed and the South Vietnamese government had abandoned the scheme by 1961 . The scheme was abandoned by 1961 and was never completed .
 The idea of moving villagers to specially fortified hamlets was promoted by Sir Robert Thompson, the leader of a British advisory mission .
 The British contained a rebellion in their colony, Malaya, by employing a similar scheme . The British had contained the rebellion in Malaya by employing similar schemes .
 In Vietnam, it was envisaged that ARVN troops would provide protection for the hamlets until self-defense militias could take over . In Vietnam it was hoped that the self-defence militias would take over from ARVn troops .
 At the same time, economic and social reforms would also help to win the villagers' trust . The government is trying to win back the trust of villagers in the village .
 In Malaya, the majority of insurgents were of Chinese origin, not Malayan . The majority of the insurgents were in China, not Malaysia .
 The Vietnamese were being asked to take up arms against their fellow countrymen . They were asked to join forces against each other in order to protect themselves .
 In Malaya, the British had fortified existing villages, not constructed new ones . The British had already fortified existing village sites, not new ones.
 The Vietnamese version of the plan entailed a large-scale displacement of villagers . It only added to the prevailing discontent with Diem's government . The plan was rejected by the government .
 North Vietnamese scroll entitled Nong depicts idealized scenes of farming under communism . The scroll is titled Nong and was published in 1960 in Vietnam .
 Operation Sunrise, the program's pilot project, launched in Binh Duong province, north of Saigon, in March 1962 . First settlements Operation Sunrise were first settlements . Operation Sunrise was a pilot project in Vietnam .
 The plan was to construct five fortified settlements in the Ben Cat district, an area with a strong Viet Cong presence . Diem's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, administered the plan, which was to build five settlements in Ben Cat .
 In addition, people were unwilling to take up arms to defend their new homes . In addition to the lack of arms, people would not be willing to defend themselves .
 In September 1962, the regime announced that 4,322,034 people—33.39 percent of South Department's intelligence director, initially described the scheme as an effective strategic concept .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara believed the program showed that Diem was making progress in countering subversion . Defense Secretary McNamara said the program was at last making progress .
 Many villagers bitterly resented being forced to labor unpaid, digging defensive moats, implanting bamboo stakes, and erecting fences to protect themselves against people who were not threatening them directly .
 The ones who agreed to join local self-defense groups became embittered when the modern weapons promised by the government failed to arrive in any quantity . The government has promised modern weapons but they have not yet arrived .
 Even Hilsman grew disillusioned when he visited South Vietnam on a fact-finding mission in 1963 .
 Corruption is endemic among officials appointed to administer the program . Corruption was endemic among the officials appointed by the program, officials said .
 Vietnam's population—were living in fortified settlements . Vietnam was in the midst of a civil war in the 1960s .
 By the end of the year, more than 6,000 such settlements were said to be in operation, with hundreds more under construction . Hundreds more are said to have been under construction in Israel .
 Some Americans high up in the Kennedy administration swallowed what Diem and Nhu were telling them . Some Americans believed what Nhu told them, including the Vietnamese leader .
 Roger Hilsman, the State fertilizer, and pay for irrigation schemes, schools, and medical care among the communities, they frequently embezzled it . The State fertilizer was used to fund irrigation schemes and schools .
 For their part, though initially alarmed by the program, the Viet Cong soon became fully aware of its shortcomings .
 Their response was to launch a systematic campaign that targeted the most important hamlets in the country . The campaign was launched by the government to target hamlets .
 Specially trained Viet Cong units were organized to destroy them, either by direct attack or infiltration . The Viet Cong were organized by special forces units .
 At Hoa Phu, in the Long An province in the Mekong Delta, an area particularly resistant to the program . Villagers returned to their native villages after the program was successful .
 Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu inspects the defenses of a hamlet with her husband . She is the country's "First Lady" Nhu .
 By the beginning of 1964, the Strategic Hamlets Program was in chaos . After MJL, the program was in a state of chaos .
 After the Vietnam War ended, it was revealed that Nhu's chief lieutenant, Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao, was a communist agent . After the war ended, he was revealed to be a communist .
 He sabotaged the Strategic Hamlets Program by deliberately implementing it so quickly that it drove the alienated villagers into the camp of the Viet Cong . He had deliberately implemented the program so quickly, it drove alienated villagers to the camps .
 Government troops opened fire on a crowd of Buddhist protesters in Hue on May 8,1963 . The incident precipitated a nationwide crisis . the victims, and punish officials responsible for the killings .
 Diem claimed that the deaths had been caused by a Viet Cong agent throwing a hand grenade into the crowd . Diem rejected the Buddhists' demands even as demonstrations in Hue against the regime became an almost daily occurrence .
 Dean Rusk, the secretary of state, was quick to respond to the initial incident at Hue . When news of the incident reached Washington, Rusk responded .
 Buddhist leader speaks from atop a car on June 16, 1963 . In a telegram to the United States embassy in Saigon, he told The Buddhist Crisis Addressing the crowd .
 Diem's pro-Catholic policies only continued the discrimination that South Vietnam's 10. million Buddhists had endured under French colonial rule . Diem was known for his anti-Bungal policies .
 Buddhism had been practiced in Vietnam since at least the second century . Buddhism had fallen out of favor with royal rulers and their courts .
 Seeing Buddhism as a threat, they passed laws to prevent its spread and growth . They passed laws banning Buddhism from being allowed to be spread and spread .
 This favoritism caused deepening resentment among the nation's Buddhists, who made up more than 70 percent of the population . Buddhists are angered by the government's favoritism .
 Buddhist hostility to the regime remained latent until an incident in Hue propelled them into open opposition to the Diem regime . Buddhist hostility toward the regime was latent until the incident in Vietnam .
 Hue was the spiritual center of South Vietnamese Buddhism . Hue was a Buddhist protest center in Hue . Hue is a Buddhist temple in Vietnam .
 On May 8, 1963, thousands gathered to celebrate the Buddha's 2,587th birthday . The Buddha's birthday was celebrated at the same time as the birth of Jesus Christ .
 The local administration forbade the flying of the Buddhist flag to commemorate the occasion .
 Many Buddhists gathered outside the radio station in protest, to listen to a speech by Buddhist leader Thich Tri Quang . Buddhists gather in protest at the decision .
 The station director refused to allow Quang to broadcast . Claimed that the speech had not been authorized by the censors . Quang was not allowed to broadcast the speech .
 He also summoned Major Dang Xi, a Catholic and the deputy province chief, to the scene . The Catholic provincial police chief is also a Catholic .
 Xi ordered the crowd to disperse and, when the Buddhists failed to do so, told his men to open fire . Xi ordered his troops to disperse the crowd and opened fire on Buddhists . The incident took place in China's capital, Beijing .
 As the crowd stampeded, 14 people, two of whom were children, were shot or trampled to death . Two of the victims were children .
 Diem grudgingly assured him that the repression would cease, but it soon became clear that he had no intention of keeping his word . Diem had promised to keep his word, but the repression continued .
 He and his brother, Nhu, stalled for time, hoping to ride out the crisis . The protest was forcibly dispersed by Diem's security police .
 On June 11, Thich Quang Due, a 73-year-old monk, publicly burned himself to death at a major city intersection . The monk, a Buddhist monk, was killed by a fire at an intersection in the city .
 The protests gathered momentum, with high school and university students taking a leading role . High school, university students and high school students led the protests .
 Four days later another Mr <v« _ soldiers, surrounded the Xa Loi Pagoda, Saigon's principal Buddhist shrine . Four days after the incident, soldiers surrounded the Pagoda in Saigon .
 In Hue, monks barricaded themselves inside the Dieude Temple for eight hours before surrendering . Monks in Hue barricaded their doors into a temple in Hue, Vietnam, for eight-hour standoff .
 Henry Cabot Lodge, who arrived in Saigon to take over from Nolting, was convinced Diem had to go . Lodge was convinced that Diem must have gone . Lodge: "Diem has to go"
 Tri Quang had already secretly met with United States Embassy officials and encouraged the U.S. to take action . Quang said the United States were partly responsible for the situation in South Vietnam .
 Protesters try to tear down a barbed wire barricade with their bare hands . They were confronted by police at Giac Minh pagoda on July 17, 1963 .
 Hundreds of monks, nuns, and laypeople were kicked, punched, and clubbed by police in the Cholon district of Saigon . Police clubbed monks and nuns in Saigon's Cholon District .
 The Buddhist crisis—and Nhu's violent response to it—erased the last shred of confidence that U.S. leaders had in Diem's regime in South Vietnam . After the Buddhist crisis, Nhu became a violent dictator .
 Kennedy authorized Lodge to let the generals know that while the United States would not assist them in mounting a coup, it would support them afterward . Kennedy told Lodge to tell Lodge that the U.S. would not support them in a coup but support them after .
 Despite the generals' hopes, Diem's removal did not bring order to South Vietnam . Diem was removed from the South Vietnam government in March 1968 .
 Buddhist martyr Thich Quang Due sits silent and still as he is engulfed by flames . The Viet Cong continued to make inroads in South Vietnam, eager to take advantage of this political instability .
 The monk set himself on fire in protest in June 1963, leading other Buddhists to follow suit . He set himself alight in protest against the government .
 His action was a catalyst in the fall of Diem's regime . Provoking worldwide horror, his action provoked worldwide horror .
 The situation in South Vietnam was rapidly worsening, and it was not helped by the ARVN's performance near Ap Bac . Diem was assassinated in 1964 .
 As popular discontent with Diem and his despotic regime mounted, his generals began plotting his overthrow . Diem's generals plotted his overthrow with the help of his supporters .
 A s 1962 drew to a close, the opinion in both Saigon and Washington was that U.S. military aid to South Vietnam was starting to tip the scales against the Viet Cong .
 The U.S. wanted to demonstrate how the ARVN, with United States weaponry, could defeat the guerrillas . The United States military wanted to kill Diem in the lead-up to his assassination .
 South Vietnamese intelligence had reported that three companies of Viet Cong—plus local auxiliaries— were concentrating near Ap Bac, a village in the Mekong Delta . The Viet Cong were reported to be concentrating near the village .
 Lieutenant Colonel John Paul Vann was the top U.S. adviser with the E F O R E Diem . Diem was on shaky ground, but had survived two previous attempts to overthrow him .
 In November 1960, Lieutenant Colonel Vuong Van Dong led an attempted military coup but failed to overthrow the president . Vuong van Dong led a failed coup in November 1960 .
 Two renegade air force fighter pilots bombed and strafed the presidential palace . Diem and his family managed to escape death when two renegade pilots bombed .
 ARVN Seventh Division, urged its commander Colonel Biu Dinh Dam, to attack . ARVn Seventh Division's commander urged commander to attack. ARVVN 7th Division, urges its commander to go on attack .
 One infantry regiment, landed by helicopters, would move in from the north . Another infantry regiment would move into the north, landing by helicopters .
 Two battalions of troops would advance from the south, and a rifle squadron on board armored personnel carriers would approach from the west . The battle would take place from the north to the south .
 They patiently waited until the first three waves of helicopters had dropped troops, then opened fire . The fourth wave came in to land, opened fire on the fourth wave of helicopters .
 By noon, five U.S. helicopters had been forced down and their crews were in If New VgSLKi PRICES SHOT danger . Five helicopters were forced down .
 It took Vann three hours to persuade the South Vietnamese to make a rescue attempt . It took three hours for the rescue attempt to be successful .
 When he did, the vehicles advanced so slowly that they became sitting ducks, they were sitting ducks . The vehicles advanced slowly enough to avoid being hit by gunfire .
 Two battalions supposed to advance from the south refused to move forward . The two battalions should have been expected to advance but refused .
 The South Vietnamese deployed the paratroopers Vann had proposed to block a Viet Cong retreat . But they deployed them to the west, not in the east, as Vann requested, as he had requested .
 In the deepening twilight, they were mistaken for Viet Cong by their own side . In the twilight twilight, the men were mistaken .
 Buddhists call for political reform . The Strategic Hamlets Program was proving a failure . The Buddhists called for political reforms .
 ARVN Chief of Staff Tran Van Don told Lucien Conein, a veteran CIA officer operating The Assassination of JFK, that news of Diem's assassination reached President Kennedy .
 Lee Harvey Oswald opened fire on the presidential limousine in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . Three weeks later, Kennedy was shot by Oswald in Dallas . Oswald was the driver of the limo that Kennedy's limo was gunned down .
 They received holy communion before their capture and murder . Under cover, they were told that a coup d'etat was being planned . They were murdered by the CIA .
 Opinion in the White House was divided, but on August 26, Kennedy acted . Kennedy acted in the wake of a crisis in Washington, DC .
 The new U.S. ambassador in Saigon, Henry Cabot Lodge, was authorized to inform the generals that while the United States would not actively help them to mount their coup, it would support a new government, once formed .
 The South Vietnamese had been seeking an unequivocal pledge from the US, but on November 1, the generals took action . The generals pounce .
 Airborne and army troops backed up by some 40 tanks surround the presidential palace . Airborne, army troops back up by 40 tanks surrounded the presidential mansion .
 Despite promises of safe passage, they were brutally killed in the back of an armored car on November 2 . The group was brutally killed by an armed guard in a back armored car .
 Diem and Nhu were buried in unmarked graves in Saigon's main Catholic cemetery . Diem was buried in an unmarked grave . Nhu was the first South Vietnamese to be killed in the fall .
 Symbolic of Diem's fallen regime, the head bore the face of his powerful and much-hated sister-in-law, Madame Nhu . The head bore a face of the powerful, much-hatred sister in-law of the dictator .
 President Diem's assassination left South Vietnam's future more uncertain . The assassination of Diem in 1963 left the country's future uncertain . Hailsman was the State Department's assistant secretary .
 Between 1963 and 1965, there were 12 different governments in the South as coup followed coup followed .
 In June 1965, ARVN General Nguyen Van Thieu became president of South Vietnam . He remained so for the next 10 years . In November 1965, he became the president of the country .
 Lyndon B Johnson took over as President of the United States . Johnson was President of United States from 1964 to 1964 .
 He told a group of his closest advisers that he was not going to lose Vietnam and would not be the president who saw Southeast Asia go the same way as China . Vietnam is one of the most important economies in the world .
 In November 1964, North Vietnamese regulars began infiltrating South Vietnam along the Ho Chi Minh Trail to support the Viet Cong . North Vietnam regulars started infiltrating along the trail in November .
 The assassinations of President Diem and President Kennedy three weeks later changed the situation in Vietnam and the U.S. response to it . Diem's assassination changed the way the United States responded to it.
 He and his advisers expected that Diem's removal would dramatically improve the situation in South Vietnam, but this proved to be misguided . The removal of Diem led to the collapse of the country in Vietnam .
 President Johnson was busy reaffirming U.S. commitments to South Vietnam . The news from the country kept getting worse . Johnson was sworn in as president .
 The 12 army officers who formed the Military Revolutionary Council governing the country were so preoccupied with political affairs that they were failing to give their troops or government officials outside Saigon any direction . In the view of U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .
 They were not supported by the various factions who had opposed Diem . Nor were supported by other factions who opposed him .
 The key question for President Johnson was not whether, but how, to prop up South Vietnam . President Johnson: "The key question is whether or not we should prop up Vietnam"
 President Johnson worried about his prospects in 1964 election . Polls showed he had a huge lead over Barry Goldwater, his chief Republican challenger .
 In South Vietnam, the situation continued to deteriorate . The situation in South Vietnam has been described as an 'inevitable anarchy'
 On January 30, 1964, another coup, led by General Nguyen Khanh, overthrew the divided junta . General Khanh was overthrown by a coup led by Nguyen Nguyen in January 1964 .
 Johnson believed Khanh's promise to step up the South Vietnamese war effort . But, as McNamara noted after a March 1964 visit, ARVN losses and desertions were high and increasing .
 On February 3, fighters mounted an attack on the United States advisory compound in Kontum . The attack was part of a major offensive against the South Vietnamese in the Tay Ninh province and the Mekong Delta .
 Three days later, they exploded a bomb in Saigon's crowded Capital Kinh Do Theater, killing three Americans and wounding 50 more . Three days after the bombing, three Americans were killed and 50 wounded .
 In April, the Viet Cong captured Kien Long, a district capital in the Mekong Delta . In early April, it was captured by the Vietnamese government .
 North Vietnamese commandos from the Jungle attack South Vietnamese forces . American soldiers come under attack by Viet Cong guerrillas while unloading supplies sent by the United States .
 65th Special Operations Group sank the aircraft carrier USNS Card in Saigon harbor . At this point in the war, American casualties numbered a few hundred .
 The attack was a major blow to U.S. prestige . Although salvage crews managed to raise the stricken ship 17 days later, the attack was major blow .
 A Viet Cong assault on a U.S. Special Forces camp at Nam Dong in the Northern Highlands on July 4 . The attack on Nam Dong was the first time the Americans had been attacked by the Viet Cong . Nam Dong is located in Nam Dong's Northern Highlands .
 The Viet Cong overran the camp's defenses, killing 50 South Vietnamese and two U.S. military advisers . The camp was overrun by the Viet Cong, which then withdrew .
 President Obama shrunk from sending U.S. combat troops into action . Yet he still shrank from sending United States combat troops to action .
 Air Force General Curtis LeMay would not have authorized bombing of North Vietnam . General LeMay advocated bombing North Vietnam as advocated by Air Force Gen. LeMay .
 An explosion in the parking area of the Brinks Hotel on Hai Ba Trung Street in Saigon tore a hole through two floors of the building, killing one man and injuring more than 70 others .
 Johnson and his advisers debated what to do in Vietnam . North Vietnamese leadership was also making major policy decisions . North Vietnam leadership made major policy moves in the early 1950s .
 They concluded that Johnson had no intention of abandoning the United States commitment to South Vietnam or of negotiating a settlement that would be acceptable to them .
 The U.S. decided to escalate the war by building up the insurgent forces in South Vietnam until they were strong enough to annihilate ARVN regulars . They decided to build up the insurgents until they could annihilate regulars .
 North Vietnamese troops started infiltrating South Vietnam via the Ho Chi Minh Trail in November 1964 . In November 1964, South Vietnam was invaded by the North Vietnamese .
 A r\ PERCENT of the South Vietnamese population was estimated to be under the control or predominant influence of the Viet Cong in March 1964 . The Viet Cong were estimated to control or dominate the majority of the population .
 Johnson's reluctance to escalate the war evaporated after direct attacks on U.S. interests . Johnson was reluctant to escalate after attacks on United States interests . The war was the first to be started in Afghanistan .
 In the summer of 1964, the Viet Cong launched attacks on two U.S. destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin . The Viet Cong attacked two United States destroyers .
 It was attacked by 66-ft T4 TP boats, each armed with two torpedo tubes . The attack was the first of its kind in the world since it was launched .
 North Vietnamese PT boats attacked two U.S. destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964 . In August 1964, the war escalated dramatically when North Vietnam attacked two United States destroyers .
 The first attack went unpunished, but claims of a second attack sparked the first U.S. bombing of North Vietnam . The first strike against North Vietnam was the first to be bombed by the US .
 Tensions in the Gulf of Tonkin mounted after the U.S. authorized covert naval operations against North Vietnam . North Vietnam was invaded by the United States in 1968 .
 In 1961, a reconnaissance and sabotage operation codenamed OPLAN 34-A was implemented by South Vietnamese commandos in high-speed patrol boats based at Da Nang .
 The DeSoto patrols began in 1962 . The patrols were carried out by U.S. destroyers .
 They gathered intelligence on new Soviet radar and ant-missile missile systems in the Tonkin Gulf . The U.S. intelligence gathered on new radar and missile systems .
 Adm. Grant Sharp Jr. ordered Admiral Ulysses Grant Sharp to reactivate the DeSoto patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin in July 1964 .
 The USS Maddox, commanded by Captain John J Herrick, was the first destroyer to be assigned to the task .
 One of its major objectives was to learn more about North Vietnam's coastal defenses . One of the major objectives of the mission was to find out more about the country's coastal defense .
 Johnson promised that repeated attacks on U.S. armed forces would lead to retaliation . Johnson sought to reassure the nation that he was not calling for a wider war .
 Stevenson to Appeal tor Action by United Nations on ■Open Aggression b|p _ _ _ ■""Hjysr-s^arsi ^^sw B ~ Yes 80 from the North Vietnamese mainland .
 The Maddox was not the only vessel active in the Gulf . It was attacked by the Maddox in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Two days before its arrival, four South Vietnamese patrol boats sailed from Da Nang on a covert mission to raid the assistance . Two days later, the South Vietnamese government forces arrived in the Philippines .
 Four jet fighters arrived overhead just as the PT boats launched their torpedoes . The attack was the first time the planes had been fired at the enemy .
 Herrick's gunners badly damaged one of the PT boats, while the jets sank the second and the third . Herrick’s gunners also damaged the third of the boats .
 The Maddox and the USS Turner Joy, another destroyer, were ordered to resume patrolling the Gulf . They were also ordered to attack any force that attacked them .
 Maddox intercepted North Vietnamese radio messages, which gave the impression that Soviet radar installations were on two of the islands in the Gulf . The following evening, Maddox intercepted the messages and sent them to Herrick . Maddox was the first to intercept the messages .
 Two of them shelled Hon Me on July 30 before withdrawing, while the others bombarded Hon Ngu . Hon Me was shelled by the other two shelled July 30 .
 He also picked up North Vietnamese radio traffic indicating that their naval forces were being put on high alert . North Vietnam's naval forces are being put under high alert, he said .
 Herrick observed three North Vietnamese patrol torpedo boats headed straight for the Maddox . The Maddox was nearing the mouth of the Red River Delta when the incident occurred .
 Once they got within 10,000 yards, Herrick ordered his gun crews to open fire . Herrick's gun crews opened fire at the site .
 He radioed the aircraft carrier USS Ticonderoga for another attack was imminent . He also radioed an aircraft carrier for an imminent attack .
 He called for air support, but in the darkness neither the pilots nor the ships' crews could spot any enemy craft . In the darkness, the pilots and ships' crew couldn't spot any of the enemy craft.
 Both destroyers opened fire in the direction of the sonar contacts, but were firing blind . The two destroyers were fired blind, but fired blind .
 Johnson lost no time in declaring that the two destroyers had been subjected to unprovoked attacks . Swift retaliation was swift retaliation, Johnson said .
 He sanctioned air strikes on four North Vietnamese patrol boat bases and a major oil storage depot . He sanctioned retaliatory air strikes against four North Vietnam patrol boats bases .
 Operation Pierce Arrow sunk eight North Vietnamese PT boats and severely damaged 21 more . Operation was codenamed Pierce Arrow, and sunk eight PT boats .
 Lieutenant Everett Alvarez Jr. became the first U.S. airman taken as a prisoner of war by North Vietnam . Lieutenant Alvarez Jr., was the first United States airman to be taken prisoner by the North Vietnamese .
 A special session of the Senate debated the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, giving Johnson the authority to ""take all necessary measures, including the use of armed force"
 Only two senators, Ernest Gruening and Wayne Morse, voted against . It took less than two hours to pass the resolution .
 The allegation that the North Vietnamese had ’ attacked the destroyers a second time was less convincing upon closer examination . The allegation of a second attack is less convincing than the claim .
 Neither destroyer nor destroyer made any "actual visual sightings" of PT boats, he said .
 Commander James Stockdale was certain that no North Vietnamese vessels had been present . Commander Stockdale led the jets from the Ticonderoga .
 President Johnson signed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution on August 10, 1964, in the White House East Room . Such doubts were discounted by Johnson and his advisers, even though the war was over in Vietnam .
 M. Johnson would use the authority of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution to increase U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 Contingency planning for a bombing campaign in North Vietnam was already underway . It took another Viet Cong attack to precipitate further U.S. reprisal .
 The resolution gave him what he wanted: a free hand to take whatever actions he deemed necessary in Vietnam . The resolution also gave him the right to take action in Vietnam.
 "I will do my best; that is all I can do," says James Stockdale . “I will try to do the best. That's what I've done.”
 L yndon Baines Johnson rose to the presidency in the wake of President Kennedy's death in 1963 . He was confirmed in power by a landslide election victory the following year .
 Johnson initiated an idealistic program of domestic reforms designed to tackle poverty and racial injustice . In office, Johnson initiated a program of reform designed to help tackle poverty .
 His presidency was one of the most unpopular in U.S. history . However, mounting involvement in Vietnam and violence on the streets of American cities undermined support for him .
 His father, a farmer and businessman, had sat in the Texas state legislature . His father was also a businessman .
 Johnson embarked on a career in politics, rising through a combination of hard work and a talent for ruthless political maneuvering . Johnson: "I'm not afraid to be a politician, but I'm glad to be president"
 Aged 28, he entered Congress as a New Deal Democrat . 10 years later he was elected a Senator, albeit amid accusations of vote rigging . He entered Congress aged 28 and was elected as a Senator .
 The Senate provided an ideal arena for his talents as a political fixer . He was an outstandingly successful leader of the Democratic majority from 1955-55 .
 A boisterous career politician committed to improving the lives of disadvantaged Americans, Johnson had his reputation destroyed by the Vietnam War . He could neither win nor bring to an honorably peaceful conclusion .
 President Johnson meets civil rights leaders at the White House on August 6, 1965 . Voting Rights Act, prohibiting racial discrimination in voting, was signed into law in 1965 .
 His ability to induce politicians to change their votes became legendary . He used a mixture of brow-beating, arm-twisting, and favors to change votes .
 Johnson aspired to be the Democratic presidential candidate in 1960, but his hopes were flattened by the tidal wave of support for John F Kennedy .
 Johnson was invited to run as vicepresident to secure the Southern vote . Kennedy camp were inclined to disparage Johnson, with his blunt Texan manner and reputation for unscrupulous wheelerdealing .
 Kennedy inner circle was reluctant to allow Johnson any significant role . Once in office, however, the JFK inner circle would be reluctant to let him go .
 He carved out areas in which his drive could express itself, notably civil rights and the fledgling space program . Instead, he focused on civil rights .
 Warren Commission was a strong political maneuver designed to hold the lid firmly down on a dangerous issue . The Warren Commission, a week after Kennedy's assassination, was appointed to investigate the assassination .
 In domestic affairs, Johnson committed himself even more firmly than Kennedy to the cause of civil rights . Johnson committed to civil rights in domestic affairs .
 Foreign affairs were not Johnson's forte . Johnson's utopian vision of the ""Great Society" was not his forte. Johnson's vision of a 'Great Society' was a nightmare .
 He had none of Kennedy's background in diplomacy or broad international outlook . Kennedy had no previous international experience . He had no diplomatic background or broad outlook .
 Johnson was heavily dependent on advisers inherited from Kennedy's administration . Faced with the worsening crisis in Vietnam, Johnson relied heavily on advisers .
 Johnson treated the North Vietnamese politburo like recalcitrant congressmen, who might be bullied or bribed into doing what he wished . Johnson was more pugnacious than his predecessor, treating the North Vietnam .
 Far from wanting a war in Vietnam, he loathed it as a distraction from his real concerns and a nightmare from which he could not escape, he said . He loathed the war, which he described as a 'nightmare'
 His vision of the Great Society had proved a mirage as black rioters took to the streets and the cost of war undermined federal finances . The Great Society proved to be a failure as war undermined the government .
 His decision not to seek the Democratic nomination for a second term in 1968 was based on the knowledge that he could not have secured it . His decision to not seek the nomination for the second term was made in 1968 .
 Johnson lived only four years after leaving office— he died one day before the signing of the peace deal that ended America's Vietnam War . His 1964 election campaign was based on antipoverty and antidiscrimination programs .
 Johnson was two cars behind Kennedy in Dallas when the president was shot . Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Sworn in aboard Air Force One that afternoon, he assumed the reins of power with confidence and dignity . Sworn into office with confidence, dignity .
 President Johnson visited Sydney, Australia, in October 1966, on a visit to Australia . Johnson's swift Antiwar protests were the result of his visit to Sydney .
 Johnson was plagued by similarly hostile demonstrations wherever he traveled, whether in the U.S. or abroad .
 Born on a farm at Stonewall, Texas, the son of Sam and Rebekah Baines Johnson . Born August 27, 1908, Johnson was born in Texas . He was born on a family farm .
 On active service in the United States Naval Reserve; flew one combat mission . December 1941-July 1942 On active duty in the U.S. Naval Reserve .
 January 20, 1961 Takes office as vice president under President Kennedy . Takes office in 1961 as Vice President of United States .
 November 22, 1963 Sworn in as United States President after Kennedy was assassinated . Sworn-in as U.S. President after he was assassinated in 1963 . President Kennedy was sworn in as President of the United States .
 August 7, 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution authorizes Johnson to escalate military operations in Vietnam . August 7: 1964 Gulf War Resolution authorizes escalation of military operations into Vietnam .
 April 1965 Authorizes use of ground troops in combat operations in Vietnam . April 1965: Use of ground forces in Vietnam for combat operations . May 1965: Operation began in Vietnam in April 1965 .
 March 31, 1968 Halts bombing in Vietnam north of the 20th parallel and announces he will not seek reelection . President Nixon announced he would not run for re-election in 1968 .
 By 1965, Viet Cong guerrillas are making inroads in South Vietnam . America goes to war January 1965-September 1967 . America's first war with Vietnam began in September 1967 .
 America responds by expanding its role in the war, sending the first U.S. ground troops there in March . America responded by sending first United States ground troops to Afghanistan .
 The Seventh Marines wiped out the First Viet Cong Regiment, which had retreated to the peninsula, during Operation Piranha . The Marines wiped them out during the operation .
 AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1965—SEPTEMBER 1967 . America's involvement in Vietnam was responsible for responsibility on ground troops . America went to war in 1967 .
 Operation Rolling Thunder failed to rapidly escalate with the launch of Operation Rolling . Operation Rolling dented North Vietnam's will to fight and it proved frustratingly Thunder, a bombing campaign against North Vietnam .
 Under General William Westmoreland, the U.S. Army casualties increased at an alarming rate and rising troop levels . Marines employed a combination of firepower and mobility to reguired the extension of the draft, an initially small antiwar find and destroy insurgents .
 The United States Navy patrolled the Mekong Delta in search of insurgents . The U.S. Navy was deployed in the region to combat insurgents .
 Vietnamese beach resorts provided respite from combat for U.S. troops in Vietnam . The beach resort is a popular tourist destination for American troops .
 AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1 96 5-SEPTEMBER 1967 . Operation Rolling Thunder is first battle for United States ground troops . Air strikes are launched against targets in North Vietnam in Operation Flaming Dart .
 U.S. Marines go ashore at Da Nang, the first American combat troops to enter Vietnam . Marines were the first Americans to enter the country's first combat troops .
 General Nguyen Van Thieu elected president of South Vietnam in June . General Nguyen van Thieu is elected President of Vietnam . General Thieu was elected president in June 2013 .
 Two U.S. F-105 Thunderchiefs shot down by North Vietnamese MiG-17 fighters over North Vietnam . North Vietnam shot down two F-100s in April . U.N. fighter jets were shot down in April 2010 .
 President Johnson announces that 50,000 more ground troops are to be sent to Vietnam . Requiring an increase in the draft to 35,000 per month .
 American Quaker Norman Morrison burns himself to death in front of the Pentagon in protest of the Vietnam War . Morrison burned himself in protest against the war in Vietnam .
 JAN 28-MAR 6 US, Korean, and ARVN troops carry out a ""search-and-destroy" operation in Binh Dinh province .
 A battalion of the Cavalry is ambushed by the NVA at landing zone X-Ray . The NVA ambushed a battalion of Cavalry in the area . The incident occurred during the Second World War .
 U.S. bombing of North Vietnam resumes after a 37-day pause . Operation Rolling Thunder resumes after 37 days of pause in bombing .
 In Operation Hastings, U.S. Marines repel a substantial incursion by NVA troops across the DMZ into Quang Tri province . Operation Hastings is the result of Operation Hastings . The operation is called "Operation Hastings"
 Operation Rolling Thunder launched mainly from bases in Thailand . V Bush hat adopted by U.S. pilots based in Thailand adopted by pilots .
 Student antiwar protesters demonstrate outside the White House . Student anti-war demonstrators demonstrate outside White House.
 18 Australian troops fight the Viet Cong in the Battle of Long Tan, the most famous Australian engagement of the war . 18 Australian soldiers died in the battle, which ended in a shoot-out .
 U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara makes a damningly pessimistic assessment of lack of progress toward winning the war . McNamara made the comments in a letter to the U.N. Secretary of State of Defense .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese Marines carry out a major amphibious operation in the Mekong Delta . The operation was part of a joint effort to shore up the peninsula .
 U.S. Third Marine Division repels NVA attempts to cross the DMZ into Quang Tri province during Operation Prairie . Operation Prairie was the first of its kind in Vietnam .
 President Johnson meets Asian leaders, including President Thieu, at the Manila Conference . They discuss a way to end the war in Vietnam . Johnson met Thieu at the conference .
 U.S. carries out a large-scale search-and-destroy action to clear the Viet Cong from their ""Iron Triangle"" stronghold north of Saigon . Operation Cedar Falls took place January 8-26 in operation .
 U.S. launches program to coordinate efforts to pacify the South Vietnamese countryside . Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support program launched May 9 .
 At the year end there are 389,000 U.S. troops in Vietnam . At the end of the year, there were 389,500 troops in the country .
 Operation Junction City, the largest U.S. military offensive of the war, is launched on February 22 . It is the largest United States military offensive in the war's history . The United States is expected to launch a major offensive against North Korea .
 U.S. Marines repulse North Vietnamese troops in a series of actions around the Marine combat base at Khe Sanh . U.N. troops repulse N.V. forces around the base in the early months of May 11 .
 President Johnson committed United States forces to combat in Southeast Asia in the hope of preserving an independent, noncommunist South Vietnam . The U.S. invested heavily in military and logistical infrastructure for South Vietnam in the 1960s and '60s .
 When economic aid, diplomatic measures, and military advising failed to quell support for the insurgency, Johnson embraced a more aggressive, military approach . Johnson embraced the more aggressive approach .
 President Obama promised the U.S. people he would not ask their sons to fight . He needed public support to escalate the conflict he had promised the American people . First, though, he needs public support .
 On February 7, 1965, a Viet Cong attack on Camp Holloway, a U.S. base near the city of Pleiku, in the Central Highlands, gave Johnson a valid pretext for just such an escalation .
 Eight Americans killed, dozens more wounded, and several helicopters destroyed . Johnson administration used the attack to garner public support for deeper involvement in the Vietnam War .
 President Johnson authorized Operation Flaming Dart, a campaign of reprisal airstrikes . In response, on the same day Johnson authorized the campaign of airstrikes, the U.S. bombed the Iraqi capital .
 Initially, 49 sorties were flown by U.S. and South Vietnamese pilots . Initially the sorties flew by United States and South Vietnam pilots .
 Robert McNamara was defense secretary from 1960 until 1968 for presidents Kennedy and Johnson . McNamara had previously been president of the Ford Motor Company and served in World War II in the United States Army Air Forces .
 As defense secretary, McNamara used statistics such as body counts to measure the success of combat operations . McNamara: Body counts are a measure of success in combat operations.
 They were greeted with flowers by crowds of local people who gathered on the beach . Crowds of locals gathered to pay tribute to the couple .
 P. P. resident Johnson's decision to scale up American military involvement coalesced over time . P.J. Johnson: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it. It's a big step up"
 Plans for massive troop increases were laid in the early 1960s, as the U.S. BEFORE ■ their attack included Viet Cong strongholds near the demilitarized zone on the border of the two countries, and also struck North Vietnamese military installations .
 U.S. fighterbombers launched from United States aircraft carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin . North Vietnamese and Viet Cong reprisals were reprised .
 On March 2, the United States launched Operation Rolling Thunder, a massive further commitment to the conflict . The U.S. launched the operation on March 2 . The United States has been involved in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003 .
 This sustained bombing campaign was intended to drive North Vietnam out of the war entirely . It was meant to drive the war out of Vietnam entirely .
 The escalation of the air war required more U.S. military personnel on the ground in South Vietnam for security and support . The escalation required more American military personnel in the South Vietnam .
 On March 8, 1965, elements of the Ninth Marine Expeditionary Brigade landed near the city of Da Nang . They were met on the beach by city officials and a welcoming crowd .
 When he became president, Johnson inherited a volatile situation in South Vietnam . Charged with securing American bases to free up South Vietnamese soldiers for American bases .
 Johnson ran for the presidency in 1964 as a peace candidate . He won a peace vote in 1964 . Johnson won a presidential election in 1966 .
 Marines were the first official American combat troops in South Vietnam . Marines were first official U.S. combat operations in Vietnam . They were first Marines to engage in combat operations .
 By the end of the year, more than 180,000 American service personnel were stationed in bases throughout South Vietnam .
 Henry Cabot Lodge reappointed in 1965 as ambassador to South Vietnam . Meeting of allies was a meeting in Saigon in July 1965 .
 The U.S. became involved in the Vietnam War in the summer of 1965 . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict between the United States and South Vietnam . Vietnam was a major ally of the West .
 The shift took place without public debate or even any significant announcement, leaving the vast majority of Americans unaware that a war was coming until it was already well underway . The shift was not announced until it had already been underway .
 Johnson administration officials were divided on the issue of escalation, with most arguing that only military force could achieve political results .
 Others urged caution, saying that President Johnson could choose to "ride the tiger" by going to war against a determined Vietnamese foe . But he could not be certain of being able to choose the place to dismount .
 The tenacity of the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong would be a deciding factor in the war's outcome . Ultimately, the tenacity would be the key to the outcome of the war .
 By the fall of 1965, the United States was fully engaged in a ground war in South Vietnam and an air war over North Vietnam . The U.S. was engaged in both ground and air operations in Vietnam .
 Nguyen Van Thieu was elected president of Vietnam . He had supported the overthrow of Diem . U.S. forces provided a measure of political stability in Vietnam .
 The U.S. presence in Vietnam dramatically altered life for the South Vietnamese people . The war engulfed ever-increasing areas of the country . The United States presence also altered life in South Vietnam .
 The war failed to stem growing communist insurgency or to counter North Vietnam's continuing attempts to claim South Vietnam . The war also failed to stop communist insurgency .
 General William C Westmoreland came to Vietnam War on the recommendation of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . General Westmorelland was an honored colonel in World War II and a decorated colonel in WWII .
 Westmoreland's decision to wage a war of attrition on the communist forces of North Vietnam led to him being recalled from Vietnam to serve as Army chief of staff and left him with an ambiguous reputation .
 Westmoreland was born in South Carolina . He was the son of a textile mill manager . His father was a mill owner .
 The Westmoreland family had an illustrious military history that stretched back to the Revolutionary War . He would uphold that legacy that he would uphold .
 An Eagle Scout in high school, Westmoreland showed self-discipline and military bearing in his studies . He was a member of the National Guard .
 In 1932, after a year at the Citadel, the military college of South Carolina, he was appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point . After a year of study, he went to West Point in 1932 .
 He graduated in 1936 with the highest cadet rank, and received the Pershing Sword in recognition of his skills .
 Westmoreland served with distinction in World War H as a battalion commander for operations in Tunisia, before being moved to Europe .
 His success led to his appointment as chief of staff of the Ninth Infantry . Military decorations include the French Legion d'Honneur, Korean 1st Class Order of Military Merit, and the Philippine Order of Sikatuna .
 WILLIAM C WESTMORELAND Division in the final assault on Germany . Division in final assault of Germany . Later as commander of postwar occupation regiment .
 He was commanding officer of the 101st Airborne Division . Over the next decades, he distinguished himself in several important positions, including commanding officer .
 He progressed quickly through the officer ranks to lieutenant general by 1963, with seemingly limitless career potential . He was lieutenant general of the Army in 1963 .
 Search and destroy Westmoreland arrived skeptical about the war and the chance of U.S. victory . He arrived at the start of the war skeptical of the chances of winning the war . The search and destroy mission was a major success .
 In private he was candid in his view that without the ability to go into Laos, the war would be long, difficult, and problematic, he said . Although his public stance was invariably positive, in private he said that without access to Laos would be difficult and difficult .
 Time magazine named Westmoreland its Man of the Year in 1965 . The successful defense of Vietnam's Central Highlands led Time magazine to name him its man of the year . Time magazine also named him the Vietnam War's most decorated general .
 Westmoreland's engraved lighters were presented to select soldiers and visitors to his Pentagon office . The lighters are a stark contrast to the darkly humorous lighters that circulated among troops . However, this good Serious message would soon change .
 Limited by political and resource constraints, Westmoreland's war strategy settled on attrition . The war strategy was based on attrition, with the loss of life in the war .
 The NVA and Viet Cong were able to sustain a high body count, which meant that the number of United States troops sent to fight them rose to more than 500,000 . The number of U.S. troops sent in to fight the NVA rose to over 5,000
 President Johnson wanted to start removing U.S. forces from Vietnam . President Johnson moved Westmoreland back to the United States to become Army's chief of staff .
 General Westmoreland interpreted it as a repudiation of his leadership . The decision was made in 1976 as a result of the Vietnam War .
 For the next four years, he focused on global army readiness, tackling racism in the Army, and creating an allvolunteer military . For the rest of the time, he will focus on global readiness and tackling racism .
 His campaign for the Republican nomination for governor of South Carolina in 1974 was unsuccessful . He was unsuccessful in his bid to become governor of the state .
 In January 1982, CBS aired a documentary that accused Westmoreland and his staff of manipulating enemy counts to gain support for attrition .
 The long case brought renewed attention to the ethics of Westmoreland's leadership, and was eventually settled out of court . The case brought new attention to ethics of the former president .
 Westmoreland devoted his retirement years to speaking opportunities and supporting veterans until Alzheimer's brought an end to his public life . He devoted most of his life to supporting veterans .
 Liked by his men Westmoreland was known for his loyalty to his troops . The First Infantry Division was one of the most decorated units in the world .
 He was liked by troops, and aimed to be ""respected"" but not ""loved” as he performed his duty of care . He was known to be 'respected' but not 'loved' as he did his duty .
 In retirement, he tried to ensure that veterans were not criticized for their service in Vietnam . He said he was proud of his service in the Vietnam War .
 Graduates from the U.S. Military Academy and is commissioned as a second lieutenant .
 II 1985 Pursues a libel suit against a damning 1982 CBS documentary, which was settled out of court . Pursues lawsuit against a CBS documentary that was aired in 1982 .
 When Lyndon Johnson took office in November 1963, his national security advisers explained the conflict in Vietnam as a war of aggression rather than a civil war . America goes to war in 1965-September 1967 .
 Operation Rolling Thunder began in the spring of 1965 . The U.S. Navy and Air Force shifted their efforts to sustained bombing of military targets in North Vietnam .
 Rolling Thunder was the heavy bombing of North Vietnam by the U.S. Air Force and Navy and the ARVN Air Force . Rolling Thunder lasted from March 2, 1965, until November 1968 .
 The bombing gradually increased in intensity, focusing first on military targets, then on transportation systems, petroleum storage, and industrial targets, as well as the civilian population centers of Hanoi and Haiphong . The bombing was first directed at military targets and then at transportation systems .
 U.S. strategists hoped sustained bombing of North Vietnam might precipitate withdrawal of forces from the South . South Vietnamese government to stabilize, they hoped, but insurgency to collapse .
 Several factors limited the effectiveness of Rolling Thunder . Political interference contributed to the success of the band . Rolling Thunder was the first Rolling Thunder to be recorded in the United States .
 Johnson was legitimately concerned about the risk of triggering war with China or the Soviet Union if their supply lines into North Vietnam were targeted .
 U.S. Navy Mark 2 pneumatic life vest was standard issue for naval aviators and aircrews throughout the Vietnam War . Strict rules of engagement prevented American aircraft from striking .
 It is not known how many U.S. pilots shot down over water owe their lives to this kit .
 Rolling Thunder failed to damage North Vietnam sufficiently to trigger meaningful negotiations . Rolling Thunder did not damage the country enough to prompt meaningful negotiations with North Vietnam .
 Johnson's involvement in the selection of bombing targets prevented longrange planning, while also disrupting the ability to respond with air strikes to actionable intelligence in a timely fashion . Johnson's interference prevented long-range planning .
 Johnson's micromanagement engendered frustration within the U.S. military, leading to persistent accusations that civilian leadership had undermined an American victory . Johnson was accused of micromanaging the United States military .
 Johnson implemented ""bombing pauses,"" designed to incentivize diplomatic talks in an attempt to appease the U.S. antiwar movement . Johnson also periodically implemented a "bombing pause" to incentivise diplomatic talks .
 Traffic along the Ho Chi Minh Trail proved to be an elusive target . Traffic was a problem for the tourists in Vietnam .
 North Vietnamese infiltration of South Vietnam accelerated in spite of the bombing . Indeed, North Vietnamese infiltrations of the South Vietnam increased despite the bombings .
 The people of North Vietnam, a largely nonindustrialized country, simply found ways of adapting to the destruction that surrounded them . North Vietnam was largely non-industrialized, but found ways to cope with destruction .
 North Vietnamese air defenses consisted of Soviet-made fighter aircraft, radar, antiaircraft artillery, and surface-to-air missile sites . Civil defense program was highly organized and highly organized .
 With air raid sirens, frequent drills, there are extensive underground shelters . Air raid drills, air raid drills and underground shelters are common .
 North Vietnamese civilians soon learned to clear busy streets and squares in a matter of seconds . The bombing was limited to a few seconds, limiting the human cost of the bombing .
 The strategy failed to win the election, which went to the Republican candidate . The strategy didn't work, and the GOP candidate won .
 President Johnson: A thousand American airmen killed, captured, or wounded . President Johnson to his advisers: "A thousand U.S. airmen died, captured or wounded"
 North Vietnam's morale held and its claim on the South never wavered . Despite civilian casualties in excess of 1,000 per month, N. Vietnam's claim to the South was never waverred .
 Soviet SAM SA-2 surface-to-air missiles were supplied to the North Vietnamese . The missiles were used in the Vietnam War .
 The United States Air Force and Marines deployed the very latest aircraft, built using state-of-the-art materials and technology . The USSR also provided technicians and trainers to operate these advanced missile systems .
 North Vietnam's pilots flew modern fighter jets supplied by their Chinese and Soviet allies . North Vietnam was supplied by China and Russia in the 1950s .
 E Republic F-105D Thunderchief was used extensively in the early years of the conflict . A versatile fighter-bomber, the Thunderchief is a versatile fighter bomber .
 E F-100 Super Sabre was the longest-serving U.S. jet fighter-bomber in Vietnam . The F.100 was the most-serving United States jet fighter bomber in Vietnam.
 Soviet-designed fighter jet saw combat in the Linebacker operations of 1972 . E MiG-19 (North Vietnam) was North Vietnam's first fighter jet .
 The North Vietnamese Air Force claimed 56 aerial combat victories with the E MiG-21 . The MiG21 was a North Vietnamese interceptor .
 E LTV A-7 Corsair II were used to destroy the Thanh Hoa Bridge in 1972 . These bombers were used in the bombing of the Than-Hoa Bridge . They were used as part of the Vietnam War .
 Designed to take off from ships, this aircraft was used in air-to-air combat . EChanceVought RF-8G Crusader was used to take-off from ships . Designed for air to air combat .
 E Grumman HU16C Albatross undertook search-and-rescue operations . This flying boat was used in search and rescue operations .
 With Soviet and Chinese assistance, China quickly developed air defenses capable of challenging U.S. air attacks . With Soviet help, China was able to outpace the United States .
 U.S. Major Ralph L Kluster shot down MiG-17 over North Vietnam from his F-105D Thunderchief in June 1968 . Major Kluster's Thunderchief was the first to shoot down a MiG 17 .
 This accounted for about 80 percent of the U.S. planes downed over North Vietnam . About 80 percent were downed over the border .
 Soviet-supplied surface-to-air missiles struck their targets just 2 percent of the time . The missiles were a threat to high-altitude missions, such as B-52 sorties .
 U.S. and Soviet jet aircraft entered into aerial combat for the first time during the Korean War . Although United States flights could bomb the Soviet aircraft could not be used in combat .
 The United States F-86 Sabre and the Soviet MiG-15 went toe-to-toe in aerial dogfights during the Korean War . The U.S. and Soviet aircraft went toe to toe in aerial combat during Korean War.
 The United States also used helicopters in Korea, especially for search-and-rescue of pilots downed behind enemy lines . The U.S. used helicopters during the Korean conflict .
 After U.S. air raids on North Vietnam in August 1964, China provided Hanoi with a small number of MiG-15 and MiG17 fighter jets . The People's Republic of China provided the jets to North Vietnam .
 J 98 I* AAA and SAM sites could not be used to destroy North Vietnam's MiGs . North Vietnam could not destroy its fleet of MiGs other than through air-to-air combat .
 Hanoi stationed its MiGs at airfields in southern China, which was beyond the area of combat permitted by Washington . The MiGs were stationed in China's southern China .
 The United States answer to the MiG-21 was the F-4 Phantom, the USAF's most successful interceptor and the Navy's main fleet-defense fighter .
 The number of MiGs LO destroyed by Sidewinder missiles from F-4 Phantoms between 1965 and 1968 . The F-105 Thunderchief was the primary plane used in I * .
 Designed to deliver nuclear weapons into the Soviet Union, the F-105 was also an effective Morale patch .
 Fun patches like this one, known as morale patches, were designed by artistic service personnel, who had them made in tailor shops .
 Thunderchiefs from the rear, forcing them to dump their ordnance before reaching their target . Thunderchief were forced to dump ordnance from their rear to avoid being hit by the enemy .
 Against F-4s, the MiG pilots would delay their attack until late in the bombing run, when the Americans' fuel was low . The Americans would also delay their attacks until late during the bombing runs .
 The Seventh Air Force designed a ruse known as Operation Bolo to counter the hit-and-run guerrilla tactics . The ruse was designed to counter guerrilla tactics by the U.S. Air Force .
 A flight of F-4s armed with Sidewinder missiles fired at MiGs . “The MiGs reacted as we hoped. They reacted as expected,’s spokesman says . ‘The MiG reacted as hoped. We hope it will be a success,�
 Its performance at low altitude made it ideal for going "Downtown,"" as pilots called the heavily defended airspace around Hanoi .
 The principal air-to-air weapon of the F-4 and F-105 was the AIM-9 Sidewinder infrared-guided or heat-seeking missile . The F-2 and F.3 were the F.4's principal air to-air weapons .
 The sidewinder saw its first extended use in Vietnam . Developed in the 1950s, the sidewinder was developed in Vietnam.
 North Vietnamese commanders hesitated to risk MiG-2 Is against the F-4s in air-to-air combat . North Vietnamese commander hesitated to . risk risk of risk .
 They preferred to take on the slower Thunderchiefs . They would often use ground-control radar guidance to attack the flew in a way to mimic an F-105 squadron .
 On January 7, 1967, a disguised F-4 formation led by Colonel Robin Olds shot down seven MiGs in 15 minutes . The incident took place in the U.S. Army Air Force in the early hours of January 7 .
 The MiG force stood down for four months after the attacks . Olds shot down another MiG in May . In the wake of the attacks, the MiG forces stood down .
 By 1966, the USAF had four Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Group squadrons in South Vietnam and one in Thailand, with numerous ground bases on constant alert and airborne orbits over Laos .
 SAR task forces usually consisted of two HH-3 Jolly Green Giant helicopters, two A-1 Skyraider escorts, and an HC-130 control aircraft . The SAR task force was formed by two helicopters and two helicopters .
 A downed pilot in a steep ravine reaches for a helicopter's rescue cable in this painting by Pierre Mion . The painting was printed in National Geographic in 1968 .
 Mion was a war artist for the U.S. Marine Corps during the Vietnam conflict . A former soldier himself, Mion is a former war artist .
 Under President Nixon, the air war was mainly focused on Laos and Cambodia .
 After Operation Rolling Thunder, the intensity of air-to-air and SAR actions decreased in Vietnam . The intensity of such actions decreased . The Vietnam War was a major source of conflict in the country .
 Olds led the USAF's 8th Tactical Fighter Wing, which downed 24 NVA planes in total . Pilots faced dangers from the ground when flying into a landing zone in Vietnam .
 Captain Thomas A Pienta was flying a trail helicopter with his gunship platoon when he came under fire from a North Vietnamese unit . He was flying the helicopter when he was attacked by North Vietnamese forces .
 I had to pick my spot and could not come directly to the ground as I normally did. "I had to choose my spot," he said . "I was not allowed to come directly into the ground"
 Snaring tail rotor in the trees could kill you just as easily as a machine gun . Snaring a tail rotor could kill your dog in the woods . Snare tail rotor can kill a dog in a trap .
 A rocket-propelled grenade slammed into a U.S. Huey helicopter . The helicopter was just coming out of translational lift when the grenade struck .
 "The cliche about not hearing the one that gets you was true in my case. The cliche is true in this case," he said . "I'm not going to be able to get through the wall," he added .
 It seemed as if there was a big whoosh, similar to the effect a Zippo lighter has after being freshly overfilled and lit, or a propane grill lighting after the gas has been left on too long .
 A South Vietnamese pilot watches as a South Vietnamese T-28 aircraft drops napalm bombs on Viet Cong positions . An American pilot is credited with saving the lives of his fellow pilots .
 Even when not directly involved in the action, pilots had a front-row seat to view the danger of the air war .
 Search-and-Destroy South Vietnam's volatile political situation required a flexible strategy to target enemy combatants, minimize civilian casualties, and keep U.S. troops safe . The Vietnam War was one of the most successful military operations in the world .
 U.S. military authorities settled on a relatively simple strategy to accomplish the United States goal of preserving an independent, noncommunist South Vietnam . The Vietnam War was a relatively complex political issue .
 Ground operations focused on protecting U.S. military installations, destroying the Ho Chi Minh Trail and other supply routes . A strategy known as search-and-destroy was used in Vietnam .
 This strategy of attrition involved locating and killing enemy combatants, discovering and destroying material intended to support the enemy (including food) and identifying and neutralizing people who supported the enemy and their efforts .
 Its unprecedented mobility allowed the delivery of combat troops to remote areas in the jungle and mountains . The U.S. military says it has never been able to deploy troops in such remote areas .
 Archipelago of fire support bases built throughout South Vietnam provided security to U.S. military installations . 1,369 deaths in 1965 . 9,378 American combat deaths in Vietnam in 1965.
 Search-and-destroy tactics, previously used by the British, were designed for guerrilla warfare . The tactics were designed to combat guerrilla warfare, and were originally designed for the British .
 The British had used search-and-destroy methods against communist guerrillas in Malaya in the 1950s . The conflict was known as the Malayan Emergency .
 President Johnson's escalation of U.S. role in Vietnam in 1965 led to a change in mission . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country to be involved in the war .
 Such firebases could be fairly elaborate and semipermanent, or could be more rudimentary, built and dismantled as the company moved on .
 The site would have a landing zone for helicopters, medical and communication areas, and a tactical operations center . Either way, they would always have landing zones for helicopters and medical .
 Soldiers would hunker down in hootches or dugouts fortified with sandbags . Soldiers would be able to huddle down in a hootch or dugout fortified with sandbags .
 Military Assistance Command Vietnam evaluated search-and-destroy operations by statistical analysis of data . Photojournalist Dickey Chapelle had covered battles in Japan in World War II, as well as revolutions in Hungary, Cuba, and Algeria .
 Chapelle was outspoken in her dislike of communism and support of the U.S. in South Vietnam . Chapelle supported the United States in Vietnam in the 1960s and '60s .
 In November 1965, she became the first female journalist to die in the war . She died while on patrol with Marines on a search-and-destroy mission .
 VETERAN JACK HILL, RECALLING A SEARCH-AND-DESTROY OPERATION in 1967, recalls a search-and-destruction operation in 1967 . The number of weapons captured, and the number of combatants killed .
 The body count became search-and-destroy's main measure of success, with combat units rewarded by commendations, bragging rights, and even prizes such as ""standdown R&R"
 The indiscriminate nature of the violence generated by search-and-destroy was ripe for tragedy . Civilian casualties were the result of indiscriminate violence .
 Combat efforts against NVA regulars resulted in battles between well-prepared foes . Operations against Viet Cong insurgents yielded frequent civilian casualties .
 It was difficult to distinguish ordinary civilians from insurgents, whose family homes were often in contested areas .
 The creation of ""free fire zones" enabled U.S. commanders to bomb and shell areas thought to contain enemy combatants with impunity . The creation was created by the creation of 'free fire' zones .
 This lighter has an Army marksmanship qualification badge welded onto the front of it . It has been welded on to the front with a symbol of indiscriminate violence against Vietnamese people .
 Even when villagers suspected of having Viet Cong sympathies survived a search-and-destroy attack, they often endured forced relocation or forced relocation .
 These encounters encouraged support for the insurgency among those affected . These encounters encourage support for insurgents .
 Many American soldiers questioned the efficacy and ethics of the war they were charged with fighting . They also left many questioning the efficacy of the campaign .
 Lieutenant Commander Donald D Sheppard aims a flaming arrow at a bamboo hut believed to conceal a Viet Cong bunker on the banks of the Bassac River in December 1967 .
 U.S. forces succeeded again and again in seizing territory and inflicting higher casualties on the enemy than they endured themselves . But American strategy failed to yield political results, and the war did not last long .
 The morale of the insurgents withstood such attacks . and the infiltration of North Vietnamese soldiers and supplies increased . North Vietnamese troops and supplies were increased .
 American efforts to support the South Vietnamese military and take the war to the enemy also encouraged ARVN dependency on the United States, making American withdrawal more difficult . U.S. withdrawal from South Vietnam would have made it harder for the South to withdraw .
 Search-and-destroy dominated American ground war strategy until the withdrawal of U.S. troops under President Nixon .
 General Creighton Abrams replaced General Westmoreland, the chief advocate of attrition, as MACV commander in June 1968 .
 In November 1965, American and North Vietnamese troops fought their first large-scale battle in the la Drang Valley of South Vietnam's Central Highlands . The battle took place in November 1965 .
 Five days of brutal fighting established a pattern for Vietnam War battles that would repeat again and again . The battle was one of the most brutal in Vietnam War history .
 Battle of la Drang Valley was part of the second phase of a month-long operation known as the Pleiku Campaign . The Battle of the Drang valley took place during the second month of Operation Pleiku .
 The first phase provided relief for the United States Special Forces camp at Plei Me, which was besieged by the North Vietnamese Army for a week in October 1965 . The second phase of the relief provided relief to the U.S. camp .
 In the second phase, elements of the American First Air Cavalry Division were deployed to draw the NVA away from Plei Me . The NVA is still at the center of the battle .
 Operation Silver Bayonet I was an early demonstration of the air mobility concept . Ground troops were dropped onto and withdrawn from the battlefield by helicopter . The operation was the first demonstration of air mobility .
 After a brief artillery bombardment to clear the initial landing zone, helicopters began landing eight at a time . The men of the First Air Cavalry took up defensive positions in the area .
 The battalion was dropped into the la Drang Valley on November 14, to engage with North Vietnamese units operating in the area . The battalion has been deployed since November 14 .
 A large force is quickly confronted by a large force at a well-defended base camp . They were quickly confronted with a large number of troops .
 The fighting at LZ X-Ray lasted for two days and nights, as U.S. forces repulsed attack after attack by NVA infantry advancing in waves .
 First wounded Men of the First Air Cavalry Division rest and receive medical care 3 miles north of the la Drang Valley in November 1965 . Eventually, enough reinforcements were able to get back to the battlefield .
 The weary men had survived an ambush, and had spent all day and night in intense firefights . They had survived the ambush and spent a long day and a long night in the desert .
 Men who had already endured three days of combat now found themselves fighting in close quarters, sometimes hand-to-hand, for 16 hours . Men who'd already endured .
 The tide finally turned on November 19, thanks to reinforcements and artillery and air strikes . U.S. forces were so close to United States lines they caused friendly fire casualties .
 U.S. forces eventually withdrew from the area and returned to their bases, allowing the NVA to resume operations . Both sides declared victory, the United States for suffering fewer casualties and achieving a territorial objective . The NVA stood up to United States forces and fought again .
 LZ X-Ray was secured on day three, but at heavy cost . It allowed soldiers in the field to calibrate the range, angle, and fuse setting of artillery pieces to hit the enemy target .
 The remaining United States units abandoned the area to make way for a B-52 strike, then marched toward a new landing zone . The remaining U.S. units then retreated to a new land area .
 NVA forces ambushed the column en route, resulting in a new round of vicious combat . The NVA says it was ambushed en route to the checkpoint .
 Four days into the battle, wounded soldiers of the First Cavalry watch flares from planes light up a field in the la Drang Valley . Four days later, the battle is over and the war is over .
 First major encounter between United States and NVA regular forces . Battle established a template for the remainder of the war . It was also the first major encounter with United States .
 The United States would rely on superior technology and firepower to inflict heavy losses on their foe . The U.S. would withdraw when fighting was no longer prudent, the author says .
 The Battle of la Drang Valley was just the first of many such conflicts between U.S. and NVA forces over South Vietnam . The North Vietnamese also learned that the best way to blunt the effectiveness of United States artillery and airpower was to keep close contact .
 After the war, memoirs by those who had served softened public opinion . Memoirs from those who served soften public opinion after war .
 We Were Soldiers Once ... and Young, a true account of the Battle of la Drang Valley by Lt. Lt. Gen. John Hagan . Lt. Hagan: "We Were Soldiers once ... and . Young"
 Air Mobility Helicopters enabled U.S. commanders to move large numbers of troops over rugged terrain in a short amount of time . Helicopter was used in the battle to save South Vietnam from ailing Vietnam .
 They also provided air artillery, medevac supply, and other vital support functions . They were also provided by air artillery and medevacs .
 Second Battalion of the 20th Artillery, First Air Cavalry Division, known as Blue Max, was one of two aerial artillery units operating during the Vietnam War . Their main air-to-ground weapons were Folding-Fin Aerial Rockets and M60 machine guns .
 The United States Army acquired its first helicopters in 1947 . The U.S. Army acquired the first helicopters from South Korea .
 In 1954, General James Gavin published an article, ""Cavalry, and I Don't Mean Horses,"" praising the maneuverability that helicopters offered ground forces . Gavin published the article in 1954 .
 During the Cold War, the ability to disperse and move troops quickly provided greater force security than having large, slow formations of troops exposed to nuclear attack . In the 1950s, U.S. troops were able to disperse quickly and move quickly .
 Despite some rivalry between the U.S. Army and Air Force, some old-guard concern that helicopters were too vulnerable to attack . The U.N. Army says helicopters are too dangerous to attack.
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara had the airmobile concept tested at Fort Benning, Georgia . Airmobile concept was tested by the Air Force in the 1960s .
 The results were encouraging, and in 1965 the Army created the First Cavalry Division . The division was deployed to Vietnam in 1965 .
 When the First Cavalry arrived in Vietnam, helicopters were already in use . Helicopter war was a major factor in the war .
 Army and Marine advisers had begun transporting and positioning ARVN troops with helicopters in 1962 . Army and . Marine advisers began transporting . and positioning . ARVn troops with . helicopters .
 Also in that year, testing in the field of armed UH-1 Iroquois helicopters was underway . The UH1 helicopter was also being tested for armed use .
 The UH-1, known as the Huey or Slick by the troops, became the workhorse of Army and Marine Corps aviation in Vietnam . The Huey was known as "Slick" or "Huey" by the soldiers .
 In 1967, the Huey was supplemented by the AH-1 Cobra gunship attack helicopter . When fully loaded with rockets, the Cobra had the same firepower as a ground artillery battalion .
 Both the First Cavalry and the 101st Airborne Division —fully converted to airmobile in 1969—had their own aircraft . The 101st airborne Division also had their own airmobile aircraft .
 Airmobility was so popular that over time many other divisions and corps added their own aviation units . Over the years, the number of units in the Air Force rose to more than 100 .
 The effectiveness of airmobility was apparent in the First Cavalry's tactics in the Battle of la Drang in the fall of 1965 . Airmobility is a key component of the Army's tactics .
 The engagement was a prototype of airmobile doctrine that became standard throughout the theater of the war . It was the first of its kind and became standard in the war's theaters .
 Reconnaissance helicopters located the enemy and possible landing zones . Hueys and larger capacity CH-47 Chinooks ferried entire companies of infantry to the landing zones with gunship cover . 4,000 rounds per minute fired by AH-1 Cobra gunship .
 Captain William E Taylor uses an AN/ARC-122 radio to coordinate ground and air actions . Medevac choppers carried out dead or wounded soldiers, while other helicopters resupplied equipment and rations .
 Throughout the battle, artillery observers and commanders could direct ground operations from light observation helicopters . Light observation helicopters were used in the battle .
 Helicopter's noisy approach forewarned the enemy . Helicopters allowed generals to insert troops quickly and without fatigue that a long march .
 Much of the terrain in Vietnam was steep and covered in jungle, making it difficult for helicopters to land, and even for ground troops already in place to create a landing zone of sufficient size . In addition to the steep terrain, much of Vietnam was also difficult to land .
 Bombing sorties could open a patch of ground to create a landing zone . They could also telegraph an assault, say experts .
 The airmobile units trained soldiers to rappel by ropes or ladders into dense vegetation that prevented aircraft from landing . The maneuver also exposed the men to enemy fire .
 Despite these dangers, the suppressing fire from gunners in the Hueys and Cobras reduced the threat to the landing zone and to the helicopters themselves . The helicopters were shot down by helicopter fire .
 The rapid insertion and extraction of troops was ideal for search-and-destroy operations in which United States technology inflicted severe losses on the enemy quickly . Air mobility was less useful when it came to clear and hold tactics, but air mobility less useful in clear-and hold .
 vertical takeoff and landing became key to positioning ground troops in all wars in difficult terrain . It placed United States units in remote places that were difficult to defend and sustain . After Vietnam, vertical takeoff became key for positioning troops .
 In subsequent U.S. wars, helicopters and tilt-wing aircraft remained the foundation of the airmobile concept . Helicopter innovations such as the UH-60 Blackhawk and AH-64 Apache were the mainstay .
 The strategy is now known as air combat by the First Cavalry and air assault by the 101st Airborne and Marine Corps. Air combat is now called air combat . Air assault is part of a new strategy to combat the enemy .
 The Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 authorized the first peacetime draft in U.S. history . The draft was authorized by the Act of the 1940s .
 After World War II, this was was replaced by the Selective Service Act of 1948 . This was was the first act of compulsory service .
 As manpower needs in the 1950s and early 1960s were low, the system aroused little opposition among the public . The system was used to recruit men and women in the military .
 In the U.S., the rights and obligations of citizenship have long engendered argument, and Vietnam was no different . J The Call to Service: The Vietnam War is now over . J
 Many Americans questioned the necessity of the war, and millions of young men chose to avoid military service . Millions of men chose not to go to war .
 President Johnson quietly escalated the war in the summer of 1965 . He chose to rely on the draft to meet rising manpower needs rather than the National Guard and reserves .
 Johnson's reliance on conscription was intended to avoid a divisive public debate . But instead it provoked a divisive debate about the war, and it provoked one . Johnson's use of conscription in the war was meant to avoid divisive debate .
 When monthly draft calls more than doubled, young Americans were suddenly forced to contemplate combat in the jungles of South Vietnam .
 Military service was not the experience of the majority of young men of the era . It was not an easy experience for many of the men in the military .
 Roughly one-third of those in Vietnam were volunteers motivated by patriotism, a hatred of communism, or the desire for a military career . Roughly 1-3 percent of those who died were volunteers .
 Another third were draft-motivated volunteers who enlisted to have some control over their futures when conscription seemed imminent . Another third of those volunteers enlisted to get control of their futures .
 The remaining third were draftees, often unable to invoke one of the lawful means of avoiding the draft, such as family hardship, infirmity, certain types of labor, conscientious objection, or student status .
 Of the 16 million who avoided military service during the period of U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, only 600,000 actually served . Only 600,00 Americans were drafted into Vietnam .
 As noncommissioned officers, sergeants rose through the ranks to fill training and mentoring roles . Sergeants are now serving in the U.S. Army .
 AnTIWAR, ANTI-DRAFT SLOGAN of the 1960s and 1970s broke the law by failing to report or fleeing abroad, most commonly to Canada . AnTIwar, an anti-war newspaper of the same era, was published in Canada .
 These draft resisters risked jail for refusing to fight a war they did not support . Draft resisters risk jail for not backing the war they wanted to end .
 By the late 1960s, a majority of Americans regarded the draft system as unfair . The draft system was considered unfair by many Americans .
 Local draft boards, usually composed of white men, adjudicated on requests for deferments while trying to meet quotas . Draft boards were often composed of men, often veterans themselves .
 Men of means who could provide documentation of physical infirmity from doctors or long-standing moral pacifism from clergymen had an advantage in this process . Men were able to provide documentation from doctors .
 Draft boards defer white, middle-class men whose futures were deemed more valuable than those unable to afford college . Poor men and men of color were least likely to avoid military service . Draft boards tended to defer whites whose futures more valuable .
 The unfairness of the system led to incremental changes to the system that eventually ended graduate school and teaching deferments . The system was eventually ended .
 Congress passed legislation in 1970, authorizing a lottery system nine rules to make draft selection fairer . The lottery system was created in response to public discontent with draft draft selection .
 Selective Service officials drew 366 tiles, one for each day of the year, from a hopper on national television . The men watched with bated breath as officials drew them from a national television hopper .
 Eligible men with birthdays drawn in the first third or so of the process received induction notices . Those whose birthdays were drawn last did not receive induction notices, while those who had birthdays last did .
 The process was more rational, but hardly felt fair to those who were called up and did not want to go to Vietnam . The process is more rational but hardly feels fair, says the author of the book .
 During the Vietnam War individuals were deployed for a one-year tour of duty . Unlike in World War II, soldiers I served for the duration of the conflict .
 The policy was intended to blunt public hostility to the war by avoiding unit call-ups that could generate opposition within a community . This policy was aimed at avoiding unit calls-ups .
 A card entitled Nine Rules was first issued to U.S. soldiers in Vietnam in 1967 . As a result, Vietnam veterans returned home as Code of conduct . The card was issued to veterans in Vietnam .
 The U.S. government gave guidelines for the use of the "Freedom Bird" in the United States . The bird is often seen without fanfare except from its own friends and family .
 Ending the draft was a long-standing promise of the Nixon administration . The draft was long-running promise of ending it .
 The unpopularity of the war contributed to a loss of respect for military service that affected recruitment for the remainder of the 1970s and later . Nixon's advisers believed that market forces would ensure a steady supply of suitable volunteers .
 Difficulty meeting military manpower needs remained an unfortunate legacy of the war until the 1980s . Massive defense spending finally improved the guality and popularity of the armed forces as a career option .
 The bases were slices of Middle America in the jungles of Vietnam . Similar to small towns, the larger bases served as slices of the Middle America .
 The construction boom in South Vietnam was unprecedented in American military history . It was unprecedented for the U.S. military to build on the ground .
 Previous foreign wars had emphasized troop mobility rather than long-term occupation . But conflicts simply did not last long enough to result in sophisticated construction projects .
 The United States built hundreds of bases across South Vietnam during the war . The U.S. bases were built in South Vietnam .
 Some were rugged outposts perched on mountaintops or hidden deep in the jungle, while others were just as well developed as any stateside base .
 All of these bases supported the U.S. war effort . The contrasts between the different types led to disparate experiences for Americans who lived there .
 Between makeshift camps eating C-rations and men in catered brick mess halls, there could be no one typical experience of life in Vietnam . Between soldiers in makeshift camps and men living in a catered mess hall, life was very different .
 Building infrastructure took time and money to build the U.S. base network . Building infrastructure was a major challenge for the U..S. government .
 Some 56 million square feet of storage areas were built, as well as cold storage . Cold storage facilitated fresh food for 90 percent of meals served to troops during the war .
 As the years passed, bases became more elaborate, necessitating all the services . 99 percent of U.S. soldiers owned or had access to one .
 U.S. Armed Forces Radio used to listen to sanitized transmissions on the Armed Forces radio . They also listened to rock music and defiant political commentary .
 North Vietnamese radio programs played music for United States troops, interspersed with anti-American propaganda and sometimes accurate reports of battles and troop movements . Hosts such as ""Hanoi Hannah,"" played American music for U.S. troops .
 Troops of the 25th Infantry Division take part in a carol service at Fire Base Evans .
 As well as the Christian holiday, the festival of Passover was acknowledged with an organized annual seder for Jewish troops of modern U.S. cities .
 Construction priorities shifted from housing and services to recreational facilities intended to boost troop morale . The facilities are intended to be used to boost morale .
 Support personnel on larger bases often did regular shifts in offices, warehouses, or on flight lines, leaving hours of off-duty time to fill . Support personnel were often left to fill hours of time off duty .
 Commanders authorized enabled military personnel to acquire souvenirs of their war experience . Handicrafts, watches, cameras, jewelry, and even American-made cars were among souvenirs .
 Majority of U.S. personnel in Vietnam served in support capacities, as mechanics, drivers . Majority of United States personnel served as mechanics and drivers .
 the construction of theaters, craft shops, education centers, libraries athletics courts, and swimming pools . BA-MUOI-BA AND BODY BAGS, 2003 A PHILIPS RADIO, is the first episode of the series of "Aphilephilia"
 Alcohol consumption was rampant among American troops in South Vietnam . More than 2,000 open mess clubs (unit-run bars) in Vietnam at the system's peak at the time .
 The expansion of electricity and broadcast media across the country enabled men to improve their barracks with simple pleasures such as electric fans, hot plates, and radios . Meanwhile, men were able to buy electric fans and hot plates .
 BEER eased tension and quenched thirst . Shopping at the local post exchange, or placing an order in the Pacific Mail-Order System catalog for delivery .
 For those stationed on large rearward bases, their war was a far cry from the mud, dust, and constant danger of fire support bases, remote radio outposts, and especially combat patrols .
 Poor morale among the troops was a persistent problem . Commanders often addressed it by trying to make life on base more comfortable .
 Support troops risked little, yet received the same combat pay as combat troops . Support troops were stationed at military bases in the U.S. and abroad . Support soldiers were stationed in support bases in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The abundance on display in American PXs, open mess clubs, and even individual soldiers' quarters did not only upset other U.S. personnel, but also upset other soldiers .
 The largess was particularly shocking to displaced Vietnamese people nearby . Many of them worked menial jobs on base, and fashioned their homes and meals from American garbage .
 U.S. construction projects continued in Vietnam even as America's role in the war began to decline .
 Long Binh Post planned to build a 1,690-acre recreational lake for swimming and fishing in 1970 . Commanders already had a golf course, massage parlor, nightclub, nightclubs, and more .
 The long months and often tough conditions in Vietnam took a toll on morale . For U.S. troops with only letters from loved ones to remind them of home, the long months were difficult .
 Periods of relaxation, especially out of the country, are eagerly anticipated . Period of relaxation is therefore eagerly anticipated for the country .
 Prior to the Vietnam War, logistical restrictions meant that travel outside the war zone for rest and relaxation was rare . The USO was founded by the USO .
 J L ife in the war zone meant acute hardships that over time dampened soldier morale . Soldiers were forced to endure acute hardships in order to survive .
 High heat and humidity, endless rain and mud, biting insects, and, for combat troops, the anxieties and danger of battle all took their toll . High heat, humidity and biting insects all took toll of battle .
 There were also long working hours, relentless discipline, and limited opportunities for privacy or individuality . Long working hours and relentless military discipline were also factors .
 Mail provided the only contact with friends and family back home, and loneliness and homesickness were rife . Mail was the only way to contact friends and relatives back home .
 Many service personnel questioned the ethics of the war's ethics and necessity, and whether it could even be won . Like antiwar demonstrators back in the U.S. many service personnel wondered the war .
 Low morale could lead to indiscipline, absenteeism, drug abuse, and other subversive behavior . Low morale threatens discipline and mission readiness .
 The U.S. military equipped bases with an array of leisure amenities to occupy the troops . To counter the problem, the United States .
 Most bases within the war zone had ball courts, while larger bases had swimming pools, and a few even had golf courses, go-cart tracks, and bowling alleys . Most bases in the War Zone had balls courts, and swimming pools .
 Some bases had education centers, arts and crafts workshops, libraries, movie theaters, and performance spaces . Some bases also had art and theater facilities .
 Lola Falana performs for American servicemen in Da Nang as part of the Bob Hope Christmas tour in 1970 . Music therapy was part of Bob Hope's music therapy .
 Hope entertained troops in Vietnam every Christmas from 1964 to 1972 . Hope entertained the troops every Christmas between 1964 and 1972 . He performed every Christmas for the troops .
 The United Service Organization arranged celebrity-studded tours from time to time . Most of the civilian acts were unknown entertainers flown in from Asia and Australia .
 Command Military Touring Shows are composed of GI musicians on temporary duty . For bases that were too dangerous for civilian entertainers to visit, the Army's Special Services Division dispatched them . GI musicians were on duty at the time .
 By the late 1960s, there were hundreds of acts touring the war zone at any given time . The United States Army in South Vietnam was effectively the largest promoter of live entertainment in the world .
 The military also provided United States troops with respite from the war through a robust R&R program . U.S. troops also provided respite .
 These were standard bases with extra amenities into which combat units rotated while on break from combat . The bases were also known as bases for the duration of combat .
 The military also built two in-country R&R centers at China Beach and Vung Tau . The resorts offer hotel services such as clean sheets and towels .
 Reunion in Hawaii provided the greatest contrast with the war . The most popular R&R option, however, was out-of-country R&r .
 Soldiers were able to indulge themselves with food, drink, prostitutes, and shopping for five days . Soldiers were also able to buy prostitutes, prostitutes and shopping .
 At the peak of the R&R program, troops on leave could visit one of nine destinations on the Pacific Rim . Bangkok, Hong Kong, and Sydney are among the destinations .
 Hawaii was the most popular out-of-country option, providing home comforts plus the chance to spend time with family . Advances in technology meant that U.S. soldiers in subsequent wars did not suffer the same degree of isolation .
 U.S. military authorities continue to believe in the importance of maintaining troop morale . R&R SINCE VIETNAM continues to focus on maintaining the morale .
 MWR (morale, welfare, and recreation) centers were provided in Iraq and Afghanistan to provide units with leisure facilities, such as pool tables, video games, and swimming pools . MWR centers were also used to provide entertainment facilities for units .
 R&R in countries such as Qatar was also offered, but most troops chose to visit home instead . Most troops went to Qatar but most chose to go to the UK instead .
 3,200 performers from 26 countries toured Vietnam circuit in 1970 . The number of performers touring the Vietnam circuit .
 Veterans returned home from Vietnam with small tokens to remind them of their experience . Mementos and Memorabilia from Vietnam .
 These war souvenirs most often commemorated the friendships they had made and the people they had fought alongside . These souvenirs were often made of friendships and people they shared with .
 Sixteen inches tall, this statue was purchased in Pleiku in 1969 . Hand-carved statue is 16 inches tall and 16 inches wide .
 Colored-in calendars were also used to count down to the end of a tour . Short timer calendar was also used in the 1930s .
 Some cartoons featured cartoon characters, such as Snoopy, while others were crude . Some featured popular cartoon characters like Snoopy .
 Teddy bear belongs to a soldier killed in the war . Teddy bear was left at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial .
 Albert E Short created this book in the 1980s as a way to process his memories of the war . The veteran created the book in a way of processing his memories .
 EH Cigarette lighter with clear protest symbol . It was likely inscribed after its owner had finished his tour .
 This lighter commemorates the partnership of the First Battalion RAR, from Australia and New Zealand, and United States 173rd Airborne Brigade . EH Plastic cigarette lighter .
 Many young men took advantage of the facilities to enjoy their time on base . Pete Whalon of Redondo Beach, California, extended his tour to serve as a lifeguard at one of the 12 pools .
 With its cold beer, loud music, absence of lifers (career soldiers) and lack of rules, the pool soon became the coolest place to party . The pool is the place to hang out at .
 Whalon describes a typical evening at the Bayou with up to 30 drunks in and around the pool as music blasted from the Sugar Shack . Whalon: "Up to thirty drunks are in and out of the pool"
 Marathon sessions of Monopoly would take place in the Shack . There were rowdy water-football games and Monopoly games .
 The smell of marijuana was heavy in the air and four maverick military policemen had assured them that they would never get busted for smoking marijuana while they were in country . The four MPs were in the country when they smoked marijuana .
 The high life 61s pass around a joint in their living quarters on base in Quang Tri . VIETNAM's other war: SEX, DRUGs, rock TV .
 When allied support for the war began to wane, U.S. and South Vietnamese soldiers ended up providing most of the manpower . The United States and South Vietnam provided most of their manpower .
 Aussie support Servicemen of the Royal Australian Air Force arrive at Tan Son Nhut airbase near Saigon on August 10,1964 .
 More than 60,000 Australian soldiers fought in the Vietnam War from 1962 through the end of 1972 . The war was fought between 1962 and 1972 .
 The formation of the United Nations in 1945 offered the promise of world peace by enabling nations to resolve their differences without violence . The United Nations was formed in 1945 to help nations resolve differences in the world .
 Since 1948, the UN's peacekeeping force has been used to suppress noncompliant armed forces in conflicts around the world . The force is composed of troops volunteered by members of the UN .
 The biggest obstacle to the UN stepping in to prevent the Vietnam War was that the Soviet Union and the United States, both members of the UN Security Council, supported opposing sides in the war .
 Attempts by the United Nations to resolve the conflict through negotiation failed . U.N. attempts by the UN to reach a resolution failed .
 G. eneral Westmoreland's strategy of attrition required steady increases in troop strength . The strategy was designed to increase troop strength in the war's early years .
 President Johnson pressed U.S. allies around the world to support the war effort in 1965 . President Johnson believed other countries should contribute to the effort .
 Great Britain and Canada offered only rhetorical support, and Spain sent about 50 soldiers . Other nations provided economic, technical, and medical aid to South Vietnam .
 The Johnson administration fared better with regional allies, who feared communism's international advance . The Johnson Administration fared better than the Johnson administration .
 The mutual defense provisions of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization provided formal justification for Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and the Philippines to send troops to South Vietnam . The Philippines also sent troops to Vietnam .
 Soldiers from these nations were known collectively as ""Free World Military Forces" They fought in support of both U.S. and ARVN efforts in South Vietnam . Soldiers from this nations were collectively known as "Free World Military Forces"
 The Australian government was fully committed to Johnson's policy, it says . Australian troops will be deployed to support the policy, the government says .
 Australia's first commitment of military advisers to train the ARVN in 1962 was escalated in 1965 to include combat troops . The First Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, and logistics personnel attached to the United States' 173rd Airborne Brigade were involved .
 This collaboration revealed major differences in U.S. and Australian operational methods . Later deployments of Australian forces involved only independent operations .
 Australian troops relied less on heavy firepower and more on small patrols . Giggle hat was intended to protect the wearer in hot and humid climates .
 Such hats were nicknamed giggle hats (as well as ridiculous-for-theuse-of"") by troops due to their appearance .
 The Republic of Korea (South Korea) provided considerable support to its United States ally, in return for civilian support . This badge was worn by civilian nurse Dorothy Angeil who was part of an Australian Surgery Team at Bien Hoa in 1967 .
 Her team, from Melbourne's Alfred Hospital, performed hundreds of life-saving operations on Vietnamese civilians . Her team has performed more than 1,000 operations on Vietnam civilians in Vietnam .
 About 300,000 ROK troops served in South Vietnam . About 5,000 of whom were killed . About 3,000 killed .
 The ROK was the third largest force to combat North Vietnamese infiltration and the Viet Cong insurgency . It was the largest force in the country to combat the insurgency .
 They conducted search-and-clear operations, usually in battalion-sized units . They excelled at setting ambushes and discovering weapons caches .
 In their careful sweeps of Vietnamese villages, ROK troops earned a reputation for ruthlessness . The ROK forces were known for their ruthless tactics .
 Their actions led to accusations of war crimes in several villages where hundreds of civilians were killed . Hundreds of people were killed in the villages of several villages .
 Thailand and the Philippines are deploying soldiers to Laos and South Vietnam to fight North Vietnamese infiltration . In addition to deploying soldiers, they have deployed troops to Laos, South Vietnam and Laos .
 Thailand also hosted several large U.S. Air Force bases on Thai soil . Thailand was also host to several large United States Air Forces bases .
 Bases in Thailand supported Rolling Thunder bombings and provided tactical air support to U.S. ground operations in South Vietnam . Rolling Thunder bombing base was based in Thailand, Thailand .
 About 40,000 Thai soldiers served in South Vietnam itself, as volunteers . Thai forces also undermined North Vietnamese efforts to extend Hanoi's influence into Laos .
 The Philippines provided similar support to United States air operations via the United States naval base at Subic Bay, which serviced the ships of the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet .
 The FWMF responded to President Johnson's call for ""more flags"" in South Vietnam by sending 1,500 troops to assist with civic action programs . Public resentment toward the war in Vietnam caused problems for the governments fighting under the banner of the FWMf banner .
 Protests in Australia, New Zealand, Australia and New Zealand have led to troop reductions . In Australia, they forced reductions in troop strength and eventual withdrawal . New Zealand's relationship with the U.S. has changed for decades .
 In South Korea, the Vietnam War remains a bitter subject, but keeping faith with its U.S. ally has proved economically fruitful in the long run . Keeping faith with the United States ally has proven economic success in South Korea .
 President Lyndon Johnson met with his advisors in 1965 to discuss Vietnam's future . Vietnam was ruled out of Vietnam in 1972 . President Johnson was assassinated in 1968 .
 South Korean Ninth Infantry (White Horse) Division was based at Nha Trang . The South Korean 9th Infantry Division was stationed there .
 Long Tan defeated despite being outnumbered twenty to one at Long Tan . Long Tan were victorious despite being outnumbered by 20 to one .
 First Australian Task Force's mission in Vietnam was to win control of Phuoc Tuy province . T he First Task Force was in Vietnam to help win the province .
 The bulk of 1ATF was made up of two infantry battalions, a squadron of armored personnel carriers . Over time, Australia's advisory role in Vietnam changed to direct combat .
 In 1962, the Australian government sent 30 military advisers to South Vietnam . Australia sent 30 advisers to the country .
 Three years later it sent a battalion, which would operate under American command, to the U.S. Three years after it was sent, the battalion was sent under American control .
 In 1966, the First Australian Task Force was sent to Phuoc Tuy province, southeast of Saigon . The area has a long tradition of resistance to foreigners . In 1966 it was an independent unit of 4,500 men .
 They were joined by a New Zealand artillery battery that had been in Vietnam since 1965 . They were supported by United States artillery and air support .
 In June 1966, 1ATF established a base at Nui Dat, in the center of the province . The base is located in the province's capital, Nui .
 They improved village defenses and mounted a series of patrols, without major engagements . They improved the village defenses . Without major engagements, they mounted patrols of the area .
 On July 29, Australian intelligence discovered a large force of Viet Cong and NVA troops, totaling some 2,500 men, in the surrounding area . The NVA and Viet Cong troops were found in the area .
 The communists' mission was to show their strength to the local villagers by striking at the Australians and perhaps overrunning the base . The communists wanted to show them strength to local villagers .
 Hanoi believed that a defeat of 1ATF would force the Australian government to scale back its role in the war . The Vietnamese government believed that the defeat would force Australia to scale down its involvement in Vietnam .
 At 2:43m. on August 17, a bombardment rocked Nui Dat . The battle builds at the start of August 17 .
 Three infantry companies were sent out to locate the communist forces . The rest of the day passed without significant incident .
 His men were carrying light loads of ammunition—120 rounds per rifle and 1,000 rounds for each machine gun . He was carrying 120 rounds of ammunition per rifle .
 August 18 was the date when two rock 'n' roll acts were due to give the first-ever concert at Nui Dat . Coincidentally, August 18 is the date of the first ever concert at the venue .
 Australian signalman Private Ken Meredith waits for the order to return to base after the Battle of Long Tan . Private Meredith was the first Australian to die in the battle .
 LI A1 self-loading rifle was the standard rifle of the Australian Army from 1960 to 1992 . The British-made L.A1 was the rifle's standard rifle from 1960 until 1992 .
 Gas-operated, it ejected spent cartridges and loaded new ones automatically . Gas-powered, it ejects spent cartridges, reloads them automatically .
 Waves of attacks D Company advanced toward Long Tan, 3 miles from Nui Dat . D Company was attacked by Japanese troops in the area .
 They were unaware that there was an enemy regiment massed in a rubber plantation near the village . The villagers were unaware of the enemy's presence in the rubber plantation .
 A platoon from D Company clashed with forward troops of the Viet Cong and forced them to withdraw . At 3:40m, a platoon of D Company forced the enemy to withdraw.
 Returning in greater numbers half an hour later, the Viet Cong launched waves of attacks, hoping to encircle and destroy the Australians . The Viet Cong were returning to the Australian base in the early morning .
 Monsoon rains prevent American jets called in to provide support from launching an airstrike . U.S. jets were unable to launch an airstrike because of the rain .
 The beleaguered company relied on artillery batteries at Nui Dat, which bombarded within 50 yards of their position and fired nearly nonstop, even though their position was twice struck by lightning .
 A relief force was not immediately dispatched due to concern about leaving Nui Dat undefended . To make the situation worse, the relief force did not arrive due to concerns about leaving it undefending .
 Australians at Long Tan began to run out of ammunition . Meanwhile, the Australians are still holding out .
 Shortly after, the Viet Cong launched a mass assault, attacking on three sides . Shortly afterward, the South Korean government launched an attack on the site .
 Bruce Fletcher painted by Australian war artist Bruce Fletcher in 1970 . Long Tan Action commemorative artwork by Bruce Fletcher .
 Some details, such as headlamps on APCs and the resupply by cargo hook, are embellishments . Some of the details are embellished by embellishment .
 Supplies were dropped rather than lowered, and headlamps turned off . Headlamps were turned off as darkness fell at 7m. fire held them off until arrival of relief force .
 This forced the enemy to withdraw, and within 15 minutes all firing had ceased . The enemy was forced to withdraw from the battlefield .
 After Long Tan, the Australian presence increased, peaking at 7,672 soldiers in 1968 . Australian dominance of Phuoc Tuy was not seriously challenged again .
 Coral-Balmoral was the Australians' bloodiest battle of the war, with 25 deaths . Coral and Balmoral were attacked for 26 days, making it the deadliest battle of all the war . The Australians were killed in the battle .
 Vietnam holds Vietnam Veterans' Day on August 18, the day of the Battle of Long Tan . Vietnam veterans' Day is August 18 . It is the day that Vietnam fought against the U.S. in Vietnam .
 In 1967, U.S. forces attacked North Vietnamese and Viet Cong strongholds in the border region northwest of Saigon . The Iron Triangle was the site of the first American invasion of Vietnam in 1967 .
 General Westmoreland's plan was to push enemy fighters into less populated areas, where U.S. air power could demolish them . The plan was intended to push them into less densely populated areas .
 North Vietnamese forces and Viet Cong insurgents enjoyed strong support from local villagers in the area . The Viet Cong had invested heavily in a fortified tunnel complex in Cu Chi . The North Vietnamese government and the Viet Cong enjoyed strong local support .
 The Iron Triangle provided a staging area for attacks on U.S. and South Vietnamese units in the region and also on Saigon itself . The tunnels, like the Iron Triangle as a whole, were used to stage attacks on the United States .
 American forces made three major assaults on the Iron Triangle over a nine-month period between the fall of 1966 and May 1967 . U.S. troops made three assaults on Iron Triangle between fall and spring 1967 .
 Operation Attleboro began in September 1966, Operation Cedar Falls in January 1967, and Operation Junction City lasted from February to May 1967 . Operation Attelboro began from September 1966 to February 1967 .
 The main aim of Operation Attleboro was to destroy NVA and Viet Cong supply lines in the Iron Triangle . The main target of the operation was to eliminate supply lines from the area .
 It developed into a major confrontation between a force of around 6,000 Viet Cong and NVA regulars and 22,000 U.S. and ARVN troops . The confrontation was a major clash between the two sides .
 A series of intense battles over nearly three weeks resulted in heavy Viet Cong and NVA casualties and the seizure of oil stores, weapons, weapons . The battle was fought over three weeks in Vietnam . The NVA and Viet Cong seized oil stores and weapons from oil stores .
 The Viet Cong chose to flee to sanctuaries across the Cambodian border . However, as proved to be the case in most search-and-destroy operations, they chose to disengage from the fight when it was expedient .
 Once American forces had withdrawn from the area, Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces simply returned . Viet Cong, North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces returned .
 A month after Cedar Falls, U.S. forces embarked upon the largest search-and-destroy operation of the war . The operation was the largest of its kind in a month .
 Operation Cedar Falls tracked U.S. movements in a jungle clearing of the Iron Triangle . Viet Cong guerrillas posed for a photograph as they tracked United States movements in jungle clearing .
 Operation Cedar Falls in January 1967 forced civilians from the village of Ben Sue . Forced removal forced by U.S. Army Chinook helicopter to evacuate civilians from Ben Sue during operation .
 The reports highlighted problems with the ethics of the U.S. approach in Vietnam . They provided arguments for the growing antiwar movement in America .
 The battle plan reversed the usual search-and-destroy methods by using American units to destroy suspected enemy villages, and then employing South Vietnamese units to detain and interrogate survivors . U.S. troops also used South Vietnamese military units to interrogate and detain survivors .
 Cedar Falls targeted the terrain with defoliants and Rome Plows to destroy vegetation that could conceal insurgent activity . Cedar Falls also targeted terrain that could hide insurgent activity.
 In terms of casualties, territory, and war materiel captured, the operation was a resounding victory for the U.S. The operation was the most successful in the history of the war .
 Long-term goal of driving North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces into unpopulated areas was not met . However, the long-term target was to drive them into populated areas where they could be destroyed .
 Operation Attleboro took place across the Cambodian border, beyond the reach of bombing authorized by Washington at this point in the war . They did retreat into an unpopulated area, but it was across the border .
 Cedar Falls also resulted in the demolition of an entire village, Ben Sue, which the Viet Cong used as a supply station on the Saigon River . Ben Sue was also used by the Vietnamese to supply supplies to the South Korean army .
 These were essentially refugee camps run by the South Vietnamese government . The camps were run by South Vietnam's government .
 Families that once sustained themselves through farming suddenly struggled to find food . Families once sustained them through farming now struggle to find a way to survive .
 U.S. forces burned, then plowed under and bombed, Ben Sue, ensuring that the refugees could not return to their village . Meanwhile, United States forces burned and bombed Ben Sue .
 The military successes of war in the Iron Triangle began to pale beside the disturbing human dimensions of the refugee crisis it created . Reaction in the United States to the U.S. To the American public, the military .
 Race relations were tense in the early 1960s, even before the war . The war drew hundreds of thousands of men of color into military service .
 Questions about the war reached a fever pitch as African Americans confronted a war many deemed exploitative and imperialist . Questions about war reached fever pitch in response to questions about its exploitative nature .
 Historically, African Americans viewed military service positively, because it provided job skills and conferred respect . That could result in better employment opportunities in civilian life . Historically, military service was viewed positively .
 In World War II, African Americans embraced a ""Double V"" strategy that supported victory abroad while also demanding race equality in the United States . African Americans embrace the 'Double V' strategy to support victory abroad and support equality .
 The pace of change remained slow after the war, leading to the modern Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s . However, the pace of the change was slow after it led to the civil rights movement .
 African American soldiers raise their fists in black power salutes for the birthday of Dr. King . The salute was held on January 15, 1971, in honor of the late King .
 His assassination in 1968 caused some black troops to reevaluate their participation in the war . Some black troops were re-evaluated by the assassination .
 The Vietnam War was the first U.S. conflict fought with a fully racially integrated military . Vietnam was first war fought with an integrated military in the United States .
 The Armed Forces were formally desegregated by 1954, but discrimination remained . Discrimination often prevented black soldiers from rising in the ranks .
 Racial tensions also continued to boil on the home front, especially as the Civil Rights Movement gained momentum . Racial tensions continued to simmer throughout the country .
 Martin Luther King Jr. remarked in 1967 that it was a cruel irony to watch black and white men kill and die together in Vietnam . All for a nation unable to seat them together in the same room, he said .
 During the Vietnam War, African Americans' traditional support for military service began to wane . By 1969, 56 percent of African Americans opposed the war, and 56 percent opposed it .
 Many of those already fighting for civil rights turned their voices against the draft . Organizations such as the Black Panthers and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee denounced the war .
 One black man evaded the In H onor draft by fleeing to Canada . He called himself not a draft dodger but a runaway slave . He fled to Canada to escape the draft .
 Troops often had tour jackets personalized with images and dates of service . People generally experience pride in their culture .
 This jacket, now in the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington, D.C., declared support for the black power movement . The jacket is now on display at the museum in Washington .
 An individual's draft status was determined at the local level, where black men had to plead their cases to all-white draft boards that tended to bestow exemptions and deferrals onto more ""promising"" white college students .
 There were no black Americans on draft boards in Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, or Louisiana . One member of a Louisiana draft board was even a Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan .
 In contested areas, where potential for violence made unity and brotherhood an operational necessity, race relations were mostly good . Some men found that the experience of battle had caused deeply held prejudices to be cast aside .
 In rearward areas and bases such as Long Binh, racial tensions rose to the surface . However, life was quieter in the quieter parts of Vietnam's capital .
 President Johnson's so-called Project 100,000, from 1966 to 1969, thousands more African American soldiers were recruited for the war effort . Thousands more were recruited from African American backgrounds .
 Forty-one percent of the recruits under this program were African American . Many were not career soldiers, and many hailed from poor urban areas . The program is aimed at African Americans .
 Many black officers who served in Vietnam went on to have distinguished military careers . Some African Americans remained in the military after the war, but some remained in military .
 African American soldiers in Vietnam often greeted one another with an elaborate handshake called the dap . The dap was a key concept of greeting African American troops in Vietnam .
 Customized by unit or hometown, it had political overtones as a display of racial solidarity between black men, even those who had never met before . Customized with unit, hometown or hometowns, it was meant to show solidarity .
 The dap could bring activities to a halt, as black soldiers dapped with every other black soldier in a club or chow line . Black soldiers are expected to dap with all the other black soldiers in the club or line .
 Some commanders and white soldiers resented the practice, and black soldiers risked punishment for engaging in it . Some commanders resented it, and some soldiers were punished .
 Many of the recruits were more radicalized than those in earlier years . Many of these recruits are now radicalized .
 Some called themselves ""bloods,"" and were influenced by the teachings of men such as Malcolm X in the black power movement . They called themselves "bloods" and called themselves 'bloods'
 They objected to poor treatment and demanded the right to express their culture with hairstyles, jewelry, music, and the dap handshake . They demanded that they be allowed to express themselves .
 Tensions sometimes erupted into violence, prompting the military to enact reforms in 1969 . The military enacted reforms in the wake of the violence in 1969.
 African American soldiers often came together in solidarity to form groups such as the Unsatisfied Black Soldier to support each other, study their history, and lobby for the small comforts of white men .
 Life for black soldiers differed greatly from those of their white counterparts . As a result, life for black troops differed greatly .
 Haywood T Kirkland described how black soldiers banded together in the face of racism in Vietnam and upon returning home .
 Kirkland described rebel flags flying from jeeps and how it made him feel insulted and intimidated . Kirkland: "Rebel flagging" was a sign of disrespect for the U.S. government .
 Black soldiers were sent to the fields, even those who had supply clerk or cook military specialties . White soldiers usually got jobs as supply clerks or in the mess hall, he says .
 This led the black soldiers at the base camp to close ranks and become more organized as a group . This led them to become organized and more organized, the soldiers said .
 They began to discuss being part of the struggle of black people and how Vietnam was doing nothing for it . Vietnam is doing nothing to help black people, they said .
 When Kirkland returned home, the reaction of his peers who questioned why he had gone to war led to him developing a more revolutionary, militant attitude . The seeds of Kirkland's militant attitude were laid back in Vietnam, the seeds of which he had been laid back .
 An African American soldier and his fellow men, members of the 173rd Airborne Brigade, continue their search-and-destroy mission in Vietnam, in 1966 .
 Logistics operators found that by dismantling the tails, they could transport five helicopters instead of three . Logistics operator found it easier to transport helicopters by dismantling tails .
 American troop levels climbed over the course of 1965, as the U.S. began to engage in offensive rather than defensive operations . More airpower was needed to support and protect these ground troops .
 The vast majority of fixed-wing and helicopter sorties were for flying cargo, known in the war's vernacular as trash hauling . Most of the millions of sorties flown over South Vietnam were for cargo .
 Some crews flew a set schedule each day, making regular deliveries or providing a shuttle service on a predictable route . Some of the crews flew on a regular schedule .
 Others flew ad hoc supply missions that often took them into treacherous weather conditions or onto dangerous runways . Others flew on dangerous missions into treacherous conditions .
 Helicopter pilots often struggled to identify landing zones from the air, especially in remote areas . Helicopter landing zones are often difficult to identify from the ground .
 Supplies landed by helicopter are loaded onto a truck for distribution . They relied on radar guidance, nearby features in the Dropping supplies . Supplies were landed by helicopters and landed on a truck .
 To ensure the grenades were not released by enemy combatants seeking to lure the pilot into a trap, the smoke was color coded to ensure it was not released .
 Hauling cargo in South Vietnam might mean delivering hot meals to exhausted GIs on patrol in the jungle, or water and ammunition to a landing zone under fire, or perhaps flying a Conex .
 Skycranes were also used to deliver heavy artillery targets for an hour or more . The aptly named Skycranees were used in the U.S. for more than an hour to deliver targets .
 Weapons, houses, people, people -- everything under fire from Spooky turned to mulch .
 Forward air controllers tried to exercise discretion over calling in air strikes when civilians were present . The strikes were carried out in Iraq and Afghanistan, the U.S. says .
 The air war over South Vietnam often involved indiscriminate violence . Ffowowever, like the ground war strategy of search-and-destroy, the air war was often indiscriminate .
 American use of 'free fire zones' resulted in unknown civilian casualties . American use resulted in a shipping crate of consumer goods suspended in a net that could be easily dropped .
 It could also mean flying combat troops into action, collecting the wounded and delivering them to hospitals, or removing the dead from the battlefield . The process brought crews insulated to some degree by altitude directly into contact with the shooting war .
 Many U.S. and ARVN Air Force aircraft risked small arms fire when taking off, landing, or flying just above treetops . Whatever the mission, many aircraft were at risk of fire .
 Along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, airmen faced antiaircraft artillery from the NVA and Viet Cong . Airmen also faced anti-aircraft artillery from both sides .
 The air war over South Vietnam also involved the tactical support of U.S. ground troops . Fixed-wing air strikes from Air Force or Navy bombers and covering fire from helicopter gunships .
 The range and power of such air strikes was much greater than that of conventional artillery and formed an important component of search-and-destroy strategy . Air strikes were also an important part of search and destroy strategy .
 Spooky, the modified Douglas AC-47, could direct a curtain of machine gun fire onto a U.S. air superiority . Not a single American soldier in South Vietnam was killed on the ground by enemy aircraft during the Vietnam War .
 After Vietnamization, U.S. forces continued to police the skies over Vietnam even after Vietnamization . The United States continued to do so in the 1960s .
 Antipersonnel chemical weapons, such as napalm and white phosphorus, caused untreatable wounds, resulted in further suffering . napalm, white phosphorus and napalm were among the weapons used in the war .
 American airpower directed at North Vietnamese forces proved a decisive advantage that kept North Vietnamese operations in check . U.S. air power directed at N.V. forces proved to be decisive advantage .
 American bombing in populated areas undermined efforts to win the support of the South Vietnamese people, driving families and even whole villages to support the Viet Cong .
 Ultimately, perhaps, the indiscriminate nature of violence designed to protect American soldiers made them less safe . The indiscriminate violence against U.S. soldiers made soldiers less safe, perhaps .
 The crew of this Douglas AC-47 plane fire 7.62 mm rounds at an enemy target . The plane was shot down in Vietnam in the early 1950s .
 These converted cargo aircraft, codenamed ""spooky," provided support for ground operations at night . The converted cargo planes provided support to ground operations .
 Bell OH-58 Kiowa arrived in Vietnam in 1969 . Often used for direct fire support . Often equipped with a Ml34 7.62mm Minigun .
 Bell UH-1 Iroquois performed diverse roles including air mobility, fire support, and medical evacuations . Commonly known as the Huey, this workhorse performed . The Huey was the Bell U.S. Army's workhorse .
 The U.S. Navy and the Marines used this heavy-lift transport helicopter, which was adept at recovering downed aircraft . Sikorsky CH-53 Sea Stallion was a heavy-lifting transport helicopter .
 Kaman HH-43 Huskie was a dedicated search-and-rescue helicopter . Notable for its intermeshed rotors, the Huskie is a dedicated rescue helicopter .
 Sikorsky UH-34D Seahorse adapted to assault and evacuation . Marines liked the simplicity of this transport helicopter and adapted it to assault . The UH34D can be used to transport and evacuate .
 Bell AH-1G Cobra was used to provide fire support to ground forces . The heavily armed attack helicopter was used in support of ground forces in Afghanistan .
 Confronted with a much more powerful adversary, the Viet Cong leveled their odds on the battlefield by taking the war underground . The Viet Cong took advantage of a larger enemy by taking their fight underground .
 Vietnamese civilians and combatants created thousands of miles of subterranean passageways and bunkers . Vietnam civilians and . combatants—North and . South—created thousands of . miles of . subterranean tunnels and . bunkers, tunnels .
 Vietnam's limestone and clay soil was relatively easy to excavate, but also stable enough to support large, permanent underground dwellings . Vietnam is known for its limestone, clay soil, which is relatively easy excavated .
 Bunkers became a standard part of Vietnamese homes, particularly in contested areas where bombs and artillery were a constant threat . The bunkers are now a permanent fixture in Vietnamese homes .
 The Viet Cong drew upon their experience of fighting the French in the First Indochina War to help them confront United States forces and the Saigon regime .
 These included building a complex network of tunnels and bunkers to conceal political and military operations, store weapons and supplies, and to shelter from bombs . These included . building a network of . tunnels and . bunkers . to conceal . political and . military operations .
 The number of babies born in the tunnels of Vinh Moc during the course of the war is estimated to have been born in tunnels .
 In Vinh Moc, a village in the heavily fortified DMZ, local people took the bunker concept a stage further . The village is located in a heavily fortified area of Vietnam .
 60 families relocated underground, living in a network of tunnels more than a mile long, safe from U.S. bombs and artillery . Eventually, 60 families moved underground, with the help of 60 families .
 The village tunnels included rooms for every family, a larger room for community meetings and school lessons, kitchens with special stoves to vent the smoke, an infirmary, and several secret entrances, including some that opened onto the beach .
 Villagers lived this way for five years, going into the open only at night to farm their land or ferry supplies to guerrillas on Con Co island . The communist base is 15 miles offshore, about 15 miles from the island .
 The villagers of Vinh Moc claimed that they did not lose a single life to American bombs after they relocated underground . The villagers relocated underground after the U.S. bombed the area .
 Inhabitants endured stinging insects, venomous snakes, malaria, intestinal parasites, food shortages, and vitamin D deficiency . Inhabits were plagued by malaria, malaria and intestinal parasites .
 Rats and cassava, a nutritious root vegetable that grew wild, were mainstays of the villagers' diet . Rats were a mainstay of the village's diet .
 This diagram, dating from 1966, is an American representation of a tunnel network . Tunnel dwellers Mapping the tunnels in the tunnels .
 United States training bases built tunnel systems to help prepare their troops . The tunnel system was built in the U.S. military's training bases .
 In reality, tunnels were more complex, with many entrances and booby traps . Also risked tunnel collapse, oxygen deprivation, and death or injury from bombs .
 A compartment in the base stored a spare bulb and filters soldiers who braved darkness, the danger of getting lost, and booby traps . Soldiers were dropped through trap doors or dropped through a trap door between two levels .
 They might be impaled by punji sticks, stung by scorpions, or bitten by snakes tied to stakes in the roof . They might also be struck by sharpened lengths of bamboo bamboo .
 Early attempts to use dogs instead of people were soon abandoned, as dogs could not detect traps . Early attempts were abandoned as dogs were not able to detect traps and traps .
 Other precautions, such as using smoke to detect openings, or clearing tunnels with grenades, had the drawback of alerting the enemy .
 An Australian combat engineer, Sandy MacGregor, is credited with being the first to discover the extent of the Cu Chi tunnels . The underground warren spread for miles in the Iron Triangle northwest of Saigon . The tunnels are believed to have been discovered in the 1970s .
 Tunnel rats are charged with investigating tunnel networks . They were equipped with a flashlight, a pistol, and a knife . Tunnel rats were armed with a knife and a flashlight .
 The angle-headed flashlights were waterproof and could be clipped to or suspended from the soldier's belt . They could also be suspended from or clipped from the soldiers' belt .
 Two men went into a tunnel at one time; the job of the second man was to radio coordinates to the surface so that the tunnels could be mapped . The second man's job was to help map the tunnels so that they could be found .
 Eventually, the cumulative effect of bombing, Rome Plows (armored bulldozers), and search-and-destroy infantry operations such as Cedar Falls and Junction City blunted the effectiveness of Cu Chi tunnels .
 Cu Chi tunnel network was never eradicated in Vietnam . However, like the other tunnel networks in South Vietnam, Cu Chi never was eradicated . Cu Chi was never fully eradicated.
 The NVA and Viet Cong used the tunnel systems to help launch several major offensives . The main tunnel systems are today celebrated in tours of the main tunnels .
 Bombing limited the usefulness of the tunnel systems at Cu Chi and Vinh Moc . U.S. and South Vietnamese forces never succeeded in destroying the tunnels entirely .
 Cu Chi and Vinh Moc are important historical sites and open to tourists . Cu Chi is located in Vietnam's capital, Hànhàààhànàh .
 Tours of the tunnel systems stress the ingenuity and fortitude of the Vietnamese people . Tourists are encouraged to explore the ingenuity of the people of Vietnam .
 V Captured guerrilla captured by U.S. soldiers in Vietnam in January 1966 .
 He was selected to infiltrate the elaborate underground networks of the Viet Cong as a tunnel rat . Along with seven other ""thin, small men"" from his company, he was selected for the mission .
 Dominguez was known as Ghost for his ability to explore the tunnels undetected . He was also known as 'Ghost' for his skillful ability to get undetected into tunnels .
 Many tunnels were rigged with explosives and trip wires, but Dominguez claims the worst thing about the tunnels was the bugs, which would eat you alive .
 On one occasion he was sent down into a deep, complex hole, with very little room to move . On another occasion, he had to be sent down in a complex hole with little room for movement .
 He crawled along until he had almost reached the end and he was able to straighten up a little . He crawled until he was almost out of the way .
 The flashlights tunnel rats were given were such poor quality it was difficult to see . He though he though he was walking through water—the flashlights he was given were .
 Sergeant Ronald Payne emerges from a Viet Cong tunnel in the so-called Hobo Woods, South Vietnam, on January 21,1967 . Sergeant Payne emerged from the tunnel with a pistol in hand . The United States Army TUNNEL RAT RUBEN ""GHOST""
 Payne discovered detailed maps and plans belonging to the Viet Cong guerrillas . Payne also discovered detailed plans and maps belonging to Viet Cong . Payne's mission underground revealed detailed maps, plans . Payne was captured by the U.S. Army in 1968 .
 During the war against the French, Viet Minh leaders in the mountains of the Laotian and Chinese border regions struggled to maintain contact with forces further south .
 Footpaths used to travel through Truong Son Mountains in Vietnam . They relied on a network of footpaths to get around the mountains .
 The United States waged war on the Ho Chi Minh Trail for years, without success . The U.S. tried to take control of the trail, but failed .
 Vietnamese people maintaining and using the trail found an effective and often ingenious workaround . For every high-tech method it deployed, the Vietnamese people found a way to get around the trail .
 Ho Chi Minh Trail was not a single trail, but a network of trails and roads that eventually reached 12,000 miles in length . The Ho Chi-Minh Trail eventually reached a total of 12,500 miles . T he Ho Chi . Minh . Trail was a network
 Rustic paths, treacherous bamboo staircases, and rope bridges traversed by porters pushing bicycles gave way by the early 1970s . One-lane roads and bridges able to carry truck traffic gave way to one-lane roadways .
 North Vietnam deployed about 75,000 civilians to maintain the trail, including boys and girls in their teens . The trail was used by North Vietnam troops in the 1960s .
 Youth Volunteers could expect to spend time filling bomb craters, repairing bridges, and even detonating unexploded ordnance . Youth Volunteers will fill bomb crater craters and repair bridges .
 They lived on the trail deep in the jungle, generally sleeping by day, in hammocks or in underground bunkers, and coming out to work by night to work . They lived by day and by night, sleeping by night in bunkers or hammocks .
 Malaria, dysentery, and trench foot were rampant, and medical care was rudimentary or nonexistent . Malaria was rampant and there was no medical care for many .
 When the workers returned home at war's end, they were pale, hairless, and frail, with health problems that would plague them for the rest of their lives . The workers were hairless and hairless when they returned home .
 A cave on the trail serves as an auto repair shop in 1968 . A cave in the trail was used as a place to repair cars in the area .
 U.S. Air Force and Navy planes bombed the trail heavily, hunting trail workers and North Vietnamese troops going south to fight . North Vietnamese trail workers were killed by the bombing .
 It is estimated that some 30,000 people died on the trail over the course of the war . Some put the figure as high as 100,000, though some say it could be as high .
 Much of the trail was hidden under jungle canopy . American pilots grew frustrated that they were risking their lives to bomb what was often just trees .
 To address this, United States planes sprayed defoliants over the jungle to rid the trees of foliage .
 Cloud seeding sprayed clouds with silver iodide and lead iodide to create rain in order to slow truck traffic by reducing visibility or washing out roads and bridges .
 Project Popeye was a top-secret cloud-seeding operation over the Trail between March 1967 and July 1972 . The operation sought to extend the monsoon season each year by a month or more .
 The United States tried to locate the trail more precisely by planting motion and sound sensors to detect traffic . The U.S. military also developed ""people sniffers,"" sensors designed to detect the smell of human urine and sweat .
 Army and Air Force pilots dropped leaflets in Vietnamese on the Trail, threatening more devastating bombing and urging workers and soldiers to desert . The leaflets were dropped by the U.S. Air Force and U.N. troops in Vietnam .
 Vietnamese trail workers found ingenious ways to undermine efforts to get around the world's largest island nation . Vietnamese trail-traffickers often use ingenious ways of getting around the country .
 They drove cattle down false trails to trigger motion and sound detectors, luring United States bombers away from actual trail traffic . The cattle were used to lure the U.S. bombers from the area .
 They hung bags of urine in trees far from the trail to fool people sniffers . The bags were hung in trees to fool the people sniffer .
 Workers repaired the damage wrought by bombs by hand or heavy machinery . But mostly they worked diligently to repair by hand .
 Despite their efforts, U.S. forces failed to slow down traffic down the Ho Chi Minhh Trail . Despite efforts, United States forces did not slow, let alone stop, traffic .
 Infiltration accelerated over the years, reaching 20,000 tons of war materiel per month by the late 1960s . Infiltration increased over the course of the decade .
 At one point, U.S. aerial surveillance detected 15,000 vehicles on the trail in a single day .
 Thousands of American and South Vietnamese soldiers and airmen were killed or injured trying to interdict the trail . Thousands of U.S. and Vietnamese soldiers died or injured in the effort .
 Today, the modern vestiges of the trail provide an interior highway for Vietnam, bringing economic development . The trail was established by the Viet Cong guerrillas in 1969 .
 The elephants' ability to carry heavy loads and force their way through jungle made them a useful addition to a range of transportation methods . Elephants can also be used in a variety of ways to transport large animals .
 The Combined Action Program sent Marines into towns and hamlets to forge positive relationships with the locals . Marines were sent into the communities to forge relationships with locals .
 General William Westmoreland's use of the attrition strategy and searchand-destroy tactics, the war remained a political struggle in need of political solutions . D espite General Westmorelland's . use of . attrition strategy, searchand . destroy tactics, it remained a . political
 American units throughout South Vietnam embraced civic action as a means of winning hearts and minds . The Marines built an entire program around it .
 Under the program, the Army relocated villagers to specially fortified hamlets and declared their former homes to be free-fire zones for rooting out insurgents in search-and-destroy operations .
 It sought to prove to the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong that they could not win the war and should seek a settlement . The U.S. tried to prove that they failed to win the battle and should therefore seek a solution .
 This strategy ensured a great deal of destruction, but it did little to stop NVA or Viet Cong fighters from receiving sanctuary at the village level . The NVA and the Viet Cong were able to get sanctuary at village level, despite the destruction .
 When the Army did engage in civic action to improve civil-military relations, it did so in addition to—not in lieu of—search-and-destroy operations . The Army did not engage in searches and destroy operations in the 1980s, it says .
 This shooting war was at odds with the Army's efforts to win hearts and minds . The Army was trying to win the hearts of the American public with the help of the Taliban .
 The Marine Corps, operating primarily in the northernmost part of South Vietnam, offered an alternative model for conducting the war . Marine methods were used in Vietnam .
 Marine initiatives to improve villagers' standard of living included providing school supplies for children, tools for tradesmen, and equipment such as rice threshers for villages . Sharing farming expertise to improve livestock and crop yields; and building dams and wells to provide clean drinking water and irrigation .
 They also provided medical care and distributed emergency food and clothing . They also distributed emergency clothing and medical supplies .
 It began as an improvised solution to a manpower shortage in 1965, when a junior officer suggested using South Vietnamese militia units to augment Marine strength .
 They received 10 days of training in Vietnamese language and customs before they were sent to live in a village to forge bonds with local people . The team was sent to a village in Vietnam to forge bond with locals .
 The platoons were strengthened by the complementary skills each side brought to the unit . The platoon was strengthened by their complementary skills .
 CAP Marines brought firepower, training, and access to American resources such as medevac, artillery, and air support . CAP Marines, who were on average about 20 years old, are about 20-years-old .
 The seal of the Combined Action Program shows a South Vietnamese flag joined with the Star Spangled Banner, in reference to the program's collaboration between the U.S. Marines and South Vietnamese militiamen . The local militia, on the other hand, had varying degrees of military prowess .
 The Marine Corps declared the program a success, although the evidence is largely anecdotal . Ultimately, the program was declared a success .
 CAP platoons generally experienced lower casualty rates than units engaged in search-and-destroy operations, but they produced a higher body count relative to unit size . CAP plataons experienced lower casualties rates than those engaged in operations .
 Hospital corpsman Ronald L Williams treated a boy with an infected leg in An Tan, during a medical civic action visit in June 1966 .
 CAP platoons' ability to intimidate and persuade may have been rooted in Viet Cong pragmatism, as well as public support . The village was captured in 2003 .
 CAP platoons were too small, few, and unevenly distributed to have much impact on the outcome of the war . Ultimately, the CAP plataons were small and few, too small to have a much impact .
 CAP Marines often made friends among the families of families in the villages to which they were assigned . They were invited to eat meals in civilians' homes .
 CAP platoon members and South Vietnamese villagers who came to rely on them for security were remembered long after the war's end . Friendships between CAP platoon . and villagers who relied on CAP platoon for security .
 The United States also used psychological persuasion, known as PSYOPS, to win over the populace . The U.S. also used PSYOPs to threaten the NVA and Viet Cong . PSYops were also used to win the populace over .
 General Westmoreland claimed that PSYOPS and civic action were at the heart of counterinsurgency . Westmorelands claimed PSYOPs and civic actions were key to the success of the war .
 These would urge people to reject the Viet Cong and support the South Vietnamese government . Typically, these would urge support for the government .
 It was the first service to go into formal combat operations in 1965 and the last one to leave Vietnam a decade later . The U.S. was the last service to leave the country in Vietnam .
 The United States Navy had been a source of support for the South Vietnamese government since the 1950s . The U.S. Navy has been supporting the Vietnamese government for decades .
 In the 1950s, the U.S. Navy provided guidance to South Vietnam's Navy . The Navy advised the government on infrastructure projects and civic action programs . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country .
 These advisory and nationbuilding missions continued throughout the war .
 Seventh Fleet provided critical support to the war effort in a broad range of capacities . U.S. Navy did not have to contend with serious threats from North Vietnamese naval forces .
 At Yankee Station, multiple aircraft carriers launched airstrikes against North Vietnam and the Ho Chi Minh Trail as part of operations Flaming Dart, Rolling Thunder, and Linebacker, among others .
 Warships at Yankee Station shelled the coast of North Vietnam and provided artillery support to American units operating in South Vietnam .
 At Dixie Station, much farther south, a single-carrier group provided close air support for United States troops engaged in combat operations .
 Other Navy missions included advising the Republic of Vietnam Navy, transporting troops to Vietnam, building U.S. bases .
 Aircraft carrier The USS Enterprise was used to launch airstrikes at various points in the war in Vietnam .
 The U5S. New Jersey fires shells into North Vietnam from the Gulf of Tonkin . The U.5S New Jersey fired shells into the communist country . U.S. fired at communist targets .
 The New Jersey was a heavy bombardment battleship, equipped with 16-inch guns . It was the first ship from the New Jersey to be armed with 16 inch guns .
 Navy personnel engaged in riverine operations faced many of the same hardships and threats suffered by ground troops engaged in searchand-destroy operations farther north .
 The United States Navy played a vital role in United States retaliatory action following North Vietnam's Easter Offensive in 1972 . However, for sailors in the Seventh Fleet, the threat of accident—fires, helicopter crashes, collisions, explosions, and errors — is still a concern .
 Last Force Out constructing and maintaining South Vietnamese port facilities, providing medical support in shipboard surgical hospitals, and coastal defense .
 The Navy's most important role was disrupting the so-called Sihanouk Trail . North Vietnamese supply route into South Vietnam via the port of Cambodia in Cambodia was disrupted .
 The Republic of Vietnam Navy addressed such smuggling, but its efforts were ineffective and prone to corruption . Initially, the Republic Vietnam Navy tried to combat such smuggling but was ineffective . Now, the Vietnam Navy is trying to tackle the problem, but it has been plagued by corruption .
 Operation Market Time was launched in 1965 to intercept and search thousands of vessels . The U.S. Navy and Coast Guard launched the operation in 1965 . It was the first time the Navy had intercepted and searched thousands of ships .
 The Brown Water Navy patrolled inland waterways in the Mekong Delta and Ca Mau Peninsula . It was similar to the Brown Water Army, which patrolled waterways .
 Brown Water Navy also conducted search-and-destroy missions against the Viet Cong . The Viet Cong had long operated in areas that infantry equipped with tanks and heavy artillery could not reach .
 The U.S. Navy continued to provide support to the South Vietnamese long after most American ground units had withdrawn from Vietnam .
 V_ Riverine Riverine operation was launched in April 1969 . V_Riverine operation took place on the Ca Mau Peninsula .
 1969 River Patrol Force launched Operation Game Warden, an attack on Viet Cong capabilities in the Mekong Delta . The operation was part of an attempt to counterbalance the threat posed posed posed by the Viet Cong . The Vietnamese were killed in 1969 .
 It imposed a curfew on the local population and limited Viet Cong movements, securing waterways and preventing attacks on regional cities . Consisting of small patrol boats and attack helicopters, it imposed an curfew .
 Mobile Riverine Force was formed in 1967 by the Navy . The force was formed by the Army and Navy . It paired Army infantry with Navy armored assault boats . It was the first of its kind .
 Initial operation in the Rung Sat Special Zone involved a ""hammer-and-anvil"" attack in which riverine infantry landed to drive Viet Cong forces toward a second attack force delivered by helicopter . Operation involved a vast area of mangrove forest south of Saigon .
 Operation helped secure provincial capitals and prevented the Viet Cong from mining water approaches to Saigon launching aircraft—exceeded the risk of injury from attack . The operation helped .
 The heaviest Navy casualties due to enemy action occurred in 1968, when Viet Cong divers detonated two mines alongside the USS Westchester County . 25 sailors were killed when the mines were detonated by the Viet Cong .
 LRRP teams collected intelligence on the movement of communist fighters . They coordinated artillery and air strikes on communist fighters in the area .
 Previous efforts to clear the area northwest of Saigon had had mixed results . Previous efforts had failed to clear a large area near Saigon .
 U.S. forces and the ARVN lacked resources to occupy and patrol the area . The population soon moved back in .
 To prevent accidents, ""Front toward enemy"" was always embossed on the side of the vehicle . The front of the car was always always always "front"
 Junction City was intended to deal a deathblow to the insurgents' infrastructure in South Vietnam . Junction City is intended to be a death blow to the insurgency's infrastructure in the country .
 Viet Cong and NVA forces recognized the folly of trying to combat the U.S. war machine and sought to outlast it instead . The Viet Cong, NVA and Viet Cong forces were not interested in fighting the United States .
 Junction City was the largest joint US-ARVN operation of the war . Junction City is largest joint U.S. operation in the war's history .
 Launched on February 22, 1967, it lasted 82 days and involved 45,000 U.S. troops . It was the war's only significant combat parachute assault . The mission was the only significant parachute assault in the world's history .
 War Zone C in Tay Ninh province northwest of Saigon was relatively flat and dry compared to the saturated paddies of the JVIekong Delta and the steep hillsides of the Central Highlands . War zone C is a relatively dry and dry region northwest of the city .
 Operation Junction City saw the heaviest use of armored vehicles during the war . Operation . Junction City was one of the most heavily armored operations in the war's history .
 The objective of Junction City was to clear the region of North Vietnamese and Viet Cong fighters . As with other search-and-destroy operations, the objective of the operation was clear of the region .
 The COSVN remained elusive and retaining control of the Iron Triangle proved impossible for the U.S. and its allies . The United States and allies were unable to keep control of Iron Triangle from the COSN .
 U.S. forces charged with maintaining security in the iron Triangle proved too small for the task or not up to it, allowing North Vietnamese and Viet Cong fighters to filter back . ARVN forces were either too small or not capable of maintaining security .
 United States forces continued to hunt for the COSVN, whose staff increasingly took sanctuary across the border in Cambodia, beyond the reach of American troops .
 U.S. paratroopers parachute into the drop zone, a flat and clear area west of Katum Special Forces camp, in their only major combat assault of the war . Junction City jump was the only major assault of Operation Thunderbolt .
 In general, Vietnam's rugged terrain made parachute assaults impractical . The country's mountainous terrain made parachuting impossible .
 The relatively flat terrain of War Zone C was ideal for the U.S. Army's M113 armored personnel carrier . The M113 was nicknamed the Green Dragon by the Viet Cong .
 Operation Cedar Falls, Junction City employed a ""hammer-andanvil'' technique to drive enemy forces overland toward destruction . Operation . Cedar Falls employed a technique called the "anandanvil" technique .
 U.S. forces were placed in position for the assault . Under the guise of conducting routine combat patrols, United States forces were deployed in Afghanistan .
 Overall, Junction City had mixed success. Then, on the morning of February 22, eight infantry battalions under the control of the .
 The 25th Infantry Division helicoptered into landing zones, where they met little resistance . The airborne assault was spectacular, making for dramatic .
 U.S. forces extended their lines almost to the Cambodian border, creating a horseshoe-shaped cordon . The cordon was designed to trap the Viet Cong so that United States forces could hunt them down . Collectively, these forces then extended their forces .
 In fact, for the next month, American forces had only light contact with the Viet Cong . The Viet Cong were content to remain hidden .
 The second stage of Junction City began in mid-March, when United States forces set up Katum Special Forces camp and fire support bases . U.S. forces established the camp to establish a permanent American presence in the region .
 During this phase of the operation, Viet Cong forces mounted substantial resistance, especially on the grounds of a former rubber plantation . The operation was part of the Vietnam War's first major offensive .
 The Viet Cong launched deadly assaults against U.S. forces, who beat them back with overwhelming firepower, inflicting heavy casualties . These battles forged a pattern, in which the Viet Cong attacked the United States with heavy firepower . The U.N. forces were defeated by overwhelming firepower .
 The number of U.S. helicopers used to drop eight infantry battallions into position on February 22. headlines on the home front and boosting the morale of troops in Vietnam .
 The guerrilla fighters hid or retreated across the border into Cambodia, whose neutrality prohibited U.S. forces from following . For the most part, the guerrilla fighters retreated into Cambodia .
 United States forces discovered a cache of enemy propaganda suggesting that a component of COSVN was active in the region . The organization as a whole was neither discovered nor seriously compromised by the operation .
 Junction City's most significant contribution to the American war effort was its body count . Junction City contributed to the U.S. war effort .
 CWS did, however, perfect the use of incendiary devices such as bombs and flamethrowers . The CWS was the first organization to use incendiary devices .
 Rebranded as the Chemical Corps in 1946, it also developed biological weapons . The Chemical Corps was also known as the Biological Corps .
 The use of chemical weapons opened another front for the antiwar movement . The anti-war movement targeted chemical manufacturers such as Monsanto and Dow Chemical for their support .
 Activists launched boycotts, disrupted job fairs, picketed chemical plants, and lobbied elected officials to regulate the chemical industry and rein in its ability to profit from war .
 Viet Cong booby trap made from white phosphorus scavenged from unexploded American ordnance . U.S. soldier lies wounded by a booby-trap made of white phosphorus .
 White phosphorus grenades were widely used to hit Viet Cong tunnel networks . White phosphorus was widely used in the fight against the Viet Cong .
 In the 1960s, the Army Chemical Corps was charged with protecting U.S. personnel from chemical attack . It was also charged with perfecting and deploying chemical weapons . The Corps was tasked with protecting personnel from attack, but also with developing chemical weapons.
 In Vietnam, the Chemical Corps partnered with the Air Force to conduct Operation Ranch Hand— the aerial spraying of chemical defoliants on forests and farmland from 1961 to 1971 . The stated A United States soldier clears a path through Vietnamese aim of killing roadside vegetation, jungle with a flameth
 In 1978, the United States defoliating jungle hiding enemy banned the use of flamethrowers in future troops, and destroying civilian combat, due to their ""indiscriminate"" and crops suspected of being grown excessively injurious effects for enemy use .
 Agent Orange was the most widely used herbicide in South Vietnam . It was named for the orange band on the barrels in which it was stored . Agent Orange is named for its use in Vietnam .
 It consisted of two chemical herbicides mixed with diesel fuel or kerosene, but also a manufacturing byproduct . It was a mixture of herbicides and diesel fuel .
 Leaves would fall from trees or plants, remaining bare until at least the next rainy season . Within two weeks of spraying, leaves would fall out of trees and plants .
 Destroyed crops exacerbated poverty and drove people from their land, contributing to the refugee crisis . The refugee crisis is the largest refugee crisis in the world, with more than 100,000 refugees .
 The effect of multiple sprayings permanently destroyed vegetation and disrupted animal populations . The effects of the spray-spray have been permanent .
 Dioxin, associated with birth defects and diseases, also filtered into the soil . The soil was contaminated with dioxin and other chemicals .
 While international law prohibits chemical warfare against people, U.S. courts ruled that Ranch Hand targeted plants, indemnifying the United States from liability .
 U.S. chemical warfare in Vietnam also involved incendiary devices . The devices were designed to burn structures but also highly effective against people . Incendiary devices were used in Vietnam .
 Essentially jellied gasoline, napalm is chemically engineered to stick to its target . It burns incredibly hot and rapidly deoxygenates the air, suffocating people .
 The U.S. Air Force dropped napalm bombs over villages or forests sheltering enemy combatants in Vietnam . The bombs resulted in massive orange fireballs, resulting in massive fireballs .
 Soldiers used napalm in flamethrowers to target bunkers and tunnels . Soldiers also used napalash in flambethrowsers . napalm was also used in other areas .
 White phosphorus, an incendiary and smoke-producing agent, was also used in Vietnam . White phosphorus was used in the Vietnam war .
 Like herbicides, incendiaries were effective but controversial, because they led to untreatable wounds . In the 1930s, incense was used in the United States as a form of medicine .
 White phosphorus would continue to burn until it was completely deprived of oxygen, resulting in horrific burns and lethal poisoning . White phosphorus was used to burn out of control until it had to be deprived of air .
 Incendiaries did not discriminate between civilians and insurgents hiding in their midst . Incendiary did not distinguish between civilian and insurgents in the midst .
 This resulted in thousands of civilian casualties, which overwhelmed the South Vietnamese health service . Thousands of civilians were killed in the conflict in Vietnam .
 American UC-123K aircraft spray Agent Orange on a Mekong Delta mangrove forest in 1970 . Agent Orange was used to spray deadly chemical warfare agents in Vietnam .
 The converted gliders had jet engines fitted and dispensers on their wings and tails . They were optimized to spray three gallons of pesticide per acre per acre .
 Criticism of napalm and defoliants in Vietnam continues . Side effects of Agent Orange linger .
 Agent Orange believed to cause birth defects and many serious ailments . Agent Orange is believed to have caused birth defects, serious ailments and birth defects .
 The Chemical Corps was disbanded from 1973 to about 1980 after a string of accidents .
 Chemical Corps' new role includes preparing for chemical attack and mass decontamination . Chemical Corps is now active again, with the help of chemical experts .
 American A-1 Skyraider aircraft dropped phosphorus explosives during a 1966 strike against Viet Cong positions in South Vietnamese hamlet of Ban De .
 When Ho Chi Minh declared the Democratic Republic of Vietnam independent from French control in 1945, he understood this to include all of Vietnam . When he declared the country independent, this included all of its territory .
 Ho Chi Minh's vision of independent, communist Vietnam slipped out of reach . The vision of an independent Vietnam, which he and his followers had been fighting for, slipped out . Ho Chi-Minh's followers were fighting for a communist state .
 New ranks and a formal order of command were created, making the NVA more reflective of modern Western armies . NVA also acquired weapons from China and the Soviet Union .
 Tanks and aircraft from these allies allowed the NVA to form artillery and air . North Vietnamese forces line up, ready to fire, during a training exercise in Bach Dang .
 The NVA practiced tactical maneuvers and field exercises, hoping to make up for its lack of firepower by keeping its men well-prepared and well-disciplined . NVA hopes to keep its men healthy by keeping their men well prepared .
 Ho Chi Minh agreed to the terms of the 1954 Geneva Accords because they had promised to reunify Vietnam under leadership determined by national elections in 1956, which virtually guaranteed victory for him and his movement . T he Viet Minh's movement was virtually certain victory in 1956 .
 Ngo Dinh Diem, president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam), refused to hold these elections . Ngo Diem was president of Vietnam's new republic .
 The politburo of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam believed that they had no alternative but to return to war to unify the country . The war was the first war in Vietnam and the second in Vietnam .
 After eight years of war against France, North Vietnam knew it was not yet strong enough to win against the South . However, after eight years, the North Vietnamese knew it would not be strong enough for victory .
 1954 poster shows women and families saying goodbye to men leaving to fight in NVA force units . Army continued to use majority of its men in infantry units .
 In the 1960s and 1970s, war was all many North Vietnamese youth had ever known . War was all they'd ever known, against Japan, France, and now the U.S.
 North Vietnam's one-party government ensured that the communists had no opposition . North Vietnam was one of the most powerful communist states in Vietnam .
 Northerners received information about the world—and the war—exclusively through state-controlled media . The patriotic necessity of compliant support was reinforced by the state-run media, the author says .
 Primary school children were inculcated in a love for ""Uncle Ho" and loyalty to the communist party . Youth Volunteers cleared the Ho Chi Minh Trail of mines for years on end .
 The picture North Vietnam presented to the world was of undertaken by truck but more often, especially during the early years, involved long marches over rugged terrain . North Vietnam's image of the country was of driven by trucks but often by foot .
 Trail workers deferred to soldiers for rations and shelter . Conditions were still extremely harsh . Conditions still harsh .
 NVA soldiers often lived exposed to the elements in temporary encampments, dark tunnels, and cramped bunkers . After surviving months on the trail, NVA troops often lived in temporary camps, dark bunkers and cramped spaces .
 NVA units foraged on the march, procuring rice voluntarily from sympathetic peasants and taking it by force from those in opposition . The NVA took rice by force and foraged foraged in advance .
 North Vietnamese unity and determination, even as its people endured grief, frustration, and exhaustion, was unity . North Vietnam's people have endured grief and frustration .
 North Vietnam began to send NVA units southward in earnest in 1959 . NVA forces began to move southward from Vietnam in 1960s . North Vietnam has been fighting a long-running insurgency in Vietnam .
 They encouraged insurgent activity by the National Liberation Front in South Vietnam; and coordinated the war effort between the two . They also encouraged insurgents in Vietnam .
 Soldiers in the NVA served a long way from home, but their tours of duty were indefinite . Like their American counterparts, soldiers in the U.S. served long tours from home .
 The journey into South Vietnam was occasionally a change of clothes, nylon tent and poncho, hammock, canteen, bowl and spoon, first-aid kit, ammunition pouch, and perhaps a week's worth of rice, as well as personal items .
 The sum given to the NVA by the Soviet Union in 1967 far surpasses China's contributions . They also carried machetes, shovels, flashlights, medical supplies, and 70n BILLION DOLLARS .
 Injured soldiers received treatment in jungle hospitals before returning to duty . Injured and ill soldiers were treated at jungle hospitals .
 For those too gravely wounded to fight any longer, the journey home on stretchers carried by porters back up the Ho Chi Minh . The journey home took several months and could prove fatal .
 As American support for the war declined, the North Vietnamese politburo knew that it merely had to survive, not defeat U.S. forces . After the war, North Vietnamese knew they had to live not to defeat United States forces .
 The ARVN time again proved itself weak, while the NVA only became stronger . The NVA has proved itself to be a strong force in the U.S. Army .
 North Vietnam set its sights on defeating the ARVN and deposing the Saigon regime in order to reunify the country . After United States withdrawal in 1973, North Vietnam focused on defeating ARVVN . North Vietnam wanted to defeat ARVn and depose Saigon .
 The enamelled aluminum badge commemorates the ""5-8"" victory of August 5, 1964 . It was later awarded to NVA soldiers who shot down U.S. aircraft .
 MAT-49 is a French submachine gun seized in large numbers after French withdrawal from Vietnam . It was seized by the French in large quantities during the French withdrawal .
 The CD Type 56 assault rifle was the NVA's main infantry weapon . Simple, reliable, and accurate, this Chinese copy of the AK-47 was the main weapon . The NVA used it as a reliable and accurate weapon .
 Tokarev TT pistol was a popular semiautomatic pistol . Reliable and powerful, this was a very reliable and powerful gun . It was also popular in Russia .
 Luger P.08 pistol Lugers, captured in previous wars, were supplied by the Russians and the Chinese . Lugers were captured by the Russian and Chinese during the Second World War .
 Helmets were also made from pressed paper or plastic . Tropical cork helmet helmets were made from tropical cork helmets .
 Even those who did not actively participate in the war effort experienced terrible hardships, including the violent deaths of loved ones, homelessness, and hunger .
 Vietnamese women's labor and skills were too valuable not to be utilized in the fight for national independence . The wars of the 20th century created opportunities for Vietnamese women, because of their labor .
 Traditional Vietnamese culture offered women few options beyond being wives and mothers, but in wartime they often assumed more public roles . In wartime, women often assumed public roles, such as acting as mothers and wives .
 They also served in local militias, providing security to their communities . They captured downed U.S. airmen and captured downed airmen .
 Thousands of teenage girls volunteered for service maintaining the Ho Chi Minh Trail . They disarmed care, organize logistics, and serve as spies in support of the NVA and the Viet Cong .
 They lived in danger and deprivation, returning home to North Vietnam only at war's end . They returned home to the country only at the end of the war .
 Many were rendered unable to bear children due to poor diet and constant stress . They lacked sanitary supplies to care for themselves, and many were unable to .
 A wider family was—and remains—of paramount importance to the Vietnamese people, and the communists were quick to exploit the power of family to mobilize political support . Family was always important to the Vietnam people .
 They argued that one's family did not just consist of blood relations but of the entire Vietnamese nation . Service to the nation was therefore also also service to the family, they said .
 By framing political struggle in this way, the communists encouraged many women to step into roles previously reserved for men . By framing the political struggle as a struggle, communists encouraged women to take up roles in politics .
 The Trung Sisters led a rebellion against China in the first century of the century . They led a revolt against China and led the Trung sisters .
 Two hundred years later, Trieu Au, a ""Vietnamese Joan of Arc,"" reputedly rode into battle against the Chinese on an elephant . Au rode the elephant into battle on his elephant .
 Despite such examples, women struggled to assert their place in society . Religious beliefs, Confucian principles, and custom often limited their influence to family and home .
 NORTH VIETNAMESE SEAMSTRESS, 1966 unexploded artillery shells and mines . POEM BY AN ANONYMOUS NORTH VICTIM E. E. SEamSTRESS .
 The political situation in South Vietnam demanded that women choose sides, with some supporting the Saigon government, others supporting the Viet Cong, and most just trying to survive . Women were among the North Vietnamese support personnel who went south .
 Many soldiers in the South Vietnamese Army kept their families with them in the field . Thousands of women acted as ""soldiers without serial numbers,"" even defending camps against Viet Cong attack .
 Starting in 1965, women could also serve in the Women's Armed Forces Corps . Women were relegated to support roles in the ARVN auxiliary that relegated women to supporting roles .
 New recruits to South Vietnam's Women's Army Corps trade their ao dai for ARVN uniforms . The traditional dress fell out of favor in North Vietnam in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Dang Thuy Tram volunteered for service in North Vietnam fresh out of medical school in 1966 . Tram was born in Hue in 1942, and served in Vietnam from 1966 to 1968 .
 For four years, she worked as a battlefield surgeon, providing care to communist combatants and civilians from a mobile clinic hidden in the jungle . She was killed in 1970 .
 Tram's diary, found by an American Gl, was returned to her family in 2005 and published, to great acclaim . Tram was found by American Gl and published in 2005 .
 Workers took to keeping rifles close by as a precaution as U.S. air attacks on North Vietnam increased .
 The men left in villages and refugee camps tended to be very old or very young . Due to the ARVN draft on the one hand, and the appeal of fighting for the insurgency on the other, the men left were very old and young .
 It was not unusual, in contested areas, for young women to be widowed many times as their husbands were killed in combat . Young women are widowed often times as husbands die in combat.
 Communist propaganda posters encourage women to serve as combatants . Some found work on Appealing image .
 Others took a different approach, showing women harvesting rice or holding children . Others took different approaches, with some showing children or harvesting rice .
 Many women also worked as prostitutes in nightclubs and massage parlors that sprang up around the bases . They offered themselves directly to United States soldiers, sometimes in exchange for food .
 Whatever choices these women made, they were usually driven by their commitment to family . Whatever choices were made, these women were driven by commitment to their families .
 Vietnamese women continued to assert their influence on the war until its final days . Vietnamese women were influential in Vietnam's war .
 Nguyen Thi Binh served as the foreign minister of the Provisional Revolutionary Government (Viet Cong) in Vietnam . She was one of the signers of the 1972 Paris Accords . She signed the Paris-Paris Accords in 1972 .
 After the war, most Vietnamese women returned to traditional roles in the domestic sphere . After the conflict, Vietnamese women began to play traditional roles of domestic roles .
 Some areas still have issues with women being kidnapped, forced into prostitution, or sold as brides . Some areas are still dealing with issues such as kidnapping and forced prostitution .
 Economic reforms limited female-headed households' access to loans . Economic reforms have limited women's access to bank accounts . Women's bank accounts account for more than 80% of households .
 The Vietnam Women's Union is currently working alone to push for increased gender equality . Vietnam's women's union is currently pushing for gender equality in the country .
 Life in the army was one of unrelenting hardship, shown by NVA servicewoman Phan Ngoc . Whatever the role, life in the NVA is one of the most difficult experiences .
 In all the companies, there were women between 17 and 18 years of age who had joined the army hoping to fight . Women between the ages of 17-18 years old were hoping to join the army to fight.
 When Phan Ngoc joined, she was initially assigned to cook and she describes her sense of anger and disappointment . She describes her job as a cook at the start of the Vietnam War .
 A month later she became a sapper, working with dynamite, filling craters, and rebuilding bridges . However, a month later, she was back in action as a sapper .
 As head of the company, she had twelve people working under her and was in charge of explosives . She had 12 people under her, including explosives experts .
 A typical day for these women involved waking up at 5m., but they worked during the day or at night depending on the bombs . The bombs were bombs dropped in the area, and the bombs were detonated in bomb raids .
 They ate out of tins with branches because they had no chopsticks . They cleaned the tins and drank out of streams with leaves, and drank from streams .
 At the same time, they tried to retain some elements of a normal life by carrying books with them . At night they would read or write home. At the time they would also carry books .
 A group of young North Vietnamese women watch as one trains with a rifle . The North Vietnamese are called to arms by the North Korean government .
 All women in North Vietnam were taught to fight with weapons and in hand-to-hand combat, but few chose to join the NVA . Those who did did were often young, single, and childless .
 No corner of the war zone was entirely safe in Vietnam, and no role was without risk . Some places and duties were more dangerous than others . The challenges of ground combat in Vietnam were the greatest challenges .
 Army and Marine Corps infantry—the ground troops --suffered most of the casualties . Army and Marines suffered most of their casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 U.S. ground troops faced many physical hardships, especially out in the bush . American ground troops suffered physical hardships during the war .
 On patrols that might last hours, days, or even weeks, they ""humped"" through difficult terrain, hacking trails through I lacerating elephant grass and vicious thorns .
 Vietnam's climate exacerbated soldiers' discomfort, guaranteeing oppressive heat and humidity most of the year, but also drenching rain at temperatures cool enough to cause hypothermia at higher elevations, such as in the Central Highlands .
 Fighting gear might consist of a web belt with ammunition pouches, hand grenades, smoke grenades, first-aid kit, and canteen . Fighting gear may consist of ammunition .
 Packs contained a poncho and liner, extra socks and clothes, a gun-cleaning kit, and C-rations . Packages included meat or chopped ham and eggs, cans of fruit, and pound cake . Packs also contained a gun cleaning kit and a gun .
 There might also be small luxuries such as candy, cameras, and cigarettes .
 The gear was so heavy that soldiers often discarded items on the march to lighten the load . Soldiers often discard items on march to lighteren their load .
 Private First Class Fred Greenleaf, with other soldiers and members of an ARVN Ranger Group, wade through an irrigation canal on the way to a Viet Cong-controlled village during Operation Rang Dong in 1967 . Frustration was perhaps the infantrymen's primary state of mind—
 The hunger, exhaustion, fear, and loneliness endured by foot soldiers in Vietnam would have been familiar to veterans of World War II, Korea, and the American Civil War, and conflicts long before .
 The United States Army and Marine Corps infantry are trained for combat, and they generally excelled in this role in Vietnam . They were not prepared for the uncertainties of this particular combat zone .
 North Vietnamese insurgents were often indistinguishable from the civilian population of South Vietnam . North Vietnamese regulars were easy to identify, but insurgents often were indistinguishable from civilians .
 Soldiers frequently “The national flower... should be an immense thorn.” The national flower should be “an immense thorn,” soldiers say .
 Farley survived the war and was awarded the Silver Star, the third-highest U.S. military decoration for valor . Farley himself survived and received a Silver Star for his bravery .
 The number of U.S. ground troops in Vietnam continued to rise until 1969, as did the number of United States casualties . After the war, the United States continued to engage in Vietnam .
 General Westmoreland asked for more U.S. troops to be sent to Vietnam . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country to be fought in Vietnam .
 V described villagers as duplicitous, smiling and selling sodas to the Viet Cong during the day, then facilitating Viet Cong sabotage and sniping at night . V described village leaders as "duping" and selling soda to the enemy .
 Most American soldiers knew only a few phrases of pidgin Vietnamese . Racial and cultural prejudices exacerbated tensions between South Vietnamese villagers and exhausted American soldiers .
 Enemy mines and booby traps caused tens of thousands of American casualties, second only small arms fire .
 The psychological consequences of these weapons were perhaps worse, because soldiers in the bush understood that any step could be their last . "The psychological consequences were perhaps even worse," he says .
 On any patrol, the danger was particularly acute for the ""point man" The point man is the first man in a column of troops whose every sense strained to catch sight, sound, or scent of the enemy . The danger of the point man was especially acute for him .
 To ensure the point man was mentally and physically fresh, point duty was normally rotated . Point duty was usually rotated .
 -162-5G58 SUNBURN 7 PREVENTIVE PREPARATION MIL-S-11262C CONTENTS 2 OUNCES NET WEIGHT A-DEC/67 DIRECTIONS Rub on bare skin (face, neck, hands, arms, chest, back
 Combat troops also had the responsibility of taking lives, and to hesitate to do so could prove fatal . To hesitate to take lives, soldiers also had to take responsibility for their actions .
 Some struggled to reconcile the killing with religious prohibitions on violence, but a few reveled in it . Most, however, recognized it as an operational necessity . Some struggled with the killing, but some reveled it .
 The loss and maiming of colleagues during combat also took a mental toll . The loss of colleagues in Afghanistan also took mental toll on the nation .
 The vast majority of combat troops approached the challenges they faced stoically and with a high degree of professionalism . Most of them were draftees or draft-motivated volunteers who never wanted to be soldiers .
 Ground troops had to contend with natural hazards as well as the perils of combat . Ground troops faced a host of challenges, including natural hazards .
 Sun, humidity, insects, and leeches led to a host of serious ailments, including foot rot, leading to gangrene, and malaria . Sun and humidity led to foot rot and gangrene .
 Larry Burrows's photograph captures the moment Marine Gunnery Sergeant Jeremiah Purdie, a bloody bandage on his head, stumbles toward a wounded comrade .
 As American involvement in South Vietnam grew, so too did the size and intensity of the antiwar movement . America went to war in Vietnam in January 1965-September 1967 .
 Americans from all walks of life opposed the war in Vietnam . White, white, middle-class college students became the face of the movement . White and white college students led the anti-war movement .
 The growing Vietnam antiwar movement in the U.S. had deep roots and broad appeal . Martin Luther King Jr. led the country's civil rights movement in 1963 .
 The antiwar protesters had links to other mass social movements of the time, such as the African American Civil Rights Movement, and the Berkeley Free Speech Movement . The anti-war protesters were linked to the antinuclear movement .
 David Miller was sent to prison for publicly burning his draft card in October 1965 . This form of protest became more organized and widespread after Miller's arrest in 1965 .
 Americans objected to the war in Vietnam, but only a small percentage of them participated in protests against it . Only a small number of Americans protested against the Vietnam War .
 Reasons for opposition to U.S. involvement in the war varied dramatically, undermining the strength and solidarity of the antiwar movement as a whole . Reasons for opposing the war vary dramatically .
 Pacifists opposed the Vietnam War on principle, but many more Americans specifically opposed the war in Vietnam out of concern for civilian casualties and doubts about whether the cost —in dollars and lives — was justified .
 Many young men opposed the war out of self-interest; they did not want to fight . Many young . men opposed it out of . self interest; many young men . did not . want to . fight .
 Others supported the aim of halting the spread of communism in South Vietnam, but disagreed on how to do so . Others wanted to end communism in Vietnam but disagreed how to stop it .
 Some in this group, while supporting the escalation of America's role in the war, advocated withdrawal if the U.S. was not prepared to fight to win . Some in the group also supported the escalation in the conflict .
 Many antiwar activists had participated in the Civil Rights Movement . nonviolent tactics, such as marching and sit-ins, swayed public opinion and lent the movement its moral authority .
 In October 1967, 100,000 demonstrators gathered at the Lincoln Memorial, with more than a third of them also marching on the Pentagon .
 By this time, protests consisting of tens 20,000““ marching at an antiwar rally in Washington, D.C., in 1965, were at the height of the antiwar movement .
 Muhammad Ali became one of the antiwar movement's strongest voices when he refused induction into the army in 1967 . The boxing champion refused to be inducted into the military .
 Ali, a conscientious objector due to his Muslim faith, declared that his enemy was not the Viet Cong, but racism in the U.S. Ali declared that racism in America was the real enemy . Ali was killed in the Vietnam War in June 1968 .
 Vietnam—led to a spate of legal trials that ensured antiwar protests remained in the headlines . The trials of the Vietnam War era included a number of high-profile trials .
 In the mid-1960s, the antiwar movement gained a particular momentum on college campuses . It was largely provoked by the increase in draft calls . Students and hippies protested the Vietnam War .
 Students conflated resistance to university authority and challenges to government authority . Some students conflaced resistance to authority with challenges to the government authority, officials say .
 Demonstrations voiced opposition to military recruitment, private-sector recruitment for government contractors such as Dow Chemical . University research on behalf of the military also voiced opposition .
 Police brutality against these student protesters often became the antiwar movement's most effective recruiting tool, as hitherto apolitical bystanders became radicalized at the sight of violence against their classmates .
 Many observers characterized antiwar protestors as ""drop outs"" or ""hippies" The 1960s' counterculture was a key part of the 1960s counterculture .
 Antiwar movement also included workingclass people and people of color who objected to draft . There was overlap between these groups, especially among white, middle-class youth . Workingclass people also objected to the draft .
 Due to its links to other such movements, antiwar activism became associated with radical political and social ideas . Antiwar activism was associated with a wide range of radical political ideas .
 The seemingly radical tactics, methods, and language of many of those who spoke out against the war could dissuade some groups, such as older people and political conservatives, from engaging with protesters, even if these groups shared many of their concerns .
 As U.S. troop commitments and casualties rose, increasing numbers of Americans from all walks of life began to question United States involvement in Vietnam . After the war, Americans began questioning the U.N. involvement in the Vietnam .
 She hoped to convince the Guardsmen to put down their arms and join her cause . She hopes to convince them to put their arms down .
 In the fall of 1967, North Vietnam makes ambitious plans to retake Saigon . September 1967-December 1968 is the turning point of the Vietnam War . The U.S. invasion of Vietnam began in 1968 .
 Tet Offensive is one of Vietnam's largest campaigns during the Vietnam War . Tet Offensive sees a series of coordinated attacks across South Vietnam, resulting in heavy fighting .
 The ancient city of Hue saw the longest, bloodiest battle of the Tet Offensive, with some of the worst devastation of the war . Hue was one of the longest and bloodiest battles of the Vietnam War .
 North Vietnam and the Viet Cong began to prepare for an offensive they hoped would win the war . The fall of 1967 marked the turning point of the Vietnam War . In 1968, the U.S. and North Vietnam began planning a major offensive .
 After diversionary attacks on U.S. bases in border areas, they delivered the main thrust of their offensive during the Tet holiday in early 1968 .
 The Viet Cong fought for control of towns and cities across South Vietnam . The North Vietnamese Army seized the city of Hue in 1968 . The battle was fought in Hue and Hue .
 The Tet Offensive was a military failure for the communists, and Viet Cong forces were weakened substantially by the campaign . In spite of the scale of the attack, the campaign was a failure for communists .
 United States and South Vietnamese troops retook urban areas in Vietnam . United States Marines successfully defeated a siege of their base at Khe Sanh .
 Second phase of the Tet Offensive, ""Mini Tet,"" also failed to win significant military gains for the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong . Later in 1968, the second stage of the offensive failed to gain significant military forces .
 U.S. GIs regularly patrolled the paddy fields near the United States base at Da Nang . GIs often patrolled paddy field near the base .
 American aircraft launched strikes against Viet Cong guerrillas in Dak To, in the Central Highlands . U.S. aircraft were launched against the guerillas during the attacks .
 The United States responds with an aerial resupply of the base and bombardment of NVA positions . The U.S. responds to the UVA's request for supplies .
 Viet Cong guerrillas and NVA troops carry out attacks in cities and towns across South Vietnam, including Hue and Saigon, where they penetrate the U.S. Embassy compound .
 United States and ARVN counterattacks begin, retaking Tan Son Nhut airbase in Saigon . U.S. and ARNN counterattack begins, but U.N. forces are still at large .
 The United States Marine base at Con Thien, near the DMZ, successfully resists a siege by NVA forces and prolonged heavy artillery bombardment . The base was attacked by the NVA, who were surrounded by heavy artillery .
 An attack by the Viet Cong against a military outpost at Loc Ninh near the Cambodian border is repelled with heavy losses . The attack was repelled by heavy losses from the Vietnamese army .
 The battle for Saigon ends with the clearing of Viet Cong guerrillas from the city . Saigon was declared a victory in March 1968 .
 After restrictions on U.S. bombing of North Vietnam are dropped, the United States conducts widespread raids on bridges and other transportation links, power plants, and factories .
 In the Battle of Dak To, U.S. and South Vietnamese troops repel an offensive by communist forces in the Central Highlands . The battle took place in Vietnam's Central Highlands during November 3-22 .
 U.S. Marines succeed in retaking the imperial palace of Hue in Vietnam . The battle lasted for more than three weeks . The United States has been fighting in Hue since April .
 President Johnson's chances of re-election are fading after McCarthy's strong performance in New Hampshire primary . Antiwar Democrat Eugene McCarthy's performance casts doubt on Johnson's election chances .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff tell the president that 200,000 more soldiers are needed to win the war in Vietnam . Joint chiefs of Staff say the U.S. needs 200,00 more soldiers to win Vietnam War .
 American involvement in the war is rejected . The Khe Sanh Marine base in northern South Vietnam is located in northern Vietnam . The base is a base for the Marines .
 General Creighton Abrams replaces General Westmoreland as commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam . Abrams will be the commander of United States forces in the Vietnam .
 Operation Sealords is a long-term campaign by U.S. and South Vietnamese naval and riverine forces against Viet Cong supply lines and bases in the Mekong Delta . The operation is launched in the fall of October 8 .
 Defense Secretary Clark Clifford tells General Westmoreland he will not be given the extra troops he has stated he needs to win the war . American soldiers massacre hundreds of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai . A Battle of Michigan Avenue, August 1968 .
 Preliminary peace talks open in Paris but stall over issues of procedure and representation . May 13, 2012, Peace Talks begin in Paris .
 U.S. troops evacuate Khe Sanh from the combat base . A few days later, the Viet Cong raises the North Vietnamese flag over the base .
 Operation Pegasus begins, an advance by U.S. troops along Route 9 to relieve the siege of the Marine base at Khe Sanh . Operation Pegasus began on April 1, 2007 .
 Rolling Thunder, the American bombing campaign against North Vietnam, is terminated . Rolling Thunder is terminated, reopening the peace talks . The bombing campaign is terminated and reopens the talks .
 Republican candidate Richard Nixon wins the United States presidential election, claiming to have a plan to end the war . Republican candidate Nixon claims he has a plan for ending the Vietnam War .
 President Johnson announces halt to most bombings of North Vietnam to facilitate the opening of peace negotiations . Johnson also announces his decision not to run for another term in the White House .
 Operation Pegasus relief force joins up with the Marines at Khe Sanh, ending the siege after 77 days . Operation Pegasus is the first relief force to join forces with the U.S. Marines .
 By the year's end, there are 495,000 U.S. military personnel in Vietnam . American deaths for the year total 16,899. American deaths in Vietnam are 16,900 .
 In the early years of the war, the majority of Americans backed U.S. participation in the war . The majority of those who supported the war were Republicans .
 Most Americans were too preoccupied with the Civil Rights Movement and the 1960s' counterculture to question America's role in Vietnam . Yet most Americans had been too busy to question the Vietnam War's role .
 More than half of all Americans approved of the war effort in polls conducted by Gallup in 1965 and 1966 . Gallup poll: More than 50 percent of Americans approve of war effort .
 General Vo Nguyen Giap directed the execution of the Tet Offensive of 1968 . Giap was a veteran of the First Indochina War against the French .
 Vietnam War had ground to a bloody stalemate, with neither side capable of achieving a final or even partial victory . The Vietnam War ended in 1967, with the U.S. occupying Vietnam in 1968 .
 The American military and its allies proved adept at winning conventional battles, while the NVA and the Viet Cong excelled at gaining the upper hand in smaller skirmishes and at controlling large parts of South Vietnamese countryside .
 Viet Cong positions in South Vietnam were pounded with B-52 Arc Light raids on a daily basis, as well as by naval guns and ground artillery .
 Lyndon B Johnson was pouring ever more men and machines into the anticommunist cause . Some 20,000 U.S. troops had already been killed in action . There was no reason to believe the escalation would abate .
 The communist leadership determined that the only way to break the stalemate was to undertake a massive military offensive against multiple targets in South Vietnam . The U.S. government decided to take action against the communist leadership .
 At best, the assault might topple the South Vietnamese regime outright and drive the U.S. into the South China Sea . At best it might drive the Americans into the region .
 At worst, it would demonstrate the communists' ability to strike anywhere, at anytime, and inflict massive damage . It would force the U.S. to the negotiating table, forcing Americans to take responsibility .
 Growing anti-war sentiment in the U.S. encouraged North Vietnam's leadership to launch a full-scale attack . North Vietnam believed the time was ripe to attack in fall of 1967 .
 There was also a growing fear that North Vietnam— its economy in shambles due to the ongoing American bombing— might soon lack the necessary resources .
 In the summer of 1967, the politburo in Hanoi approved the general offensive . General Giap, commander of the NVA, was authorized to put the plan into action . The NVA was defeated in the fall of 1967 .
 Giap determined that the only way to strike at so many places along such a broad front was a coordinated action by NVA regulars and Viet Cong guerrillas . Giap decided to strike against the NVA and the Viet Cong .
 He also decided that the best time to launch the assault was over Tet, Russian firearms . The Viet Cong were often poorly equipped and outgunned .
 Hanoi resupplied them with the latest Soviet-made weaponry, such as AK-47 assault rifles and this fragmentation grenade . The Vietnamese New Year (at the end of January) is when a ceasefire would be in place across South Vietnam .
 In preparation for the offensive, the NVA bolstered its own arsenal and began resupplying the Viet Cong with arms . The NVA also resupplied itself with arms to prepare for the attack .
 Through the fall of 1967, men and materials began moving down the Ho Chi Minhh Trail in ever-greater volume . Men and materials moved down the trail in ever greater volume .
 Giap's strategy was to lure American troops away from their strongholds in urban areas and along the coast by attacking American and ARVN outposts along the DMZ and in the Central Highlands . Diversionary tactics were the last piece of Giap strategy to lure U.
 Giap hoped to conjure up fears of the siege he had mounted on French forces at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . The siege so terrible it had ended the First Indochina War .
 An estimated 200,000 NVA troops and more than 80,000 tons of military supplies were moved into South Vietnam via the trail . Astonishingly, the trail was dismissed by U.S. intelligence agents as North Vietnamese propaganda .
 In January 1968, General Giap put his plan into action, taking ARVN and U.S. forces by surprise in towns and cities throughout the South . Giap's plan took place in Vietnam in 1968 .
 General Giap grew up in a staunchly anticolonial household . Giap was interviewed by St. KARNOW in the New York Times in 1990 .
 His father took part in early uprisings against the French and later died in prison after his arrest for subversive activities . His father was arrested for his involvement in the French revolution .
 One of Giap's sisters also died as a political prisoner and his first wife would perish in a French colonial prison . Giap also died in a prison in France .
 These events had a profound effect on Giap's world view and political leanings, Giap says . Giap: "These events had an impact on the world view of Giap"
 Following in his father's footsteps, Giap was active in politics from an early age . Giap is a former member of the House of Representatives in Vietnam .
 He spent the late 1920s and early 1930s agitating against French rule in Indochina . He joined underground revolutionary groups and spent the time in France .
 Giap secretly returned to Vietnam to organize the Viet Minh spy network, establish a paramilitary force, and start a propaganda campaign against the Japanese-supported government . Giap returned to the country to organize a spy network and establish an anti-Japanese government .
 Vo Nguyen Giap led communist forces to victory in the First Indochina War and the Vietnam War . With the end of World War II, which halted the negotiations with France for independence, Giap and Decorated commander Giap was awarded a posthumous medal .
 A master of guerrilla warfare and one of the great military minds of the 20th century . The most famous guerrilla warfare master master of the war .
 General Vo Nguyen Giap piloted the Vietnamese resistance to the Japanese invasion during World War II . He spearheaded the military insurrection against the French colonists in the 1950s . Giap led NVA and Viet Cong efforts against the United States and its allies during Vietnam War .
 Giap's 1954 victory at Dien Bien Phu is depicted in a propaganda painting on the walls of the old fort . The French held out for 57 days before surrendering to the Viet Minh .
 The Viet Minh launched a decadelong struggle to oust their colonial adversaries . General Giaap talks to the BBC in 2004 about the war in Vietnam .
 Giap took the fight to the French with guerrilla tactics . Showing a natural flare for guerrilla tactics, Giap fought the French in Vietnam .
 As a military strategist, Giap was adept at compelling the opposing army to divide its forces into smaller units spread across a huge area . He could then be isolated and attacked with force .
 Giap's coup de grace was the 1954 battle against the French at Dien Bien Phu, where he achieved a decisive victory with his unconventional battlefield tactics . Giap won the battle with unconventional tactics in the battle against France .
 Giap and his troops may have lost on the field of battle, but they were the clear victors in the propaganda propaganda . Giap lauds ""Heroes of Socialist Labor"" during Hanoi's May Day celebrations in 1968 .
 Giap masterminded the 1972 Easter Offensive and then the 1975 Spring Offensive that would retake Saigon and reunify Vietnam . Giap was the commander in chief of the North Vietnamese Army . He was also the leader of the Vietnamese Army during the Vietnam War .
 In 1975, although the United States had been expelled from Indochina, the threat to Vietnamese sovereignty was not over . After the war, the U.S. continued to threaten Vietnamese sovereignty .
 Hanoi found itself facing threats from former Communist allies . Giap quickly quashed threats by the Khmer Rouge and Chinese in Vietnam .
 Giap retired from his military duties in the early 1980s . Giap persevered in politics for another decade, during which he wrote extensively about military strategy and his own experiences .
 General died in 2013, aged 102, after four years in an army hospital . In 2013, with his health failing, he died aged 102 .
 McNamara decided that the war could only be won by stopping NVA soldiers and supplies from infiltrating South Vietnam . McNamara wanted to stop NVA troops and supplies infiltrating the country .
 Scientists in the Pentagon proposed all kinds of devices to help secure the line . The Pentagon is considering a range of devices that could be used in the future .
 Their aim was to draw U.S. and ARVN forces into these areas and clear the way for a major communist assault on South Vietnam's cities and towns . The aim of this was to to draw United States and ARNN forces in these areas . Their aim is to
 The McNamara Line, as it became known, was intended to link a chain of new or reinforced firebases from the border with Laos to the South China Sea . The line, which is now known as the "McNamara Line," was intended for a chain .
 General Westmoreland was forced to limit the project to firebases at Con Thien, Dak To, and Khe Sanh . North Vietnamese artillery harassed the construction crews to such an extent that the project was limited .
 General Giap and the NVA high command, planning their ""general offensive,"" saw how they could use the American firebases to their advantage . The NVA saw how the U.S. could use their firebase advantage . Giap saw how he could use American fire
 If they could lure U.S. and ARVN units away from their urban strongholds to firebases around South Vietnam, their offensives in Saigon and other major cities would have a greater chance of success .
 U.S. Marines repulsed an intense NVA ground assault with bloody hand-to-hand combat . Located in Quang Tri province just 14 miles inland from the coast and 2 miles south of the DMZ .
 Fighting continued around the firebase throughout the summer . Mobile antiaircraft guns mounted on armored cars were the few ways the North Vietnamese could counter total American domination of the skies above South Vietnam .
 Marines and their ARVN allies launched counterattacks to find and destroy NVA bunkers and artillery emplacements . U.S. Marines and ARVn allies were able to defeat the NVA with counterattacks .
 Thousands of artillery and mortar rounds rained down on the beleaguered Marines from September 19 to September 27 . Marines drove back an NVA ground assault before it could breach the inner defensive wire .
 The NVA targeted American outposts that were vulnerable to siege . The United States forces responded with their Vulnerable to attack . The UVA targeted outposts .
 Khe Sanh, near the Ho Chi Minh Trail, was massively reinforced and its landing strip upgraded through 1967 . The landing strip was upgraded in 1967, and the base was heavily expanded .
 This aerial view was taken in November of that year . It was taken during a massive bombardment from land, sea, and air . The barrage eventually broke the siege .
 A similar situation played out in June 1967 at Dak To firebase in Kontum province, near the Laotian border, not far from the Ho Chi Minhh Trail .
 The siege began with a heavy mortar attack against United States Special Forces stationed there . It began with heavy mortar attacks against U.S. Special Forces .
 Fighting was so intense that United States airborne, infantry, and cavalry units were deployed to hold the firebase and surrounding hilltops . U.S. forces were deployed as well as ARVN forces as well .
 American forces eventually prevailed with a combination of close aerial support and a series of bold sweeps during which they dislodged the NVA from their elevated positions, which were connected by trenches and tunnels .
 The firefight took more than two days to play out and included one of the war's worst friendly-fire incidents . 42 soldiers killed and as many wounded when a U.S. Air Force fighter dropped a bomb on a United States position by mistake .
 The siege was finally lifted during a fierce battle through the first three weeks of November . Heavy casualties were heavy casualties on both sides of the battle .
 Three members of the 173rd Airborne Brigade were posthumously awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for their actions . Three of the brigade's members were killed in the battle .
 The McNamara Line did very little to halt North Vietnamese infiltration or the resupply of Viet Cong forces in the South .
 By October of that year, the whole scheme to create a physical barrier along the DMZ had been abandoned . The whole scheme was abandoned in October .
 The lack of U.S. military power in the area around the DMZ made it even easier for communist forces to move men and materials along the Ho Chi Minh Trail .
 There was never another attempt to construct a defensive barricade between North and South Vietnam . However, there was never a further attempt .
 Their prime target was the ""Saigon Circle,"" which included the United States Embassy and the ARVN headquarters at nearby Bien Hoa . The U.S. Embassy and ARN headquarters were also targets .
 Before the war, South Vietnam's capital felt like a largely French city, with tree-lined avenues, colonial villas, and Catholic churches . Paris of the Orientation was largely French .
 Until 1968, the South Vietnamese capital had been comparatively free of violence . The city of Hanoi was relatively calm until 1968, when the war began .
 Viet Cong secretly entered cities and towns across South Vietnam in readiness for a major offensive scheduled for Tet, the Vietnamese New Year, on January 31 . The Viet Cong were ordered out of their jungle bases by the communist leadership in Hanoi .
 Many ARVN soldiers would be on leave over the holiday and urban areas filled with out-of-town visitors, providing a perfect cover for the civilian-clad Viet Cong to blend in with the general population .
 The infiltration coincided with the announcement of a ceasefire over the Tet holiday by both the Saigon government and the National Liberation Front . Viet Cong troops charge from hiding places in the jungle during the Tet Offensive .
 ARVN infantry supported by U.S. troops in tanks and armored personnel carriers counterattack Viet Cong units in northern Saigon during the Tet Offensive . ARN/Viet Cong units were supported by United States troops in the offensive .
 Fighting in the capital lasted the better part of a week . Political wing of the communists in the South was fighting in capital .
 With South Vietnam lulled into a false sense of security, the stage was set for the massive and unprecedented assault . South Vietnam was lulled by a false security, with the U.S. lulling the nation into false peace zones .
 Due to communication problems, the attack actually began on January 30, a day earlier than scheduled, with raids on U.S. and ARVN bases in towns in the Central Highlands and along the north coast .
 General Westmoreland placed United States forces on high alert and South Vietnam's President Thieu canceled ARVN leave . This led to the U.S. being placed under high alert .
 These measures were enough to quell the initial wave of attacks but not what was to come . These measures are enough for the first wave of terror attacks, but not the first .
 Main offensive erupted across South Vietnam in the early hours of January 31 . The main offensive began in the morning hours of the morning .
 Around 5,000 Viet Cong attacked strategic targets around Saigon, supported by North Vietnamese regulars in the countryside . Offensive included nearly every provincial capital and major city .
 Communist leaders were confident their forces would gain momentum as civilians rose up against the Americans and the Saigon regime . Communist leaders hoped to gain momentum in the fight against Saigon .
 Dozens of South Vietnamese and American government buildings and bases were attacked between 2 and 3m. Attacks were carried out in Vietnam and Vietnam .
 Among the hardest hit were Tan Son Nhut airbase and the adjacent MACV compound, the headquarters of the U.S. high command . The compound is nicknamed Pentagon East on account of its size and importance .
 Other targets included the presidential palace, the United States Embassy, the ARVN headquarters, the national radio station, and the national police barracks . The U.S. Embassy was also targeted .
 The embassies of the Philippines and South Korea, America's allies in the war, were also attacked . America's embassies of South Korea and the Philippines were attacked .
 The number of communist battalions, totaling 35,000 men, in the Saigon Circle at Tet . Using sappers to blast their way through fortified walls and front gates, the Viet Cong r blasted their way into Tet .
 The Viet Cong assembled in local hotels where they were staying under the guise of ordinary holiday visitors . Their task was made easier by the leisurely pace at which ARVN troops returned from their leave and the fact that few U.S. troops returned .
 Some were clad in civilian clothes, others in stolen ARVN uniforms . Some were wearing stolen uniforms . Others were dressed in stolen uniforms.
 Exiting assembly points, the Viet Cong waylaid private cars and taxis to reach their targets . The Viet Cong made their way into their assembly points and ambushed private cars .
 They gunned down South Vietnamese police or American MPs unfortunate enough to stray into their path . Along the way they gunned down police or South Vietnamese MPs . They also gunned down American MPs .
 The vast majority of American combat units were stationed up north where much of the fighting had taken place over the previous six months .
 The city center was held by the ARVN Fifth Rangers and a small detachment of Marines guarding the United States Embassy . General Weyand had boosted the number of troops in the wider Saigon area .
 Most U.S. personnel remaining in Saigon were administrative staff rather than battle-hardened combat troops . Most of the United States personnel remaining was administrative staff .
 The United States had put the ARVN in charge of the defense of Saigon just a few weeks before the Tet Offensive in recognition of its growing confidence in the South Vietnam's army .
 Westmoreland and his staff were forced to take refuge in his command bunkers in the MACV compound . He was forced to live in the bunkers .
 As the fighting around the U.S. headquarters intensified, the general's staff drew . Captured Viet Cong guerrillas are displayed alongside Soviet arms seized during fighting to retake Saigon's Cholon district .
 Among the weapons are automatic rifles, rockets, Sten guns, and ammunition clips . They have joined the last-ditch defense .
 Many of the duties of the central command should be immediately transferred to the United States Army headquarters in Long Binh . Westmoreland mandated that many duties be transferred immediately to the U.S Army headquarters .
 A similar situation was unfolding at the U.S. Embassy in downtown Saigon . Similar situation unfolded at the United States Embassy .
 The Viet Cong blasted their way through the front gate and into the landscaped area surrounding the six-story structure . Armed with mortars, grenades, automatic weapons, and explosive charges, the Viet Cong used mortars and grenades to get into the area .
 South Vietnamese troops and policemen return fire from behind a wall as part of a counterattack against Viet Cong forces in Saigon . As American diplomats sought safety inside, a firefight ensued between the Viet Cong and the Defending .
 ARVN troops were key in repelling the communist attack . With the bulk of U.S. forces deployed elsewhere, ARVNs were key to the victory .
 U.S. troops managed to prevent the attackers from storming the building, but could not immediately drive them from the compound outside . United States troops prevented the attack from entering the building .
 Reinforcements were on their way to the embassy but had no idea of the obstacles they might face along the way . The embassy was in full lockdown .
 The situation was far less desperate at Tan Son Nhut airbase on the outskirts of Saigon . The Seventh Air Force Command had raised its security alert to the highest level just before Tet .
 Viet Cong sappers breached the perimeter and hundreds of attackers flooded into the airbase . USAF reaction forces were able to respond quickly and beat back the attack with relatively little loss of life or damage .
 By daybreak, Saigon was shrouded in smoke from fires sparked by the overnight fighting . The smell of cordite and the sound of gunfire drifted across the capital .
 Entire sections of Saigon were under Viet Cong control, including the Cholon district . Many of the city's ethnic Chinese resided .
 The streets were strewn with the bodies of combatants from both sides and hundreds of civilians caught in the crossfire . The streets of both sides were littered with bodies of people killed in the conflict .
 Civilians who survived the carnage huddled in their shops or houses, tending to wounded family and friends . Civilians huddled in shops or homes to care for wounded .
 Most of the strategic targets around Saigon had been secured and the attackers had been driven back with heavy casualties . By midday on January 31, most of the key strategic targets were secured .
 It took nearly a month to clear Cholon of Viet Cong forces, but within a week American and South Vietnamese forces had recaptured the rest of the Saigon .
 The offensive caused immense destruction and heavy loss of civilian life, but no popular . Civilians sort through the ruins of their shops and homes in the Chinese quarter of Cholon .
 Cholon saw some of the fiercest street fighting during the Tet Offensive . The hub of economic activity in the city was the heart of the fighting .
 In total, an estimated 45,000 NVA and Viet Cong troops were killed, captured, or wounded . The battle was the deadliest of the war in Vietnam .
 Tet Offensive was a massive military defeat for the NVA and the Viet Cong . It also proved a major strategic victory for North Vietnam because of its psychological impact on the American public, media, and politicians .
 The Tet Offensive continued elsewhere through the spring, and erupted again in May . The overall attack, especially the communists' penetration of the United States Embassy compound in Saigon, caused a media firestorm and a profound political backlash .
 In the wake of the atrocities committed against civilians, their political influence also diminished in South Vietnam . The atrocities committed by the South Vietnamese government also diminished . In the aftermath of these atrocities, the political influence in Vietnam diminished .
 After Tet, and as the war went on, the city took on an increasingly American landscape, with bars and military bases . After the war, it became increasingly American .
 English overtook French as the second language after Vietnamese and vehicles came to supersede cydos and handcarts on the streets of Saigon . At the same time, French overtook Vietnamese as a second language at the time .
 As the Tet Offensive exploded across South Vietnam, Saigon came under intense attack from Viet Cong units . January 31, 1968, was the day of the first Tet Offensive .
 Among their foremost targets was the compound of the U.S. Embassy, held by a small contingent of military police and Marines with the help of a handful of embassy staff . Among the foremost targets of the United States Embassy, the compound is the compound .
 Allan Wendt was woken at 2.30 in the morning by an explosion and the sound of masonry falling . Wendt recalls how he reacted to being woken by an enormous explosion in the early hours .
 Rockets were crashing into the building and the embassy was under a full-scale assault . The embassy was in the midst of an attack on the embassy in Syria .
 Estimates put the number of Viet Cong guerillas at 20; they had blown open the wall and were pouring into the compound, firing rockets and AK-47 assault rifles into the building .
 Wendt made numerous phone calls to military assistance command, Washington D.C., Situation Room, State Department . Wendt pleaded for relief with military command headquarters at Tan Son Nhut airport . He also spoke to the Situation Room in the Whitehouse, to the Operations Center in the
 U.S. military police protect the American Consulate adjacent to the United States Embassy in Saigon . As their dead comrades lie nearby, three United States military police patrol the area .
 Images like this one, showing the embassy compound in danger, caused consternation in the U.S. Images show the embassy in danger in the United States .
 United States forces were equipped with a range of standardized small arms . The U.S. armed forces were armed with small arms in the early years of the Cold War .
 This example includes an M1951 entrenching tool and a rolled-up camouflage tent . E 1941 backpack .
 E Tropical WR II class pants are lightweight and comfortable . Made of lightweight fabric, these are designed to offer comfort in tropical combat zones .
 United States infantrymen in Vietnam generally carried at least two canteens . Canteens were carried by the U.S. infantrymen .
 E M1910 aluminum canteen . Old-style canteens remained in use throughout the 1960s . Canteens were used in World War II .
 Combat boots made from nylon and canvas were introduced after leather boots proved unsuitable . E Tropical combat boots are made of nylon, canvas and canvas .
 E Claymore mine bag can be used independently . Once the mine had been detonated, the bag could be used separately .
 EH M61 grenade filled with 5. ounces of explosive . Fragile fragmentation grenade filled in 5.5 ounces of explosives .
 EH M16A automatic rifle became the U.S. Army's standard rifle in 1969 . This became the standard rifle for the United States Army .
 The magazine of the U.S. Army's standard sidearm from 1911 to 1986 holds seven rounds . E3 M1911 pistol .
 EH Ml 4 self-loading rifle was the primary U.S. infantry weapon in Vietnam until the arrival of the Ml 6 . This was the . primary United . States infantry weapon .
 EH M79 grenade launcher could fire a variety of rounds, including explosives and smoke . Nicknamed the Blooper by U.S. troops, the M79 can fire a range of rounds including explosives .
 Extra ammunition distributed across infantry squads to spread the weight . Extra ammunition was distributed to spread out the weight.
 Many Americans lost confidence in the Pentagon's version of events and the ability of U.S. forces to triumph . As a result, many Americans have lost confidence . The Pentagon has been accused of overreacting to events in Afghanistan .
 Photographers Terry Fincher of the Daily Express and Larry Burrows from Life magazine take a break during an operation in 1968 .
 Burrows often followed the same men for extended time periods, such as Captain Vernon Gillespie, to give a more complete glimpse into their lives . Burrows would often follow the same man for extended periods .
 Long before digital cameras were invented, photographers used a variety of sturdy film cameras . A vintage Nikon Model F single lens reflex camera was a favorite of old film photography .
 Photographer Don McCullin took a Viet Cong bullet as it hung from his neck . McCullin's camera saved the life of McCullin, who was shot by the enemy .
 I n 1960, there were more than 52 million American households with TV sets . The majority were black-and-white units, and satellite broadcasts were still a thing of the future .
 Three big nationwide networks (CBS, NBC, and ABC) dominated the airwaves . CBS, NBC and ABC dominated the TV networks in the 1960s .
 News and entertainment programming was conservative and largely conformed to middle class, white American values . It was largely dominated by middle class white Americans in the 1980s .
 Prior to U.S. involvement in Vietnam, American TV technology and culture were relatively primitive . American television technology was relatively primitive.
 The media painted an optimistic picture of eventual and inevitable U.S. victory in Vietnam in the early years of the Vietnam War .
 The Pentagon allowed journalists unprecedented access to Interchangeable lens United States troops, bases, and battlefield operations . Due to this positive coverage, journalists were allowed unprecedented access .
 At the beginning of the war, the Pentagon had no reason to believe that its special relationship with the press would sour . The Pentagon says it's not worried that the war will sour .
 Media coverage of the civil rights struggle and antiwar movement back home was often slanted against the establishment . However, media coverage of this struggle was often skewed against establishment .
 The rise of a popular counterculture press pushed the mainstream media into being critical of U.S. policies . The mainstream media became more critical of the United States policies than it otherwise might have been .
 Negative press coverage of the Vietnam War started before Tet . Negative coverage of Vietnam War in the 1960s and '60s was negative .
 The phenomenon of reporting from the battlefield was not new to the Vietnam War . The use of photography to capture the horrors of combat was also a part of the war .
 The U.S. media's cozy relationship with the military stretched back to the Civil War, when reporters dispatched eyewitness stories from the battlefield .
 Most of the coverage was slanted toward the ""home side" of the Civil War . The Union or Confederacy was the focus of most of the attention given to the Union .
 During World War I, General Pershing allowed reporters to be embedded with his troops on the Western Front, while World War II produced reporters such as Ernie Pyle .
 One of the first war photographers, Roger Fenton, took pictures during the Crimean War in 1854 . War photography had an equally long history .
 President Kennedy tried to pressure the Times into recalling the young reporter . Vice President Johnson inferred he was a traitor . President Kennedy also tried to recall the reporter .
 Halberstam held his ground and won a Pulitzer Prize for his war coverage . Two years later he won a war coverage Pulitzer Prize . He won the Pulitzer Prize in 1973 .
 An ever-growing number of correspondents refused to tow the Pentagon line during the 1960s . Among them were Neil Sheehan and Peter Arnett .
 CBS correspondent Morley Safer accompanied U.S. Marines on a search-and-destroy mission in 1965 . One the most controversial TV reports was broadcast in 1965, when CBS correspondent accompanied United States Marines on the mission .
 Larry Burrows's evocative photos for Life magazine depicted the plight of ordinary GIs in the face of horrible battlefield conditions . Life magazine's Life magazine featured the images .
 The Pentagon's policy of giving reporters extraordinary access would backfire in the wake of the Tet Offensive in 1968 . The Pentagon would give reporters unprecedented access to Vietnam .
 TV images, photos, and stories about the offensive seemed to prove otherwise . Despite claims by American leadership that Tet was a U.S. and ARVN victory, photos and stories seemed to show otherwise .
 The media painted a picture of looming defeat in South Vietnam . Witnessing carnage in the streets of every major South Vietnamese city, the media painted the picture of defeat . The media now painted the media picture of a looming defeat .
 The Tet Offensive radically altered the perception of the war by media stars back home . Many of whom had a great influence over American public opinion . The Tet offensive was the first to take place in Vietnam .
 Walter Cronkite traveled to Vietnam in the aftermath of the Tet Offensive in Vietnam in 1968 . Cronkites aired a scathing report on the state of the war effort in Vietnam .
 The conversion of Cronkite and other media gatekeepers from ambivalent onlookers to antiwar advocates was a major blow to the U.S. effort in Vietnam . The conversion was major blow for the American effort .
 American television evolved by leaps and bounds during the course of the war . General William Westmoor: American television has evolved dramatically since WWII .
 By 1975, more than 71 million households had television . TV revolution began in New York City .
 The launch of the Telstar satellite in 1962 enabled broadcasts from Vietnam . progressive TV shows such as M*A*S*H (set in the Korean War) and All in the Family brought pressing cultural issues and antiwar sentiments into American living rooms .
 Veteran war correspondents were instrumental in launching news shows such as 60 Minutes and CNN, which debuted in 1980 . Later on, veteran war reporters helped launch cable news networks such as CNN .
 One of the most famous images of the Vietnam War captures the moment ARVN General Nguyen Ngoc Loan executes a Viet Cong officer on a street in Saigon . EYEWITNESS February 1, 1968 .
 Eddie Adams recalls the moment he took the shocking image and the impact it had on the general's life . The photographer, Eddie Adams, recalls both the moment and impact of the image .
 Adams was taking occasional pictures as three men walked toward him . Adams says he was taking photos of the men walking toward him in February . Adams: "It's a good thing that you can get your hands on the camera"
 A man walked into his camera viewfinder, took a pistol out of his holster, and raised it to the head of the Viet Cong officer . When they were about five feet away, the soldiers stopped and backed away .
 Adams got ready to take a picture of the man's reaction to a police officer's arrest . Adams says he expects the man to interrogate the officer .
 Adams took the photo of the man who shot the Viet Cong officer in the temple at the same time as Adams took a photo . Adams says the man shot the officer at the time of the photo . But the man also shot the man at the scene of the shooting .
 This photograph had a negative impact on the life of General Nguyen Ngoc Loan . The photograph was taken in Vietnam in 1968 . General Nguyen Nongongong Loan was killed in a helicopter crash .
 Adams claimed he killed the general with his camera that day, and that he felt bad for him and his family for a long time after . Adams claimed to have shot the general in the head with a camera . Adams said he felt sorry for the general's family after his death .
 Photographs capture a moment but they do not ask the viewer what they would have done if they were there at that time and place . Photographs of a moment are often taken without asking what viewers would like to see .
 The image, which contributed to growing antiwar sentiment, won the Pulitzer Prize in 1969 . The image was taken in Vietnam in 1968 .
 Communist forces overran the city of Hue at the start of the Tet Offensive . They held fast in Vietnam's ancient capital for nearly a month . The Battle for Hue was the first major battle of the Vietnam War .
 United States and ARVN forces fought street by street, often hand-to-hand, to oust them . U.S. and N. Korea fought to oust the N. Korean regime of North Korea in 1991 .
 Viet Cong troops storm the Citadel's Ngo Mon Gate at the start of the Tet Offensive . The Tet Offensive was the first major offensive in the Vietnam war .
 The Citadel contained the Tay Loc airfield and the headquarters of the ARVN Rangers, who were also known as the Black Panthers . The Citadel also contained the airfield, which was used by ARVn Rangers, which were known as Black Panthers.
 Hue became Vietnam's imperial capital in the early 19th century when Emperor Gia Long moved his royal court from Hanoi to Hue . Hue became the capital of Vietnam in the 19th Century . Hue was Hue's first imperial capital .
 The Citadel was a fortress-palace complex surrounded by high walls and filled with palaces, temples, and gardens . Started in 1804, the Citadel was the largest palace complex in the world .
 It contained the Imperial City, where the emperor and royal family lived inside the Forbidden Purple Palace . The Imperial City was the site of the Forbidden Palace .
 Hue remained royal capital until 1945, when Emperor Bao Dai abdicated and went to live in exile in Paris . Hue remained the royal capital of Hue until 1945 and Hue remained until 1945 .
 Saigon was the primary objective of the Tet Offensive, but the ancient city of Hue was next in line . Hue was the headquarters of the United States military and the South Vietnamese government .
 The city's imperial history made it highly symbolic, and capturing Hue would show the nation and the world that their struggle was against all forms of imperialism . The NVA and Viet Cong captured Hue to show their struggle against imperialism .
 By the eve of Tet in 1968, some 10,000 Viet Cong guerrillas and NVA regulars had worked their way into clandestine positions all around the city . By the time of Tet, some ten,000 had already been in clandestine positions .
 They launched their assault on Hue shortly after 2.m. on January 31 . Synchronized their attack with many others around South Vietnam .
 Disguised in ARVN uniforms, a small group of NVA soldiers tricked the guards and House-to-house in Hue . United States Marines take refuge in a devastated building during the battle to retake Hue .
 Marine in the foreground wields an M60 machine gun; his companion by the window has an M79 grenade launcher . Marine in front of the window is armed with a grenade launcher and machine gun . Marine also wields a machine gun and two other weapons .
 United States Marines stationed at Phu Bai airbase and other spots within 10 miles of Hue were ordered to reinforce the city . They also came under fire, a combination of ground attacks and rocket-mortar bombardments that kept them pinned down .
 Marines from First Battalion under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Marcus Gravel finally entered the city from the south . Marines from the First Battalion entered the south of the city .
 The Marines reached the south bank of the Perfume River . The Marines are continuing their push to the south of the river .
 Crossing the main bridge, they came under heavy enemy fire and retreated to the MACV compound . The team was attacked by the enemy, but returned to the compound .
 As night fell on January 31, the compound was surrounded by NVA forces . The compound is now surrounded by the NVA .
 There had been no reinforcements for the ARVN troops inside the Citadel . There were also no reinforcements from the forces .
 The third group survived the night was a company of ARVN Black Panther reconnaissance troops . They were defending Tay Loc airfield inside the Citadel . The Black Panther were the last to survive the night .
 General Truong commanding the First Division ordered the Black Panthers to organize a strategic retreat from the airfield and join the defense of the ARVN headquarters . The Black Panthers were ordered to leave the airbase and join forces with the defense .
 The ARVN has not been able to hold out for long . However, there seemed little hope that it would be able to do so again . It is the first time the country has had a long wait for a government solution .
 The popular uprising the communists had hoped to spark elsewhere in South Vietnam actually materialized in Hue . Students, teachers, and Buddhist monks welcomed the attackers .
 The Marines flush out snipers with tear gas during the battle to retake Hue . The Marines are wearing gas masks to protect themselves .
 W. SOMERSEt MAUGHAM gained access through the western gate of the Citadel on the north side of the Perfume River .
 Communist troops pour into sprawling royal compound on hunt for South Vietnamese troops . Communist troops poured into sprawling compound on the hunt for S.Vietnamese troops .
 Other battalions swarmed through the modern town on the south bank with the objective of disabling or destroying Hue's civilian government and any U.S. military presence .
 Hanoi was able to claim that it had liberated a major South Vietnamese city for the first time . It was the first major city to be liberated by a major city in Vietnam .
 Hue was not completely in communist hands . Hue was taken over by the Communist Party of the Second World in 1945 .
 Several battalions of ARVN airborne and infantry engaged communist troops in heavy fighting and eventually broke through into the Citadel and recaptured the airfield . The airfield was recaptured .
 Later that day, they were reinforced by more South Vietnamese troops, flown in under low clouds by Marine helicopters amid heavy mortar fire . The South Vietnamese were reinforced later that day .
 Despite the arrival of the United States Army First Cavalry troops on the western side of the Citadel, progress in retaking the city remained painfully slow over the first few days of February .
 American GIs confronted a warren of snipers, machine-gun nests, spider holes, bunkers, and booby traps . Communist resistance was much tougher than expected, and casualties mounted .
 United States commanders eventually reversed their earlier decision not to bombard the city, but even then they and their ARVN allies had to fight hard . The U.S. eventually reversed its earlier decision to bomb the city .
 U.S. Marine guards Vietnamese civilians caught up in heavy fighting on a residential street in Hue . The Viet Cong base in the commercial district of the commercial city of Hue is located in Hue, Vietnam .
 It was difficult for the U.S. to tell whether civilians were friends or foes . It was hard for the Americans to tell if civilians were friendly or friendly .
 By dawn on February 1, the United States Marines and their ARVN allies had gathered enough troops around Flue to launch a counterattack on the communists . The U.S. Marines and ARVn allies launched a counter-attack on Flue .
 Their biggest challenge was the lack of intelligence regarding the size, power, and placement of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese units inside the city .
 American commanders had little choice but to order their units to advance . U.S. troops were ordered to advance on the battlefield .
 They could not have foreseen that it would take the better part of a month to clear Hue of communist troops or that along the way they would lose one man to every yard .
 Gravel and his men tried to break out of the MACV compound and retake other strategic points in the commercial quarter . But they were thwarted by communist forces that had dug in overnight .
 Marine reinforcements began to arrive on the southern outskirts of Hue, but their progress was slowed by intense street fighting against veteran NVA units . Marine reinforcements arrived but were slowed by fierce street fighting .
 The counterattack was also hamstrung by foul weather, which thwarted air support, and an initial reluctance to use close-quarter bombing and artillery in advance of an attack for fear of causing civilian casualties .
 Mass graves containing government workers, policemen, and anyone suspected of collaborating with the Saigon regime turned much of Hue's civilian population against the NVA and Viet Cong . Quarter of the south bank of the river was finally taken on February 6 .
 Marines crossed the river in assault craft supported by helicopter gunships . By then, the communists had destroyed the last bridge, forcing the Marines to cross the river . The Marines were forced to use assault craft and helicopter gunship to get over the bridge .
 More bloody fighting ensued as the Marines, Army, and ARVN attempted to dislodge the Viet Cong and NVA troops from their well-fortified positions .
 A break in the monsoon cloud enabled close air support from U.S. airbases and carriers in the South China Sea . The tide turned on February 21, when a break in monsoon clouds enabled air support .
 The communists were flushed from the Imperial palace and forced into a last stand in the Citadel's southwest corner . That same day the communists were finally flushed from Imperial palace .
 The handful of NVA and Viet Cong and NVA troops still inside the walls were ordered to retreat under cover of darkness . Troops still in the walls ordered to return under the cover of the darkness .
 Cleanup operations continued in the new town and Citadel until February 25, when the Battle of Hue was finally over . The battle was over February 25 .
 Half the commercial quarter of the city lay in ruins, as did nearly all of the historic monuments in the Citadel . The Citadel was destroyed in the aftermath of the attack .
 The population fled the city, impeding the ARVN defense . Mindful of the atrocities committed during the Tet Offensive, the population fled . The population of the city was wary of atrocities committed in the Tet offensive .
 Postwar projects restored some of Hue's historic buildings . Hue was Hue's first city . Hue is now a city in Hue City .
 UNESCO enshrined the Citadel and nearby royal monuments as a World Heritage Site in 1993 . UNESCO cited the walled city as a remarkable example of the planning and construction of late feudal urban planning in East Asia .
 The Marines have served in nearly every U.S. overseas conflict since the Revolutionary War . The corps was founded in 17th century and has served in almost every war since then .
 On November 10, 1775, the Continental Congress instructed Samuel Nicholas to raise two battalions of seaborne soldiers . The Continental Congress told Samuel Nicholas that he should raise the troops .
 Their nickname leathernecks derives from the stiff neckpieces of their early uniforms . Their nickname Leathernecks is derived from stiff neck pieces of their uniforms .
 In World War I, the Germans called the Marines devil dogs for their ferocious performance at the Battle of Belleau Wood in 1918 . The Marines were called devil dogs by the Germans .
 In World War II, the Marines rose to world renown for their bravery in battles against the Japanese in the Pacific . They rose to fame in the war with the Japanese, winning the most famous battle of the war .
 T he United States Marine Corps was an important component of United States operations in the war . T he U.S. Marines were an important part of the United States .
 Between 1965 and 1975, around 450,000 Marines served in the conflict . Some 13,000 were killed in combat, and more than 88,000 wounded .
 Fifty-seven Marines were awarded the Medal of Honor for bravery under fire . Fifty-sixteen Marines were killed in the battle .
 The Marine Corps is a selfcontained combined-arms force with its own artillery and airpower . It is best known for its infantry—rapid response ground forces that engage in close-range combat .
 The corps is part of the United States Department of the Navy, reflecting its original role of supporting naval campaigns . The corps was formed from the Navy in 1941 .
 In Vietnam, the vast majority of Marine recruits were volunteers, typically between the ages of 18 and 20 . The majority of the Marine recruits in Vietnam were volunteers .
 They signed up for a minimum of three years, although this was reduced to two during the buildup of U.S. troops in 1965 and again in 1967 . The men signed up to a minimum three years .
 Recruits were put through rigorous training at Parris Island Recruit Depot, South Carolina, or its sister establishment in San Diego, California . Would-be recruits had to undergo physical and mental stamina .
 The four-month program included an 80-day boot camp, cut to 60 days during parts of the war . The program included a mandatory hair cut and drill .
 Further training in combat skills included long-range shooting, a specialty of Marines . Further training was required for the Marines .
 Rifleman's Creed is a guiding doctrine avowing the pact between man and gun . This included learning to learn the rifle's Creed, a doctrine avowed between the sexes .
 The 'devil dogs' of the Ninth Marine Expeditionary Brigade were met by TV crews and welcome banners held by grateful South Vietnamese .
 It was not long before they were engaged in counterinsurgency activities and open combat against Viet Cong guerrillas and NVA regulars .
 Operation Starlite in August 1965 was a mission to interdict and destroy Viet Cong forces massed around Chu Lai air base south of Da Nang . Their first major offensive, Operation Starlite, was the mission to kill and destroy the Viet Cong . The U.S.
 By the end of 1965, the initial force of Marines had been augmented by units under the aegis of the III Marine Amphibious . “They are called the Viet Cong, but you are Marines.” said the Marine Corps .
 By the end of the war, United States strategic interest had begun to shift to the Middle East . U.S. strategic interest began to shift toward the region .
 13 Marines were among 65 Americans taken captive when Iranian revolutionaries stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 . Thirteen Marines were taken hostage during the embassy invasion of Iran in 1979.
 Later that year, Marines took part in the U.S. invasion of Grenada in the Caribbean .
 General Westmoreland sent combined action platoons on search-and-destroy missions in the countryside . The combined action squadrons were sent out on search and destroy missions .
 Typically, they were equipped with M-16 rifles, M60 machine guns, Ka-Bar combat knives, grenades, grenades and machetes .
 Communist forces attacked Marine bases along the DMZ prior to the Tet Offensive . The Marines faced their biggest challenge in 1967 and 1968, when communist forces attacked .
 They repelled a fierce attack on Con Thien, endured a brutal 77-day siege at Khe Sanh, and ousted NVA and Viet Cong troops from Hue in bloody house-to-house fighting . They also endured a grueling 77 days-long siege at the base of
 By the summer of 1969, Marine units began to withdraw from the war zone, though they formed part of the invasion of Cambodia in 1970 . Marine units were withdrawn from the Vietnam War .
 Most of the last ground units left Vietnam on June 25, 1971, leaving a small GRUNT Slang for a member of the Marine Corps fighting in Vietnam .
 Later in the war, it was applied to all U.S. soldiers on the frontline to guard the United States Embassy .
 Twenty-six Marines were among the POWs handed over by North Vietnam after the 1973 peace treaty was signed .
 Marines distinguished themselves again during the evacuations of the U.S. embassies in Saigon and Phnom Penh . In April 1975, the Marines were part of the rescue of the USS Mayaguez from the Khmer Rouge .
 Marine aerial and ground units led the invasion of Iraq during the First Gulf War . They were called upon again during the Iraq War that toppled Saddam Hussein . The Iraq War was the first Gulf War and second Gulf War in Iraq .
 Marines are still active in Iraq as well as in the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan . Marines are active in both Iraq and Afghanistan . The U.S. Marines are currently serving in both countries .
 Marines raise the Stars and Stripes while a bugler renders honors to the nation atop Hill 881, near Khe Sanh, in January 1968 . The U.S. Marines were deployed to Vietnam in 1968 .
 The United States Marines continue to be a vital part of American military action overseas . The U.S. Marines have been involved in the fight in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Frank Petersen graduated from the Naval Aviation Cadet Program in 1952 . Petersen was the Marine Corps' first African American aviator . Petersen is credited with saving the lives of his fellow servicemen and women in the Navy .
 In Vietnam, he was forced to bail out when his aircraft was shot down on a 1968 mission . He flew a McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom, where he flew in Vietnam .
 He survived, and that same year became the first African American to command the Black Knights squadron . That same year, he was the first Black Knights commander .
 When ARVN troops eventually entered the imperial palace, they found the communists had already slipped away . ARVn troops eventually found communists had slipped away from the palace .
 Approximately 1,000 U.S. military women who were not nurses served in-country in Vietnam from 1962 to 1973 .
 Women were not allowed to serve in combat positions, but nonetheless fulfilled a variety of key support roles . Women were also allowed to play in support roles for the U.S.
 World War II saw the first American WAC detachment activated in a war zone . The WAC was the first to be activated in the war zone during the war period .
 Vietnam was only the second U.S. war to utilize a WAC detachment . Vietnam was the second United States war to use the WAC in Vietnam .
 While willing to serve in Vietnam, many women were ill prepared for the realities of a combat zone . Many women were unprepared for the reality of the combat zone.
 Basic training consisted of classes on ironing, deportment, make-up application, manners, hairstyles, and speech .
 Like the men, women experienced the stresses of life in a combat zone . Women walked by body bags, seeing the wounded, and hearing the incoming choppers .
 They also battled challenges unique to their gender, including sexism, harassment, and sexual violence . However, they also battled issues such as sexual violence, harassment and sexual assault .
 She was one female soldier among more than 10,000 U.S. military personnel in Vietnam in 1962 . She served in Vietnam as one of the country's first female soldiers .
 Major Kathleen Wilkes and Sergeant First Class Betty Adams, stepped off the plane to serve as advisers to the newly formed Vietnam Women's Armed Forces Corps . Major Wilkes, Sgt. First Class Adams and Sgt. Second Class Wilkes will be advisers to Vietnam's newly formed women's Armed
 General Westmoreland soon decided to bring over more women as stenographers . General Westmoreland eventually decided to introduce more women stenographers to the stenographers in the US .
 First Sergeant Crawford jokes with Captain Ready to aim at the target, not the men, who spread to the four winds" upon seeing women with weapons .
 They arrived in 1966 and 1967, followed by many others in the ensuing years . They were the first to arrive in the U.S. in the 1960s .
 The WAC Detachment was established at Tan Son Nhut airbase and moved to Long Binh for greater safety after the Viet Cong breached the compound in 1967 . The Viet Cong broke into the airbase in 1967 and the WAC was established in 1968 .
 Captain Peggy Ready was the first Detachment commander in Vietnam, and Marion Crawford was her First Sergeant . Marion Crawford served as the first First Sergeant in Vietnam .
 Officers who agreed to have female staff members discovered that these women were highly competent and would work long hours without complaint . Officers agreed to work without complaint, finding that they were highly competent .
 The women took on a variety of roles, serving as intelligence analysts, translators, clerks-typists, flight controllers, couriers, physical therapists, or photographers . The women were able to serve in a range of roles from intelligence analysts to flight controllers .
 Senior military leaders did not believe women, other than nurses, should serve in a combat zone . Soon, many of the male holdouts wanted women assigned to their staff, even though senior military leaders didn't .
 The success of the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy women has brought more women to the U.S. military .
 Within a year, they were wearing jungle fatigues, boots, and helmets, and knew the fastest route to their bunkers during rocket attacks . Within a few months, they had learned the fastest way to bunkers in order to survive rocket attacks.
 The majority of Army Women were assigned to Long Binh and Saigon, although some were stationed in distant places, such as Saigon . The number of United States women who served with the U.S. Marine Corps in Vietnam was 5.5 .
 In addition to Army women, the Air Force sent women to Vietnam, Thailand and Hawaii .
 The Navy sent eight female officers, as well as four who served on the USS Repose and USS Sanctuary . The Navy also sent four female officers .
 June Hilton, Carol Hornick, Rita Pitcock, Barbara Snavely, Shirley J Brown, and Eva Nordstrom are among the stars .
 Lieutenant Commander Barbara Bole was the first Navy woman to get the Bronze Star with Combat ""V"" in Vietnam . In 1970, Army Colonel Clotilde Dent Bowen, MD, arrived in Vietnam to be chief psychiatrist in the Army .
 Air Force Major Barbara Thompson became the first female engineer to be assigned to the Rapid Engineer Deployable, Heavy Operations Repair Squadron . Thompson is the first woman in the Air Force to become an engineer .
 The service of these women paved the way for U.S. military women thereafter a ""baby killer"" by protesters . Protesters call the service of the women a "baby killer"
 The total number of U.S. women who served in Vietnam is unknown .
 United States Army records are lost, while the Air Force records exist only in paper archives . The Air Force is also lost in the United States .
 The Vietnam-era guidon was lost for years before it was returned to the United States Army Women's Museum . It was returned, no questions asked, to the museum .
 Military women in Vietnam opened doors to later wars . Military women opened doors for later wars in Vietnam . Vietnam women helped open doors for other wars .
 Congress disestablished the WAC as a separate corps in 1978, and women now constitute about 15 percent of the U.S. military . The WAC was disestablished in 1978 .
 Sherri Tipton recalled being called Dulinsky was the first woman Marine to serve in a combat theater . She was called frauds or liars simply for wearing the combat patch they had earned, and were subjected to harsh criticism . Sherri was called a fraud or a liars
 U.S. Marines at Khe Sanh scramble to take shelter from incoming fire . U.N. Marines are at the top of the world's most dangerous places .
 In 1966, Khe San was reinforced with large numbers of Marines; the Green Berets moved to Lang Vei, a few miles west . The Khe San base was reinforced in 1966, with Marines, Marines, and Green Beretts in 1968 .
 Khe Sanh and the nearby Special Forces camp of Lang Vei had come under attack by communist forces through the summer and fall of 1967 . L ike other combat bases along the DMZ, Khe . Sanh was attacked in the summer, fall of that year .
 United States forces had successfully counterattacked, supported by aerial bombing . U.S. forces had succeeded in counterattacking in the area .
 There was no reason for the U.S. to believe that the action around Khe Sanh in January 1968 would be any different from these earlier battles .
 The geography of Khe Sanh and Dien Bien Phu was remarkably similar—isolated hilltop forts near the Laotian frontier, surrounded by old coffee plantations and jungle .
 Giap also resolved that the 304th Division of the NVA—heroes of Dien Bien Phu—should be one of two NVA divisions (totaling around 18,000 troops) that would launch the strike . Giap: The 304th would be one
 Route 9 is the only overland route to Khe Sanh from U.S. bases on the coast . Two more divisions, with similar troop strength, were positioned to block Route 9 . Route 9 was the only route to the base from the United States bases . The two more divisions
 The NVA destroyed the Marines' ammunition dump and other vital supplies . No significant ground was gained, but the NVA gained significant ground . The Marines lost significant ground in the battle .
 Khe Sanh commander Colonel David Lownds reacted to the initial assault by evacuating civilians and calling in more Marines and elite ARVN Rangers, boosting allied numbers to around 6,000 men .
 Over the week that followed, the communists tightened the noose around Khe Sanh and Lang Vei . The communists crept closer to the base's perimeter until their trenches were only 1,000 yards from their opponents .
 Ihese maps accompanied reports of the battle circulated by the United Press International news agency . As a prelude to a a a Mapping the battle, maps were accompanied by reports .
 A large number of journalists risked their lives to report on the siege . The siege received more media coverage than any other combat zone during the let Offensive .
 Low cloud and fog impeded close U.S. air support, allowing the NVA to capture the road between the two bases, thus isolating Lang Vei . The road was captured by NVA, which is now isolated from the base base .
 The U.S. airlift continued whenever weather permitted . The planes and helicopters dodged incoming fire from the Taliban in the early 1990s .
 As Tet Offensive exploded across the rest of South Vietnam on January 30 and 31, the area around Khe Sanh remained eerily calm . The Tet Offensive was the second major offensive in Vietnam's history .
 The hill, W r . named after its height in meters, is where U.S. forces came under attack on January 21 and February 5 . Two days later, thousands of ground troops from the NVA's ground troops arrived on the hill . The hill was attacked by U.
 304th Division attacked Lang Vei, supported by light tanks, in battle of Khe Sanh . The opposing armies fought fiercely for control of the heights around the heights . 304th division attacked LangVei, supporting light tanks and heavy artillery .
 By late afternoon, the NVA had broken through the perimeter and was overrunning the camp . The camp was overrun by the UVA, which is now in control of the area .
 With the NVA in control of the road and nightfall closing in, relief by ground or air from Khe Sanh was impossible . Nightfall was closing in and it was impossible for relief by air or ground .
 Faced with certain defeat and probably slaughter, the Green Beret commander called for a blistering artillery barrage on his own base . The commander ordered his troops to retreat into the jungle . He called for an artillery barrage to be directed on the base and called for retreat .
 At sunrise on February 8, the situation looked bleak for the U.S. soldiers at Khe Sanh . The situation was looking bleak at the beginning of the month .
 The nearby Special Forces camp at Lang Vei had been utterly destroyed with great loss . The main firebase was surrounded by tens of thousands of communist troops, and Route 9 to the coast was blocked . Route 9 was blocked by communist troops .
 Tet Offensive had been blunted nearly everywhere else in the South by early February . There was no sign of a communist retreat from the warren of bunkers and zigzag trenches around Khe Sanh .
 Giap's forces continued to inch closer to the American lines . Under cover of darkness, foul weather, and artillery attacks, Giap forces inched closer .
 The Marines dug in for the siege, hunkering down in muddy bunkers strewn with garbage that attracted legions of rats . Operation Niagara was dubbed Operation Niagara by the U.S. Marines .
 The lack of proper sanitation led to infections and disease, while the constant stench and noise of explosives pushed defenders to the brink of mental breakdown . The constant noise and stench of explosives led to the death of defenders .
 The U.S. responded to the initial attack and siege with the only logical means, a massive air strike . The United States responded with the first logical means—a massive air strikes .
 Operation Niagara entailed thousands of sorties by B-52 bombers flying from bases in Guam and Thailand and by fighter-bombers based in South Vietnam . Operation Niagara was codenamed Operation Niagara .
 Together they dropped more than 110,000 tons of ordnance onto NVA positions around Khe Sanh, often close to the base itself .
 U.S. soldiers set fire to Vietnamese huts between Khe Sanh and the coast during Operation Pegasus . The vast majority of Giap's troops who lost their lives during the siege were killed by conventional bombs . Hide and seek United States troops set fire in Vietnam .
 After the bombing, Marines combed the area around Khe Sanh, flushing out any NVA troops hiding in the villages . and napalm. and . napalm . The bombing was the first to hit the area, and the second to flush out the NVA . Marines comb
 The bombardment destroyed large amounts of weaponry and supplies of ammunition . The bombardment also destroyed large quantities of their weaponry and ammunition .
 Giap's forces made a final effort to storm Khe Sanh on February 29 . Giap forces made an attempt to storm the base in Vietnam .
 The 304th Division launched a ground attack along the eastern edge of the base . The 304rd Division was hero of Dien Bien Phu and Lang Vei .
 After heavy fighting, they were beaten back by the ARVN Rangers stationed there . The ARVn Rangers were defeated by heavy fighting .
 Operation Pegasus kicked off Operation Pegasus to recapture Route 9 between the coast and Khe Sanh . The siege and its incessant shelling continued through early April, when the U.S. Army's First Cavalry Division began Operation Pegasus .
 Army and Marine engineers built a forward base with a landing strip just north of Ca Lu off Route 9 . The feat was achieved in just 11 days, with engineers building the landing strip .
 Going into the jungle in small patrols, the U.S. forces incurred far higher casualities than during the siege itself .
 As communist shelling of the base resumed, the United States high command decided to abandon and destroy the combat base rather than risk another costly siege . The U.S. high command also decided to destroy the base .
 The final troops were evacuated on July 5 and a few days later the North Vietnamese flag was raised over the ruined combat base . North Vietnamese flags were raised over ruined base in July .
 This shoulder patch recalls the division's descent from horse-mounted cavalry, used for the last time in World War I . It was valued for agility and rapid response, and was used for agility .
 Tet Offensive marked a watershed in the war . Despite siege being lifted, fighting continued around Khe Sanh as Marines and Army units fought .
 Following Khe San, General Westmoreland ordered United States troops to abandon combat bases along the McNamara Line . Following the fall of the Korean Peninsula, U.S. troops were ordered to abandon the line of combat bases .
 In addition to the cost in human lives, bombing and napalm destroyed much of the rainforest surrounding Khe Sanh . The rainforest was also destroyed by napalm .
 Over the decades, the jungle reclaimed many of the bomb craters . Much of the military ordnance left on the battlefield was collected and sold or repurposed by the hilltribes of the area .
 As part of the Tet Offensive, the North Vietnamese Army subjected the isolated Marine base of Khe Sanh to daily shelling for six weeks . V. V. eyewitness tells of the six-week siege .
 Sometimes there was little that the besieged Marines could do but hunker down in their sandbag bunkers . The U.S. bombing campaign to repel the NVA eventually prevailed .
 Marines filling sandbags were caught by the first shell burst, and exploding rockets sent showers of hot fragments everywhere . Marines fill sandbags in the bunkers, Marines filled sandbags .
 The marines tried to make themselves as small as possible by hugging their legs and bowing their heads . Meanwhile, inside the bunkers, the marines hugged their legs, bowed their heads and hugged each other .
 As the tempo of the shelling increased, in their minds the small opening to the bunker seemed to grow . The 6,000 sandbags over the bunker seem dangerously thin, they say .
 When the shells stopped, a few men climbed out of the bunker and checked if more dead or wounded men were outside . The men were able to find out if they had been killed or wounded in the attack .
 Three U.S. Marines arriving to reinforce besieged stronghold at Khe Sanh drop their duffel bags to run for shelter as a rocket explodes nearby . Three Marines are seen running for shelter from the blast .
 The Americans built artillery bases as defensive strong points . They allowed infantry patrols to order strikes against enemy targets . The bases were built as strong points to allow infantry to attack targets .
 The Type 31 60 mm mortar was captured from the Viet Cong by Australian troops in 1968 .
 The NVA also used this Soviet howitzer . E BM-21 Grad rocket launcher .
 Ml 16 howitzer was used by the Viet Minh against French forces in World War II . Supplied to Chinese forces in WWII, this American howitzer used by French forces .
 E Ml 14 155mm 155mm howitzer developed during World War II . Developed during WWII, it remained in widespread service with U.S. forces . Ml
 White phosphorus was used to create smoke screens . E Mortar smoke shells were used in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Artillery pieces like the Ml 14 fired 155mm shells . Ell Howitzer shells fired at 155mm rounds . Ellitzer shells were fired by artillery pieces .
 Each side refused to compromise on key starting points in negotiations . Negotiations have proved no easy feat with each side refusing to compromise .
 The negative press of the Tet Offensive gave Johnson a reason to once again seek conciliation . Johnson sought conciliation with the South Korean government after the attack .
 President Johnson announced a partial halt to the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam on March 31, 1968 . President Johnson hoped to lead to peace negotiations with Hanoi and a rapid de-escalation of conflict .
 Johnson had attempted in 1965 and again in 1967 to halt the bombings and appeal for peace talks . Johnson's earlier overtures had failed to lead to a resolution .
 It is to save the lives of brave men, and to save lives of innocent women and children, says President Obama . It's to save men's lives and women's lives, Obama says .
 Despite failing to achieve its military objectives, the Tet Offensive had achieved its major political aim . The Tet Offensive was largely neutralizing the Viet Cong as a fighting force . The address was a remarkable (if perhaps unintentional) admission on Johnson's part .
 In the eight weeks since the offensive, the United States media had turned against the war . In the past eight weeks, the U.S. media has turned against Syria .
 Johnson pushed for peace rather than extend a war that seemed unwinnable . Johnson pushed to end the war with the U.S. rather than end it, he said .
 Several locations suggested as potential settings for the peace negotiations, including Warsaw and Phnom Penh . The negotiations are scheduled to take place in Poland and Cambodia .
 The talks unfolded at the Majestic Hotel near the Arc de Triomphe . Officially called the International Conference on Vietnam, the talks unfolded in Paris .
 French would be the official language of the conference . French President Charles de Gaulle was hosting the meetings at the time .
 William Averell Harriman, former U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union and Great Britain, headed up a delegation that also included future secretary of state Cyrus Vance . Discussions stalled at the end of the trip .
 The North Vietnamese team was led by former foreign minister Xuan Thuy, whom the U.S. would soon come to view as a major obstacle to their goals during the peace process . On the other side of the table, the United States would soon be looking at the North Vietnamese .
 Diplomats on both sides hoped the talks would bring a quick end to the war in Indochina . Diplomats hope the talks will bring an end to a long-running war in Vietnam .
 Both sides refused to budge from their original positions after weeks of negotiations .
 The major sticking point for the United States was the refusal of Xuan Thuy and his team to immediately withdraw all North Vietnamese troops from below the DMZ . The U.S. refused to recognize the legitimacy of the Saigon government .
 Delegates from both sides gather in May 1968, under the crystal chandeliers in the ballroom of the Hotel Majestic in Paris .
 Once a palace owned by Isabella II of Spain, the hotel belonged to the French government from 1936 to 2008 . The hotel was once owned by the Spanish queen and later owned by France .
 The war would continue for five years before peace accords took the U.S. out of Vietnam . The primary hurdles to reaching an agreement were the United States balking at a proposal to include the National Liberation Front in a coalition government .
 The peace talks were held against a backdrop of chaos in the streets of Paris that nearly toppled Charles de Gaulle's government . The peace negotiations were held in the aftermath of the Paris riots .
 Student demonstrations and general strikes brought the entire country to a standstill for the better part of two weeks in the middle of May . Student demonstrations coupled with widespread general strike brought the country to standstill .
 Talks stalled for four months, until November, when Johnson agreed to suspend all bombing and end Operation Rolling Thunder . Johnson agreed in November to end the bombing campaign .
 Nguyen Thi Binh crashed the peace talks on behalf of the National Liberation Front (the political arm of the Viet Cong) and eventually got a place at the table . She crashed the talks and got a seat at the negotiating table .
 A skilled diplomat, she has served two terms as the vice president of Vietnam in the postwar era . She is a skilled diplomat and has served as a vice president in Vietnam since 1968 .
 The May Offensive was also known as Little Tet, the May Offensive, or Phase Two of the Tet Offensive . Striking against more than a hundred targets, it was also called Little Tet or Little Tet . The Tet Offensive was the second phase of the Vietnam War .
 Tan Son Nhut airbase, on the outskirts of Saigon, was the most important base in Vietnam . The United States had bases across South Vietnam, but Tan Son was the biggest . The U.S. had bases in Vietnam before the war .
 By the 1930s, Tan Son Nhut was the primary air gateway into southern Vietnam, served by carriers such as Air-Orient . By the 1950s, Air-Air was the main air gateway to southern Vietnam .
 It became an American base in 1961, and in 1967 became the headquarters of United States' Military Assistance Command Vietnam . captured part of Tan Son Nhut airbase and Kham Due in the Central Highlands .
 The NVA's attack on Saigon unfolded in the hours before dawn on May 6, as communist troops infiltrated the city via several routes, including Phu Tho racetrack and French cemetery .
 Using rockets, mortars, sniper fire, and ground troops, Viet Cong units attacked the western and southern perimeters of the base and engaged United States and ARVN troops in heavy fighting . The U.S. base was attacked by the Viet Cong using rockets and mortars .
 The defenders responded quickly and by late afternoon had stemmed the attack . Although parts of the airfield were damaged by rocket fire, the defenders returned quickly .
 Kham Due in the Central Highlands west of Da Nang was the only remaining U.S. Special Forces base along the Ho Chi Minh Trail . After the first phase of the Tet Offensive, Kham Due was the last remaining United States Special Forces Base .
 On May 10, the Viet Cong attacked and overran Ngok Tavak, an outlying post manned by a small Australian unit . The attack took place on May 10 in the area .
 Fearing that a major assault was imminent, airborne U.S. reinforcements were rushed to protect Kham Due . Kham Due was captured by the Soviets in 1991 .
 By the morning of May 11, the base was completely surrounded by Viet Cong and NVA forces, who unleashed a blistering rocket and mortar attack on the base . The base was surrounded by NVA and Viet Cong forces .
 Coinciding with the barrage, they began to capture isolated hilltop outposts around Kham Due .
 General Westmoreland and the U.S. high command decided to evacuate the base . Determined that it was not as easily defendable as Khe Sanh, General Westmister decided to .
 More than 1,500 personnel were kept at bay by U.S. B-52 strikes, close air support, and helicopter gunships kept the communists at bay . Surrounded, outmanned, and outgunned, the United States executed a chaotic air assault .
 Nine United States aircraft were lost to enemy fire during the evacuation . Nine U.S. aircraft were killed in the evacuation.
 Lieutenant Colonel Joe M Jackson landed his C-123 under heavy fire on the airfield to retrieve three members of a combat control team who had been left behind .
 Rather than trying to capture or disrupt Tan Son Nhut airbase or other U.S. facilities, the Viet Cong concentrated their efforts on Cholon, the city's main ethnic Chinese district . Rather than capturing or disrupting the airbase, they were trying to target ethnic Chinese districts
 Once a horse racing venue enjoyed by French officials, the track in western Saigon was later used to land helicopters from attack . The Viet Cong took refuge inside Buddhist temples during the war .
 ARVN and U.S. troops gradually drove them from the city . The assumption proved wrong, however, and they were eventually driven out of the country .
 Better intelligence gathering in the wake of the first Tet Offensive enabled U.S. and ARVN forces to intercept NVA units before they could reach targets .
 Many of these attempts were short-lived in the May offensive . However, just as in May offensive, many attempts were made to get back on track .
 At the end of 1968, both sides had gained little from the offensives, and at the expense of great loss of life . Both sides had lost little, but both sides gained little, with the loss of lives .
 Tan Son Nhut would once again be at the center of the action in 1975 . Tan Son was once again in charge of the Vietnamese government's evacuation operation .
 When it was reoccupied by U.S. infantrymen in July 1970—during Operation Elk Canyon I and II—patrols were sent to look for missing men .
 The bodies of crewmen from the Butcher crash were found in the 1990s, and were finally buried in the United States in 2008 . The bodies were buried in 2008, and the bodies of the crewmen were finally found .
 U.S. Air Force VETERAN SAM MCGOWAN, on the EVACUATION of KHAM DUC, on October 31, 2015, on CNN.com.com .
 P acification programs were designed to win over local people and lessen their desire to revolt . The programs were intended to lessen the desire for revolt .
 They encouraged people to live peaceably and cooperate with U.S. and ARVN forces in spite of a turbulent situation . They said people should cooperate with United States and ARVs forces .
 Early programs had not been especially effective, leading the U.S. to devise new ways to win the ""hearts and minds"" of South Vietnam's rural population .
 Civil Operations and The ""hearts and minds"" campaign developed out of earlier civilian pacification programs launched by United States forces . Foremost among these was the Civil Operations .
 The United States first experimented with proactive pacification techniques during the Philippine—American War . The U.S. tried to win over the populace by building schools and public works .
 From the very start, the programs concentrated on a rural, peasant population long abused under French colonial rule . Most likely to have political, social, and economic gripes about the South Vietnamese regime .
 J Revolutionary Development Support program created by U.S. Ambassador Flenry Cabot Lodge in 1967 . Program was created by United States ambassador to France in 1968 .
 White Flouse Special Assistant Robert Komer was brought to Vietnam to head the program . White House was brought in to Vietnam by the White House . Komer is a Vietnam veteran .
 CORDS integrated personnel from the military intelligence into the CORDS team . CORDS is the largest intelligence agency in the United States. CORDS was founded in 1983 .
 Central Intelligence Agency and a number of South Vietnamese agencies into teams that could gather and assess intelligence data . Teams could gather intelligence data, in cooperation with operatives and advisory teams in the field .
 The program is tasked with growing the People's Self-Defense Force militias in rural areas . The program was tasked with . growing the . People's self-defense Force militias .
 CORDS' first priority was the resettlement of displaced Montagnard tribespeople . The other major priority for CORDS in 1968 was the resettlement of displaced Montagnard tribal tribespeople .
 Militia patrol the perimeter of the hamlet of Kien Dien to discourage Viet Cong infiltration . Female volunteers of the People's Self-Defense Force patrol . Militia patrol Female volunteers .
 By 1972, the PSDF's combat arm numbered around one million people, with another 2 million in support roles . The PSDF was one of the most powerful units in the country's armed forces .
 At the same time, the U.S. Agency for International Development made a push to bring modern health care into villages across South Vietnam .
 Their work ranged from efforts to eradicate malarial mosquitoes to staffing and equipping rural aid stations and hospitals . Their work was to staff aid stations, hospitals and to staff malarial mosquito eradication .
 CORDS was the Hamlet Evaluation System —through which the U.S. collected and analyzed data on more than 9,000 hamlets and villages across South Vietnam . CORDS is one of the offspring of CORDS, a system that collected data on hamlets .
 Given the pressure on advisers to increase security in their zone, it was inevitable that data was frequently inflated .
 American Gl interacting with a Vietnamese child as she uses the antibomb sandbags in front of her home as a playground . hamlets under total communist control were not included in the system .
 The evacuation of rural areas, a massive flow of refugees to coastal and urban areas, impacted the CORDS program . The diversion of personnel and funding to the counterattacks impacted the program .
 Once the NVA offensive was thwarted, the program regained momentum . The program regained its momentum .
 It also utilized two types of local militia—Regional Forces and Popular Forces . RuffPuffs to their American advisers— grew into an effective fighting force .
 CORDS could provide some security for villages vulnerable to Viet Cong attacks . Through them, CORDS will provide security for vulnerable villages . CORDS is based in the United States .
 CORDS mostly failed to convince Viet Cong troops and other communist sympathizers to come to the side of the U.S. and South Vietnamese . CORDS failed when it came to convincing communists to join the United States in Vietnam .
 Although the concept had mixed results in Vietnam, the U.S. would use ""hearts and minds"" as a nonviolent companion to military might in later conflicts . The United States would use the concept as a non-military companion in the future .
 Provincial Reconstruction Teams became a cornerstone of U.S. policy in both Afghanistan and Iraq . Provincial Reconstruction teams were first established in 2002 . Reconstruction Teams were established in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 PRTs build schools and hospitals, distribute aid, and assist farmers . PRTs are made up of members of the U.S. military, diplomats, civilian advisers, and representatives of USAID and other government agencies. PRTs help build schools, hospitals and distribute aid .
 The Phoenix Program was a systematic drive to destroy the political structure of the Viet Cong and root out communist sympathizers . The result was the Phoenix Program, which destroyed the political structures of the communist party . The Phoenix program was the result of a systematic effort to root out communists .
 Phoenix Program's mandate went much further than previous intelligence initiatives . The Phoenix Program was a predecessor to the CIA's "Air Force One" program .
 As well as authorizing the detention of communist agents and sympathizers, it sanctioned their torture and assassination . The U.S. government also sanctioned the torture and assassinations of those who were communist agents .
 Phoenix personnel in any operation was to identify communist leadership in each province, district, and village . The first task of Phoenix personnel is to identify the communist leadership .
 The Central Intelligence Agency was involved in Indochina long before the first U.S. military advisers or troops arrived . Thousands of committees were set up to gather information on the situation .
 CIA opened its first covert station in Saigon in 1954 . Saigon was the CIA's first covert base in the country .
 A year later, the agency laid the initial groundwork for a ""secret war"" in Laos against communist forces . The war would last nearly 20 years . The agency laid groundwork for the 'secret war'
 Project Tiger inserted South Vietnamese spies into North Vietnam from the late 1950s . Under Project Tiger, the agency inserted spies into the North Vietnam . Project Tiger was the brainchild of the CIA .
 1965 Viet Cong badge made of brass and enamel carries the phrase ""National Liberation" and the red, blue, and gold Viet Cong flag .
 Phoenix Program established to compile lists of names of individuals . Such open allegiance became less common once the Phoenix Program was established .
 In theory, accusations had to be confirmed by at least three independent sources before suspects could be interrogated . Three independent sources had to confirm accusations before suspects were interrogated .
 The PRU then took the accused to a provincial interrogation center, where he or she could be detained for up to two years without trial . The accused could be held without trial for two years in a provincial center .
 Their members in South Vietnam were assigned to districts in which they already had contacts . Their members were assigned in districts where they already have contacts .
 Much of the countryside, especially around the Mekong Delta, was effectively controlled by the Viet Cong . The Viet Cong controlled much of the country's countryside .
 At the outset of the program, J it was estimated that around 70,000 individuals were actively working for the communists in South Vietnam . Thousands of sympathizers performed small duties or favors .
 PRUs used enhanced interrogation techniques to extract information from captives . Many of these techniques were considered torture under the Geneva Convention governing the treatment of civilians in war . PRUs were used to interrogate prisoners in secret .
 These torture methods included waterboarding, electric shocks, starvation, sodomy, and gang rape . Torture methods include waterboarding and electric shocks and starvation .
 PRUs used information obtained through such methods to identify other communist leaders and collaborators . The PRUs were used to identify communist leaders .
 PRUs were authorized to eliminate suspects by any means they deemed necessary . Suspects could not be detained, persuaded to surrender, or seek amnesty .
 Many of those who were detained, tortured, or assassinated under Phoenix were noncommunist opponents of the South Vietnamese regime . Phoenix was Phoenix, Vietnam's first state-sanctioned state of martial law .
 Villagers sometimes falsely accused neighbors out of revenge or for other personal reasons, often incriminating whole families . Villagers often falsely accuse neighbors of crimes out of anger or revenge .
 Informants were also paid for their information, leading to more false accusations . Others were persuaded to make accusations in order to avoid their own torture or death . Informants also paid to make false accusations, while others were persuaded by their information .
 At one point, police were required to identify several thousand suspects every month . At one time, they had to identify thousands of suspects a month .
 Phoenix helped to cripple Viet Cong Infrastructure in South Vietnam . Without a doubt, Phoenix helped cripple the Viet Cong infrastructure in Vietnam . Phoenix helped .
 It was not until after the war that organizers of the program began to realize how effective it had been . Organizers of the project realized how effective the program was .
 Colby claimed that communists had found the years the program ran to be the most difficult of the entire war . Colby claims that communists found that the years they ran the program was the hardest .
 It aimed to combat negative publicity about the program in the U.S. It laid out a legal framework for the program and establishing limitations on PRUs .
 Enhanced interrogation tactics, including torture, were used in U.S. intelligence operations after the Phoenix Program . After Phoenix Program, enhanced interrogation tactics were used .
 Under pressure in 1971, program architect William Colby attended a Congressional hearing on the Phoenix Program .
 He admitted that the program included illegal killings but said that this was a necessary element of war . The program includes illegal killings, he said .
 The posters were sold for a few dollars each, mainly to the rising antiwar student population . The posters sold for several dollars each .
 Before 1968, Americans protested against the war through campus teach-ins, draft resistance, and draft resistance . A large-scale march on Washington in 1967 in 1967 led to the march on D.C.
 Contemporary to the antiwar movement was the Civil Rights Movement, which also rocked the nation . The Civil Rights movement was also contemporary to the movement .
 Johnson would be elected president in his own right in 1964, in a landslide victory .
 Women's Strike for Peace was one of the first groups to oppose the war . Women's strike for peace was held at the Pentagon building on October 1 .
 Tet Offensive inflamed passions in the US, leading to widespread antiwar protests in the streets and on college campuses . The Tet Offensive led to widespread protests against the Vietnam War .
 These disturbances would spill over into the presidential election of 1968 . The disturbances would have a major impact on the election that year .
 Allen Ginsberg, Noam Chomsky, James Baldwin, and many other famous writers opposed the war . The list included many famous and influential writers who opposed the invasion .
 Challengers step up in a hotly contested election year . Challengers stepped up to challenge the President's re-election bid .
 The Tet Offensive in January 1968 threw the entire campaign into Ready for victory . Senator Eugene McCarthy, an anti-war senator from Minnesota, had already announced his intention to challenge Johnson .
 Two days later he would accept the Republican nomination for the 1968 presidential election . Two days after accepting the nomination, he accepted the Republican presidential nomination .
 President Johnson announced March 31 that he would not seek reelection . The blowback from Tet and mounting opposition within his own party contributed mightily to his decision not to run for reelection .
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was California primary—threw the election and the nation into bedlam again . Dr. King was California's civil rights hero, a hero of the day .
 As Nixon was officially named as the Republican candidate, protesters rioted in the streets of Miami .
 Hubert H Humphrey emerged as the Democratic candidate in the midst of violence around the convention hall in Chicago . Humphrey was the candidate for the Democratic Party .
 The Chicago riots tipped the election in favor of the Republican candidate . Chicago riots helped tip the Republican presidential candidate .
 President Nixon called for a de-escalation of American involvement in Vietnam . Although the margin of support was slim, Nixon's call for an end to U.S. involvement .
 After 1968, a small number of students and civilians expressed their feelings against the war . Students and civilians were among those who expressed their views .
 McCarthy nearly bested Johnson in the New Hampshire primary in early March . McCarthy nearly won the primary in New Hampshire in March . Others have already jumped into the fray .
 Robert Kennedy declared his candidacy on March 16 . Robert Kennedy is the brother of John F Kennedy . He has declared himself a presidential candidate .
 Alabama's segregationist governor George Wallace was also in the race, running as a third party candidate with Vietnam veteran General Curtis LeMay as his running mate .
 Wallace would have one of the strongest third party campaigns in U.S. history . Wallace carried the southern states of Arkansas, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Georgia . Wallace would be the first person to carry a third party candidate in a presidential election .
 Violence erupted in 60 cities across the U.S. in the wake of King's assassination . It coincided with rising antiwar sentiment, especially on college campuses, especially in college campuses .
 By early summer, Kennedy had emerged as the favorite to capture the Democratic nomination and face presumptive Republican nominee Nixon . Kennedy was expected to face Nixon in the fall .
 The 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago saw eight days of violent confrontation between thousands of demonstrators and the Chicago Police Department . Robert Kennedy's assassination on June 6—on the heels of his victory in the Democratic Convention, he was assassinated .
 Post-convention reports identified the Chicago police as the instigators of the violence . Seven antiwar leaders, including Hoffman and Rubin, were arrested and put on trial .
 Thousands of medals were discarded in the national demonstration by Vietnam Veterans Against the War . Thousands of Vietnam veterans against the war gathered in Washington, DC .
 Richard Nixon took office in 1969 with the North Vietnamese due to poor leadership and morale . Peace talks in Paris soon stalled. promise to ""bring the boys home"" without losing South .
 Cambodia, already take on a bigger role in the war, and American troop presence destabilized by U.S. action, also came under threat from was steadily de-escalated . U.N. troops were withdrawn from Cambodia in 2010 .
 In the United States, antiwar protests would increase in scale . Meanwhile, in the United over to them, the ARVN saw mixed results in battle .
 National Moratorium peace demonstrations take place across the U.S. October 15 . Peace demonstrations are held across the United States .
 American and South Vietnamese forces carry out major operations across the Cambodian border, attacking communist base areas . R Hard hat riot, May 1970, occurs in Cambodia .
 President Nixon announces withdrawal of 25,000 troops from Vietnam in June . Nixon withdraws troops from the country in June 1968 . Nixon: "The Vietnam War has been a very difficult time"
 Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk appoints proAmerican General Lon Nol as his prime minister . General Nol is pro-U.S. pro-Cambian .
 Henry Kissinger begins secret peace talks with Hanoi politburo member Le Due Tho in Paris . Kissinger begins peace talks in Paris in February . Kissinger talks with Tho for the first time in a decade .
 In Cambodia, a US-backed coup led by General Lon Nol overthrows President Norodom Sihanouk . The coup overthrows Cambodia's president in March 18 .
 Two students protesting the war at Jackson State College, Mississippi, are shot by police . Two students were killed by police on May 14 .
 President Nixon authorizes as United States president, promising secret bombing of enemy to bring peace with honor supply lines and bases in Vietnam in Cambodia .
 Operation Dewey Canyon is the last major offensive campaign of the Vietnam War . Operation Dewey Canyon was the U.S. military's last major campaign in Vietnam . Operation "Dewy Canyon" was the first major offensive offensive campaign in the Vietnam war . Operation Dew
 About 250,000 anti-war protesters gather in Washington, D.C. for the ""Mobilization"" peace demonstration .
 An investigation begins into the March 1968 massacre at My Lai, triggered by letters from Vietnam veteran Ronald Ridenhour . The investigation is launched in March 1968 .
 In a renewed offensive, the Viet Cong and NVA launch attacks against U.S. bases and cities across South Vietnam . The NVA and Viet Cong launch attacks on United States bases, cities across the country .
 American troop levels in Vietnam reach their peak at 543,400 . Troops in Vietnam were at the peak of their troop numbers in 1969 . U.S. troops killed more than 500,000 in Vietnam .
 The Tonkin Gulf Resolution is repealed as the U.S. Congress tries to reassert control over the president's power to take the country to war . President Nixon wore a tiger-striped tunic .
 In Operation Lam Son 719, some 20,000 ARVN troops invade Laos with American support . The operation aims to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The U.S. and Laos are involved in the war effort .
 The publication of leaked Defense Department documents about the war begins on June 13 .
 Military court finds William Calley guilty of murdering 22 Vietnamese civilians in My Lai Massacre . H Protest badge, September 1970, commemorates massacre .
 Operation Jefferson Glenn, inland from Hue and Da Nang, is the last major combat operation in which U.S. ground troops take part . U.N. troops were involved in the operation in Vietnam in the fall .
 A series of nonviolent acts of civil disobedience by antiwar militants in Washington, D.C. results in 12,000 arrests . May 1-5 was a series of non-violent acts of protest .
 Cambodian government troops launch an offensive against Vietnamese communist and Khmer Rouge forces . The offensive is the first of its kind in Cambodia since 1968 .
 Air Cavalry Division refuses to engage in combat in Vietnam . The incident draws attention to the poor morale of U.S. troops .
 In Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge controls all territory east of the Mekong by the end of the month . The regime continues to make further gains in the country .
 By the year's end, the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam has fallen to 156,800 . By the end of the year, the United States will have fewer than 160,000 troops .
 His presidential cavalcade was pelted with rocks and beer cans from antiwar protesters . Within hours, the president's cavalcade had been pelted by rocks and cans .
 As vice president in the 1950s, Nixon had a reputation for being a tough anticommunist . Nixon was known for his tough stance on the Chinese Communist Party .
 President Eisenhower urged President Eisenhower to use U.S. troops and airpower in Indochina . He had urged him to use United States troops and . airpower .
 Even after losing the 1960 presidential election to Kennedy, Nixon supported the new administration's decision to increase U.S. aid to South Vietnam . Nixon was elected president in 1960 but lost to Kennedy .
 Nixon suggested he had a secret plan to end the war in 1968 . Nixon was campaigning for the presidency in 1968 when he made the claim . Nixon's secret plan was revealed in a speech at the White House .
 He promised ""peace with honor"" and created the expectation that he could end the stalemate and make Hanoi capitulate . He promised to end the stalemate and make it into peace with honor .
 Nixon assumed the presidency in January 1969, believing he could force Hanoi to negotiate, while reducing U.S. troop levels in Southeast Asia . J The Nixon Administration believed he was able to force negotiations with Vietnam .
 Within a year, he was as frustrated with the war in Vietnam as his predecessors had been . He was frustrated by the war, and was frustrated with his efforts .
 N ixon's initial efforts to end the war were as much improvisation as grand strategy . His initial efforts were more improvisation than grand strategy, he says . He says the end of the war would be as much as a victory .
 The president and his national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, guided the nation's foreign policy . Henry Kissinger was a key adviser to President Richard Nixon's administration .
 Nixon was a veteran politician and Kissinger was a Ivy League international relations scholar . Kissinger was an Ivy League scholar . Nixon and Kissinger were both Ivy League scholars .
 They shared a penchant for secrecy and crafted U.S. policy in Vietnam without significant input from others . They crafted the United States policy in the country's Vietnam policy in advance of others .
 They had no blueprint for success in Indochina but they were confident that one existed and they would find it . They were determined to find a way to get the best out of the region .
 Both Nixon and Kissinger were convinced diplomacy and the use of force had to be better coordinated . The Madman Theory: Diplomacy and force must be coordinated in the U.S.
 On January 25, 1969, they expanded the peace talks that Johnson had begun in Paris to include representatives of North Vietnam, South Vietnam, and the Viet Cong .
 On March 18, the United States secretly began to bomb North Vietnamese military sanctuaries in neutral Cambodia . Shortly afterward, the U.S. began to begin bombing North Vietnamese forces in Cambodia . The United States began bombing North Vietnam military bases in Cambodia in March .
 Haldeman said he wanted the North Vietnamese to believe that he was unpredictable and dangerous . He said he was a rampant anticommunist with his hand on the nuclear button . The North Vietnamese believed he was dangerous and unpredictable, he said .
 Secretly, the Nixon administration called the plan Operation Duck Hook . Secretly it was called Duck Hook. Secretly the plan was known as Duck Hook by the White House .
 Nixon planned a ""go for broke"" air and naval assault to inflict punishing blows on North Vietnam . They deliberately leaked to the press that Nixon planned to go for broke . Nixon planned an attack on the North Vietnam in 1968 .
 Vietnamization is a plan to increase the combat role of the South Vietnamese while reducing the number of Americans fighting the ground war . On March 19, the administration announced the introduction of Vietnamization .
 U.S. public was growing restless about the high cost of fighting the war, in terms of both human lives and resources . Such a prospect was widely welcomed by the American public, who were growing restless .
 Those who opposed continued U.S. intervention in Vietnam were not willing to wait for de-escalation . However, those who opposed the U.N. intervention did not want to wait . The United States intervened in Vietnam in the early 1960s .
 In October, large and peaceful antiwar protests occurred throughout the country . The protests were peaceful and peaceful .
 Nixon's threats of massive bombing did not move the politburo in Hanoi, in part because it could see that the U.S. public had turned against the war . Talking while fighting Nixon's . threats of bombing didn't move the . Politburo .
 Leadership in North Vietnam was in the hands of Le Duan following the death of Ho Chi Minh in September 1969 . Also, leadership in the . hands of the . North Vietnam . leadership in North . Vietnam was also in control of North Vietnam during the war .
 Duan was ruthlessly determined to win the heroic victory he thought was in sight . While Ho Chi Minh had never ruled out negotiation, he was determined to keep his troops on top .
 Nixon and Kissinger turned to Hanoi's chief patrons, Beijing and Moscow . Kissinger and Nixon turned to China and Russia for their help .
 Kissinger also undertook secret negotiations with North Vietnamese representatives in Paris . Nixon made high-profile trips to the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union in 1972 .
 Despite historic handshake with Mao Zedong in China and nuclear arms treaty with the USSR, Nixon gained little leverage against North Vietnam from these trips . Nixon's trips to China and North Vietnam were largely unsuccessful .
 White House staff invited press to photograph Cabinet members reading telegrams from the Silent Majority . Cabinet members read telegraments from the so-called Silent Majority. Nixon's Silent Majority speech on November 3 .
 In fact, the telegrams were part of a letter-writing campaign organized by the administration . The campaign was organized by Obama administration .
 Nixon visited Di An, south of Saigon, in July 1969, during his first visit to Vietnam as president of the U.S. as president .
 Nixon knew that he had to try to end U.S. intervention in Vietnam while preserving the credibility of his leadership at home and that of America abroad . Nixon's new strategy was a new strategy for the United States .
 RICHARD NIXON's InAUGURAL ADDRESS, 1969 on the outskirts of Los Angeles . Richard Nixon's Inaugural address is located in the city of New York City .
 In 1922, the family farm failed and the Nixons moved to nearby Whittier, California . The Nixon family moved from the farm to the city of Los Angeles .
 At the outbreak of World War II, Nixon secured a job at the federal government rations office in Washington, D.C., where he got his first taste of Washington politics .
 He was unhappy sitting behind a desk when a war was taking place, so enlisted in the U.S. Navy . He enlisted to fight in World War II .
 Posted to Solomon Islands in the Pacific, he helped coordinate cargo operations . Posted to the Solomon Islands, he was posted to the Pacific in the 1980s .
 Southern California Republicans searching for a rising star convinced Nixon to run for U.S. Congress in 1946 . Nixon was elected to Congress in 1945 .
 Richard Nixon rose quickly from humble origins among the orange fields of southern California to congressman, senator, vice president under Eisenhower . Victory led him to become the 37th president of the United States .
 Richard Milhous Nixon rose from humble Quaker origins in southern California to become Eisenhower's vice president and then president himself in the 1968 election . He was born in a Quaker family, and went on to become president in 1968 .
 Although he brought American troops home from Vietnam, he went down in history for having to leave office in disgrace . He brought U.S. troops home, but left the White House .
 Nixon was born in 1913, Nixon grew up in Yorba Linda, California . Nixon and Kissinger met with Congressman Gerald Ford in October 1973 to discuss Ford succeeding Spiro Agnew as vice president . Nixon, Kissinger and Haig met to pave the way for Ford .
 Richard Nixon became president in 1953, when he was Dwight Eisenhower's vice president . Nixon was a senator in 1950 and later became the president of the United States in 1953 . He also served in the Senate and White House .
 Nixon was known as a zealous anticommunist and a politician willing to cut ethical corners in order to win office . His reputation that earned him the nickname Tricky Dick earned him a nickname .
 TV politician Nixon was one of the first politicians to exploit the power of television . He earned fame for his 1952 ""Checkers" speech rebutting allegations of financial irregularities while campaigning as Eisenhower's running mate .
 His tired appearance in a televised presidential debate with John F Kennedy in 1960 (Nixon was recovering from flu) probably cost the White House .
 He was defeated again in 1962, running for governor of California, but won the presidential election in 1968 with his promise to bring the troops home from Vietnam . He was elected to the presidency in 1968 .
 Nixon's Vietnamization program, ping-pong diplomacy, and detente with China culminated in the Paris Peace Accords of 1973 . Nixon fired Watergate Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox and Attorney General Elliot Richardson resigned in protest . Mounting pressure Campaigners outside the United States Capitol .
 Despite his conservative leanings, Nixon's environmental policies were often progressive . Nixon's policies often included a progressive stance on the environment .
 He created the Environmental Protection Agency and supported the Clean Air Act of 1970 . The EPA was created by President Richard Nixon in 1964 .
 The Nixon White House also launched the controversial War on Drugs . Some thought it was a way to attack two of the constituencies that most opposed him—African Americans and young whites .
 Nixon could not divorce himself from dirty tricks that had always marked his campaigns . Nixon ran well ahead of Democrat George McGovern in the 1972 presidential election . Watergate and after Watergate .
 On June 17, 1972, five men were arrested for breaking into the Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex . The Watergate complex was the site of a massive Watergate scandal .
 Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein linked the burglars to the White House . The burglars broke into the U.S. White House in 1992 .
 President Gerald Ford, Nixon's successor, granted him a full pardon in September 1974 . President Nixon pardoned him in 1974 .
 Nixon began the process of rehabilitating his image by writing books and making high-profile foreign trips . Nixon's image has since been rehabilitated by writing about his image .
 Nixon was born January 9, 1913 in Yorba Linda, California . Born the second of five children to Frank Nixon, the owner of a service station, and a committed Quaker .
 The Nixon family moves to Whittier, California, in 1922 . Richard excels in high school and becomes a skilled debater . Richard is the son of Richard Nixon, who was born in 1924 .
 Looks tired and sickly in televised presidential debate with John F Kennedy and later loses the election . Later loses the presidential election .
 U.S. military personnel in Vietnam totaled 543,000 in April 1969, marking the highpoint of American ground combat forces and support personnel . Vietnam was the Vietnam War's first major conflict .
 Public opinion and that in Washington had shifted against the war . By 1969, public opinion had shifted to opposing the war.
 Nixon administration was eager to withdraw U.S. troops from Vietnam . Nixon was wary of the rising human costs and the unpopularity of the war in Vietnam .
 At the village level, Vietnamization entailed training a civil self-defense force to provide security against Viet Cong and NVA attack . The war had gone on longer and cost more than anyone had foreseen General Creighton Abrams had replaced Westmoreland as the head of Military Assistance Command
 The lightly armed local militias in each province received about 13 weeks of training in 1968 . After Nixon became president, Abrams began a process called Vietnamization .
 Vietnamization was the operational term for what journalists called the Nixon Doctrine . The Nixon Doctrine was coined by Nixon's Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird .
 The policy of transferring responsibility for combat in Vietnam from American forces to the ARVN led to the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnamese soil .
 The withdrawal of 25,000 U.S. forces was announced on June 8, 1969 . Citing improved ARVN capability, the White House announced the withdrawal . The withdrawal was cited as a reason for the decision .
 Nixon met with South Vietnamese president Nguyen Van Thieu at Midway Island . Nixon also met with Vietnam's president at the same time .
 He praised Thieu's leadership and reaffirmed U.S. support for the Saigon government .
 Nixon Doctrine: U.S. would continue to provide military support for Vietnam . Operation Keystone Eagle: Vietnam, Korea, Vietnam, Vietnam . Vietnam was the first major operation in Vietnam .
 The Ninth Marines were some of the first troops redeployed as a result of Vietnamization . Their departure on July 14, 1969, followed a lavish ceremony for the Ninth Marines .
 Vietnamization was portrayed as evidence of progress in Saigon . It was actually central to Nixon's effort to end the drain of the war on the U.S. and reduce pressure at home .
 Vietnamization was a policy, and its timing and evolution were determined almost entirely by United States domestic politics . Not a PERCENT of the generals in the United States Army believed that Vietnamization should have been implemented earlier, according to a 1974 survey .
 Administration hoped fewer U.S. service personnel in Vietnam meant fewer casualties . Administration hoped that would mean less public outcry against the war .
 The program decreased the role of American troops but increased supplies to the ARVN . It reassured the war's supporters that commitment to the South Vietnam remained strong .
 To be successful, Vietnamization had to be about more than substituting ARVN troops for U.S. units, or South Vietnamese blood for American blood . Vietnamization must be more than simply substitute troops for United States units .
 MACV returned to the advisory model for U.S. units that had existed before 1965 . MACV was used as a model for United States units in the early 1960s .
 Nation building in South Vietnam also required many nonmilitary improvements . The three seifs were built in the country's three largest cities .
 The country needed rural pacification, public services, economic viability, and security for its citizens, says President Obama . The country needs rural Pacification and public services to ensure its citizens' safety .
 Police, land reforms, controlling inflation, holding local elections, rooting out Viet Cong, and increasing the rice harvest were not improvements that U.S. military assistance alone could provide . However, policing, land reform and controlling inflation were not all the improvements .
 Special Forces and Montagnard Civilian Irregular Defense Group members at Due Lap listen to the radio broadcast of Nixon's November 3, 1969, speech . The South Vietnamese summarized their needs as self. defense, self-government, and self-development .
 Vietnamization assessment: Vietnamization is difficult to measure . Success of Vietnamization policy is hard to measure, says Vietnamization expert . Vietnamization was a success story for the first time in Vietnam .
 South Vietnam provided well for refugees, and succeeded in land redistribution . South Vietnam succeeded in redistributing land to refugees .
 The rice harvest in 1969 was the best in five years, and tractors replaced water buffalo for plowing . It was the first time tractors had been used in the rice harvest .
 Viet Cong and North Vietnamese activity decreased in many areas of South Vietnam but likely not because of increased ARVN size . Viet Cong/North Vietnamese activity increased in areas of the country .
 The politburo in Hanoi held back, biding its time for further U.S. withdrawals . Vietnam's political leaders are biding their time for the withdrawal of the US .
 Low morale and weak leadership continued to plague Saigon's troops . Meanwhile, low morale and poor leadership also plagued the troops .
 Those tasked with training the ARVN struggled to keep up with the timetable created by Nixon's administration . Those tasked to train the ARNN struggled with the training schedule .
 After just over two years in office, the Nixon administration had halved the number of U.S. forces in South Vietnam . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country since Vietnam in 1968 .
 The number of U.S. military personnel in Vietnam fell to 239,000 in June 1971 and continued to decline . U.N. forces in Vietnam continued to fall in 1971 and the number of troops in Vietnam declined .
 Westmoreland's war of attrition, designed to force Hanoi to abandon the South, had failed . A new approach was needed and Westmorelands' war was needed, he said .
 Abrams believed that the security of the South Vietnamese, right down to village level, was the key to success in Vietnam . Abrams: "Security of the village level" is the key .
 Abrams was born in 1914 in Springfield, Massachusetts, and grew up in modest circumstances in the nearby town of Agawam . Abrams is known for his role in the television series "American Horror Horror Horror"
 At the age of 17, he entered the United States Military Academy at West Point . He graduated in 1936 alongside William Westmoreland at the academy .
 He began his career in horse cavalry but soon switched to the armored branch . He began with horse cavalry before switching to armored cavalry .
 Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger described Abrams as ""an authentic national hero” for his personal bravery, tenacity, and unwavering dedication to service . Abrams first saw combat in World War II, commanding the tank battalion that spearheaded the invasion of Sicily .
 He led the relief of the besieged 101st Airborne Division at Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge . An aggressive and talented leader, he led the troops during the battle .
 During the Korean War, Abrams served as chief of staff of three different army corps . Abrams served in Korea during his time in the military .
 In 1963, he commanded V Corps in West Germany, on the frontline of £4191 the Cold War . In 1963 he was a lieutenant general, and by then he was lieutenant general . He commanded V . Corps in 1963, by then a lieutenant .
 President Johnson promoted Abrams to the rank of general in Vietnam . Abrams was promoted over the heads of several three-star generals, including William Westmoreland .
 From 1964 to 1967, Abrams and Johnson worked as a team to create an army that was fit for Vietnam . The ARVN contained a large number of draftees and inexperienced officers .
 Abrams took the idea of integration of military operations and pacification . From it, Abrams came up with the idea "one war" from the concept of the war .
 Over the next six months he traveled to every ARVN command in the country . Over the years he visited every command branch in the region .
 World War II hero Abrams twice received the Distinguished Service Cross for extraordinary bravery . Abrams received the D.D.C. Cross for his bravery during the war .
 On both occasions, his tank advanced ahead of his battalion, against superior forces, inspiring his men and turning the course of battle . The ARVN's improved response to the 1968 Tet Offensive was credited to him .
 Abrams directed the US-ARVN counterattack that retook Hue during the Tet Offensive . Abrams himself directed the counterattack against the Vietnamese .
 Abrams began implementing his ""one war"" ( interrupt enemy supplies and provide more local security . Abrams replaced Westmoreland in July 1968, replacing him with the President .
 For Abrams it was reconnaissance in force— now referred to as clearand-hold . While the shorthand for Westmoreland's method had been search and destroy, for Abrams, it was clear and hold .
 Success was measured by the number of towns and villages under the control of Saigon . Success measured by number of cities and towns under Saigon's control .
 Abrams: It was a complex effort that required more time to implement than he had at his disposal . Abrams: "I'm not sure how long it will take to implement" Abrams: 'I'm sure it will be very difficult'
 The political will to continue U.S. intervention was already gone by then . It was not the first time the political will was shown to be gone .
 GENERAL CREIGHTON ABRAMS BRIEFED JOINT CHIEF OF STAFF CHAIRMAN GENERAL EARLE WHEELER, OCTOBER 4, 1969 concept concept . General Abrams was a joint chief of staff at the Pentagon .
 He cut back on heavy use of artillery against villages and on large-unit rural sweeps that often hurt civilians . The former Iraqi general also cut down on the use of heavy artillery .
 He employed small-unit patrols to General Frederick Weyand in June 1972 . Instead of deploying troops, he employed small unit patrols .
 Abrams worked to restore morale and purpose to the institution that had been his life . Abrams was appointed as U.S. Army chief of staff in 2009 .
 He was still serving in this position when he died of cancer on September 4, 1974 .
 It is unknown whether Abrams's ""one war"" approach, if started earlier, would have produced a better outcome for Washington and Saigon . Abrams holds an honored place in the U.S. Army .
 General Abrams and Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird light each other's cigars as they listen to a briefing on pacification .
 September 15, 1914 Born in Springfield, Massachusetts, was the son of a repairman for Boston & Albany Railroad . Born September 15 in Springfield .
 The three sons become army officers, and the three daughters marry army officers . The three daughters are also army officers; the three sons are army officers.
 Serves as chief of staff for three corps commands in Korea . Serves in Korea for three years .
 T he ARVN was formally established by the government of President Diem in 1955, following the French withdrawal of the country .
 The ARVN grew from a modest strength of 150,000 in the 1950s to a seemingly robust total of one million by 1975 . The organization was founded in the 1960s .
 In addition to the army, there were separately organized and smaller air, naval, marine, and commando services .
 The best was the regular army, consisting of 13 infantry divisions, seven ranger groups, and various elite and support elements . The best of the British army was the British Army, with 13 divisions, 7 ranger groups and seven elite groups .
 The Military Merit medal was awarded mostly to enlisted men for valor in combat . The regional forces supplied the troops for the ARVN's four regional commands and popular forces .
 The medal was modeled after the French Medaille Militaire . Established in 1950, the medal was created in 1950 .
 The officers and NCOs of the VNA were almost entirely French . The soldiers themselves remained poorly trained and ill equipped . The VNA was poorly trained .
 One of the major weaknesses of the ARVN was that senior officer positions were largely determined by patronage . There was little possibility of promotion of able soldiers into officer class .
 The majority of commanders were Catholic, as was Diem, but most of the troops were Buddhist . Most of Diem's troops were Buddhists .
 Corruption was endemic as the less-qualified officers pocketed funds intended for their units or kicked back funds to superiors to retain their positions . Corruption is endemic in the police force, says the police chief .
 Reforms occurred under Vietnamization, but a toxic culture remained entrenched . Reforms were made in Vietnamization . Vietnamization was Vietnamization and Vietnamization began in 1968 .
 Many of the top commanders adhered to vestiges of passive French defensive tactics, while their younger, Americantrained juniors often favored aggressive operations . This created tension and confusion in the officer corps .
 A frequent charge was that the generals commanded from safe rear areas, rather than facing the enemy . The generals command from the rear areas rather than face the enemy.
 The enlisted men often lacked loyalty to their own government, felt pushed aside by the American commanders, and were ill-equipped . The “Tiger Stripe"" camouflage pattern on this ARVN Marines shirt is believed to have been first used by the Vietnamese Marine Corps from 1959 .
 Many soldiers only missed reporting for duty on one or two days or joined another unit closer to their home while still listed as a deserter on another roster . Many soldiers were only missing missing for several days .
 ARVN conscription methods were severe, and the Saigon government was largely unresponsive to the personal needs of its troops . The government's conscription method was severe .
 ARVN soldiers received no mail, their pay was meager, and barracks and dependent housing were in short supply and corruptly allocated . Soldiers were not allowed to receive mail, pay, barracks or housing were short supply .
 American canned goods and soy sauce were poor substitutes for the fish, rice, vegetables, and nuoc mam cham that were the staples of the South Vietnamese diet . and poorly trained .
 American officers sometimes declared that the ARVN spent too much time complaining, but the conditions under which many served were deplorable . American officers often declared that . The conditions under . which many . served were . deplorable.
 These largely conscripted troops were often very young and poorly trained . They were often young, poorly trained and often very poor .
 As the war progressed, the South Vietnamese forces became increasingly dependent upon American support . The South Vietnamese were dependent on American support.
 The availability of massive air support when needed paradoxically seemed to inhibit the resourcefulness and self-reliance of the Southerners . The continuous supply of replacement parts and new equipment, and the availability of huge air support .
 Soldiers of the Women's Armed Forces Corps of the ARVN took on a variety of support roles . Women's armed forces were established in 1966 following the establishment of a training school for female soldiers .
 Recruits are instructed on parachute packing at the 90th Aerial Eguipment Depot . The 90th aerial eguipment depot is located in the US Air Force base .
 Many ARVN officers and troops fought effectively during the multipronged Tet Offensive of 1968 and then in the Easter Offensive of 1972 . Nevertheless, many of these officers and soldiers fought effectively .
 They also offered strong resistance during the final chapter of the war in April 1975 . They also fought in the final months of the conflict .
 It has often been observed that, in combat, soldiers in all armies fight for one another above all else . It is often observed that soldiers in combat fight for each other above all .
 It is clear that the ARVN fought to protect their homes and families more than for the government . It was clear that it was not for government, but for their families and their families .
 The victorious North assumed control of South Vietnam in April 1975 . Some conscripted soldiers of the ARVN returned to their villages . Some soldiers were forced to leave their villages to join the North .
 Families of those who supported the government of the South were subject to restrictions . Decades after the end of the war, the families of those supporting the government in the South faced restrictions . The families of the supporters of the government were not allowed to leave the South .
 The 1965 hit ""We Gotta Get Out of This Place"" by the Animals was banned from Armed Forces Radio by the South Vietnamese government . One of the most popular songs among the troops was the 1965 hit by the Animal Gang .
 By the end of 1969, the number of troops in Vietnam had decreased by 115,000, and by December 1970, there would be only 280,000 left .
 The strain of fighting in Vietnam, their letters home damning the immoral, unlawful, and inglorious war they found themselves still fighting in . Their letters home from the war were damning, but they were still fighting for their country . The letters home were damning the war .
 U.S. troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in a series of incremental ""redeployments"" under the codename Keystone .
 A United States infantryman lies exhausted on the ground as he drinks from a canteen in the Fishhook region in 1970 . Desperate and fatigued, he is seen drinking from the canteen as he is exhausted .
 The United States suffered heavy losses during grueling combat there in 1970 . The war with poorly articulated objectives manifested itself in attacks on officers and noncommissioned officers .
 Infantry Division, departed Vietnam in June 1969 in Operation Keystone Eagle . Echoing debates at home, many soldiers began to question America's role .
 Keystone Cardinal withdrew 45,000 U.S. troops in late 1969 . Keystone Bluejay withdrew 50,000 troops in spring 1970 . In spring 1970, 50,00 troops returned to the United States .
 The troops sent home came from various branches of the military, so that proportion of each service was maintained .
 This was counter to General Abrams's original plan, which would have seen the bulk of initial redeployment focus on the Marine Corps; arguments about the makeup of each increment would continue into 1972 . This was the original plan .
 For those left behind in Vietnam, morale was in freefall . For those who had been left behind, morale in Vietnam was in a freefall. For those that had been in the U.S.
 The United States military during the late 1960s reflected the same issues prevalent at home . The U.S. military was in touch with the world during that time .
 This Zippo by Bradford Edwards engraved with a quote from Czech historian Konstantin Josef Jirecek . It is a copy of a lighter used by soldiers in Vietnam .
 Soldiers often had their lighters engraved with words showing dark humor, disillusionment, and references to death . Soldiers often have words engraved with dark humor and references of death .
 Vietnam were not immune to racial tensions in U.S. society, but combat had a way of bonding warriors . Vietnam's war was a time of racial tensions, but the war was not immune .
 Self-segregation of soldiers off duty or in rear areas away from active combat became more apparent after 1969 . After 1969, the self-solicy became even more apparent .
 This practice likely mirrored attitudes brought over from the United States. This practice was likely to mirror attitudes brought in from the U.S. The practice was common practice in the United Kingdom .
 In an era when youth culture was openly challenging authority in America on many fronts, strong leadership of young men in combat also became a special challenge . The U.S. military says it's a challenge to the nation's authority .
 The expansion of the Army had left a deficit in experienced small unit leadership—junior officers and sergeants, says the Army . The expansion had left the Army with a deficit, he says .
 While most men placed in these roles performed well, there were some who exposed units to ambushes, firefights, or petty harassment .
 Six-month rotations of officers and one-year tours of duty in-country also made unit cohesion difficult, says the U.S. Army .
 Drugs and alcohol played a part in most of these disputes, threatening to undermine discipline . The drugs and alcohol were used in the majority of the disputes .
 Marijuana and amphetamines, commonly used by young Americans in the late 1960s, were cheap and easy to obtain throughout Vietnam . The drugs were commonly used in the Vietnam War .
 GIs used drugs to escape anxiety or boredom, Pentagon report says . Pentagon report: A third of GIs were addicted to drugs in order to escape boredom or anxiety .
 Escaping the war GIs exchange heroin vials in a decorated bunk in Vietnam . Escaping GIs from their bunk, GIs trade heroin for heroin . GIs were able to escape the war with the drug trade .
 Opium and heroin were cheap, and of a high quality, but used primarily in secure areas . Opiums were cheap and of high quality . They were used mainly in secure places because their narcotic effect could get the user killed .
 A tank crew member nicknamed Big Buddha stares morosely at his combat base in 1971 . Counting the days of the days he was in the tank .
 A hand-painted sign on the tank's protective shield expressed his desire to leave Vietnam . The sign was painted on the shield as ever more U.S. units left the country .
 Studies of Vietnam veterans indicated that drug use primarily stemmed from combat exposure . 90 percent of veterans stopped using drugs upon their return to the United States .
 Nixon administration tried to downplay the military's concerns about drug use . Popular stereotypes began to emerge back home of service members as 'potheads' and drug addicts .
 U.S. artillerymen were stationed at the Laotian border in 1971 . They were hoping for peace, but they were killed in the conflict .
 The proliferation of peace signs among U.S. troops showed their diminishing support for the war . Peace signs were painted on tanks, pinned to helmets and pinned to tanks .
 The United States top command in Vietnam had changed, but skepticism of American strategy remained . The U.S. had changed its approach to Vietnam .
 Strategy under General Westmoreland had followed the attrition model, which relied on large unit operations intended to produce body count and to exhaust the enemy . The end of the war was marked by the end of attrition in 1945 .
 The American push for Ap Bia Mountain, later known as Hamburger Hill, was the product of General Abrams's positional strategy . General Abrams led the push for the summit .
 A grim and grueling battle, it produced a high body count on both sides . The battle further inflamed public debate on U.S. conduct of the war . The U.N. troops were killed in the battle .
 W estmoreland's attrition strategy underestimated the value of holding territory . The US president's strategy is to win back control of the world's most important battleground .
 General Abrams was prepared to use U.S. combat power, but his new idea was to use it not just to take out the North Vietnamese Army . He wanted to deny its forces access to major population centers . Abrams' plan was to deny the Vietnamese Army access to key population centers
 To accomplish that objective, he sought to target key locations, not just enemy personnel . He sought to hit key locations not just personnel, he said .
 The wounded were hooked up to saline drips and treated with field bandages . They were carried on litters to waiting Medevac choppers in Hue and Da Nang by targeting NVA's logistical network .
 The heaviest fighting of Apache Snow occurred in Ap Bia Mountain in the A Shau Valley . Apache Snow was the heaviest fighting in the region .
 Marked on U.S. military maps as Hill 937, meaning it was 3,074 feet high, it was known to locals as the Keeping record .
 Battlefield reports heavily influenced United States public opinion on Hamburger Hill . One such report by Jay Sharbutt for the Associated Press brought the name ""Hamburger Hill" into American discourse .
 Cables to connect microphone to recorder Mountain of the Crouching Beast . Cables connect microphones to recorder to recorder .
 The United States would later come to know it as Hamburger Hill . The terrible carnage there made it akin to a human meat grinder . It was so called because of the terrible carnage it made it feel like a meat grinding .
 Units of the Third Brigade of the 101st Airborne Division, the Ninth Marine Regiment, and ARVN First Division's Third Regiment were flown in by transport helicopters, to approach up the hill and attack the NVA on the top of the hill .
 The NVA on the hill decided to stand and fight on the high ground, and combat raged there for 10 days . Rather than retreat, the NVA stood and fought on the top ground .
 After one U.S. regiment attacked with little success, two regiments of the 101st Airborne, and the ARVN regiment, reinforced the attacking force . After one regiment attacked, the U.N. regiment reinforced the attack .
 The tenacity of the U.S. and ARVN ground forces and heavy bombardment by air support with B-52s dislodged the defenders, but the fog of war prolonged the engagement .
 A torrential downpour on May 18 turned the mountain slopes into mudslides, and on two occasions United States helicopter gunships mistakenly struck elements of the 101st Airborne approaching the ridge . The NVA finally withdrew into Laos on May 20 .
 Under pressure from the public and the Pentagon, General Abrams switched to a strategy of protective reaction, which would minimize United States casualties . These numbers were not TERRIBLE TOLL .
 Many did not die at Hamburger Hill, but the public associated them with the battle nonetheless . Many of the soldiers died at the battle but were associated with it .
 War critics argued against continuing to endanger U.S. troops in battles over territory that would not be held . They argued that such battles would likely return to enemy control soon after .
 Abrams made the distinction between denying the enemy a place and occupying that area . Abrams made it difficult for those who were already against the war to appreciate the distinction .
 U.S. Army-issued multipurpose ponchos were worn during the downpour at Hamburger Hill . They could also be unbuttoned for use as tents, shelters, blankets, and ground sheets . NVA had taken heavy losses and been forced out of the
 Operation Apache Snow's objectives had been achieved, and United States forces and those of the ARVN withdrew from Hill 937 . The U.S. forces withdrew from the base .
 Although the NVA moved back onto the hill, they would not use the supply route through the valley for three years .
 Medevac helicopters took soldiers from the front lines to makeshift Mobile Army Surgical Hospitals, pioneered by surgeon Michael DeBakey . In Korea, soldiers were taken to makeshift makeshift hospitals by helicopter helicopters .
 War still saw 26 percent of casualties die from their wounds . Wounded men were treated much more quickly than before before .
 In 1966, he got permission to test it as a sutureless wound closure on the battlefield and in field hospitals in Vietnam . In 1966 he was given permission to use it in the Vietnam War .
 The glue worked, successfully reducing bleeding and infection, but the version in use at the time was too concentrated and also caused irritation to the skin . The glue was used to reduce bleeding and infections .
 M edical support for United States forces increased with the escalation of ground forces . U.S. ground forces increased in Iraq and Syria .
 Combat medics were expected to treat a wide range of problems . All-purpose kit was expected to be used to treat any of the problems .
 In South Vietnam, the United States created evacuation hospitals, surgical hospitals, field hospitals, and convalescent hospitals . The U.S. created evacuation and surgical hospitals in South Vietnam .
 These essentially permanent facilities had air-conditioning, sanitary environments, and high-tech equipment . Air-conditioned facilities were air-constructed and sanitary .
 U.S. Army surgeons were able to perform blood transfusions and other lifesaving procedures in the field . Army surgeons also performed blood- transfusions .
 Hospitals are staffed with a wide range of surgical and other specialists . The hospitals were staffed with surgical and medical specialists .
 Each division of the army had its own medical specialists, including physical therapists, dieticians, and pharmacists, including dieticians .
 Such roles were not limited to men, and some women served in these capacities . Some women were also involved in the military, but some were not .
 The availability of medevac, commonly called ""dust off,"" helicopters, saved countless lives . Medevac helicopters and proximity to the battlefield of well-equipped and staffed evacuation hospitals saved lives .
 The air ambulances were reconfigured UH-1 troop transports, known as ""Hueys" or ""slicks,"" that could accommodate up to nine litters . The air ambulance service was the first of its kind in the U.S.
 Despite large red crosses on the aircraft, they faced intense enemy fire when extracting the wounded . The aircraft were surrounded by heavy gunfire when they were extracted .
 Many times medevac pilots ignored standard procedures and flew into hot LZs without cover . Armed escort gunships provided suppressing fire, but medevacs were often ignored .
 They flew day and night and in all types of weather and terrain, performing seemingly impossible rescues . They flew in all weather and performed seemingly impossible rescue missions .
 The peak year for the number of patients evacuated by dust off was 1969, when 206,000 US, ARVN, other allies, and civilians were transported .
 39 medevac crew members were killed in action in Vietnam during the two-year period . The + dust dust off pilots and crews and the medical corpsmen in each unit performed heroic service .
 Of those who made it through the first 24 hours after injury, only one percent died . Only one percent of those who were injured in the hospital survived .
 19 percent of U.S. casualties in Vietnam died from their wounds in Vietnam . Overall, 19 percent died from wounds from wounds in the war .
 Many soldiers returned home with severe psychological and physical trauma, necessitating further care on U.S. soil . One reason for these survival rates is the less destructive .
 Many combat veterans experienced post-traumatic stress disorder . The disorder is poorly understood and diagnosed . It is difficult to diagnose .
 Agent Orange exposure led to serious conditions in veterans and birth defects in their children . Agent Orange exposed veterans and their children suffered from birth defects .
 The many amputee veterans would also require long-term or lifelong care. nature of North Vietnamese and Viet Cong weapons weapons. nature . nature of weapons weapons .
 More than half of U.S. deaths were from small arms, mines, and booby traps . The United States has a history of small arms and mines deaths .
 The transportation system sought to utilize Pacific and mainland U.S. resources, while maximizing the availability of beds and resources in Vietnam . Military Assistance Command Vietnam coordinated the transportation system .
 Michael Bradbury was a member of the 26th and 3rd Marine Regiment . He was wounded in the battle at Hamburger Hill in 2003 .
 Medics had stopped wearing a red cross for medevac helicopters . Medics were required to be marked with the red cross, but have stopped wearing this symbol .
 The enduring image of American women serving in Vietnam is that of the nurse . U.S. nurses served in Vietnam during the war .
 These women provided a broad spectrum of care for soldiers and civilians alike . Many emerged from the war traumatized by what they had seen . They provided a wide range of care .
 U.S. nurses in Vietnam served in Army hospitals, Air Force flight nurses and Navy nurses on hospital ships .
 All treated a steady stream of 83 60 patients with horrific injuries and serious tropical diseases . Many experienced difficult social and professional readjustment after their service .
 In the 19th century, Clara Barton was called the American Nightingale for her nursing of soldiers during the American Civil War . About 10,000 United States nurses served overseas during World War I . At the beginning of World War II, women had to be white, unmarried volunteers,
 It had become more diverse by the end of the war, with African American nurses in all-black units . It became more diverse after the war .
 The first man, Edward T Lyon, joined the Corps in 1955 . He was the first man to join the Corps .
 Most of them were young, in their early twenties, and had clinical training but limited experience with the injuries and illness they encountered in the war zone . Most of the soldiers were young and had limited experience in the Iraq War zone .
 All were volunteers, and most were patriotically motivated, but also attracted by recruiting incentives . Recruitment incentives that subsidized nursing training were also attracted .
 Much of the work was in disease and infection control, pain management, and the provision of psychological comfort to the wounded . Much of their work was to provide psychological comfort .
 Malaria and dengue fever were prevalent in Vietnam . Both were life-threatening, as were encephalitis, typhus, hepatitis, and other infectious diseases .
 They would also play a role in caring for those undergoing treatment for drug addiction . Would also help those undergoing drug addiction treatment .
 United States nurses participated in humanitarian operations in Vietnam . The Medical Civic Action Program provided vital outpatient medical services to South Vietnamese civilians in rural areas .
 U.S. Navy nurses Lieutenant Barbara Wooster, Lieutenant Ruth Mason, and Lieutenant Ann Reynolds become the first women awarded purple heart medals in Vietnam . They survived the Christmas 1964 Viet Cong bombing in Saigon .
 Nurses in a war zone suffered many kinds of emotional strains and stresses, including job stress . Nurses suffered from many of the emotional strains of working in the war zone .
 The incidence of both post-traumatic stress disorder and emotional problems was high among nurses . Nurses were faced with treating a stream of horrific and painful wounds .
 The evacuation of severe cases to other hospitals or out of the country meant that nurses and doctors did not have the satisfaction of seeing all patients through to recovery .
 Nurses experienced social isolation owing to the low number of women in the area and the tensions of living and working in the violent, male-dominated environment of war . In addition to social isolation, nurses experienced low numbers of women .
 Nurse Judy Marron described the horror of seeing cockroaches crawl out of amputees' stumps . Marron wrote about her time in Vietnam, writing about the horrors .
 Female nurses also dealt with stresses that were unique to their gender . Female nurses dealt with stress of working as a nurse in the US .
 According to one study, 63 percent of them experienced sexual harassment, ranging from ""small pranks"" to rape . According to the study, one in five women say they have been sexually harassed .
 Lieutenant Sharon Lane was the only nurse killed as a direct result of enemy action . Lane was a nurse killed by enemy action in the Battle of the American Civil War .
 The blast from an artillery round struck her while she was working at the 312th Evacuation Hospital in Chu Lai on June 8, 1969 . She was struck by an artillery blast while working in the hospital .
 Several nurses died in helicopter crashes, including Second Lieutenant Carol Drazba and Second Lieutenant Elizabeth Ann Jones, both assigned to the Third Field Hospital .
 As a result of their experiences, nurses in Vietnam became more specialized than they would have been in civilian practice . Nurses in Vietnam were trained to be more specialized in Vietnam .
 Military nurses often developed expertise that gave them increasing autonomy . Especially in the areas of trauma, critical care, and anesthesia, military nurses often develop expertise .
 In mass casualty situations, nurses also took on triage of the wounded . The responsibility is to determine who received care first and who is beyond medical help .
 In 1970, Colonel Anna Mae Hays became the first woman in the U.S. military ever to be promoted to the rank of brigadier general . Hays was the chief of the Army Nurse Corps who built the nursing staff in Vietnam .
 NEW: In 1993, a new statue honoring the contribution of military women was dedicated at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . NEW: A new statue was dedicated to the contributions of women in the military in 1993 .
 Glenna Goodacre's Vietnam Women's Memorial statue shows three nurses aiding a wounded soldier . Paid for through public donations, the statue was created by Goodacre .
 This memorial highlights their contributions to the world's most famous nurses . While not exclusively for nurses, this memorial highlights the contributions .
 Twenty-three-year-old Army Second Lieutenant Roberta Steele alights from a medical supply truck in Qui Nhon .
 Steele, from Tillamook, Oregon, traded places with a recently married nurse in Vietnam in 1965 . Steele was eager to serve in Vietnam and had traded places .
 The reality of war was often shocking and permanently transforming . However, the reality of life in the war is often shocking .
 Nancy Randolph, a nurse from the South, served in Vietnam for a year . She felt alienated from medical culture and society from which she felt alienated .
 Back in the U.S. as a professional nurse has had its complications, including complications . "I'm not going to be able to go back to my native Australia," she says .
 U.S. Army Nurse Nancy RANDOLPH interviewed in the Human Tradition in Vietnam . Interview was conducted in Vietnam in 1998 .
 seriously wounded soldiers were transported to army hospitals in the Philippines and Japan for treatment . Seriously wounded soldiers transported to hospitals in both countries for treatment.
 Army photographer Ronald Haeberle took pictures of women and children at My Lai on his personal camera .
 The My Lai massacre was the largest single American atrocity in the ground war in Vietnam . The massacre was largest single U.S. atrocity of the ground conflict .
 In 1969, the exposure of what had happened and the search for explanations prompted troubling questions about the moral risks the war posed for the U.S. The war was over and over .
 In the 19th century, U.S. soldiers killed innocent Native American women and children in massacres such as the one at Wounded Knee . The massacre was one of the largest massacres in American history .
 I n 1971, controversial court martial proceedings captured the attention of the nation . The events took place in a controversial military court martial case .
 The J event had been covered up by the participants and their immediate commanders for a year and a half . Ron Ridenhour, a soldier who learned what happened from men in the company, wrote letters to the Army, members of Congress, and even the president .
 Led by Lieutenant General William Peers, their report in March 1970 recommended that no fewer than 28 officers be charged . The report was published by the British Army in 1970 .
 As part of the post-Tet operations in 1968, a task force, including three infantry companies, was sent to Son My . Three infantry companies were also sent to the region .
 Charlie Company, under Captain Ernest Medina, landed outside My Lai on March 16 . Charlie Company landed in the area on March 17 .
 Two platoons entered with guns firing and began to round up the inhabitants . Expecting to find a Viet Cong unit, two plataons entered the village expecting to find the Viet Cong .
 It was a secret that My Lai was cold-blooded brutality, which included rape as well as murder . Within the division, it was also known for its brutality, including rape and murder .
 The courts martial at Fort Benning, Georgia, would last four months . The testimonies of 91 witnesses were heard, and documents, depositions, and photographs were scrutinized by prosecutors .
 Thirteen of the officers charged were acquitted owing to lack of evidence . Thirteen were acquitted of any wrongdoing . The case was brought to light on a series of allegations against police officers .
 One officer was tried on charges of a cover-up and acquitted for the same reason . Another was acquitted of a charge of covering up the crime .
 The media coverage and trials brought public attention to the massacre . Calley said he had only been following orders, and claimed that his only crime was to value the lives of his troops above those of others .
 Lieutenant Calley leaves a preliminary hearing on August 24, 1970, with a civilian attorney and a military escort . The military prosecutors, Aubrey . Ready to be tried Lieutenant . Calley, who died in 1970, was charged with murder .
 Calley s court martial was a general court martial, the most serious court of military trial . For a preliminary Article 32 hearing, a preliminary hearing is mandatory . Calley's court martial is a military court martial .
 The My Lai case helped turn U.S. public opinion even further against the war in Vietnam .
 Rifleman Paul Meadlo testified that Calley had ordered him to help kill the civilians . Meadlo said he was ordered to kill civilians by Calley, who ordered him kill them .
 Witness Dennis Conti described Calley firing on villagers as they cowered in a ditch . Calley fired on villagers in the ditch, killing them and wounding them, he said .
 At the end of the trial, only Calley was convicted—for personally killing 22 villagers . Calley's trial was held in Thailand, but he was only convicted of killing 22 .
 Lieutenant served only three months in military prison and three and a half years under house arrest . Despite initial life sentence for premeditated murder, the lieutenant served only 3 months in prison and 3 years in house arrest.
 Nixon reduced Calley's sentence under public pressure from those who saw Calley as a scapegoat for the failures of the Army . Nixon reduced the sentence after public pressure was made public .
 Daniel and William Eckhardt claimed that politics interfered with the army's ability to bring the perpetrators to justice . The Eckhardt brothers said politics had interfered with their efforts to bring justice .
 Questions are being raised about U.S. conduct of the war . Other questions were also raised about United States conduct .
 Nixon tried to quash public access to the report, but the damage was already done . Nixon's administration tried to keep the report from being released, but it was already under fire .
 The ""Free Calley" movement believed that the lieutenant had been unfairly blamed for the orders of those higher up in the chain of command . The movement believed the lieutenant was unfairly blamed .
 They made a hero of him, holding rallies and writing songs in his honor . They made rallies and wrote songs in their honor .
 A popular antiwar poster emerged from his response, with his reply, ""and babies,"" superimposed onto a photograph of the massacre .
 Today, many veterans make pilgrimages to the site, hoping to make peace with these memories . The site is still open to the public for the first time since the bombing .
 Johnson administration had attempted to manage Cambodia's precarious neutrality . Nixon government launched several major operations within Cambodia that dragged it further into the wider war .
 Repeated cross-border raids against Viet Cong hideouts by ARVN forces, backed up by United States advisers and air support, brought tensions to a head . U.S. advisers, air support and U.N. troops were used to carry out raids .
 Norodom Sihanouk ordered U.S. diplomats out of Phnom Penh . 17 villagers were killed in an incident that left 17 villagers dead .
 Johnson had placed some restrictions on U.S. military and intelligence actions along the Cambodian border . He had rejected a request from General Westmoreland for B-52 strikes along the frontier .
 U.S. reconnaissance and land-mining patrols, codenamed Salem House and later Daniel Boone, repeatedly entered Cambodia . Cambodian villagers continued to suffer from ARVN raids planned with the United States .
 Norodom Sihanouk did not like the Vietnamese communists' use of his country for their operations . He wanted the U.S. to recognize Cambodia's borders, stop incursions, and sever ties with his domestic rivals .
 As a presidential candidate, Nixon had criticized Sihanouk as not truly neutral . Nixon agreed with military strategists who wanted more U.S. operations .
 Norodom Sihanouk surprised almost everyone, including the «**c*X""s Prince in Paris . Once in office, however, he surprised everyone, . including the . prince in Paris, however .
 Leaders of South Vietnam recognized Sihanouk's demands for respect for his country's rights and territory . Diplomatic relations were restored between the two countries in July 1969 .
 Nixon and Kissinger created a public image of cooperation with Sihanouk . The reopening of the U.S. Embassy in Phnom Penh was also useful for intelligence gathering, a factor of growing importance .
 Troops of the Cambodian army take up firing positions behind a bank near Kampong Cham in the Mekong Delta region in May 1970 . Troops take up positions behind bank behind bank in front of riverbeds .
 Cambodian forces were fighting in operations linked to the U.S. and South Vietnamese incursions that followed the fall of Sihanouk . vote of no confidence removed him as head of state after fall of Cambodia .
 The urban middle class and many in the military lost faith in Sihanouk's ability to defend the country . The war had caused many to lose faith in the prime minister .
 Cheng Heng, Chairman of the National Assembly, has been appointed interim head of state . The move follows the resignation of Prime Minister Donald Trump .
 Nixon administration was intent upon defeating North Vietnam and the Viet Cong, and had little regard for Cambodia . Nixon administration had little respect for Cambodia, Cambodia .
 Operation Menu was a covert bombing campaign of eastern Cambodia . Cambodia was a support area for the infiltration of North Vietnamese forces into South Vietnam . Operation Menu began March 18, 1969 .
 American commanders also thought it was the location of the headquarters of the Central Office for South Vietnam . It was the base of operations for communist forces in the South .
 Nixon and many of his military advisers were committed to this strategy . The nature of so-called sanctuaries and of COSVN itself had been in dispute . One reason Johnson had refused to bomb Cambodia .
 Almost 4,000 sorties were flown, but COSVN, a main target, was not destroyed . In the event, almost 4,00 sorties flew, but the main target of the mission failed to be destroyed . The U.S. military says the mission was
 Lon Nol served in the French colonial service from 1937 . He entered the police force in 1951 . He served in colonial service .
 He joined the army in 1952, taking part in the fight against Vietnamese communist insurgents . He joined in 1952 and is survived by his wife .
 He was defense minister and prime minister, alternately or simultaneously . Subsequently, he held the posts of defense minister, prime minister and vice president .
 Following overthrow of Sihanouk in March 1970, he led the government in Phnom Penh until March 1975, when he left Cambodia . Despite a debilitating stroke in 1971, he was able to lead the government until 1975 .
 Many Cambodian villagers died in these raids, however . Many of the bombing raids were in Cambodia .
 The Vietnamese communist forces moved westward from the border and further into Cambodia, increasing their political influence on the Cambodian population . The Vietnam communist forces are now in Cambodia .
 The U.S. had never asked Sihanouk for approval of these bombing operations, he says . The United States had never been asked for approval, he adds .
 U.S. strategy also had a catastrophic effect on Sihanouk's hold on power . The Cambodian population as i a whole was devastated by the bombings .
 In March 1970, while Sihanouk was absent in Europe supposedly for medical care, a parliamentary New blood General Lon Nol had not plotted the coup . In the preceding weeks he had been urging Sihnouk to be tougher with North Vietnam, but in the previous weeks he
 Lon Nol has been in charge of the government since the overthrow of Sihanouk . He was overthrown by the ousted Prime Minister of Cambodia in 2006 .
 General Lon Nol failed to halt the activities of communist forces from Cambodia and Vietnam in spite of military support from the U.S. After the war, General Nol tried to halt communist forces but failed .
 He was a leading figure in the resistance to French rule in Cambodia . He later became committed to the overthrow of the government of Prince Norodom Sihanouk . He was committed to overthrowing the government .
 The CPK was transformed into the extreme and violent movement that became the Khmer Rouge . Under Sar's leadership, the CPK became a violent and violent group .
 North Vietnam initially supported the Khmer Rouge, but this alliance had broken down by the mid-1960s . North Vietnam's communists initially supported North Vietnam .
 Operation Menu was launched by the U.S. in March 1969 . It upset the political balance in Cambodia . Unintended consequences were the result of Operation Menu .
 Historical antagonism between Cambodians and Vietnamese inhibited fraternal relations between the communist movements in each country . The Khmer BAS RELIEF OF KHMER SOLDIERS FROM ANGKOR WAT .
 When a small group of communist-led rebels formed in Cambodia in the 1950s to oppose Sihanouk, they received little help from the Vietnamese communists . The Vietnamese communists did not help the rebels .
 The Khmer Rouge led the Vietnamese communists to hate both in equal measure . The Vietnamese communists and the Vietnamese Communists were enemies of the Vietnamese government .
 Pol Pot believed that Cambodia had nothing to learn from external influences and envisioned the restoration of the old glory of the Khmer Kingdom . Pol Pot was versed in the ideologies of the French revolution, Marxism, and Stalinism .
 He and his followers viewed all Vietnamese people, from the North or South, as enemies . He and followers viewed Vietnamese people from the South or the North as enemies, he said .
 For years, Sihanouk considered what he called the Khmers Rouges little more than a nuisance . The Forest Army is now known as the French Army .
 They remained a small, isolated group of extreme zealots, nurturing their own vision of ""pure" revolution and extolling suffering and sacrifice . They remained an isolated group, nurturing a vision of 'pure' revolution .
 It was a rural-based agrarian communism roughly modeled on Mao Zedong's peasant movement . The movement was modeled on the Chinese Communist Party of the Second Century .
 In its camps Rouge took advantage of the weakness in Phnom Penh under Sihanouk and subsequently Lon Nol, and the spread of the Vietnam War to Cambodia to expand their membership among disaffected rural Cambodians . The Khmer Rouge was formed in the early 1950s and
 Nixon declared that ""no Cambodians had lived in [the area bombed] for many years"" and that ""it was totally occupied by the North Vietnamese Communists,"" American intelligence knew otherwise .
 Terrified villagers fled the B-52 attacks, and some of the survivors ended up in the ranks of the rebels . Some of those who survived the attacks ended up joining the rebel ranks .
 Those who did not join the militants became sympathetic to the enemies of the U.S. Those who didn't join the militant group are sympathetic to its enemies .
 Very young, displaced villagers were radicalized and trained as guerrillas . Very young and displaced villagers are radicalized into rebels .
 Few photos exist of Khmer Rouge soldiers in their camps in the 1960s and 1970s . Few photographs exist of soldiers in camps in Cambodia .
 Khmer Rouge guerillas are as young and committed as those of earlier decades . Pictured at their base in western Cambodia in February 1981 .
 The overthrow of Sihanouk by conservative factions of the ruling class led by Lon Nol created a moment of opportunity for the Khmer Rouge . The overthrow was a moment when conservative factions led to the rise of the Khmmer Rouge in Cambodia .
 Cambodia descended into violent anarchy of rival gangs, Khmer Rouge guerrillas, and Vietnamese troops of various kinds grasping for Peasant support . The Cambodian peasantry was overwhelmingly apolitical, but had royalist sympathies .
 After Sihanouk voiced his support for the Khmer Rouge, their numbers swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 . Their numbers increased to more than half a million .
 Lon Nol appealed for outside help, and the Nixon administration was more than ready to respond . U.S. officials in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, were prompted by United States officials in Cambodia .
 Khmer Rouge was also ready to make a ""recruiting sergeant" of the misery caused by continued U.S. and Vietnamese incursions . Khmer was ready to become a "recruitry sergeant" for the U.K.
 Under Prime Minister Lon Nol, Cambodia began the creation of a Cambodian national army with the advice and training of U.S. Army Special Forces operators .
 The Khmer Rouge were aligned with the ousted prince whom they had long opposed and with the Vietnamese communists, whom they distrusted . They were also opposed to Vietnamese communists .
 At the time of the coup, France floated a proposal for an international conference that might secure Cambodian sovereignty and neutrality . France failed to get support from enough nations to make this a reality .
 Sihanouk took refuge in Beijing after feeling betrayed by his government . He later fled to China .
 In spring 1970, Nixon decided to risk public criticism and attack Viet Cong and NVA bases in Cambodia, an officially neutral country . In later years, he later attacked the NVA in Cambodia .
 He also wanted to shore up Lon Nol, Cambodia's newly installed pro-American premier, and send an intimidating message to the North . Cambodia's new premier is pro-U.S. pro-Cambrian, who has been in the region for years .
 Members of the Ninth Infantry Division fight enemy forces in Cambodia's forest terrain . Armed with M16 rifles, an M60 machine gun, and a sniper rifle, they fight without shirts, flak jackets, or helmets .
 General Lon Nol quickly offered military cooperation with the United States as a way of controlling communist activity in Cambodia . The new prime minister offered cooperation to the U.S. in a bid to control communist activity .
 Nixon had publicly declared that the United States had no advance warning of the coup . It was clear that the change of leadership was welcomed by the U.S.
 On April 30, 1970, at the request of General Abrams, Nixon ordered incursions into Cambodia . Nixon ordered the incursion into Cambodia in April 1970 .
 The plan and execution of the incursion was a joint operation with South Vietnamese forces . It was a combat test of Vietnamization. It was the first invasion of Vietnam .
 By 1970, President Nixon and Henry Kissinger were conducting peace negotiations in private . Nixon and Kissinger conducted peace talks in private.
 Henry Kissinger had begun secret talks with North Vietnam's Le Due Tho in Paris in February 1970 . Kissinger had secret talks in Paris with North Vietnamese leader in 1970s . Kissinger and Tho met in Paris on February 21, 1970 .
 Private meetings were evidence of Nixon's and Kissinger's secretive conduct of the war . Nixon's concern to use political pressure as well as military means to force a settlement, Kissinger said .
 Le Due Tho demanded U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam and role for the People's Revolutionary Government, the political arm of the Viet Cong . Le DueTho demanded United States withdrawal and a role in the PRCG .
 The goal was to encircle and destroy a large concentration of North Vietnamese forces there . The U.S. troops were in the area at the time .
 Two days later, a primarily American force attacked the ""Fishhook,"" some 48 miles north of Saigon . It was believed to be the site of the Central Office for South Vietnam, the nerve center of the Viet Cong .
 Over the following weeks, the attacking ARVN and United States forces often operated independently in multibattalion cross-border attacks or in brief raids . The attacks were carried out by the ARVn and U.S. forces .
 Some stayed to occupy an area to provide support for the army of Lon Nol's Cambodian government . Others quickly went back to South Vietnam .
 It was the largest military sweep since Operation Junction City in 1967 . The operation was part of the biggest military sweep in the country's history .
 The incursion was intended to force communist units away from Vietnam's border, thus buying time for Vietnamization and reducing pressure on Lon Nol's pro-American regime . Vietnamization is under way to buy time for the pro-U.S. regime, but it's not clear
 Operation killed 11,000 enemy troops, destroyed 8,000 bunkers, found thousands of weapons and tens of thousands of rounds of ammunition . U.S. commanders claimed the operation killed around 11,500 enemy troops and destroyed thousands of bunkers .
 This costly effort did not have a significant impact on the strength of communist forces in Vietnam . Le Due Tho's hardline position in the Paris peace talks did not move him from hardline to hardline .
 The COSVN was not a place but a leadership group that moved frequently between various meeting sites in order to avoid attack or capture . The leadership group would move frequently between meeting sites to avoid capture or attack .
 At a time when Washington was attempting to reduce the scale of its engagement in Indochina, the theater of war had expanded with the accompanying costs and risks . At the time of the war, Washington was trying to reduce its engagement with the country .
 United States forces pull out of Cambodia on June 30, 1970 . U.S. forces left Cambodia in 1970 . United States left Cambodia .
 Without United States or ARVN troops to defend Phnom Penh, the Cambodian Army now faced the emerging Khmer Rouge alone . Without U.S. or ARN. troops, the Khmer. Rouge was now faced by the emerging .
 Within four months of the United States withdrawal, the Khmer Rouge controlled the country east of the Mekong, and much beyond . The United States withdrew from Cambodia four months later .
 Lon Nol's government held on to the capital, but it was unable to regain any territory . The government was able to regain control of some of the country's most populous regions .
 Cambodia's economy quickly deteriorated and poverty and hunger took hold . Cambodia's hunger and poverty took hold in the early years of the Khmer Rouge era .
 Thousands of enemy weapons captured in the Fishhook area during the incursion of May and June 1970 . Thousands of weapons captured .
 The incursion into Cambodia inflamed antiwar protests and provided added impetus to the scaling down of U.S. operations in Cambodia .
 He also said that he sought to bridge the country's deep differences over the war . He said he also said he wanted to build bridges over the conflict .
 Nixon ignited a political firestorm that would engulf his presidency . Instead, he ignited a national firestorm . Nixon ignited the firestorm, but it would lead to his resignation .
 The selective service system had long been a point of controversy . A siege mentality began to develop inside the White House, says White House aide .
 Congress decided to draw birth dates by lottery to set the order of induction . Congress worried about requiring young Americans to participate in an unpopular war .
 Congress ended the lottery lottery in 1972 and instituted an all-volunteer service . The draft was unpopular and unpopular among Americans . Congress ended it in 1972, and instituted a volunteer service .
 Many members of Congress who were already opposed to the war exploded in anger over Nixon's incursion . Nixon's Cambodian incursion was a major factor in the war's decision .
 Some charged that the administration had lied outright to Congress, as only days before the incursion . Secretary of State William Rogers had testified to the Senate that there were no plans for operations .
 On May 1, two bills challenged the president's authority . The bills were passed by Congress .
 Republican John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky and Democrat Frank Church of Idaho sponsored a measure to cut off all funds for military operations in Cambodia after June 30 . The measure would cut off funds for operations in the country .
 Four students were killed and nine more wounded during 13 seconds of gunfire at Kent State . Neither bill became law, but in June the Senate voted for a resolution to terminate the 1964 Tonkin Gulf .
 Only two of the four students killed, Jeffrey Miller and Allison Krause, had actually taken part in protests . Only two students actually took part in the protests .
 On hundreds of college campuses, antiwar voices called the incursion an invasion . Antiwar voices have called the invasion an invasion on hundreds of campuses .
 Two students killed in a similar incident at Jackson State in Mississippi . Ten days later, two students were killed in similar incident .
 Vietnam Veterans against the War expressed their discontent . On the antiwar side, the Vietnam Veterans Against the War express their discontent. On the other side, they expressed their displeasure.
 Counter-protesters beat some peace marchers with work tools . Chanting "America, love it or leave it," they beat them with tools . Peace marchers were marching peacefully in support of the movement .
 President Johnson and Nixon claimed authority to deploy U.S. forces to Vietnam . John Kerry to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: "Resolution"
 The Cambodian incursion inflamed domestic opposition to the war that had been mounting misconduct they had witnessed . The war had been on the brink of collapse when it began .
 Nixon responded to the intense public criticism by taking action . Lt. John Kerry, a Navy veteran, argued that loyal young Americans were loyal .
 Nixon authorized the Huston Plan to wiretap and burglarize the homes of ordinary Americans . Nixon believed that radical groups in the U.S. were linked to foreign governments .
 Nixon created the President's Commission on Campus Unrest in response to the events at Kent State . NO CONSEQUENCES were no consequences .
 The guardsmen were not punished, and were acquitted by a Grand Jury in 1974 . However, the guardsmen did not receive any punishment .
 Tom Grace, a sophomore on the way to a history exam, was caught up in the tragedy that followed . Tom Grace was on his way to an exam at the time of the shooting .
 The students felt that it was their campus and they were doing nothing wrong . National Guardsmen had no right to order them to disperse, they said .
 At the same time, some students were wandering through the area with textbooks, unaware of what was taking place .
 National Guardsmen began to fire rifles at the top of the hill, a witness says . "All of a sudden, the National Guardmen got to the . top of . the hill where they began to . fire rifles," he says . The National Guardman says .
 Tom Grace describes turning and running as fast as he could, before being knocked off his feet by a bullet through his left heel . Grace was knocked off the feet by the bullet through the heel .
 There was no cover and farther down the hill in the parking lot, he could see people dropping, he said . "There were no cover," he said. "People were dropping. There were people dropping"
 He didn't know if they were being hit by bullets or if they just hugged the ground . "It... kept going and going," he says of the shooting victims . He says he didn’t know if the victims were hit by gunfire .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning image by photojournalism student John Filo . Fourteen-year-old Mary Ann Vecchio screams over the body of Jeffrey Miller in the 1987 tragedy .
 National Guardsmen shot 67 live rounds in 13 seconds, killing four and wounding nine . Instead of firing blanks, they fired live rounds instead of blanks . Four people were killed and nine were wounded .
 He became the first pilot to be held prisoner in North Vietnam and remained in captivity for eight and a half years . He was held prisoner for eight years .
 The longest-held American prisoner was United States Army Special Forces Captain Floyd James Thompson . Thompson was captured in South Vietnam on March 26, 1964, after only three months .
 North Vietnamese captors wanted to subdue us and then win us over to do their bidding, says J. J. "What [Vietnam's] captors] wanted was . Subdue us, then win over us," he says . J.
 First Lieutenant Gerald Santo Venanzi is taken prisoner by a young Vietnamese woman . JEREMIAH A DENTON JR., when hell was in session, was taken prisoner .
 Venanzi was copilot of a plane that was brought down in North Vietnam on September 17, 1967 . He was shot down in Vietnam in 1967 .
 The fate of American prisoners of war in North Vietnam became a political issue during the war . The number of Americans held prisoner or missing was relatively small, but the fate of U.S. POWs became a major issue .
 Many surviving prisoners had suffered extreme hardships in captivity . Many of these surviving prisoners were held in captivity by the Nazis .
 Most of them died in fiery crashes or at the hands of guerrillas in remote areas . Few remains were ever found, and few remains were found .
 Known to Americans as the Hanoi Hilton, it was once a French jail holding Viet Minh suspects . The Hilton was once held in France and held in Vietnam .
 A large fortress covering a city block, it had 20-foot high walls that were topped with electrified barbed wire . The fortress was covered in 20,000 square feet of walls and was topped with electric wire . It was the largest fortress in the world .
 Many prisoners were isolated and tortured in special interrogation rooms in attempts to secure confessions for propaganda use . Prisoners were isolated, tortured and isolated in special rooms in an attempt to get confessions .
 Mistreatment included beatings, shackling, being held in darkness for extended periods, and being denied washing facilities . Mistreatment .
 American POWs stand for inspection by international observers in the yard at Hanoi's Nga Tu So prison, nicknamed the Zoo, on March 29, 1973, just before their release .
 They left the prison shortly after, still dressed in their prison uniforms . The men were released shortly after . They continue the war primarily for the purpose of POW release .
 National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia was formed in May 1970 . Backed by the administration, some members of Congress, and the media .
 While successful in gaining support at home, diplomatically, the focus on POWs backfired . While successful, it backfired.
 The North Vietnamese reasoned that their negotiators could use offers to release POWs as leverage to gain concessions it wanted from the United States . The U.S. wanted concessions to reduce its support for the Thieu government .
 U.S. military did not hold Vietnamese POWs, these were held by the South Vietnamese . North Vietnam did not make its own prisoners or missing an issue in the peace negotiations . POWs devised ingenious ways to keep up morale .
 The Hanoi Hilton held some prisoners who were destined for later prominence . Medal of Honor winner and later admiral James B Stockdale and future senator and presidential candidate John McCain were among them .
 The reasons are unclear but may have related to North Vietnam's perceptions of U.S. military de-escalation and the possibilities for negotiation raised by the POW issue . North Vietnam may have been wary of the possibility for negotiation .
 Nixon and his aides began to prioritize the demand for the release of American prisoners of war . The POW issue was a counter to the peace movement and to acquire political support .
 Americans opposed to continuation of costly war to maintain unpopular Saigon regime . Many Americans had been willing to fight communism, but they had become opposed to the continuation of a costly war . Saigon had been unpopular with Americans .
 By making POW release an issue, Nixon gained backing from POW families and from pro-war individuals . The longest-held American civilian prisoner was Ernest Brace, a contract pilot taken in Laos in May 1965 .
 Captive guerrillas were captured by the U.S. Marines in 1967 . They were held captive for questioning .
 U.S. forces did not hold prisoners long term, but took advantage of their capture to question them for information about enemy plans .
 All North Vietnamese and Viet Cong prisoners were placed under the jurisdiction of the ARVN military police . After interrogation by U.S. intelligence, all prisoners were put under military police jurisdiction .
 The South Vietnamese Ministry of the Interior operated four prisoner of war camps, one in each military region . The camps were set up by the South Vietnamese government of war .
 A student organization called Voices in Vital America first issued these bracelets in May 1970 as part of their campaign to ensure that POWs would not be forgotten . Communist political operatives who were not soldiers were placed .
 Those who wore the bracelets vowed to leave them on until the soldier or their remains were returned .
 Tiger Cages were only 5 feet square and 9 feet high with an open roof of metal bars . Originally forming part of a French colonial prison, they were only five-foot square and nine-foot high .
 No North Vietnamese soldiers, except some POWs convicted of murder in prison camps, were held at Con Son . Con Son is located in Vietnam's capital, Hui-Hui-Son .
 The Red Cross declared the prison in violation of the Geneva Convention prohibiting inhumane treatment of prisoners . Conditions at the prison were so terrible that in July 1970 the Red Cross had declared it in violation . Conditions were so bad that the prison was declared a violation of Geneva Convention .
 Reports on the prison helped convince the U.S. Congress to begin to curtail aid to South Vietnam . The prison was a significant turning point in the war .
 Nixon administration wanted a military success in Vietnam to demonstrate to the North and the American public that the U.S. political will to fight the war remained strong . Raid on SonTay was part of Nixon administration's efforts to obtain the release of prisoners from the North .
 50 American POWs at a camp at Son Tay about 23 miles north of Hanoi . POWs were held in Son Tay, 23 miles from the capital .
 This seemed to provide the opportunity to liberate American prisoners from the heart of North Vietnam, which would be a valuable propaganda coup . The U.S. would be able to liberate prisoners from North Vietnam .
 On the night of November 20, 1970, United States Air Force helicopters ferried 56 United States Army Rangers into Son Tay . U.S. Army Rangers were killed in the fall of Son Tay in November 1970 .
 North Vietnamese authorities had moved prisoners about 15 miles away due to flooding . Flooding from heavy rains had forced the prisoners to be moved 15 miles from their homes .
 Newly freed prisoners of war show their joy as their military aircraft lifts off from Hanoi on February 12, 1973 . Newly freed prisoner of war shows his joy as his military plane lifts off .
 The raid was considered a tactical success and could have rescued prisoners had they still been there . No American lives were lost in the raid .
 Some commentators saw it as a courageous attempt worth the risk, though others labeled it a foolhardy and provocative act . Some commentators said it was worth a risk .
 Nixon did not get the kind of accolades he wanted, but the action did impress the North Vietnamese . Nixon did get the most of the attention he wanted for his actions .
 The United States had inserted and extracted troops very near to their capital . The U.S. had inflicted a significant number of casualties on the camp's defenders .
 Living conditions became very crowded in the Hanoi Hilton, with some men sleeping shoulder to shoulder, but the increased contact had the benefit of enhancing prisoner morale .
 Operation Homecoming was the name given to the repatriation of American POWs in 1973 following the signing of the Paris Accords in January 1973 . Homecoming heroes were repatriated .
 The North released the prisoners as the last remaining U.S. forces withdrew from South Vietnam, except for a small contingent at the American embassy in Saigon .
 Nixon proudly proclaimed that all POWs had returned in 1973 . Many Americans remained skeptical that the North had cooperated fully . With great fanfare, returnees were welcomed home as heroes .
 Reports of live sightings and other ""evidence"" of POWs allegedly still held in Southeast Asia fueled speculation and kept hope alive for many families .
 Congressional and Department of Defense investigations in the 1970s concluded that no U.S. prisoners remained anywhere in Southeast Asia .
 For a further two decades, the United States demanded that the Vietnamese government provide a full account of all missing U.S. servicemen before diplomatic relations could be established . Nevertheless, for a further 20 years, the Vietnam government had to provide an account of missing servicemen .
 POWs had only the most basic necessities for daily life . Conditions were often atrocious and the POWs were often starved of basic necessities .
 Items for personal hygiene such as toothbrushes were provided . Toothbrush was provided .
 Small pieces of soap were pressed together to form larger bars . Prisoners were valued by prisoners, pressed together into bars .
 Commander David Rollins was held from 1967 to 1973 . NVA issue spoon was used by Commander Rollins, who was held .
 Metal cup issued to Colonel Carlyle Harris, who was a POW for nearly eight years .
 Map case was used by Viet Cong and NVA troops to carry important documents along the Ho Chi Minh Trail . Map cases were used to transport important documents .
 Cases often held information about enemy supply routes and intelligence from Hanoi regarding enemy positions or strategy .
 By 1971, the Ho Chi Minh Trail had been operational for 16 years . It brought soldiers and supplies from North Vietnam through Laos and Cambodia into South Vietnam .
 During 1970s, an estimated 8,000 men and 10,000 tons of supplies moved along the trail each month . During 1970, an estimate of 8,200 men and . 10,500 tons of . supplies moved . along the . trail .
 Congress repeatedly attempted to limit the U.S. president's war powers and block any expansion of the war beyond Vietnam . After the Cambodian incursion, Congress repeatedly tried to limit war powers . Congress also tried to block expansion of Vietnam beyond Vietnam.
 Cooper-Church amendment to a military appropriation bill finally passed Congress in December 1970 . The amendment was the first to be approved by Congress in 1970s .
 Codenamed Lam Son 719, the operation was a major test of Vietnamization . The operation was the first of its kind in Vietnam . It was a test of the country's ability to become a nation .
 General Creighton Abrams planned an operation to interdict the flow of North Vietnamese and supplies into South Vietnam along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in 1971 .
 The initiative was welcomed by both the U.S. and South Vietnamese administrations . The initiative is welcomed by the United States and South Vietnam administrations .
 Both President Nixon and President Thieu were eager to see the South Vietnamese Army succeed as United States troop strength declined . The ARVN was capable of holding its own in battle, to shew that the U.S. was capable .
 U.S. ground forces could not enter Laos because of the Cooper-Church Amendment . Much of the Ho Chi Minhh Trail passed through Laos, through which much of the trail passed .
 The operation would be an ARVN ground attack with function . Therefore, it was decided that it would be a ground attack . The operation was decided to be an operation with function.
 Truck convoys of 40 to 60 vehicles moved through the area each night on a maze of roads . Convoys of up to 60 trucks move through the maze of streets each night in a convoy of trucks .
 ARVN advance along Route 9 toward Tchepone went easily for a few days . ARNN advance into Laos went easy for the first time in recent days .
 As trained by the US, South Vietnamese troops built fire support bases as they went . Fire support bases were built as the troops went .
 After an advance of about 12 miles in two weeks, the ARVN column came under heavy attack . After advancing 12 miles, it was attacked by heavy shelling .
 Low clouds, antiaircraft fire, and proximity of enemy to friendly forces negated use of B-52s or fighter bombers . Counting on United States air support, southern forces hunkered down in firebases .
 I hope Thieu understands .. that this may be his last crack at massive U.S. support . UH-1 Hueys—with Cobra Cobra fighters -- may be the last crack of support .
 There were no American advisers or forward air controllers with the ARVN units . No American advisers were on board during the mission .
 All of the houses had been destroyed and the local people were living in caves, but the roads, communication network, antiaircraft artillery, and a rebuilt Buddhist temple continued to be rebuilt . Two South Vietnamese battalions continued to arrive into the town .
 By March 1, Tchepone had been abandoned by the North Vietnamese, and the assault therefore had no military consequences . However, by March 1 the assault was abandoned by North Vietnamese .
 President Thieu considered his objectives realized, and ordered Lam's forces to retreat . Lam's troops retreated from the scene .
 North Vietnamese troops attack a fire support base at Hill 31, Laos, 15 miles northwest of an American border base at Lang Vei . The base is located near the U.S. border with Laos .
 Hill 30. training and leadership training needed to accomplish the task . Hill 30 is located in the foothills of Mount Kilnock, a suburb of Fort Worth, Texas .
 U.S. helicopter crews went in despite poor weather and devastating antiaircraft fire, enabled the rescue of thousands of ARVN troops . It was only the bravery of United States helicopter crews that saved thousands of troops .
 Lam's forces lost at least 5,000 men, killed or wounded, plus 2,500 missing in action . Lam forces lost 2,000 of his forces, killed, wounded or wounded in battle . Lam was the only person to have been killed in the conflict .
 Traffic along that part of the Ho Chi Minh trail was only briefly stopped, and plans to expand the trail farther into Laos were underway .
 In April 1971, Nixon announced withdrawal of another 100,000 U.S. troops from Vietnam . Nixon announced the withdrawal of more than 50,000 troops in April 1971 .
 Nearly 40,000 NVA troops attacked the ARVN as they left the town, and the withdrawal quickly became a rout . The NVA withdrew from the town as it left, and it was quickly attacked by the NVA .
 Many fought well, but the army faced some overwhelming challenges . In this test of Vietnamization, many fought well . The army faced overwhelming challenges in Vietnamization .
 In October, Nguyen Van Thieu was reelected as president of South Vietnam, amid charges that the election was rigged in the incumbent's favor . An orderly retreat under fire would have been a difficult maneuver even for veteran troops, and the ARVN forces lacked both the strength and the
 In 1971, Thieu forced a list of criteria for presidential candidates through the National Assembly that not even Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky could satisfy . The one-man election was held in 1971 .
 One popular general met the criteria, but chose not to run despite CIA efforts to pay him to stay in . CIA paid him $100,000 to keep in, but he refused to run .
 Thieu went to the polls unopposed in October and received almost 80 percent of the vote, with a 90 percent turnout . Thieu was elected to the post in October without opposition .
 Thieu's own ambassador to the U.S. wrote that this election only reinforced the image of the regime inside and outside of Vietnam as a corrupt and repressive dictatorship . The election only reinforces the image, he wrote .
 NVA had attacked Phu Loc during the ARVN's advance in February, but it remained under South Vietnamese control . The NVA was attacked in February but remained under control of the South Vietnamese .
 U.S. bombs bombs on strategic targets in the North in an attempt to bring all parties back to the negotiating table . The United States has been trying to bring the North back to a negotiating table, but the North has refused .
 Easter 1972, North Vietnam launched a major offensive against the South, using tanks and heavy artillery . The U.S. entered Vietnam from Vietnam in 1973 .
 The North Vietnamese Army struck southward across the DMZ to capture Quang Tri and across South Vietnam's western borders toward Kontum and An Loc . The United States responded with extensive air support for South Vietnamese ground troops .
 After initial reverses, the South Vietnamese army halted the offensive on all fronts . The offensive was halted by the Vietnamese army . The battle was fought on all three fronts .
 In the fall, the Paris peace talks broke down after coming tantalizingly close to agreement, prompting President Richard Nixon to order air raids by B-52 bombers against key targets in Hanoi and Haiphong .
 A resumption of negotiations in January 1973 brought swift agreement on terms for a ceasefire . The final withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam was the end of the conflict .
 Route 13, the road to Saigon, became a key objective for South Vietnamese soldiers during North Vietnam's Easter Offensive at An Loc . Route 13 was blocked by North Vietnam during the Easter Offensive .
 In May 1972, the United States unleashed Linebacker 1, an air campaign against strategic targets in North Vietnam . The U.S. launched the bombing campaign in May 1972 .
 Devasation wreaked by the Easter Offensive caused thousands of civilians to flee their homes . Thousands of civilians were forced to flee homes during the offensive .
 The NVA launches the Easter Offensive, a large-scale invasion of South Vietnam, using armored vehicles and artillery to strike across the DMZ toward the city of Quang Tri . The Easter Offensive is the largest-ever invasion of the country .
 ARVN troops in northern South Vietnam launch counteroffensive with the aim of retaking Quang Tri province . Quang tri province is located in the north of the country .
 B-52 bombers begin large-scale raids on targets deep inside North Vietnam . U.S. escalates air war on North Vietnam as America escalates the air war .
 The city of Quang Tri is occupied by the NVA as South Vietnamese troops retreat southward in disorder . The city is occupied as the South Vietnamese army retreats southward .
 President Nixon approves Operation Enhance, the provision of large quantities of American military equipment to the South Vietnamese armed forces . Operation Enhance was part of the U.S. effort to arm the South Vietnam .
 Siege of An Loc ends in an NVA defeat after 95 days of fighting . Siege of an Loc ended in the fall of 95 days . NVA had been fighting in An Loc for two years .
 South Vietnamese forces stabilize a defensive line, halting the North Vietnamese advance toward Hue . May 5 South Vietnamese troops stabilize defensive line in Hue .
 After a three-day battle, North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces capture the town of Loc Ninh, near the Cambodian border north of Saigon . The town was captured by North Vietnam and the Viet Cong .
 Communist forces advance from base areas in Laos and Cambodia toward Kontum . Communists advance from bases in Laos, Cambodia and Cambodia . Communist forces move to Kontom .
 President Nixon orders the mining of Haiphong Harbor and other North Vietnamese ports to block the import of war materiel . Nixon orders mining of ports in order to block imports of war goods .
 The city of An Loc, north of Saigon, comes under attack and its defenders are placed under siege by communist forces .
 Operation Linebacker, a sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam, begins May 10 . U.S. air forces begin bombing campaign that attacks military installations, supply routes, and storage facilities . North Vietnam is the focus of the bombing campaign .
 The last combat patrol carried out by American troops in Vietnam is completed near Da Nang .
 Communist forces are cleared from Kontum City, ending the threat of South Vietnam being cut in two . Communist forces clear from the city, ending threat of split in South Vietnam .
 U.S. Navy vessels carry out a night raid against the defenses of the port of Haiphong . The raid took place on August 27 .
 COLONEL WILLIAM NOLDE, last U.S. COMBAT CASUALTY in VIETNAM, was killed in 1973 . The communist Easter Offensive ends .
 The American Linebacker bombing campaign against North Vietnam has been halted . The U.S. bombing campaign was halted in Vietnam .
 Nixon assures President Thieu that if Hanoi does not abide by the terms of the proposed peace deal, the U.S. will retaliate swiftly and severely . Nixon: "If [Hanoi] doesn't abide by terms of peace deal"
 Six B-52 bombers are shot down by North Vietnamese SAMs, forcing a revision of American bombing tactics . North Vietnam SAMs forced the U.S. to revise its tactics .
 Operation Homecoming begins transfer of U.S. prisoners of war from North Vietnam to the United States . Operation begins February 12 . Operation ends February 11 .
 South Vietnamese forces retake Quang Tri City, lost to the communists at the start of May . December 1972 .
 As peace negotiations in Paris stall, Nixon and his advisers decide to resume the bombing of North Vietnam . Operation Linebacker II, known as the Christmas Bombing, begins .
 A peace agreement is signed between the Royal Laotian government and the Pathet Lao . The agreement was signed by the government of Laototians and the Laotians .
 North Vietnamese negotiator Le Due Tho and U.S. National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger agree a draft peace agreement . North and North Vietnam negotiate a draft agreement in Paris . Kissinger and Tho meet in Paris to discuss a peace deal .
 Henry Kissinger declares that ""peace is at hand"" in Vietnam, despite rejection of the peace deal by South Vietnam's President Thieu . Kissinger: "Peace at hand" in Vietnam despite the rejection of a peace deal .
 President Thieu reluctantly accepts the proposed peace terms . JANUARY 21: Thieu accepts the peace deal .
 The ""land grab"" begins as communist and South Vietnamese forces fight for control of villages across South Vietnam . The 'land grab' begins in the early 1950s .
 Richard Nixon is re-elected as president in a landslide victory, winning over 60 percent of the popular vote . Richard Nixon wins over 60% of the vote in November .
 The provisions include a ceasefire and withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam within 60 days . The provisions also include a withdrawal of U.S. forces from the Vietnam .
 The North Vietnamese Politburo began to make plans for a major new offensive into South Vietnam in the latter half of 1971 .
 It was to be to be a campaign unlike anything they had tried before, with troops waging conventional warfare, employing massed tanks and heavy artillery .
 The North Vietnamese planned to coordinate closely among main force, regional, and local troops and to fight in urban and rural areas alike . Unlike the Tet Offensive, which had unfolded in waves, the attack would be relentless .
 Moscow also sent tanks, along with modern cannons and more sophisticated missiles, in 1972 . Moscow sent tanks and missiles, such as the SA-7 ""Strella"" antiaircraft .
 North Vietnam supplied North Vietnam with additional increments of military aid . Anxious to cushion the shock these diplomatic openings might cause Hanoi, the U.S. supplied more military aid to the North .
 China tripled shipments of 2.2 /^ The number of l U U trucks sent to Hanoi by China between 1971 and 1972, increasing capacity along the Ho Chi Minh Trail by 50 percent .
 Hanoi prepared for the much greater supply needs that were anticipated . The city prepared for much greater needs that was anticipated .
 It built a pipeline to pump oil to the South, and supplemented the existing . road net with a new Secret Road that . connected Tchepone in Laos with the Cambodia-Laos-Vietnam ""triborder"" region . The . Secret Road was built in the
 Able to carry trucks and built entirely under jungle canopy, it could be used 24 hours a day . It accelerated the movement of troops (who had previously marched) reducing deaths and sickness .
 At the end of 1971, Hanoi was in a strong position, especially after the ARVN failure in Lam Son . A mock-up of the Vietnam War, Vietnam's first war with the U.S. government .
 Communist allies augmented the NVA's supply of light PT-76 tanks with medium T-54 or T-55 vehicles . The vehicles were a better match for the U.S. M48 tanks .
 Combat divisions tasked with mastering new mass tactics in a very short time . Combat divisions specialized in certain types of attack, such as urban or mountain fighting, or ambushes .
 North Vietnamese leader Le Duan masterminded the 1972 invasion of the South . North Vietnam was invaded by North Vietnam in 1972 . The invasion was masterminded by the North Vietnamese .
 Le Duan became the ruler of North Vietnam after Ho Chi Minh's death in 1969, eclipsing rival Pham Van Dong . He led the Viet Minh against the French in the Mekong in the 1950s .
 Evidence suggests that Le Duan took part in a 1967 purge of pro-Soviet leaders that had marginalized Dong . Evidence suggests he took part part in the purge .
 The ambitious plans called for forces of several divisions to attack across the DMZ, in the Central Highlands, and north of Saigon .
 Priority was initially given to the Saigon area but this shifted to the northern provinces of Quang Tri and Thua Thien shortly before the attack began . Priority was originally given to Saigon but shifted to northern provinces shortly before attack .
 Hanoi expected to overrun those provinces, as well as Kontum and Pleiku in the Central Highlands . The Central Highlands are also expected to be overrun by the capital .
 The final pieces in the plan were for the Viet Cong to attack in the Mekong Delta and for more NVA troops to enter northern Laos . The final piece of the plan was for more Viet Cong troops to attack northern Laos, according to the plan .
 The NVA committed almost all of its forces, keeping only one division in reserve . The army was committed to almost all its forces .
 Hanoi called the campaign the Nguyen Hue Offensive, after the warrior (also known as Quang Trung) who defeated a Chinese invasion in 1789 and went on to become a modernizing emperor of Vietnam .
 Peace talks between the North Vietnamese and Henry Kissinger continued in Paris . North Vietnam and Kissinger continued peace talks between Vietnam and the North Vietnam .
 Hanoi worried that a Chinese-American rapprochement had begun at its expense . Hanois worried that the Chinese-U.S. relationship had begun to weaken at its cost .
 By its military offensive, Hanoi sought to demonstrate its resolve and break the deadlock in the peace talks . By its offensive, the Vietnamese government sought to show its resolve . The conflict is expected to last for more than a year .
 The South Vietnamese believed the U.S. was stalling for time in peace talks while Washington rebuilt the military capablities of the South Vietnamese . It believed the United States was staling for time .
 In September 1971, Richard Helms briefed the National Security Council that something was afoot . Helms expressed most concern about the DMZ and the Central Highlands . The CIA Director of the CIA had briefed the national security council .
 In a conversation with Henry Kissinger in November 1971, Nixon had expressed his desire for the U.S. to take a hard ""pop"" against Hanoi after the 1972 presidential election, regardless of who became president .
 Nixon instructed Kissinger to reinforce the U.S. fleet off Vietnamese shores . Nixon also ordered Nixon to reinforce Vietnam's naval fleet off the coast .
 At that point, the intelligence turned dark. J RICHARD NIXON, NOVEMBER 20, 1971 f jggL, Wjgg American Strategy .
 20,000 soldiers set out along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in one week and 63,000 more following over a four-month span . North Vietnamese infiltration increased exponentially over the winter .
 Aerial reconnaissance detected a tank concentration bigger than anything they had seen previously . North Vietnamese jets at airfields in the southern panhandle of North Vietnam . Two dozen NVA surface-to-air missile battalions taking position in DMZ-Trail area .
 Defense Intelligence Agency staff noticed a more aggressive tone in NVA and Viet Cong pronouncements . NVA, Viet Cong have also seen an increase in aggressive language in their pronouncements, officials say .
 On January 17, 1972, senior officials meeting in Washington tentatively predicted an attack in the DMZ in March and discussed how it could happen . Nixon met with bipartisan Congressional leaders in the White House Cabinet Room on February 17,1972, to discuss his upcoming trip to China .
 That afternoon, he left for Hawaii, where he would stay for four days before flying west . He would stay in Hawaii, then fly to Hawaii .
 Jane Fonda delivered an antiwar message on Hanoi Radio in North Vietnam in July 1972 . Fonda was an anti-war activist and anti-Vietnam activist .
 Hanoi got her to sit on an antiaircraft gun while she made the broadcast . Fonda's visit to the full was a propaganda stunt for the U.S. military .
 On January 20, General Abrams asked Washington to authorize more airstrikes and extend U.S. air support for the ARVN, including into Laos . General Abrams wants Washington to approve more airstrikes .
 On January 25, the president went on national television to prepare the public for what might unfold . President Obama spoke to the nation about what might happen in Syria .
 His speech revealed secret peace negotiations that had been taking place with the North Vietnamese, including a peace proposal presented to them in the previous October . The peace proposal was presented to the North Vietnam in October .
 He stated that if this proposal was rejected, he would take action to defend the remaining personnel in Vietnam . He said he would also take action if the proposal is rejected .
 By the end of January, the president had confirmed General Abrams's requests . Airstrikes were stepped up against the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos .
 Planners studied the intersections, choke points, and river crossings of the Trail . Planners designated ""blocking belts" and laid electronic sensors to provide intelligence .
 The United States also added to the Seventh Fleet in the South China Sea . The U.S. began preparations to operate B-52 bombers from the island of Guam and from Thailand .
 Strategy in Washington in 1972, however, was not solely focused on Vietnam . Strategy in D.C. was not only focused on the Vietnam War, but also on the U.S. strategy .
 Nixon surprised the U.S. public by visiting the People's Republic of China in February to normalize relations with China . Nixon made the trip in February . Nixon's visit came as the war in China dragged on .
 The United States were proved right in their expectation of a major offensive . After the U.S. was proved right, the United States proved right to expect an offensive .
 In March, the NVA and Viet Cong unleashed their most ambitious offensive of the war . The NVA, the Viet Cong and NVA have been fighting in Vietnam since April .
 It turned out to be a three-pronged attack across the DMZ, from the west into the Central Highlands, and from Cambodia toward Saigon in the south, employing conventional tactics and weapons .
 The ARVN, supported by massive U.S. airpower, faced its greatest test so far . The ARN was supported by the United States airpower .
 U.S. Marines trained in 1972, using helicopters and amphibious vehicles . Marines were involved in the Vietnam War, which ended in 1968 .
 By this point in the war, the last U.S. Marines in Vietnam were preparing to stand down, or training the ARVN . The prospect of a new North Vietnamese offensive saw numbers increase .
 Quang Tri United States and ARVN commanders had been anticipating a major North Vietnamese offensive in the early months of 1972 . South Vietnamese forces were in disarray and United States support was limited .
 The U.S. policy of Vietnamization had reduced the American presence to a fraction of its former might .
 ARVN still depended heavily on American support to operate effectively against the NVA and Viet Cong . Yet the ARVn still relied heavily on U.S. support for operations .
 Quang Tri province had been a key target for communist attacks since the start of the war . United States Army advisers were working with the ARVN Third Division in charge of defending the Quang tri region of Military Region 1 .
 The siege of the combat base at Khe Sanh was one of the fiercest engagements in the war . The siege took place at the end of the war in Vietnam . The battle lasted for four years .
 In October 1971, the ARVN's newly formed Third Division replaced the departing United States 101st Airborne Division, which had previously defended Quang Tri province . General Vu Van Giai's new Third Division took over the area in October 1971 .
 ARVN Joint General Staff learned the North Vietnamese attack would begin on March 29 and ordered an alert . North Vietnamese forces have been in contact with the U.S. since March 29 .
 General Giai, commanding the Third Division, was in the process of switching his Second Infantry with the 56th Infantry, which meant that neither regiment was in protective strongpoints when the attack commenced .
 The NVA used the 9K32 Strela-2 shoulder-fired surface-to-air missile launcher to counter United States air attacks during the Quang Tri Offensive . General Hoang Xuan Lam and General Giai expected the Countering air attacks .
 The most effective regiment, the Second Infantry, was being removed from this sector . They managed to shoot down 14 fixed-wing aircraft and 10 helicopters . The Second Infantry was the most effective unit in the area .
 Giai felt he had no strength for a ground operation beyond his defense line . Some artillery and air strikes had countered these attacks, but he felt no strength .
 North Vietnamese had more than 30,000 troops backed by many guns and a full armored regiment . The North Vietnamese were backed up by more than a dozen guns and many guns .
 Their prongs of attack across the DMZ, which included tanks, took the ARVN by surprise . The attack was part of a series of prongs that included tanks and trucks .
 The skeleton group of U.S. advisers sprang into action in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Thousands of civilians were forced to flee their homes and villages during April 1972 as North Vietnamese forces advanced through Quang Tri province . B-52 bombers hit NVA bombers hit the NVA in Vietnam .
 Many were killed by NVA bombardment of the routes along which they were fleeing . Many of the NVA fighters were killed in NVA bombings . Many were also killed in the attacks on the routes they fled .
 General NGO QUANG tRUONG DESCRIBING CIVILIANS FLEEING QUANG TRI, 2010 staging areas at Khe Sanh and points outside the fighting zone . General NGO Quang t.T.Ruong DEScription DESC
 Poor weather prevented fighter bombers from aiding South Vietnamese Marines under pressure in the west . However, poor weather prevented fighters from aiding the Vietnamese Marines .
 General Giai was forced to move his headquarters east to Quang Tri City, Vietnam . The western firebases had become untenable for the South Vietnamese . The South Vietnamese were forced to surrender Camp Carroll .
 On April 2, Easter Sunday, the situation for the ARVN defenders in the west deteriorated further . The situation worsened further on Easter Sunday .
 Camp Carroll, the most important of the DMZ firebases, was surrounded by enemy forces . Camp Carroll is surrounded by the best equipped military forces in the world . The camp is located in the southern part of South Korea .
 Camp Carroll went all the Vietnamese Marines' artillery and the ARVN's heaviest guns . With the loss of Camp Carroll, the Vietnamese Marine Corps' heaviest guns were left behind .
 Some 1,500 ARVN soldiers were captured . The United States advisers stationed there only just escaped in time .
 Hamburger city was known for the way new men arrived at night but were dead before dawn . Stabilizing fins Hamburger City for the . way new . men arrived in the night but died before dawn.
 The South Vietnamese fought every step of the way and took the last positions in Quang Tri's citadel on September 15 . The last positions were taken by the South Vietnamese forces in the citadel .
 With both armies exhausted and the city in ruins, the offensive in Quang Tri province was over . Both armies exhausted, the city was destroyed and the offensive was over.
 Easter Offensive in Quang Tri showed that the ARVN was capable of fighting well, but only when circumstances were right . The Easter Offensive was the first of its kind in Vietnam, and showed that it could be a success in Vietnam .
 The Quang Tri campaign proved that U.S. air support was critical to the success of ARVN actions . The good weather and good air support were critical to success of the campaign .
 Although the ARVN regained Quang Tri city, it fought to a standstill that left the communists with permanent territorial gains . The ARN gained control of Quang tri city, but lost it to the communists .
 The CHICOM Type-50 antitank grenade was a copy of the Soviet RPG-2 . Made in China for the NVA, the grenade was made in China .
 The interruption provided the ARVN with time to regroup its forces and attempt a counteroffensive, but without much effect . The interruption gave the country the time it could regroup and try to counterattack .
 On April 23, the North Vietnamese renewed their attacks, this time slowly grinding away in an attempt to wear down ARVN morale . The North Vietnamese continued their attacks on April 23 . On April 25, the South Korean government launched an offensive on the border .
 The ARVN forces abandoned Dong Ha on April 28, and Quang Tri was lost on April 29 . Quang Tr was lost in Quang Ha, which is located in the southern province of Hang Province .
 The loss of Quang Tri and the NVA bombardment of villages and towns in the area led to a mass of refugees fleeing down Route 1 toward Hue . The NVA bombings led to the loss of villages, towns and villages and villages in the region .
 The NVA targeted the road, and the loss of civilian lives there comprised one of the worst atrocities of the war . The road was targeted by the NVA, and it was a major source of civilian deaths .
 President Thieu replaced Military Region 1 commander Lam with General Ngo Quang Truong, South Vietnam's best field commander . General Truong is replaced by General Lam, who is now the commander of the military region .
 General Giai was fired, tried by a military tribunal, and sentenced to jail . His place was taken by Nguyen Duy Hinh, who replaced him in his place .
 The First Division, which Truong had once led, was far more organized in its defense of Hue, the next assumed target . Truong led the First Division in Vietnam .
 Truong moved to stabilize the line along the My Chanh River, about halfway between Quang Tri and Hue . Truong: When ARVN defenses held to the west and north of Hue, Truong went to stabilize line along riverbank .
 By May 13, ARVN forces had regained enough confidence to make further attacks . They gradually expanded their efforts west and north of the city of Hue .
 General Truong presented a plan for the recapture of Quang Tri on June 14 . Truong reached the town on July 4 and reached it by July 4 .
 Both the assault and the defense were fierce, with house-to-house fighting . The assault and defense are fierce . House to-house fights were fierce .
 The estimated I U| U number of NVA troops killed in the battle for Quang Tri City . NVA soldiers began to call the town the town after the battle . The estimated number of soldiers killed is I U | U .
 The estimated 5,000 number of ARVN killed in the retaking of Quang Tri city is estimated to be around 5,500 .
 Following the loss of Camp Carroll, General Giai ordered his forces to withdraw behind the Cua Viet River, setting up a battle for the town of Dong Ha . The bridge is blown .
 This was the bridge carrying the main north-south transportation route . This was a critical location because the bridge carried the main North-south transport route .
 A second bridge, built by the French, stood nearby, and a third bridge crossed the river near Camp Carroll . A French bridge was built nearby .
 The three crossings formed the gateway to the heart of Quang Tri province and the cities of Hue and Da Nang . The crossings were built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 By April 2, the Vietnamese Third Marine Battalion, ordered up from reserve, had entered the town . The 20th Armored Squadron on M-48 Pershings, the ARVN's heaviest tanks, also entered town .
 To the north, across the river, the North Vietnamese tanks had taken up positions . The North Vietnamese are taking up positions to the north of the border .
 Colonel Turley ordered Captain Ripley, top adviser to the Third Marines, to blow up the bridge . Ripley's top adviser was killed in the attack on the USS Liberty .
 Captain Ripley displayed extreme bravery and skill as he climbed through the steel structure of the bridge to set the explosives . Ripley was the first person to set explosives on the bridge during the attack .
 The destruction of the bridge at Dong Ha effectively sapped the momentum of the NVA advance . The NVA tanks were forced to make a lengthy detour westward to cross the river . The bridge was destroyed by the destruction .
 ARVN TROOPS V_ Mekong Delta, was placed in charge of Military Region 1 after the fall of Quang Tri in late April 1972 . Supplies to their forces also had to be supplied .
 South Vietnamese pilots dropped napalm bombs, believing their targets to be enemy soldiers . The bombs were dropped by the South Vietnamese government in Vietnam .
 Phuc sought asylum in Canada in 1992, and now speaks publicly about what happened . Phuc is now living in the U.S. and seeking asylum in the Philippines .
 She describes running from Cao Dai temple in Trang Bang and seeing an airplane getting lower . She says she saw an airplane get lower and ran from the temple . She describes the moment she saw the plane disappear .
 It spread over her body, especially her left arm, burning off her clothes . Her left arm was burned off her clothing . Her body was burned .
 She lost consciousness and woke up in hospital, where she spent 14 months in hospital and had 17 operations . She had been in hospital for 14 months and spent 17 operations.
 When she eventually went home, she found that their house was destroyed and they had lost everything . When she went home she found their house had been destroyed .
 Phan Thi Kim Phuc dreamed of becoming a doctor despite the pain, itching, and headaches she suffered almost constantly . Despite the pain and itching, she suffered from headaches and headaches almost constantly, she was determined to become a doctor .
 Local government refused to allow local girl to go to school anymore . Local government cut her studies short by refusing to allow her to go back to school again .
 The Associated Press initially rejected Nick Ut's image of the terrified Phan Thi Kim Phuc fleeing the napalm attack, on the grounds of nudity . The AP initially rejected the image on the basis of the nudity .
 Editors, however, believed the news value of the photo overrode any reservations . Editors believed the photo was a good news story . The photo was taken at the center of a debate over whether or not it should be published .
 Security of the Central Highlands was a paramount concern for South Vietnamese and U.S. strategists in early 1972 . Kontum was the leader of the South Vietnamese Army in Vietnam's Central Highlands .
 Loss of the Highlands and adjacent coastal plains would cut South Vietnam in two . Loss of Highlands would cut the country in two, cutting it off .
 In 1965 and 1967, there was major fighting in the Central Highlands . The Central Highlands was the scene of repeated attacks on British soil .
 The strategy was repeated two weeks before the start of the Easter Offensive when NVA units increased their activities in the area . NVA forces increased their activity in the region before the offensive began .
 A n attack from the west through the Central Highlands—Military Region 2—was one of the three prongs of attack that comprised North Vietnam's plan for a spring offensive . The attack was one of three prong of attack planned for North Vietnam .
 Soldiers from the hilltribes, or Montagnards, played a key role in opposing the NVA advance during the campaign in the Central Highlands .
 Montagnard troops rest in camp at Kontum while B-52s bomb the surrounding area . The French troops were attacked by the B.52s in the area .
 North Vietnamese assembled three infantry divisions along with a tank unit, two artillery regiments, and three regiments of independent infantry—roughly 20,000 troops . North Vietnam assembled three . infantry divisions, two tank units and two artillery units .
 The South Vietnamese, aware of the threat, also posted a brigade of the ARVN Airborne Division to the region . South Vietnamese also posted an air brigade of its own airborne division .
 The ARVN benefited from a formidable U.S. adviser, John Paul Vann, who was able to convince The NVA in action . North Vietnamese soldiers are seen in action as they fire rockets at ARVn tanks .
 The location of the photograph was identified as ""Dak Can,"" but the location is probably Tan Canh or Dak To . The location was originally thought to be located in Dak Canh .
 General Abrams to prevail upon the ARVN to send a second airborne brigade to the Highlands . General Abrams is expected to prevail on the decision to send an airborne brigade into the Highlands.
 Additional ARVN forces from Pleiku to forward positions above Kontum . KONTUM of additional ARVn forces . Additional ARvN forces to be deployed to forward position .
 North Vietnamese forces looking to cut off Kontum from Dak To and Tan Canh, MR 2's northerly outposts . A north-south backbone of the Highlands had several firebases .
 Serious fighting began at the end of March with clashes in Binh Dinh province . The NVA attempted to cut Route 19, which connects coastal ports with the upland cities . Further preparations for the expected offensive included the deployment of troops .
 In the Highlands, NVA troops carried out bombardments on March 30, but held off on ground assaults for several more days . NVA forces carried out the attacks on March 31, but later held off ground assaults .
 A serious engagement came near Dak To, where ARVN troops faced NVA sappers . ARVn troops faced sappers on April 1, 2007 .
 By April 11, fighting had become generalized from Rocket Ridge to Dak To and Tan Canh . By April 12, the fighting had been generalized from . Rocket Ridge was the main focus of the fighting .
 The South Vietnamese chose to move the airborne brigades out of the Highlands in exchange for the Sixth Ranger Group from Quang Tri . Meanwhile, the airborne brigade was moved to the Highlands .
 The Rangers were exhausted from nearly a month of fighting, and moving up troops of the 23rd Division at Pleiku simply weakened the defenses .
 Rocket Ridge positions collapsed, after which the NVA swiftly attacked the major base at Tan Canh, using tanks . The NVA quickly attacked the base using tanks, and the base was attacked by tanks . Rocket Ridge position collapsed .
 Some tanks were destroyed from the air, but the ARVN at Tan Canh and Dak To collapsed on April 24 . Some tanks destroyed from air, some tanks were also destroyed by the air .
 The M72 LAW was the primary ground-operated U.S. antitank weapon during the Vietnam War . The LAW was a ground-operated anti-tank weapon .
 Operable by one person and highly portable, it provided mobile defense against tank assaults by the NVA such as those during the Kontum campaign . became one of the heroes of the Easter Offensive, holding out against numerous challenges .
 General Abrams designated Kontum for a day of B-52 strikes on May 12, just as the North Vietnamese were resuming their attacks . The day of strikes was the day of the attacks .
 By May 30, the area was sufficiently secure for President Thieu to make a visit . The area was secure enough to allow the president to visit .
 A tragic footnote to the story occurred on June 9, when Vann's helicopter was shot down in the area where he declared the last NVA positions to be eliminated .
 The struggle against North Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands highlighted the continuing importance of United States airpower during major ARVN engagements . ESSENTIAL SUPPORT: U.S. airpower is essential in the fight against North Vietnam .
 In spite of its success in holding Kontum, the ARVN did not manage to retake Tan Canh or Dak To . Both remained under North Vietnamese control after the Easter Offensive .
 U.S. troops carried by helicopter into Kontum in the Central Highlands on June 3,1972 .
 Holding Kontum, 25 miles away, was a major challenge for the North Vietnamese forces . Holding the city was only 25 miles from the main base .
 The NVA's advance forces were in need of supplies, and weeks passed until the NVA was able to mount its assault on the town . Their advance forces needed supplies, so they were forced to wait for weeks to get supplies .
 By then, the ARVN leadership had sent back one of the airborne brigades . President Thieu had appointed a new corps commander and a fresh leader for the 22nd Division .
 Armored vehicles provided greater mobility and were key to the NVA's offensives . Tank battles were rare, but armored vehicles provided more mobility and greater mobility .
 Centurion MK 5 battle tank was deployed by the Royal Australia Armored Corps in Vietnam . The Centurion was deployed in Vietnam by the Australian Army in 1968 .
 Designed as a self-propelled antiaircraft gun, the Duster's guns also proved effective in breaking up infantry assaults . M42 Duster (US/South Vietnam) was designed to break up infantry attacks .
 A self-propelled howitzer, the lightly armored M55 required a crew of just six men . M55 was a self-powered howitzer that could be armed with six men and a crew .
 M706 Commando (US/South Vietnam) was used mainly as a reconnaissance and patrol vehicle . The amphibious armored car was used in Vietnam and the U.S.
 Ml 13 (US/ South Vietnam) was usually armed with an M2 Browning machine gun . This armored personnel carrier was armed with a Browning Browning .
 The PT-76 first saw service in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive . The amphibious tank was exported to allies of the Soviet Union . It was first seen in North Vietnam .
 By 1965, the NVA had begun to use a Chinese copy of the Soviet T-54—the Type 59 . The Type 59 is the Type 59 version of the T-55 .
 Military Region 3 was crucial for South Vietnam . It formed a safety belt for Saigon and contained most of the country's industry . The region was crucial to Saigon's economy .
 The area around An Loc had been the scene of several battles between the United States and communist forces earlier in the war .
 In March 1969, the U.S. First Infantry Division and 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment fought in the abandoned Michelin rubber plantation at An Loc to stop its advance south toward Saigon .
 NVA forces, and the Viet Cong, were relatively inexperienced at fighting as a conventional force . NVA and Viet Cong are relatively inexperienced with conventional warfare .
 Tran Van Tra was not fooled by his South Vietnamese counterpart . He was not able to convince his South Vietnam counterpart . The South Vietnamese were not fooled .
 On April 5, General Tra sent two regiments supported by two dozen tanks plus heavy artillery to Binh Long's town of Loc Ninh, just north of the province capital of An Loc . General Tra has sent two tanks and heavy artillery into the town .
 Tra's Seventh Division blocked a section of Route 13, and surrounded Binh Long province . Air Force close support planes, and Vietnamese planes all responded, but no action was made . Tra's 7th Division blocked the road, and surrounding Binh
 Loc Ninh fell to the Viet Cong's Ninth Division on April 7, making An Loc, the NVA's next target, a NVA target . The NVA is currently fighting in Vietnam's capital, Hui-Nhong Province .
 The ARVN had scattered groups of its Fifth Division across the province, which General Tra's forces took some time to drive back . The ARNN was taking control of the province .
 President Thieu summoned a full division, the 21 st, from MR 4 to block the road to Saigon, while bringing up the ARVN First Airborne Brigade to back An Loc defenders .
 Lieutenant Colonel Burr M Willey accompanied by his dog Moose, fires his rifle as he moves up Route 13 toward An Loc with a South Vietnamese army unit . Colonel Tran Van War companions Lieutenant Colonel Willey, accompanied by dog Moose .
 Nhut, the province chief, had been at a conference when the attacks started . He hastened to An Loc to reorganize the available Regional Forces troops .
 What became the siege of An Loc began on April 12 with an NVA attack, accompanied by a 7,000-shell barrage . Artillery bombardment began April 12 .
 ARVN soldiers initially ran away from the T-54 tanks, but soon discovered the effectiveness of their shoulder-fired light antitank weapons and the support of U.S. gunship helicopters . The ARVn soldiers eventually discovered the . effectiveness of both shoulder-fire . light
 In spite of their efforts, the ARVN lost the northern half of the town . The ARVn lost the rest of its northern part of town .
 By then, the ARVN's First Airborne Brigade had reached nearby positions and joined the defense, taking charge of recovering the airdropped supplies . The ARVn's first airborne brigade took charge of the rescue mission .
 On April 29, Tra's troops employed the SA-7 antiaircraft missile, forcing the air drops to a high altitude that required special parachute techniques . Tra's forces used the missile to make air drops at high altitudes .
 Second echelon forces concentrated behind them in An Loc . NVA crowded into An Loc, with second echellon forces behind them .
 Vietnamese efforts shifted to the restoration of ground links between Saigon and An Loc . South Vietnamese efforts to restore ground links with Saigon began in 2003 .
 I t is thought that Hanoi's objective in Military Region 3 was to strike down Route 13 from the Cambodian border and storm Saigon . Hanois thought to have been trying to strike Route 13 to strike Saigon's Route 13 and storm the city .
 Initial proposals to make it the main focus of the offensive were changed because of supply problems . Initial proposals had been made to focus on the offensive but were later changed .
 The assault opened on April 2, 1972, with an NVA regiment advancing toward the province of Tay Ninh . The assault began with a diversion .
 The North Vietnamese had even placed cardboard T-54 tanks opposite the city of Tay Ninh to convince South Vietnamese leaders that the attack would come there . The North Vietnam had placed cardboard tanks opposite to convince them that they would attack .
 North Vietnamese General Tran Van Tra led his main force of three divisions from Cambodia into Binh Long province . In fact, the real attack began three days later, when the North Vietnamese general led his troops from Cambodia to Binhlong province .
 The NVA Seventh Division aimed to block Route 13 and isolate the battlefield, while other forces conquered the province and prepared for the pursuit south into Saigon . The battle began in April 1968 .
 Although the ARVN had regained An Loc, it did not attempt to recapture the Loc Ninh district of the province . The ARN was not able to regain An Loc district .
 ARVN paid a heavy price for its victory at An Loc, with some 5,400 casualties, half of whom were killed . Half of those casualties were killed in the battle, half were killed by the ARVn .
 He knelt and prayed before a statue of Christ that had survived the shelling . The statue is one of the few statues of Christ to survive the attack .
 ARVN forces stand and cheer on a knocked-out NVA tank as airlifted reinforcements arrive on July 3,1972 .
 Lieutenant Colonel Ed Benedit recorded the destructive transformation of the city . Lieutenant Colonel Benedit also recorded the destruction of the town .
 Captain Harold Moffett Jr. describes how they counted the rounds as they came in to An Loc by the hour until they increased so much they could not keep up . Captain Moffett says they counted rounds as the rounds came in at An Loc .
 It seemed almost impossible to put so many rounds into one small area in such a small period of time . It was almost impossible for the team to do so much in one area .
 Lieutenant colonel Ed Benedit saw the intermittent shelling transform the once bustling, rural metropolitan area into a cemetery where nothing moved . The once bustling area was once a thriving, thriving city .
 Reduced to rubble Vietnamese civilians search through the remains of An Loc's main market for food and valuables on June 22,1972 .
 Once the siege was over, the inhabitants emerged from underground hiding places to find their homes and livelihoods destroyed by the bombardment . The inhabitants of the besieged areas were forced to come out of hiding places .
 Disruption of this lifeline to the North became a priority for the U.S. The U.N. says it is a "priority" for North Korea .
 President Nixon thought he had isolated the North Vietnamese regime in the spring of 1972 . Nixon's visit to China in February was a diplomatic triumph of his visit .
 Easter Offensive forced back the South Vietnamese on front after front . The Easter Offensive took place in Vietnam's capital, Hᙙ�s capital .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman Admiral Moorer said April 5 that the president wanted new options . The president has been criticized for wanting new options for the military .
 First proposal would have been a focused bombing campaign like that of 1967 . The first proposal was a focus bombing campaign .
 The second, named Pocket Money, envisioned mining Haiphong and other North Vietnamese ports . The first of two proposed mining plans was to mine North Vietnam ports .
 Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird protested that mining Haiphong would achieve little unless North Vietnam was also bombed . Laird argued that mining would not achieve little if North Vietnam were also bombed by the U.S.
 Nixon promptly approved plans for the first operation of bombing the North . Nixon then approved plans to bomb North Korea .
 No state of war existed between the U.S. and any country in Southeast Asia . However, there were no states of war between the United States and any other country in the region .
 A full menu of diplomatic notices and private meetings has been accompanied by Pocket Money . Pocket Money has been given a look at the full list of diplomatic meetings .
 Nixon surrounded this planned escalation with the trappings of a decisionmaking process, including meetings of the National Security Council, consultations with senior members of Congress, and a televised address to the nation . Nixon also surrounded this strategy with the tppings of the decision making process .
 U.S. jets bomb warehouses and shipping areas in Haiphong on May 17, 1972 . The major worry concerned was the response of the attack on Haipong .
 The mining of Haiphong occurred alongside the Linebacker I bombing campaign . The mining took place alongside the bombing campaign of the Korean peninsula .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff contingency plans envisioned sealing off North Vietnam's Haiphong harbor by mining or blockade .
 This aircraft carrier launched many of the aircraft that seeded mines at the entrance to Haiphong Harbor from May 1972 . The aircraft carrier was used to seed mines in the area .
 Nixon was shortly due in Moscow for a summit conference and signature of agreements on the nuclear arms race . Nixon was due to attend the summit conference in Moscow .
 The fear was that the Russians might cancel the summit and boost their aid to North Vietnam . The fear is that the summit might also boost the aid to the communist state .
 It's conceivable that they might respond to the mining of Haiphong with force . It's also conceivable that the mining industry might respond with force against them .
 The USSR responded by sending submarines and a flotilla of warships into the South China Sea . Although the USSR responded, they kept the date for the summit . The USSR sent submarines and flotillas of warships to the area .
 Soviet agricultural production that year had fallen far short of its needs . The USSR needed to secure grain supplies from the United States. It was fortunate for the Americans that Soviet agriculture had fallen short .
 Initial preparations for Pocket Money were advancing in high gear by April 20 . The tactical plans were complete by April 23 . Mines in place were in place by April 24 .
 Mineman Second Class Robert D Gill Jr. was sent from his duty post in Charleston, South Carolina, to the USS Coral Sea in the Gulf of Tonkin to prepare the mines .
 Six LTV A-7 Corsair aircraft and three Grumman A-6A Intruders dropped the mines at the entrance to the harbor . The mines were dropped by the aircraft .
 A number of visiting merchant vessels given warning of this deadline left port . Many of the ships given warning had already left port in time for port .
 Others, still unloading, remained to be penned in until the end of 1972 . Others remained to remain penned in as late as 1972 .
 The mines were programmed to deactivate after a certain period of time . The mines are programmed to be deactivated after certain periods of use .
 By early 1973, U.S. forces had deposited 11,603 mines in North Vietnamese ports and waterways at a total cost of $9.6 million .
 The success of the U.S. mining operation is extremely difficult to judge, says Henry Kissinger .
 The CIA warned that the North Vietnamese army requirements for war in the South were so small that stopping entry into Haiphong would not affect their supplies . The CIA had repeatedly warned that North Vietnamese Army requirements were small .
 The NVA's move to conventional warfare in the Easter Offensive had greatly increased its logistics requirements, and that offensive died down after May 1972 . It is not clear if the cessation was a result of the mining operation .
 The most intense phase of the offensive had halted before the mining of the harbor began . The offensive had been halted before mining began .
 Admiral Elmo R Zumwalt Jr. was commander of riverine warfare in South Vietnam . He was chief of naval operations from 1970 to 1974 . Advocate of mining in Vietnam .
 The Paris Accords committed the United States to clearing the mines from Haiphong Harbor . The U.S. is clearing the minefields .
 CIA estimated that North Vietnam's imports in June and July 1972 fell to about 3,000 tons a day . The CIA estimated the drop in imports was less than half the 6,100 ton daily level of the previous year .
 Eventually, it was agreed that the U.S. would take responsibility for removing the mines .
 Operation End Sweep was codenamed End Sweep between February and July 1973 . Operation was undertaken by the U.S. Navy's Mine Warfare Service .
 This strategy had little impact on the North Vietnamese war effort . Later bombing campaigns extended from bridges, roads, and railroads to whole areas to demoralize the population .
 An aircraft equipped with an LGB could plant bombs within 20 feet of the intended target, which was a massive improvement on the accuracy of fighterbombers equipped with standard munitions . An LGB bomb could be planted within 20 ft of the target .
 Rolling Thunder campaign had ended in 1968, with only sporadic later bombing . Rolling Thunder bombing campaign ended in 1970s, but ended in 1971 .
 The Spring Offensive of April reinforced a determination to disrupt supply lines from the North . In 1972, the U.S. had begun planning a renewed bombing campaign of North Vietnam .
 The Thanh Hoa Bridge is a key conduit for supplies to North Vietnam . Advances in aerial bombing technology made the precise targeting of military objectives a real possibility .
 During Rolling Thunder the bridge had been bombed many times but never destroyed . The bridge had never been destroyed during the bombing campaign .
 The strike, with two dozen laser-guided bombs, demolished the western span of the bridge . The strike was carried out with the help of two dozen bombs .
 Repeat raids ensured the North Vietnamese were unable to that remained problematic throughout the bombing campaign . Repeat raids helped ensure the North Vietnam was unable to be hit .
 As of August 12, some 22,400 sorties had been scheduled but 15 percent were abandoned due to bad weather . 15 percent of the scheduled sorties were canceled due to weather .
 The operation was unquestionably more successful than the raids that preceded it . Although barely half the listed targets had been hit, the operation was unassailable .
 Crewmen on the aircraft carrier USS Constellation, positioned off the coast of North Vietnam during Linebacker I, fit bombs to an F-4 Phantom jet on May 23, 1972 .
 The planning for the operation that would be named Linebacker I was well underway by March . The operation was called Linebacker II and was planned for August 12, 1972 .
 The Air Force and Navy had assembled significant reinforcements of aircraft and ships from South Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and the United States . The U.S. Navy and Air Force were able to muster significant reinforcements .
 The first day of the operation was May 10, 1972, when strike formations of Navy and Marine aircraft flew into North Vietnam from Yankee Station in the Tonkin Gulf . Air Force planes from United States bases in Thailand also flew in along the Mekong River .
 Over the ensuing days and weeks, the Americans destroyed bridges, railroad facilities, roads, and tunnels . Over the years, the U.S. destroyed bridges and railroad facilities .
 May 13 was May 13, when United States repaired the damage during the war . The U.S. was ingenious at finding ways to get around the damage caused by war .
 The smart bombs were a highly effective addition to the U.S. armory, but their use required good weather . They were highly effective additions to the American armory .
 Special training for U.S. naval air crews and new weapons for air forces improved American survivability and destructiveness . The new weapons and training for air force improved American . Washington in a stronger position for air warfare .
 Draft agreement reached, but both North and South Vietnamese negotiators found cause to resist signing . Draft agreement was reached but both South and North Vietnamese negotiators refused to sign it .
 Navy crews achieved a 13 to 1 kill-to-loss ratio against Hanoi's planes . U.S. Navy bombers destroyed a railroad bridge over the Song Thai Binh River southeast of Hanoa on May 10, 1972 .
 Losses of both Navy and Air Force aircraft were minimized by warnings of North Vietnamese fighter activity provided by U.S. radars and intelligence units . Losses were minimized with warnings provided by United States .
 The worst day for the Americans was on June 27, when four Air Force Phantoms were shot down, three by MiGs, with no North Vietnamese losses . No North Vietnam losses .
 North Vietnam lost 62 of its own fighter interceptors to the U.S. In all, the Vietnamese lost 62 interceptors . North Vietnam was forced to withdraw from Vietnam in 1973 .
 The U.S. had demonstrated to North Vietnam that Washington would respond forcefully to its actions in the South . Washington would exact a cost for supplying the insurgents .
 Washington knew almost nothing about the composition of imports, stock levels, or other key indices . This made definitive judgments about the effectiveness of the bombing impossible .
 The Thieu government's objectives were the removal of North Vietnamese forces from the South, the disarming of the Viet Cong, and securing the continued leadership of Thieu .
 The major concern of the North was to secure a total withdrawal of the United States from South Vietnam, ensuring the Viet Cong was brought into the Saigon government, and, if possible, ousting President Thieu .
 Peace Talks Open, or ""plenary"" talks, with permanent delegations from all the participants had got underway in Paris by 1972 .
 Henry Kissinger for the U.S. and Le Due Tho for North Vietnam were involved in secret talks . Henry Kissinger was in charge of the United States and North Vietnam . The talks proceeded alongside secret talks between Kissinger and Le Tho in Vietnam .
 Henry Kissinger and Le Due Tho left out the intensely wary South Vietnamese . Kissinger had become clear that any progress in Vietnam peace talks would have to come from the meetings .
 The U.S. played its hand very close to its chest during the Vietnam War . The South Vietnamese received periodic updates from the United States . The United States played a big role in the operation .
 President Nixon revealed the existence of the secret talks in January . After January, pressure to reach an agreement grew more intense . The talks have been ongoing since then .
 U.S. negotiators rejected a proposal to unseat President Thieu . The North Vietnamese refused to call off their offensive and the United States refused to back down .
 The peace talks in a state of deadlock, the next scheduled discussion has been cancelled . The next scheduled peace talks has been called off .
 A commission that would be created to carry out a new presidential election in the South could function as an interim coalition government . During a summit with the Russians in Moscow, Nixon sent the North Vietnamese another message via Soviet hands .
 Meetings on July 19 and August 1 began to break the deadlock . That proposal interested the North Vietnamese, and meetings began to begin again .
 The United States agreed to include both political and military elements in an agreement . The North Vietnamese, assuming Thieu would resign before any election, relented on their demand that he give up power immediately .
 Thieu rejected the idea of a ""commission"" that could become a coalition government . Any ceasefire that did not force the North Vietnamese to withdraw from the South would not be accepted .
 Kissinger asked Thieu to help to extend the negotiations until Nixon could unleash a new show of force against the North . Nixon's presidential mandate in November, a renewed presidential mandate, is expected to be renewed in November .
 The key negotiator for North Vietnam in the peace talks that led to the 1973 Peace Accords, he refused the Nobel Peace Prize he was offered jointly with Henry Kissinger . He was offered the prize jointly with Kissinger .
 Kissinger's deputy, Alexander Haig, arrived in Saigon at the end of September . Meanwhile, Kissinger's secretary of state arrived in September .
 Haig carried a new plan for bombing North Vietnam, which he discussed with U.S. air commanders . Unbeknown to the South Vietnamese, the plan was carried out by Haig .
 Kissinger returned to Saigon with a final draft ceasefire agreement . Thieu pushes back after a final round of Paris talks, Kissinger returns with draft agreement .
 He had intended to go on to Hanoi, where the paper would be initialed ahead of a formal signing . He was due to travel to Vietnam to sign the document .
 Thieu rebelled, making the very same objections that he had tabled earlier . Thieu, however, rebelled . He made the same objections as he had earlier .
 On December 13, 1972, Kissinger recommended that Nixon approve massive bombing of North Vietnam . At that point the North Vietnamese went public and revealed the text of the draft peace agreement .
 Nixon was keen to demonstrate his commitment to the South . The South was unhappy with the terms of the draft agreement .
 The U.S. was forced to seek revisions in accordance with Thieu's demands . The United States was forced by the Vietnamese government to revise the agreement .
 A new round of talks started in November 1972, but they were again inconclusive . A new set of talks was held between 1972 and 1973 .
 Both the president and Kissinger told him that from January 1973, following the opening of the next session of the United States Congress, it would not be possible for them to continue the war . But Due refused to budge .
 Further secret talks between Kissinger and Le Due Tho took place without result, and Kissinger yet again broke off the negotiations .
 President Nixon and Chinese Premier Chou-EnLai toast each other during a reception in China in February, 1972 . Nixon and Chou-Lai were first Americans to meet in 1972 .
 Nixon's contacts with China played a key part in preparing the ground for peace talks with North Vietnam . Nixon's contact with China helped prepare the way for peace negotiations .
 Kissinger did not work his way up through the ranks, but went straight to the top, due to his skills as a policy analyst . Kissinger is known for his work as a diplomat and foreign policy expert .
 Kissinger began life as Heinz Alfred, the first of two sons, in Germany . He was born in 1923 to orthodox Jewish parents in Fiirth, Germany . Kissinger attended Harvard and Yale University .
 The family moved to England in 1938 to escape Nazi persecution, and then to the United States, where Heinz became Henry Heinz . Heinz moved to the U.S. in 1938, where he became Henry .
 His native German led to assignments in Army intelligence, and toward the end of World War II to a role in military government . He oversaw a district of occupied Germany, overseeing a district .
 After the war, he won admission to Harvard, graduated with high honors and went on to gain a doctorate in history . He crafted a prize-winning dissertation on the Congress of Vienna and the end of the Napoleonic Wars .
 Ending the Vietnam War was a highlight of Kissinger's career, and one for which he was jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with Le DucTho, North Vietnam's chief negotiator . Ending the war was one of the highlights of his career .
 Due declined the prize on the grounds that real peace had not been achieved . Due declined to accept the prize because he said real peace was not achieved .
 He also served as rapporteur for study groups on key national security issues of the day . He also turned his notes into books .
 He directed a prestigious Defense Studies Program, attended by future world leaders, and became a professor in 1962 .
 Kissinger's first visit to China in July 1971 recognized the legitimacy of the People's Republic . Kissinger's visit prepared the ground for President Nixon's visit in 1972 . President Nixon visited China in 1972.
 Kissinger is a regular fixture on international lecture circuits . Kissinger was a major figure in the Middle East during the Cold War .
 Kissinger saw the rise of China, and the potential of economic cooperation, from an early point in his career . Kissinger saw China's rise as a potential economic partner in the world .
 1982 policy reviews on every imaginable subject, diverting its staff while he created National Security Council mechanisms for key policy areas, including Vietnam . 1982: "Kissinger" created a system for the White House to review key policy issues .
 Kissinger then used these sub-committees to take control of policies in selected areas . Kissinger then took control of the NSC sub-Committee . Kissinger used them to take over policy decisions in select areas .
 Henry Kissinger's power that U.S. policies advanced in areas where he exercised control is a measure of his power . Kissinger was a key figure in the United States' foreign policy . Kissinger's influence is evident in his ability to influence foreign policy in his own country .
 Both Vietnam negotiations and those on nuclear arms control involved dominant Kissinger roles . Nixon's opening to China was a key part of the Vietnam negotiations .
 In Nixon's second term, Kissinger became secretary of state as well as NSC adviser . Kissinger was Secretary of State of State and NSC Adviser in Nixon's first term .
 President Ford kept him as secretary of state but appointed a new national security adviser at the end of 1975 . President Gerald Ford appointed him in 1975, but kept him in office until 1975 .
 Kissinger left government in 1977 and opened an international consulting business . Kissinger left the country in 1977 to open a consulting business in 1977 .
 President Ronald Reagan appointed Kissinger to a policy review commission for Central America . Kissinger advised George W Bush on the Iraq war on behalf of the president .
 Hillary Clinton also courted Kissinger when she was secretary of state in the Obama adminisitration . Hillary Clinton was also courting Kissinger in the 1980s .
 Critics continue to accuse Kissinger of war crimes for his role in various conflicts, including Vietnam . Some critics continue to say Kissinger committed war crimes .
 Kissinger was already advising the U.S. president . Kissinger was advising the United States president when he was assassinated .
 President Kennedy counseled President Kennedy on the 1961 Berlin Crisis . He advised both Kennedy and President Johnson on Vietnam .
 Kissinger supplied inside information to Republican candidate Richard Nixon in 1968 election . Kissinger never refuted reports, never refuted, that he supplied information to Nixon .
 After the election, Nixon made Kissinger his national security adviser . Kissinger was Nixon's national security advisor . Kissinger is now Kissinger's successor to Kissinger .
 Kissinger's penchant for tactics quickly became clear—he set the bureaucracy to work on extensive TIMELINE 11 May 27, 1923 Born in the Bavarian town of Furth, Germany .
 Marries second wife, Nancy Maginnes, in Arlington, Virginia, in 1974 . KISSINGER with his wife Nancy .
 North Vietnamese negotiator Le Due Tho agreed that President Thieu could remain in power in the South after a ceasefire was signed . In October 1972, the North Vietnam negotiator at the Paris peace talks agreed to allow Thieu to stay in power .
 In preparation for a winter bombing campaign, a B-52 force was assembled in nearby countries by late 1972 . However, there were no B-51s in place .
 The U.S. planned a high-intensity bombing campaign codenamed Linebacker II . The bombing campaign had both military and diplomatic objectives .
 U.S. forces were already gathering for Linebacker II, a successor to the Linebacker I bombing campaign that had ended in October . The bombing campaign was the first since the bombing campaign ended October .
 General Van Tien Dung had approved the final defense plan on November 24, and ordered that everything be ready by December 3 . General Van Dung ordered everything ready for December 3, and had approved everything by November 24 .
 B-52s in the lead wave took off from Thailand, flew up the Mekong River valley and approached Hanoi . That evening, B-QCs flew into the city from Thailand .
 U.S. Navy and Air Force attack planes entered from seaward hoping to distract the North Vietnamese . U.N. Navy, Air Force planes entered seaward trying to distract North Vietnamese forces .
 The lead bomber, piloted by Captain Hal Wilson, reported wall-to-wall surface to-air missiles ahead . Captain Wilson reported wall to wall of missiles ahead.
 About an hour into the raid NVA headquarters learned a SAM from the 261st Missile Regiment had downed a B-52 . NVA HQ learned about the raid an hour later that a SAM had downed the plane . The raid was the first of its kind in Afghanistan .
 Over the succeeding days the attacks continued, with a halt for Christmas itself . Over Christmas itself, the attacks on Christmas itself continued .
 The bombers blasted air defenses, railroads, and industries; tactical aircraft added armed reconnaissance . The bombers were bombers of the day .
 The North Vietnamese tried mass firings of SAMs, missile launchings in unguided mode, fighter intercepts, even a deliberate midair crash . The North Vietnam tried mass . firings, missile launches, and even midair crashes .
 In America, pundits dubbed the operation the Christmas Bombing, a firestorm of political protest ensued .
 Marches and protests took place in many cities despite the winter cold . Marches were held in cities across the world despite the cold .
 There were rumors of pilots refusing orders and actual instances of radio spies of the Teaball (radio interception) unit halting work .
 Thirty B-52s from Andersen Air Force Base were involved in the first wave of attacks on the night of December 18, 1972 . Alexander Haig said later that later that the first phase of the attacks on December 18 was a success .
 Linebacker II achieved its objective in forcing all sides back to the negoitating table . After Linebacker I achieved it .
 It did not impinge significantly on communist forces in the South . However, it did not stop the spread of communist forces .
 The scale of the bombing had a swift effect on the peace process . It was the first bombing to take place in Iraq in the 1980s .
 With the bombing leaving the NVA forces in the South untouched by the bombing, the Ho Chi Minh Trail not targeted, the North Vietnamese could renew their operations at any time . The bombing leaves the Ho-Chi Minh trail untouched, leaving the North Vietnam could renew its operations
 American singer Joan Baez and two other antiwar activists visit the ruins of Hanoi's airport on December 21, 1972 . V Witnesses to destruction witness to destruction American singer Baez .
 Nixon gave up the Christmas Bombing because his cabinet deserted him and there were threats of impeachment . Nixon was forced to give up the bombing because of his cabinet deserting him and threats of being impeached .
 "The bombing was not sustainable politically any more than it was militarily," says President Obama . The bombing was 'not sustainable politically and militarily' says White House spokesman .
 Admiral Moorer told his colleagues on the Joint Chiefs of Staff that he had tried to get Nixon to continue the bombing until the North Vietnamese signed an agreement, not simply agreeing to reopen talks, but that he'd failed in that endeavor . Moorer said he'd tried to continue bombing until
 Doves had previously been a popular feature on badges, buttons, and posters designed by protesters against the Vietnam War . Doves were previously used in badges and posters .
 From August 1969, additional peace talks were conducted in secret in Paris . Peace talks were held in secret between 1968 and 1969 .
 Talks stalled over South Vietnam's President Thieu's insistence that NVA troops should leave the South . Talks stalled in the fall of 1972 over President's insistence on leaving NVA forces .
 In early January 1973, the Democratic majority in both houses of Congress voted to deny military aid when Nixon next requested it . Nixon's request for aid was denied by both chambers of Congress .
 Henry Kissinger shakes hands with Le Due Tho on January 23, 1973, to conclude their negotiations . J The deal was sealed in 1973 .
 The final four-hour meeting was held in the Peninsula Hotel on Avenue Kleber in Paris . Previous talks had taken place in private apartments and villas .
 All parties sat down in Paris to discuss peace, hopes were high for a resolution of the conflict . The Peace Accords were signed by the United States and France .
 Many details still had to be worked out when the final document was signed . However, many details still remained outstanding when the agreement was reached .
 On December 30, 1972, the United States called a halt to the bombing of the North . The U.S. bombed North Korea in 1972 .
 By January 5, both sides were discussing ways in which a peace agreement would be enforced . Areas for checkpoints to monitor people and equipment entering or leaving the country . A lure for the South Vietnamese was the supply of extra equipment .
 To maximize South Vietnam's arsenal in advance of the Peace Accords, supplies included broken items that would be eligible for replacement under the one-for-one rule .
 The ceasefire agreed between North and South Vietnam soon eroded . Agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in Vietnam was reached in 1973 .
 The agreement also included a provision that military equipment could be replaced on a one-for-one basis, which then raised the question of monitoring .
 International Commission for Control and Supervision — with contingents from Indonesia, Canada, Poland, Poland and Hungary — will handle all such issues . It was decided that an international commission for control and supervision would handle such matters .
 The Paris agreement provided for a ""standstill"" ceasefire, which left all military forces in the positions they occupied at the instant fighting stopped . Details resolved .
 North Vietnamese forces would leave South Vietnam, but all of the remaining American forces would withdraw . United States prisoners of war would be handed back to the North Vietnamese .
 The two South Vietnamese parties were supposed to agree to work toward elections through a National Council of Reconciliation and Concord . The two parties are supposed to have agreed to an agreement through the council .
 The sides agreed on all outstanding issues in the agreement's main text, leaving only details to be settled . The next day, the sides agreed to settle the remaining details of the agreement .
 By January 11, Kissinger and Nixon were deliberating on a schedule that would involve signing the agreement in Paris and Kissinger subsequently visiting Hanoi . Kissinger was in Paris to sign the agreement and Kissinger was subsequently in Vietnam .
 Kissinger and Le Due Tho came to a draft accord, to which South Vietnam demanded numerous changes . Hanoi would reject those changes . The popular history of these last months of talks is that Kissinger came to an agreement .
 North Vietnam meekly accepted Thieu's demands after the Christmas Bombing, and the Paris agreement was based on the revised formula .
 The draft agreement of October 1972 and January 1973 was signed in January 1973 . However, a comparison of the draft agreement in 1972 and 1973 tells a different story . The agreement was reached in 1973 and signed in 1973 .
 The most significant change was that the national council would not be an ""administrative structure,"" which minimized the possibility of it emerging as a coalition government . The national council is not an administrative structure, meaning it will not be a national council .
 The failure to convert the DMZ to a border was a success for North Vietnam . There was some new language on the border, but it was not a border .
 The removal of NVA forces from South Vietnam was delegated to the joint committees, which would frustrate Saigon's representatives . Saigon representatives would be frustrated by the NVA's withdrawal from Vietnam .
 Under Operation Enhance, the United States supplied South Vietnam with 63 working trucks and 1,350 broken ones . The U.S. supplied the South Vietnamese with 63 trucks, 1,300 broken ones, along with weapons .
 The signing took place on January 27, with William Rogers the U.S. signatory and Nguyen Duy Trinh North Vietnam's . The signing was signed by William Rogers, the United States signatory . The United States and North Vietnam are signatories to the agreement .
 Women at the Miramar Air Station, California, wait for their husbands to arrive back on U.S. soil in February 1973 .
 Their husbands, U.S. Marines, were among the first POWs released following the Peace Accord . Their husbands were released after the peace accord .
 The family of Lieutenant Colonel Robert L Stirm rushed to greet him at Travis Air Force Base, California .
 Despite the Paris Peace Accords, the Vietnamese remain embroiled in conflict . After January 1973, Vietnamese remain in conflict in Vietnam .
 After a final push for Saigon in 1975, the fate of all of Indochina is sealed . The fate of Saigon was sealed by the fall of Vietnam .
 In the 1980s, the United States worked with the governments of Vietnam and Laos to bring MIA and prisoner of war remains home . The U.S. helped bring the remains of POWs and POWs home .
 O he departure of American forces did not end the war in Vietnam . After January 1973, the U.S. military left Vietnam . The U.N. ended the Vietnam War .
 Despite an official ceasefire, fighting continued between the ARVN and communist troops . Despite a ceasefire, there was still ongoing fighting in the country .
 In America, the political will to support the Saigon government rapidly evaporated . Saigon's government was overthrown by the Vietnamese government in Vietnam .
 North Vietnam embarked upon a final offensive in spring 1975 . Realizing the U.S. would not intervene, the North Vietnamese embarked on the offensive . North Vietnam realized it would not be able to rely on the United States .
 The last American personnel were evacuated from Saigon as NVA tanks entered the city . The last U.S. personnel evacuated from the city were evacuated .
 Cambodia fell to the communist Khmer Rouge, its population suffering immense hardship . Meanwhile, Cambodia fell under the communist regime of Cambodia . Cambodia's population suffered immense hardship.
 Vietnam fought further wars against the Khmer Rouge and China before a kind of peace prevailed . Vietnam fought another war with China and Vietnam fought more than a decade before peace prevailed.
 In America, the process of coming to terms with the war and its consequences was painful and prolonged . The war was a war that left the U.S. in a deeply troubled state of war .
 About 25,000 ARVN troops have been killed in combat by the end of 1973 despite a supposed ceasefire . The ARVVN is still fighting in Vietnam .
 President Thieu withdraws his forces to a defensive perimeter around Saigon and the Mekong Delta . Thieu decides to withdraw his forces from Saigon to a defense perimeter around the city .
 President Thieu resigns, denouncing the Americans for abandoning South Vietnam to its fate . Thieu's resignation comes as President of Vietnam, Vietnam's first president .
 General Tran Van Minh becomes South Vietnamese president and seeks a deal to end the fighting . He becomes president of South Vietnam in April .
 U.S. Air Force carries out its last bombing mission over Cambodia . Case-Church Amendment comes into effect .
 May 9, 1974 United States Congress begins impeachment proceedings against President Nixon in response to his role in the Watergate scandal . Congress impeaches President Nixon after Watergate scandal led to his resignation from office .
 Congress votes to cut aid for South Vietnam to $700 million in 1975 . Congress cut aid to Vietnam in 1974 to $800 million .
 The NVA and Viet Cong attack the provincial capital of Phuoc Long to test the morale of the ARVN and the U.S. response to an open breach of the Paris Peace Accords . The attack was the first to test both the morale and the United States response
 Communist tanks drive into the center of Saigon and the government of South Vietnam surrenders . South Vietnam was defeated by the Communists in April 1968 .
 Da Nang quickly falls to communist forces as South Vietnamese military and civilian morale collapses . South Vietnamese government and military morale collapses as communist forces fall .
 At Xuan Loc, outnumbered South Vietnamese troops put up valiant resistance but were eventually forced to fall back on Saigon . The battle was fought at Xuan Loc in Vietnam's capital city .
 In Cambodia, Khmer Rouge guerrillas occupy the capital Phnom Penh and forcibly evacuate the population to the countryside . In Cambodia the population was forcibly evacuated from the countryside by the guerillas . Cambodia's government was overthrown by the Khmer War II .
 The Pathet Lao overthrows the Laotian monarchy and declares Laos a People's Democratic Republic . Laos was overthrown by the Pathet Lao in December 2003 . Laos is now a Democratic Republic of Laos .
 Stamp commemorating the . first national assembly after Vietnam's reunification . The Vietnamese Army launches a full-scale invasion of Kampuchea in association with Cambodian rebels .
 54,000 refugees flee Vietnam in a month . The Boat People exodus peaks in June 1979 .
 Vietnam completes the withdrawal of its military forces from Cambodia after an 11-year occupation of the country . Vietnam completed the withdrawal in September 1989 .
 President Bill Clinton announces the restoration of full diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Vietnam . President Clinton announced the full restoration of diplomatic relations in July 1995 .
 Vietnam adopts a Law on Private Enterprise that encourages private business, triggering a period of rapid economic growth . Vietnam adopted a law on private enterprise that encouraged private business .
 Vietnamese forces occupy Phnom Penh and overthrow the Pol Pot regime . Vietnamese forces install a new government under Heng Samrin . Pol Pot was overthrown by Vietnamese forces .
 China launches a punitive offensive into northern Vietnam, in response to the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia . China launched the offensive in 1979 . The offensive was a response to Vietnam's invasion of Vietnam .
 Vietnam amends its constitution to open the country to foreign investment in the pursuit of economic growth in 1992 . Vietnam's constitution was amended in 1992 to allow foreign investment .
 The Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall is dedicated in Washington, D.C. ft Faux Ho Chi Minh propaganda poster, made for the war tourist market 52 Vietnam veterans Memorial dedication, November 1982 ft. ft .
 Sporadic border fighting between the two countries continues into 1978 . The two countries fought each other in 1978 .
 Khmer Rouge renames Cambodia as Democratic Kampuchea in 1976 . The Khmer regime was overthrown by the end of the decade .
 Pol Pot is the key figure in a regime that massacres about a quarter of the Cambodian population . Pol Pot was the leader of a brutal regime that massacred about 25% of Cambodia's population .
 Large numbers of people begin fleeing Vietnam by sea, and are dubbed the Boat People . The Boat People are dubbed "Boat People"
 Norodom Sihanouk is reinstated as king of Cambodia under a new monarchical constitution . Cambodia was ruled by a new constitution in 1993 . Cambodia is ruled by the government of Cambodia since 1993 .
 Chinese troops complete withdrawal from northern Vietnam, claiming their mission has been successfully completed . Chinese troops pull out of Vietnam in March 1979 .
 North and South Vietnam are formally unified as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam under hardline communist rule . South Vietnam is formally unified in 1976 . North Vietnam is officially known as Vietnam .
 The Paris Peace Accords allowed the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam, but did not end the war . The Paris peace agreement was signed by the French President in 1961 .
 Fighting continued between South Vietnamese and communist forces . Political developments in the U.S. undermined support for its allies in Vietnam .
 President Thieu would not accept the continued presence of North Vietnamese forces inside South Vietnamese borders as legitimate . The North Vietnamese government still aimed to unite all of Vietnam under communist rule . The South Vietnamese government aimed to unify Vietnam .
 In the period before and after the signing of the accords, both sides engaged in land grabs . Both sides attempted to extend the area under their control and seize strategic sites .
 Hundreds of South Vietnamese villages changed hands, some several times, in the attacks and counterattacks across the country . Hundreds of villages have been attacked and counter-attacked .
 The international commission, meant to supervise the ceasefire, proved ineffectual . International commission was meant to oversee the ceasefire but proved ineffective .
 An NVA offensive in Easter 1972 succeeded in occupying substantial areas of South Vietnam, but was halted by American airpower .
 Peace talks took on new momentum when the United States agreed to accept a ceasefire without the withdrawal of NVA troops . U.S. agrees to accept ceasefire without withdrawal of troops from the North .
 The withdrawal of U.S. military personnel was completed on March 29, including the return of American homecoming prisoners of war .
 South Vietnamese forces lost some 25,000 men in combat in 1973, but generally performed better in the piecemeal fighting .
 The United States had flooded Saigon with military equipment before its withdrawal, while North Vietnam took time to Nixon and Thieu . The U.S. had flooded the country's capital with military supplies .
 Nixon renewed his promise to give military support to South Vietnam if the peace accords were violated . Congress would place severe limits on the president's ability to act .
 Investigators linked this break-in to a committee working for the re-election of President Richard Nixon . Investigators linked the break-ins to the committee working to help Nixon's campaign .
 As evidence mounted of attempts to block the investigation, Nixon resigned to avoid impeachment . Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, to avoid facing impeachment .
 In spring 1975, South Vietnam underwent a rapid military collapse, its morale and fighting efficiency fatally undermined by the withdrawal of American aid . Kissinger to Remain The ,37th President Is First to Quit Post after President Nixon .
 The American public's frustration with the war was, by this point, reflected in Congress . The U.S. public was frustrated by the war, and Congress was frustrated .
 In June 1973, it passed the Case-Church Amendment, which banned further military action in Asia . The case-church Amendment was passed in June 1973 .
 Nixon's authority was all but collapsing under the Watergate scandal . In November, this was followed by the War Powers Resolution, which severely restricted the president's ability to engage the U.S. Grenade launcher foresight case .
 South Vietnam inherited from the United States a costly way of waging war . Changing fortunes South Vietnam had inherited from U.S. had inherited .
 The impact of financial cuts on the ARVN, combined with a global chance that the U.S. would re-enter the war, could lead to a re-invasion of Afghanistan .
 President Nixon had assured Thieu that U.S. would intervene if North Vietnam breached the peace accords . The North's offensive had to wait for the right moment in war without Congressional approval . Nixon had promised Thieu the U.N. wouldn't intervene without congressional approval .
 Congress cut military aid to Saigon from $1 billion to $1. billion for 1974 . Aid for 1975 was just $700 billion . Congress cut the aid to Vietnam in 1974 .
 Soldiers' wages did not keep up with inflation, which undermined morale and increased the rate of desertions . Soldiers’ wages undermined morale, which led to desertions, according to the Army .
 South Vietnam's corruption and poor leadership came to the fore yet pipeline pipeline . South Vietnam is one of the worst countries in the country's history to date .
 The North made significant gains in 1974, especially around Da Nang, in coastal Quang Ngai province, and north of Saigon .
 In spite of these gains, the North Vietnamese politburo remained cautious . They planned a major offensive for 1975, but did not expect victory until 1976 .
 Hopes of resuming guerrilla warfare in South Vietnamesecontrolled territory proved to be in vain .
 By October 1973, the North Vietnamese politburo was preparing a full-scale offensive on South Vietnam . North Vietnam bides its time as it prepares to launch an offensive .
 Senior officers devoting themselves to black market deals rather than attending to their men . They accepted that this could not happen, as long as there was still a black market again .
 North Vietnam built up its strength. Meanwhile, North Vietnam is preparing for an attack .
 The M16A1 became the U.S. military's standard assault rifle during the Vietnam War . With no American bombers to threaten its security, the Ho Chi Minh Trail became a paved highway with an oil pipeline .
 The Americans left the South Vietnamese army well equipped with such state-of-the-art weaponry . The U.S. left the country's military with state of the art weaponry .
 Former ARVN general Nguyen Van Thieu served as the president of South Vietnam until 1975 . Often-maligned figure, he was often criticized for his actions .
 He was the last South Vietnamese president to govern for a substantial period of time . His successor, Duong Van Minh, was president for just two days before Saigon fell to North Vietnamese forces .
 Thieu was criticized during his presidency for his authoritarian style, and for his perceived intransigence . Nixon and Kissinger blamed for stalling the peace negotiations in 1972 .
 Thieu, on the other hand, felt betrayed and abandoned by the United States . Thieu felt betrayed by the U.S. in the final years of his presidency . He publicly expressed great anger toward his American allies .
 Young commander Nguyen Van Thieu was born in November 1924, but would later change his birthday to April 5, on the advice of an astrologer . He was born on November 24, 1924 .
 He chose to join the Viet Minh in the struggle against the French . However, his capability as a general was questioned after the loss of the Central Highlands . He was not particularly beloved by his people in Ninh Thuan .
 Despite rising in its ranks, after a year he renounced the brutal communist front and chose instead to ally with the French . After a year of fighting, he joined the French, renouncing the brutal front and renouncing it .
 He drove them from his village in 1954, even attacking those hiding in his family home, and from there his military career picked up momentum . He attacked them even attacking his family .
 After the First Indochina War ended, Thieu joined the new South Vietnamese Army . Thieu underwent military training in the United States in 1957 and 1960 .
 In 1960, commanding the Seventh Division, Thieu sent troops to defend President Diem from a coup attempt, but later turned on him . In 1963, he led an attack on the presidential palace during the coup that ousted Diem .
 He was a member of a group of young officers known as the young Turks . Appointed a general, he became a general . He was one of the most senior officers in the world .
 In 1964, they helped oust the ruling military junta, and also played a role in a subsequent coup in 1965 . In 1965, they also helped to oust a subsequent junta and oust a military regime .
 That year, Thieu became chief of state under the new government of fellow young Turk Nguyen Cao Ky . Thieu was the first prime minister of Vietnam in the 1970s . He later became the country's second most powerful politician .
 A major United States Navy base, Cam Ranh Bay also had a large Air Force base and a substantial United States Army presence . Addressing his allies President Thieu addresses 7,000 American troops and a crowd of journalists .
 President and general Thieu had taken a back seat to Ky in 1965, but this all changed in the 1967 election . Ky was elected president of Vietnam in 1967 .
 With ARVN support, Thieu displaced Ky to run as the presidential candidate, making Ky his running mate . Ky was replaced by Thieu, who is now the president of Vietnam .
 Concern from the West grew about Thieu's regime during the Vietnam War . Concern grew after the 1971 election, which appeared to have been rigged in his favor .
 Thieu was angered by secret talks between Hanoi and Washington . Thieu became a major obstacle to reaching a peace agreement .
 Thieu eventually signed the 1973 Peace Accords, on the basis that the United States would continue to supply aid and air support . The U.S. continued to supply Thieu's forces in Vietnam .
 When U.S. support diminished, Thieu publicly accused Henry Kissinger of tricking him into signing the agreement . Thieu said Kissinger tricked him into agreeing to the deal .
 With the U.S. out of the war, Thieu and the ARVN were left to fight the North Vietnamese Army alone . With the United States out of Vietnam's war, they were left fighting the North Vietnam Army .
 During the final NVA offensive in 1975, Thieu and his army were proved inadequate by the communist forces . The communist forces soon closed in on Saigon, closing in on the city .
 Time and again, Thieu expressed his bitterness over being left to fight alone by his former allies .
 On April 21, 1975, Thieu made an emotional final speech to South Vietnam . He resigned as president, leaving the task of surrendering Saigon to his successor . Thieu died in 1975 .
 He lived a quiet life in Foxboro, Massachusetts, until his death in 2001 . He was a quiet man who died in 2002 .
 NGUYEN VAN THIEU: In 1975 democratic government, enact social reforms, and crack down on corruption . Nguyen V Van Thieu: In his televised farewell speech, he spoke of his desire to reform the corrupt government .
 His authoritarian style caused some to call him a dictator . However, he also increased mobilization, swiftly removed rivals, and engaged in censorship .
 When peace talks began in 1968, Thieu did not attend, refusing to acknowledge the communist National Liberation Front as a legitimate authority . Thieu refused to attend peace talks in 1968 .
 President Nguyen Van Thieu is saluted by ARVN servicewomen during a visit to South Vietnam's Quang Tin province on February 5, 1969 . He hesitantly accepted Nixon's Vietnamization policy in 1969 .
 During his presidency, the general often made inspection visits to ARVN units in the field . The general often visited the country's military facilities in the military .
 A October 1961 Commands the First Division, in Hue; given command of the Fifth Division in Bien Hoa, in 1962 . Commanded the First and Fifth Divisions of Vietnam in 1961 .
 Vietnam declared martial law in response to the Tet Offensive in 1968 . Declares martial law after Tet Offensive . Vietnam's first major war in the country since 1968 .
 June 8, 1969 Meets with Nixon on Midway Island and informed of first U.S. troop redeployment . Also meets with Nixon and learns of first United States troop deployment . Later meets with President Nixon at the end of the war .
 II 1971 Re-elected president, apparently receiving 94 percent of the votes . II 1971 re-elected President of the United States .
 April 25, 1975 Flies to Taiwan; later settles in London, England . 1990s Moves to the U.S. 1990s moves to the United States.
 It showed that neither the United States nor South Vietnam had the resolve to stop a communist victory . The U.S. and South Vietnam did not have the courage to stop the communist victory in Vietnam . The United States and Vietnam were not willing to accept the communist's victory .
 North Vietnamese leadership held a meeting to discuss how best to proceed toward their goal of final victory in Vietnam in 1974 . ARVN Regional I n October 1974, was the first meeting of the North Vietnam leadership .
 After the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam, scattered but persistent fighting continued in spite of an agreed ceasefire . On the one hand, Le Duan and his colleagues E F O R E were killed in Vietnam .
 President Richard Nixon promised renewed military intervention in defense of South Vietnam if required . Nixon had promised renewed defense of Vietnam if necessary .
 The North Vietnamese are building up their forces and developing their supply routes to the South . Meanwhile, the North Vietnamese prepared for a future major offensive, building up forces .
 The resignation of Richard Nixon has sharply reduced the chances of any renewal of U.S. military intervention, says a North American soldier .
 They also noted that the performance of South Vietnamese forces had deteriorated over the year . The performance of the forces has also deteriorated, they said .
 The U.S. Army had begun building up stores of heavy equipment and developing a supply system to their troops in the South . But efforts were still far from complete, with many still needed to be built up .
 The members of the politburo also continued to be wary of the possible U.S. response to a full-scale offensive . Even under the presidency of Gerald Ford, even under the . presidency, they were wary of a full .
 The result of their deliberations was to authorize an all-out assault to capture Phuoc Long province . The province is in the Central Highlands near the Cambodian border . It is one of the most important provinces in Cambodia .
 If the U.S. failed to respond and the ARVN performed poorly, the communists would sense the way was open for them to escalate operations further in 1975 . If the United States . failed to . respond, the . communists would feel the way . was open . for them
 The attack on Phuoc Long was masterminded by General Tran Van Tra . General Van Tra amassed a force of two infantry divisions, a tank battalion, an artillery regiment, and an antiaircraft regiment, plus support units .
 Remote and thinly populated Phuoc Long was initially defended only by South Vietnamese Regional and Popular Forces . The town is now home to a population of about 1,500,000 .
 The Third Marine Division in Okinawa was put on alert and the USS Enterprise was sent closer to Vietnam . No other action was taken in Vietnam .
 The provincial capital of Phuoc Binh was quickly isolated, its defenders dependent on aerial resupplies . The provincial city was also known as Phuo Long City, but it was isolated from the air .
 Heavy antiaircraft fire deterred ARVN pilots from flying low enough to achieve accurate airdrops or provide effective close air support to ground troops . Heavy anti-aircraft fire prevented ARVn pilots from using accurate air support .
 North Vietnamese artillery was pouring 3,000 rounds a day into Phuoc Binh by early January . North Vietnam artillery were pouring thousands of rounds of ammunition into the city . The North Vietnamese capital is located in the province of Hana .
 Two companies of elite Airborne Rangers were flown in as the situation worsened for the ARVN . But this was no more than a sacrificial gesture . Two companies were flown into the country as a 'sacrifice' for the country .
 It was the first provincial capital lost by the South Vietnamese government since Quang Tri at Easter 1972 . It was also the first province capital lost to the government in that period .
 President Thieu announced three days of national mourning after the defeat . He vowed to retake Phuoc Binh, Vietnam's capital .
 With the loss of Phuoc Binh and the evident withdrawal of U.S. support, Thieu saw his prestige plummeting . Thieu's prestige was also at risk .
 President Ford stated that he could foresee no circumstances under which America would reenter the war in Vietnam in 1975 . The U.S. made a formal protest, accusing Hanoi of seeking to impose a military solution on Vietnam .
 The loss of Phuoc Long underlined the weakness of the South Vietnamese forces and leadership, says John Defterios . He says the loss of the Vietnamese forces shows the strength of the country's leadership .
 The initial successes of the NVA were to be expected, given their ability to concentrate forces against a weakly defended point . The failure of the ARVN to organize a substantial response revealed the fatal waning of both its morale and resources .
 North Vietnam continued to plan its conquest of the South, envisaging a final offensive for 1976 . North Vietnam was planning its conquest for the South . The final offensive was planned for 1976.
 Hanoi decided to start with a local offensive in the Central Highlands . Hangang province is located in the central Highlands of Vietnam .
 Initial blow was to fall on another poorly defended provincial capital, Buon Ma Thuot . The initial blow will fall on the provincial capital .
 Victory Monument was erected in Phuoc Long City to celebrate the defeat of South Vietnamese government forces . Victory Monument erected after unification of Vietnam under communist rule of Vietnam . Monument erected to celebrate defeat of government forces in province .
 North Vietnamese forces commanded by General Van Tien Dung launched a major offensive at Buon Ma Thuot in the Central Highlands in March 1975 . The final offensive began in March of that month .
 This precipitated a collapse of South Vietnamese defenses that left the way open for a final drive to take Saigon . The collapse of the South Vietnamese defense precipitated the collapse of its defenses .
 It was garrisoned only by a single ARVN infantry regiment and a Ranger Group in March 1975 . It had an army base and airfield, but only a single infantry regiment .
 The fall of Phuoc Long province in January 1975 emboldened the leadership in Hanoi to pursue a final military victory over South Vietnam's President Thieu . Holding the strategic initiative, the North Vietnamese forces were able to concentrate their efforts .
 The United States had made it clear that no further military support could be expected . The U.S. had made the decision to pull troops from Syria .
 North Vietnam's leaders, although remaining cautious, decided to mount a spring offensive in the Central Highlands . Meanwhile, North Vietnam is remaining cautious .
 South Vietnam has superior forces against this poorly defended target, deploying three whole divisions in their attack . South Korea's superior forces deployed three whole Divisions in the attack .
 Beginning on March 4, the NVA cut all the highways around Buon Ma Thuot, isolating the town . The NVA began cutting off all highways around the town in March .
 Two ARVN regiments were airlifted to nearby Phuoc An, but instead of mounting a counterattack on the NVA, large numbers of demoralized South Vietnamese troops fled the scene . Large numbers of civilian refugees joined a stream of civilians fleeing the fighting .
 President Thieu made the fateful decision to abandon the defense of the Central Highlands and all of the northern provinces except the coastal enclaves . Faced with this crisis, on March 13, Thieu .
 He envisaged a withdrawal to a line from Tay Ninh on the Cambodian border to the coast at Nha Trang . The withdrawal would be part of a withdrawal from the border .
 This was the target date set by Hanoi in spring 1975 for the capture of Saigon . Saigon was captured at the end of what had been dubbed the Ho Chi Minh Campaign .
 It was theoretically a good strategy to concentrate South Vietnam's limited military strength on the defense of this region . But attempting such a withdrawal under the circumstances prevailing in spring 1975 invited disaster .
 General Pham Van Phu, the commander in the Central Highlands, ordered to move all his regular forces immediately from the major bases at Kontum and Pleiku to the coast at Tuy Hoa .
 The only road open to them was Provincial Route 7B, a jungle track requiring repair, bridge-laying, and mine-clearance to be passable . It required bridge-laying and bridge-building to be able to get through .
 Tens of thousands of fleeing civilians impeded the movement of military vehicles . Tens of Thousands of fleeing civilian refugees blocked the military's movement of vehicles .
 The 320th NVA Division, pursuing the retreating South Vietnamese, threatened to cut the road entirely . The 320nd NVA division was pursuing the fleeing South Vietnamese .
 NVA artillery bombarded the packed mass of troops and refugees as ARVN engineers worked valiantly to bridge rivers . NVA firebombed the packed population of troops, refugees and refugees during the siege .
 On 27 March, the disorganized remnants of the ARVN corps reached Tuy Hoa . The disorganized remains of the corps were captured by the Vietnamese army .
 Thieu's decision to concentrate his forces in more defensible positions precipitated a string of disastrous events in the northern provinces . Vital bases fall .
 North Vietnamese leadership set General Dung a new target: capture Saigon before the onset of the monsoon season in May . The North Vietnamese leader wanted to capture the city before it was invaded by the start of the summer monsoon .
 In a fierce two-week battle, South Vietnamese troops acquitted themselves with credit, but the town eventually fell . The town was eventually taken down by the South Vietnamese Army .
 The roads from the northern provinces were choked by a stream of military personnel and civilians fleeing south from Quang Tri and Hue ahead of the North Vietnamese advance .
 General Ngo Quang Truong, was told to hold the base at Da Nang at all costs . His crack Airborne Division was withdrawn to strengthen the defense of Saigon . General Truong was told he must hold base at all .
 South Vietnamese Marines have been pulled out of Quang Tri province to reinforce Da Nang . South Vietnamese troops have been deployed to reinforce the city's capital . South Vietnam Marines were pulled out from Quan Tri province .
 The withdrawal of the Marines triggered an exodus of civilian refugees southward from Quang Tri . The city fell to the NVA on March 19 without a fight . The withdrawal triggered a mass exodus of civilians from the city .
 On March 29, General Truong evacuated some 10,000 troops, who waded out to ships from beaches where United States Marines had disembarked 10 years before . The Vietnamese general evacuated the beaches where U.S. Marines had landed 10 years ago .
 From 1945, he served as a general in the Viet Minh guerrilla movement . He served as chief of staff of the North Vietnamese Army . He was also a major in the guerrilla movement and served in Vietnam .
 In 1974, he replaced General Vo Nguyen Giap as commander of the NVA . In 1974 he led the final offensive in South Vietnam . He replaced Giap in 1974 and led the last offensive in Vietnam .
 He went on to command the NVA in wars with Cambodia and China in 1979 before retiring in 1986 . He was involved in two wars with China and Cambodia in 1979 .
 Thousands flooded transportation routes in the so-called Column of Sorrow . Thousands flooded transport routes in so-call column of sorrow . Thousands of people flooded transportation route in the column .
 The Battle of Xuan Loc was a beacon of hope for President Thieu in spring 1975 . The battle was part of the collapse of South Vietnamese forces .
 The ARVN salvaged some honor, but the North Vietnamese advance could not be halted . Although the ARVn salvaged, the Vietnamese advance was not halted .
 The resignation of Richard Nixon as U.S. president in August 1974 was another blow to President Thieu . Thieu was the first Vietnamese president to take office in 1974 .
 T he sudden collapse of South Vietnamese forces in March 1975 took the North Vietnamese leadership by surprise . Thieu's regime left a small area around Saigon and the Mekong Delta .
 Having not expected final victory before 1976, North Vietnamese politburo altered its timetable . Final victory was expected to be achieved in 1976 .
 On March 25, NVA commander General Van Tien Dung was ordered to proceed to the capture of Saigon and the end of the war . General Dung's orders were carried out by the NVA and the Vietnamese government .
 ARVN took positions on the five main roads to Saigon in a defensive circle around the city . The ARVn took positions around Saigon, Vietnam's capital, in a circle .
 He planned to avoid a battle inside Saigon by crushing each of the ARVN formations outside Saigon . He planned on avoiding a fight inside the city by attacking each of its formations outside .
 Given the South Vietnamese troops' recent performance, it was reasonable to expect a swift victory . The South Vietnamese are expected to win the battle in Vietnam .
 At the eastern end of the ARVN defensive ring was the town of Xuan Loc . The town was located in the eastern part of the defensive ring .
 Route 1 protected the vital air base at Bien Hoa as well as the road into the capital . Standing on Route 1, almost 40miles from Saigon, it protected the air base and the road .
 Both sides recognized it as the keystone of the South Vietnamese defenses . Both sides recognize it as a keystone in the country's defense .
 Xuan Loc was garrisoned by the previously undistinguished 18th ARVN Division, commanded by General Le Minh Dao . Xuan Loc is garrisoned in Vietnam by General Dao and his troops .
 They faced the NVA IV Army Corps—three divisions with plentiful tanks and artillery . They faced three divisions with plenty of tanks, artillery and tanks .
 On April 9, the NVA pounded Xuan Loc with artillery fire, while infantry and armored vehicles surged forward to overrun the defensive perimeter . The NVA has shown remarkable resilience in the face of repeated attacks on Xuan Loc .
 ARVN resistance was unexpectedly resolute and the NVA suffered heavy losses of men and tanks . The NVA was defeated in the battle . The battle was fought in the hands of the U.S. Army in North Korea in 1968 .
 Counterattacks by ARVN troops from outside Xuan Loc diverted NVA resources from the assault . NVA diverted their resources to defend their flanks .
 Bien Hoa airbase served the U.S. and South Vietnamese air forces during the Vietnam War . Some 16 miles outside Saigon, the airbase was located 16 miles from Saigon .
 It came under artillery fire during the Battle of Xuan Loc and was occupied by advancing communist troops on April 25, 1975 . It was taken over by communist troops in 1975 .
 On April 10, the NVA was forced to withdraw from positions they had seized in the town . The NVA had seized the town on April 10 . The town was seized by the rebels .
 The spectacle of ARVN troops fighting with skill and dedication roused understandable excitement among supporters of the South Vietnamese government .
 Opinion in the United States Congress was unmoved by stories of soldiers' courage or the sufferings of civilians . However, opinion in the U.S. Congress remained unimpressed .
 Thieu had the ARVN First Airborne Brigade lifted into Xuan Loc to aid defense, but the NVA had far greater resources . The NVA has far more resources than Thieu's forces .
 On April 16, the NVA II Army Corps captured Phan Rang and was released to join the advance on Saigon . The capture was captured by NVA I Army Corps on April 16 .
 President Thieu set the ARVN's remaining reserves against the NVA troops . The NVA forces are still at large in the country .
 With no hope of further reinforcements, the evacuation of Xuan Loc began . Xuan Loc was evacuated from Xuan Loc's base in Hui Province .
 ARVN First Airborne Brigade experienced heavy losses . General Dao's 18th Division had lost around a third of its men when it arrived in Saigon .
 Thieu resigned his presidency on April 21, as forces surrounding Xuan Loc surrounded Xuan Loc, but the NVA fought them off . Taking responsibility for his country's military collapse, Thieu stepped down as president .
 The National Order of Vietnam was bestowed for outstanding courage . The NVA bombardment of Bien Hoa airbase, curtailed the South Vietnamese air force's efforts to support ground ground operations .
 General Dao served 17 years in a re-education camp after the fall of Saigon . Instead of receiving this accolade, he served a 17-year prison term . Dao was awarded a posthumous award for his role in the Vietnam War .
 Air assistance Chinook heavy-lift helicopters take part in the movement of people and supplies out of Xuan Loc during the evacuation of the city . Vietnam Air Force helicopters are part of the operation .
 The South Vietnamese were able to hold out for a fortnight against overwhelmingly superior forces . The South Vietnam was able to occupy Xuan Loc for the first time in a fortnight .
 Conditions were primed for the communists to launch an assault on Saigon . In effect, the outcome of the war had now been decided, says historian .
 NVA commander General Van Tien Dung attacked and occupied Saigon . His departure raised hopes for a negotiated end to the war, but his departure was attacked by the NVA .
 J Waiting to escape South Vietnamese civilians hoping to be included in helicopter evacuation wait anxiously outside the United States Embassy in Saigon on April 29, 1975 . The U.S. Embassy in Vietnam was attacked by the South Vietnamese Army in 1975 .
 Many who believed they had been promised a flight to safety were left behind . Many believed they were promised a plane to safety, but were instead left behind.
 The final act of U.S. involvement in Vietnam badly damaged the country's global image . Vietnam's involvement in the Vietnam War has damaged its image . The U.N. mission in Vietnam was a major success for the United States .
 America was humiliated in defeat, as frantic helicopter evacuations left desperate Vietnamese civilians behind . U.S. was left humiliated in Vietnam's defeat .
 The collapse of South Vietnamese forces in spring 1975 left the United States with a dilemma . U.S. faced a dilemma in Vietnam after the collapse of the country's forces .
 Ford administration was looking to Congress for aid to South Vietnam that might support the defense of Saigon and pave the way for a negotiated end to the war . The Ford administration wanted to avoid a humiliating defeat for America's ally .
 Graham Martin, the United States Ambassador in Saigon, was especially resistant to authorizing a general evacuation . Martin produced elaborate arguments for postponing action .
 United States fixed-wing military transport aircraft were making regular flights out of Saigon's Tan Son Nhut airport to evacuate nonessential personnel and certain categories of ""at risk"" Vietnamese .
 The highly publicized Operation Babylift, which transported Vietnamese orphans to the United States, was interrupted by a tragic accident on April 4, when a Lockheed Galaxy transport aircraft crashed, killing many of the children on board .
 Many U.S. personnel earmarked for evacuation refused to leave unless they could take Vietnamese dependents and friends with them . Meanwhile, many American personnel were refusing to leave because they could not take friends and family .
 After the fall of Xuan Loc and the resignation of President Thieu on April 21, there was no longer any serious question of defending Saigon . The fall of Nguyen Loc and resignation of Thieu are no longer a serious question .
 Evacuation by fixed-wing aircraft continued at a more rapid pace, but without sufficient urgency . Some senior figures, including U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, did not believe that Saigon would be attacked .
 U.S. Marine corporals Charles MacMahon and Darwin Judge were killed during a bombardment . On April 28, two Marines were killed at Tan Son Nhut .
 Ambassador Martin accepted that fixed-wing flights were no longer possible and authorized implementation of a backup plan, codenamed Frequent Wind, for final evacuation by helicopter . The next day, Ambassador Martin at last accepted . Ambassador Martin said he would accept that fixed wing flights were not possible .
 U.S. Navy carriers were in position off the Vietnamese coast to carry out the plan . United States Navy carriers are in position .
 Most evacuees were bussed to the Defense Attache Office compound . Evacuees gathered at assembly points in response to the playing of the song ""White Christmas"" on the radio .
 A subsidiary evacuation was arranged from the United States Embassy building . The U.S. Embassy building was evacuated from the site .
 When communist forces occupied Saigon on April 30,1975, South Vietnamese President Duong Van Minh ordered his troops to lay down their arms . Flying back and forth between Saigon and the fleet acted with outstanding skill and efficiency .
 Hopes that the victors would follow a policy of political compromise proved vain .
 North and South Vietnam were formally reunited under communist government in 1976 . South Vietnam was formally reunited in 1976 under communist communist government .
 About 130,000 Vietnamese managed to leave the country in the last months of the war . About 130-000 people left the country during the war in Vietnam . The country was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Flight decks disrupted by arrival of fleeing Vietnamese in their own helicopters or fixed-wing aircraft . Flight decks were disrupted by the arrival of the fleeing Vietnamese .
 Parked helicopters had to be ditched overboard to make space for new arrivals to land . Parked helicopter was ditched to make way for arrivals .
 At the same time as the airborne evacuation, more than 40,000 fleeing Vietnamese escaped by sea to join private or naval vessels . At the time of the evacuation, the evacuation was the largest in the world .
 By the early hours of April 30, the only remaining evacuation point was a helipad on the roof of the U.S. Embassy .
 Ambassador Martin was among the last to be flown out as panic-stricken Vietnamese stormed the embassy building, desperate to escape the city . Ambassador Martin is one of the last members of the embassy staff flown out .
 North Vietnamese tanks reach the presidential palace in the heart of Saigon . North Vietnam tanks reached the president's palace in Saigon in April 1968 .
 Helicopter landed on the deck of USS Okinawa by a South Vietnamese pilot is manhandled over the side to make room for more arrivals .
 South Vietnamese fleeing on their own initiative complicated the evacuation of the island nation . The evacuation of South Vietnamese refugees was complicated by the number of people fleeing .
 The Vietnam conflict had begun as a guerrilla war, but victory came to a military force equipped with armored vehicles and heavy artillery . The fall of Saigon came to an end with the fall of Vietnam .
 Hopes of a negotiated end to the war vanished when the North Vietnamese Army entered Saigon as conquerors . The North Vietnam Army took over Saigon in April 1968 .
 President Nguyen Van Thieu signaled the opening of the Vietnam conflict's brief concluding phase . B y resigning on April 21, 1975, signaled the beginning of Vietnam's brief ending of the conflict .
 His departure was a public admission that South Vietnam had lost the war, as the last hope of U.S. intervention had disappeared .
 Vice President Tran Van Huong, who had succeeded Thieu, called for a ceasefire and negotiations to end the war through adherence to the Paris Peace Accords . Vice President Huong called for the ceasefire .
 The North Vietnamese politburo had given its senior commander the order to launch the offensive . North Vietnam's senior commander had been given the order by the North Vietnamese government in April .
 General Van Tien Dung, orders to pursue the military offensive until Saigon was taken . General Dung ordered the capture of Saigon in April 1968 . Dung was the first Vietnamese to take Saigon .
 "They had no reason to change their attitude once their forces were on the verge of victory. They had no . reason to . change their . attitude once they had . no reason for . changing their attitude, says historian .
 South Vietnamese troops had not given up . There was an especially fierce encounter between the rival armored forces at Long Thanh east of Vietnam .
 The mood of the victors was relaxed after South Vietnamese troops obeyed orders to lay down their arms . South Vietnamese soldiers were relaxed after they were ordered to put down arms .
 The leader of the coup that overthrew the Diem regime in 1963, Minh had lost out in the subsequent power battles between South Vietnamese generals . Minh was the leader of a coup against Diem's government in 1963 .
 He advocated a ""Third Force"" to keep contact with the communists and seek peace on the basis of shared nationalism . He advocated for a 'Third Force' to seek peace with communists .
 On April 28, Minh was chosen to replace Huong as president, in the belief that he was the man who could reach a deal with the communists . Minh has been in office since April 28 . He was chosen as president in the hope of reaching a deal .
 President Minh's inaugural speech proposed a ceasefire and a coalition government of reconciliation . No more negotiations, he said in his inaugural speech . Vietnam's new government is based on a coalition of reconciliation and a ceasefire .
 Minutes after his speech, North Vietnamese pilots flying captured A-37 attack aircraft hit the city's Tan Son Nhut airport . The airport was hit by the captured aircraft .
 The timing was not planned, but effectively showed the communists' disregard for talks . The timing of the announcement effectively showed that the communists had no intention of holding talks .
 General Dung set April 29 as the day for the final assault on the city . Rockets fired at 4m. signaled the start of the action .
 The superiority of the communist side in numbers and weaponry was overwhelming in Saigon . But the overwhelming majority of Saigon was overwhelming .
 South Vietnam and American politicians kept pursuing a fantasy of settlement without surrender . Desperate hope South Vietnamese and U.S. politicians keep pursuing a . fantasy of . settlement without . surrender .
 U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger declared that he expected a negotiated end to the war . Henry Kissinger said he expected an end of the war in Vietnam .
 In Saigon, hopes focused on General Duong Van Minh, known as Big . The only obstacle that remained to delay the North Vietnamese occupation of Saigon was the continuing American presence .
 General Tran Van Tra, deputy leader of communist forces during the final campaign, addresses a press conference after the fall of Saigon . Still cautious about a possible military reaction from Washington, the politburo preferred to avoid meeting the press .
 The city in effect came under military rule, with General Tra as area commander . General Tra was area commander in charge of the area .
 General Dung was ordered to allow a pause, offering the Americans time to complete their evacuation . The U.S. troops were ordered to leave the scene in a standstill .
 The occupation of the city began on the morning of April 30 . The occupation began on April 30.
 Some South Vietnamese generals wanted to keep resisting, but at 10:24m. Vietnamese generals decided to keep fighting . At 10.24m, they were killed by helicopter .
 NVA tanks and infantry in trucks rolled unopposed into the center of Saigon . South Vietnamese soldiers abandoned their weapons and uniforms, abandoning their uniforms .
 A dozen tanks approached the seat of South TOT Oof . The estimated ZoZ f UU number of ARVN troops killed in the war is unknown .
 The lead tank crashed through the palace gates onto the lawn in front of the building . With unnecessary violence but a fine sense of theater, the tank crashes through the gates .
 Minh's government was waiting inside ready for formal surrender . But they were informed by a North Vietnamese officer that all power had passed into the hands of the revolution . They could not hand over what they did not have .
 The aftermath of the communist victory in Vietnam was a disappointment to people who had longed for peace and reconciliation . In the afternoon, taken into custody by the conquerors, Minh was ordered to make his second r j The aftermath was a disappointing disappointment to those who had hoped for peace
 Saigon was renamed Ho Chi Minh City and Vietnam was formally reunited under the communist government in Hanoi . Vietnam was officially united under the Communist government in Vietnam .
 Saigon's new rulers announced the liberation of the city and that the administration accepted unconditional surrender . Saigon was declared a war-ravaged city of Saigon .
 Following sustained attacks against Nol's regime and the withdrawal of U.S. aid, the Khmer Rouge achieved their goal of ultimate control of Cambodia . The regime was overthrown by Nol Nol in 1975 .
 With Cambodia dragged into the war, the Khmer Rouge steadily grew while the government unraveled . Cambodia was dragged into Cambodia's war with the Soviet-controlled regime .
 Phnom Penh had been the Cambodian capital since the fall of the Angkor kingdom . The city has been the capital of Cambodia since the end of the kingdom .
 Many refugees flocked to Phnom Penh or into the ranks of the Khmer Rouge . Many refugees fled into the country to join the Khmers Rouge .
 Operation Eagle Pull April 12, 1975 saw the final evacuation of United States nationals and Cambodian allies to ships in the Gulf of Thailand . U.S. nationals and Cambodiaian allies were evacuated from the Gulf .
 Several Cambodian officials refused to leave the city, even though the Khmer Rouge had marked them for execution . Several officials had been marked for execution by the regime .
 More than L. 00,000 homes were destroyed and thousands of people were killed . Thousands of people lost their lives in the disaster .
 By March 1975, the city's airfield had been destroyed and the U.S. could no longer airlift ammunition and rice into Phnom Penh . The city was destroyed by March 1975 .
 A fter the Paris Accords in 1973, the Khmer Rouge conducted an independent insurgency against Lon Nol's Cambodian Republic . The Khmmer Rouge separated themselves from the NVA in 1973 . The NVA was a major source of insurgency in Cambodia .
 United States bombing shifted from North Vietnam and Laos to concentrate on the rebels in Cambodia . U.S. bombing shifted to focus on Cambodia in the 1980s .
 The Khmer Rouge intensely increased their efforts to secure the country . The government of Cambodia was overthrown in the 1970s . Cambodia was ruled out of Cambodia by the communist regime .
 During 1973 and 1974, the Khmer Rouge encircled the capital and engaged the Cambodian Republic Army . During 1973-1974, Cambodia was invaded by the Khmers Rouge . The Khmer Red Army was defeated by the Red Army .
 U.S. bombing protected Phnom Penh from the Khmer Rouge in 1974, but Lon Nol's army was systematically weakened . United States bombing protected the capital from the communist regime in 1974 .
 Lon Nol had become increasingly authoritarian in his years in power . He was known for his authoritarian tendencies . He is accused of corruption in the past .
 By 1975, the Khmer Rouge had conquered almost all of Cambodia, with the exception of Phnom Penh and the Preah Vihear Temple at the northern border with Thailand . His deteriorating health led him to depend on soothsayers .
 They controlled the roads into the city and placed mines in the Mekong River to stop river traffic . They controlled roads into city and place mines in Mekong river to stop traffic .
 Buddhist mystics sprinkled a line of holy sand around Phnom Penh during one Khmer Rouge assault on the city in order to defend it . During one attack, Buddhist mystic sprinkled the line of sand around the city .
 Phnom Penh depended on United States aid to survive . Overrun by refugees from the countryside who lived in squalor and were exploited by the government .
 Lon Nol's regime was despised by both the city's refugees and native inhabitants . The regime was unpopular with both the refugees and the government . The city was overrun by the regime of the late dictator Bashar Assad .
 On April 1, Cambodian government and military leaders forced Lon Nol to resign and leave the country . The government forced him to step down and leave Cambodia .
 Khmer Rouge forces entered Phnom Penh on April 17, 1975 . After months spent on the outskirts of the city, they entered the capital on April 18 .
 The soldiers were a mixture of fighters who had been at war in the countryside for years and peasants with no concept of urban life, abducted and recruited by the Khmer Rouge . The soldiers had to be recruited by a group of young peasants who had no idea of life in Cambodia .
 Many citizens came out in the streets to welcome the rebels, but their hopes for an end to strife were quickly dashed .
 Khmer Rouge leadership was already determined to eliminate all threats to their new order . Khmers Rouge leaders were determined to end the threat of a new order in Cambodia .
 More than two million people have been ordered to leave Phnom Penh for the countryside . Authorities ordered more than 2 million people to leave the city .
 The people were told that they must evacuate for safety from American bombing . They were assured that they would return within a few days when the city was secure . The people would return to the city when it was safe .
 Restoring their old homes and old lives, however, was not Pol Pot's true plan . Restoring homes and lives was not his true plan, he said .
 The ""Mouvement National"" takes to the streets of Phnom Penh to welcome the Khmer Rouge in 1975 . The Khmer regime was overthrown in 1975 and Cambodia fell out of power .
 The group was thought to be run by members of Lon Nol's regime . Despite its popular support, the group was soon eliminated . It was soon thought to have been run by the regime .
 Hundreds of thousands perished in enforced marches to the countryside and the labor camps that waited there . people. people . Hundreds of millions perished in the marches .
 Cambodia now marks this horror with an annual Day of Remembrance, formerly called the National Day of Hate . Cambodia marks this day with a Day of remembrance .
 Pol Pot's conception of a peasant revolution against modern culture exceeded even the 1960s' Cultural Revolution in China . Pol Pot: "A peasant revolution" exceeded even even the 'Cultural Revolution'
 Cambodia's new life as ""Democratic Kampuchea"" started at ""Year Zero"" with no trace of the old regime . The new life of the new regime started at "Year Zero" with no traces of old regime.
 Cambodian gunmen boarded a United States cargo ship two weeks after the fall of Saigon . Hospitals, schools, and factories were targeted, as well as scores of scores of targets .
 The only known engagement between U.S. ground forces and the Khmer Rouge was also the last military action of the Vietnam War . The incident was the last known engagement in the Vietnam war .
 The crew of the USS Harold E Holt approached the USS Mayaguez to recapture the ship . The crew found it already abandoned .
 Marines from Holt conducted the first hostile ship-to-ship boarding by the U.S. Navy since 1826 . It was the first such boarding by a hostile ship to the United States Navy since the 1826.
 In 1975, after decades of internal strife in Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge, led by the dictator Pol Pot, came to power . The USS Mayaguez was attacked by a patrol boat belonging to the Khmers Rouge alongside the USS .
 Cambodian gunboats seized an American container ship, the USS Mayaguez, a month after the Khmer Rouge takeover in Phnom Penh . The ship was on its way to Thailand when it was seized .
 The Khmer Rouge claimed that the ship had violated Cambodian waters by sailing inside the 12 mile territorial limits of the tiny, uninhabited island of Poulo Wai, 59 miles off Cambodia's coast . The United States recognized only a 3 mile limit .
 Efforts at diplomatic resolution through the People's Republic of China failed when China refused to mediate . Efforts to resolve the issue failed when the People of the Republic, China, failed .
 North Korea captured an American spy ship, the Pueblo, by North Korea in 1968, when the crew had been held hostage for 11 months .
 President Ford ordered a significant military response to Cambodia's action . Cambodia's military response was a significant response to the action .
 The Khmer Rouge took the ship to Koh Tang, an island about 32 miles from the Cambodian coast, where they transferred the 39 crew members to fishing vessels . The 39 crew were transferred to a fishing vessel .
 These boats took the Mayaguez crew to another small island nearby . Realizing that the crew would be harder to track once they reached the mainland, they decided to take them to another island .
 U.S. pilots lost track of the boat among the hundreds of fishing vessels in Kompong Som's harbor . Pentagon's lack of information about the area complicated its rescue plans .
 National Security Council attempted to move them to mainland at Kompong Som . island, and bomb Kompongs Som island, then attempted to bomb them to the mainland . Then attempted to relocate them to island, bomb the island .
 The first and last objectives were achieved easily, but the attack on Koh Tang was more challenging . The ship itself had already been abandoned .
 The Marine and Air Force landing party found the island far better defended than their intelligence briefings had indicated . The landing party landed on the island in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 President Ford ordered the suspension of the invasion and withdrawal of U.S. forces . President Ford also ordered the withdrawal of forces .
 Several troop-carrying helicopters were hit and destroyed, including one that was blown up in the air, killing 13 servicemen and injuring the pilot . Several of the choppers were blown up, including the pilot, who was injured .
 The rescue of the United States forces proved to be just as dangerous as the assault . U.S. forces were able to rescue members of the U.N. forces in the area .
 In a 14-hour battle, 15 U.S. servicemen died in Thailand, while 23 perished in a helicopter crash in Thailand . In the helicopter crash, 23 perished .
 Three Marines were left behind in the precarious extrication from the island . Extrication was conducted at night under heavy fire . The unrecovered bodies of dead servicemen were also left behind .
 The U.S. command denied the Marines' request to return for their stranded comrades . Not knowing the fate of the lost men, and certain that more would die in any rescue mission, the United States denied the request .
 The Khmer Rouge commander of Koh Tang later reported that one of the Marines had been captured and executed immediately afterward . The Marines were killed by the Khmer .
 The other two were captured and subsequently killed, although accounts of the timing and circumstances differ . Accounts of the capture and deaths of the other two also differ .
 In retrospect, the Mayaguez mission was seen as poorly planned and executed, in spite of the heroism involved . After the mission, the mission was considered poorly planned .
 The United States recognized the heroism displayed by Marines, Navy, and Force personnel in the combined response to the Mayaguez Incident . The U.S. awarded one Navy Cross and 12 other major citations .
 In 2008, a law was drafted to award the Vietnam War Service Medal to veterans of the mission . In addition, collaborative efforts between Cambodia and the United States to find and repatriate bodies from Koh Tang continue today .
 Pathet Lao forces took control of large areas of Laos in 1975 . The Pathet Leo government celebrated its achievements through posters and other propaganda .
 Laos was a crucial theater in the war in Indochina . The battle against North Vietnamese forces in Laos and along the Ho Chi Minh Trail made that country a key theater in Vietnam's war .
 Following the 1954 Geneva Conference, the Pathet Lao established control in two northern provinces . After the 1954 conference, the country was divided into two provinces .
 A coalition government between Royalists and communists collapsed in 1959 . A long civil war ensued between the two sides of the war .
 T he United States exit from Vietnam affected all of Indochina . The United States exited from Vietnam in 1968 . The U.S. exit from Indochine affected the region .
 In February 1973, the Pathet Lao and the Royal Laotian Government signed a ceasefire— the Vientiane Treaty— but the NVA remained in the country . The NVA did not disarm, and the government did not . The Pathetlao did not arm itself
 With the communist takeovers in Phnom Penh and Saigon in April 1975, the Pathet Lao stepped up attacks on the Royalist forces . The Pathetlao stepped down attacks in 1975 .
 The prime minister Souvanna Phouma knew that his forces could not prevail against this assault . The PM's forces were not able to prevail against the assault, he said .
 He had little choice but to accept a promise of moderation from the leader of the Pathet Lao, his half-brother Prince Souphanouvong . He invited the communists to participate in a coalition government .
 On August 23, 1975, 50 Pathet Lao troops entered Vientiane, the capital city, claiming to ""liberate"" it . The Pathetlao army claimed to have taken control of the city, but the city was never liberated .
 Over the ensuing months, the communists extended their control to the rest of the country . Over the years, the communist party took control of the majority of the population .
 Coalition collapses after Pathet Lao cooperates with the Royalists in the government . For a few months the PathetLao cooperated with the royalists in government . Coalition collapses .
 Souvanna Phouma ordered the Royalist. military forces not to oppose the Pathlet Lao . The Pathlet. Lao was ruled out of the conflict by the Pathle Lao forces .
 The United States cut off economic aid, but maintained a diplomatic presence . The U.S. cut off the economic aid to the Philippines .
 They swept aside noncommunist members of the coalition, forced King Savang Vatthana to abdicate, and abolished the monarchy . The monarchy was abolished after the coup dented the economy .
 The king and the royal family were sent to a brutal re-education camp in November 1976 and all died within the next two years . King and royal family died within two years of imprisonment .
 The regime broke economic relations with China, while Soviet and other Eastern bloc countries provided economic aid . The regime also broke economic ties with the Soviet Union, which provided economic support .
 Meo hill people were forced to return to their homes after an attempt by the Meos to march to the capital to protest against repression by the new communist-led government in 1975 .
 Laos fell almost totally under Vietnamese hegemony . The United States withdrew entirely and Laos fell under Vietnamese rule . The U.S. withdrew entirely .
 The new government set out to punish Hmong who had fought with or supported General Vang Pao . General Pao was a Hmong leader who had collaborated with the United States in fighting the communists in Laos .
 This quest for revenge expanded into a genocidal campaign aimed at eradicating the Hmong people and their culture . Hmong were forced to leave their homeland behind . The Hmong have been wiped out of existence .
 As many as 200,000 Hmong fled into Thailand and a number of Hmong fighters took refuge in mountains . The Hmong people are believed to have taken refuge in the mountains .
 Laos agreed to repatriate 60,000 Lao refugees living in Thailand, including several thousand Hmong people . In later negotiations, Laos agreed that the refugees would be returned to Laos .
 Fearing violence against them, the Hmong resisted return . They were imprisoned for up to ten years in so-called ""re-education"" camps similar to those in Vietnam, located in remote areas .
 About 10 percent of the population, including most among the business, professional, and educated classes fled the country . Most of the country's businesses, professionals fled the government in 2008 .
 The United States State Department's annual report on human rights violations did not mention Laos in 1976, 1977, or 1978 . Nevertheless, the U.S. State Department did mention Laos . Laos was not mentioned in the report .
 In 1979, the report noted improvements in human rights in the preceding two years . The report rejected the charge of genocide, downplaying torture in the re-education camps . It noted some improvements in the previous two years and rejected genocide .
 It reported evidence but not ""absolute proof"" of chemical warfare against the Hmong . The Hmong are believed to have been involved in chemical warfare in the past .
 By 1995 more than 183,000 refugees had been resettled worldwide . Initially housed in refugee camps in Thailand, more than 200,000 had been relocated .
 U.S. accepted 140,000 Hmong people from camps in Thailand . Some Hmong believed they would not be able to adapt to life in America .
 They settled mainly in California, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and North Carolina . They moved to North Carolina and Minnesota .
 General Vang Pao's death in California in 2010 was widely mourned by the Hmong . General Pao died in 2010 in California . Hmong members of the U.S. Hmong community mourned his death in 2010 .
 The communist government bombed their villages with poison gas and allowed atrocities against those who returned . Those who returned to their villages were targeted by the government .
 Hmong were not the only people to suffer under the new Laotian government . The Hmong are not only those who have been re-educated .
 Many people were persecuted due to their politics, religion, or even career choice, causing large numbers of South Vietnamese to flee their homeland for good .
 This stamp commemorates the 1976 session of the Vietnamese National Assembly— the first for unified Vietnam . This stamp was issued in Vietnam's first unified National Assembly .
 Officials left behind many undestroyed files at the U.S. Embassy in Syria .
 30,000 Vietnamese worked in the Phoenix Program, helping to root out Viet Cong agents in rural areas . Among these was a list of Vietnamese who had worked in Phoenix Program . The Phoenix Program was launched in Vietnam in 1968 .
 These individuals were quickly rounded up—later reports suggest they were executed . Later reports suggest that they were later rounded up .
 South Vietnamese citizens suffered deeply at the hands of the new regime . Although the feared bloodbath on a larger scale did not occur immediately, it did not appear immediately .
 The government in Saigon did not last long after the departure of U.S. forces in 1973 . Survivors, some of whom spent as many as 10 years incarcerated, described hard and enduring .
 After the ARVN were defeated at Xuan Loc, the NVA marched uncontested toward Saigon . The NVA was defeated in Xuan Loc . The ARVn were defeated in the battle .
 An estimated 165,000 people died in the camps from starvation, disease, exhaustion, suicide, and by execution . The camps were set up in the 1940s .
 Bribery and extortion payments by family members inside and outside of Vietnam allowed some of the incarcerated to survive and even buy release . Some of the families of the prisoners were forced to pay for their release .
 Religious people, especially Christians, were persecuted, as were ethnic minorities . Ethnic minorities, including the significant Chinese population, were targeted .
 Among the major targets were approximately 30 tribes of Montagnards who had cooperated with the French and later the U.S. in the two Indochina wars . The Montagnardans were among the tribes of tribes that had coopered with the United States .
 Many Montagnards continued to resist for both ethnic and religious reasons . Fighting for their cultures and autonomy, many Montagnarders continued to .
 The new regime responded harshly, slaughtering thousands of tribespeople . Thousands of people were killed by the new regime, including many of the tribesmen .
 Persecution was not the only item on the SRV government's list of punishments . Economic adaptation was also included in the list of punishment .
 Between 1975 and 1980, more than one million North Vietnamese citizens were sent to live in the south and central regions of the former South Vietnam . This was apparently to balance the population .
 Up to one million South Vietnamese people were relocated . Families were moved to previously uninhabited areas in the mountains called New Economic Zones . Up to 1 million people relocated .
 Many former South Vietnamese people chose not to remain under the new regime . Unsurprisingly, many former South Vietnam people chose to leave the country . The new regime has been described as a stateless state .
 Prisoners do manual labor in a re-education camp . After the communist takeover, two pay the price for their labor .
 The camps engaged in indoctrination but, despite the name, were more about punishment than converting people to communism . Despite the name of the camps, they were more than just about punishment rather than conversion .
 Children's burden Orphans eat at the Bamboo Shoot Orphanage in Ho Chi Minh City, in April 1980 . Orphans live in the orphanage .
 Many of the orphaned children in Vietnam had American fathers, or birth defects as a result of chemical defoliants like Agent Orange . Millions of people fled Vietnam by boat to escape the country .
 These refugees became known as the ""boat people,"" risked their lives to escape .
 Vietnamese people in America have achieved notable distinctions, including as scholars and professionals . Vietnamese people also have achieved high-ranking military officers, and, in one case, as a professional football player .
 Many firstand second-generation Viet Kieu have acquired wealth and return to Vietnam for business ventures . Many first and second generation of Vietnam's first-generation Kieu return to the country for business .
 Economic renovation in 1986 created a market system to help Vietnam's integration into the world economy . Vietnam's market system was created in 1986 to help the country's economy .
 I ~J /""v PERCENT of boat people / \J died at sea, according to SRV sources . I . ~J/""v: "I . /"
 Vuong Thanh Loc's middle-class family owned a grocery store, and two of his brothers had worked for the South Vietnamese government . Loc's family owns a grocery shop .
 Vuong had tried to escape seven times and had been jailed twice, before he embarked on the difficult journey that would eventually take him to Australia . Vuong was jailed twice for trying to escape and was jailed seven times before his journey .
 The boat was around 26 ft long and 10 ft wide, but fifty people were crammed into it like sardines in a can . The boat is around 26ft long and around 10ft wide, around 26 feet long .
 It was unseaworthy; the engine was very old and it did not have a hooded cover, exposing it to the elements . The engine was too old and the engine had no hooding cover, leaving it exposed .
 The owner had promised a bigger ship would be waiting for them out at sea, but he had tricked them . He tricked them into believing they were going to be rescued . The owner of the ship had promised them a bigger vessel .
 In the hope a ship at sea could save them, they carried on with their journey . The survivors were left stranded in the hope of finding a ship to save them .
 The engine broke down after ten hours at sea, and with no sails or paddles, the boat was left adrift . With no sails, paddles or sails, it was left stranded with no paddles .
 Finally, on the night of seventh day the boat came ashore but they did not know where they were until the police came . Finally, they were finally able to find out where they had been .
 Vietnamese refugees arrive at the island of Tai A Chau, Hong Kong, in 1989 . They are seeking sanctuary in Hong Kong . Vietnamese refugees arrived in 1989 and are now living in the United States .
 Pol Pot and his regime sought to transform Cambodia, now called Democratic Kampuchea, in accordance with their radical ideology . Cambodia Under Communism Pol Pot wanted to transform the country .
 Almost a quarter of Cambodia's population were brutally slaughtered in the name of progress and purification . The slaughter was carried out in Cambodia's capital, Phnomotra .
 Pol Pot believed that to cleanse society, all people must return to the land . He believed to be the only way to clean society was to return to agriculture .
 Untold numbers of people perished on long marches from urban areas to rural work camps . Untold number of people died in long marches to urban work camps, many of them died .
 Starvation, disease, and work exhaustion killed hundreds of thousands more . Starvation and disease also killed more than 1,000,000 .
 Numerous prison camps and execution centers were set up in the countryside to hold and punish those considered enemies of the regime . Systematic genocide was carried out in the country .
 The leader of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, he became prime minister after Phnom Penh fell in 1975 . He was the prime minister of Cambodia after the fall of the country's capital .
 He relinquished his army in 1985 and lived a shadowy life until his death in 1998 . He died in 1998 after his death .
 A bas relief at Wat Samrong Knong near Battambang, Cambodia, is one of a series of scenes detailing the atrocities committed by the Khmer Rouge .
 Tuol Sleng prison was presided over by the notorious Comrade Duch, Kang Kek lew . Victims are cruelly joined together en route to their mass execution .
 In such prison camps, interrogators employed heinous torture methods to gain confessions from supposed ""traitors against the revolution" Many were casualties of the internecine power struggles among the Khmer Rouge factions, or were accused of being Vietnamese sympathizers .
 Of the 17,000 people who passed through Tuol Sleng, only a few— one source says seven—survived . One source says 7 survived .
 Three million people were killed under the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia . The others were executed at nearby Choeung Ek, a former orchard that became known as the most infamous of ""The Killing"
 Mass graves have been identified to account for nearly 1. million individuals . Mass graves are believed to be the largest mass grave site in the United States .
 Like the Nazis during World War II, the Khmer Rouge torturers kept meticulous records and thousands of pictures of their victims . Like the Nazi torturers during WWII, they kept detailed records of victims and kept thousands of photos of them .
 Like Mao, the Khmer Rouge realized that their regime would not survive without the restoration of the very institutions and skills they had sought to eradicate . However, like Mao, they soon realized that they would need to restore the institutions they had been trying to eradicate to survive .
 Prisoners often hacked, beaten, or bludgeoned to death to save bullets . Prisoners there were often hacked or beaten to death . Prisoner was often beaten, beaten or killed .
 Religion was outlawed, and communal living replaced single-family homes . Religion was outlawed .
 Children were removed from their parents in order to be indoctrinated, while married couples were allowed to visit each other only on a limited basis .
 Those caught engaging in sexual activity could be executed on the spot . Those caught committing sexual activity in the U.S. could also be executed .
 The radicalism of Pol Pot was even more extreme than Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution in China . Hanoi's politburo never ceased wanting to annex Cambodia .
 By the beginning of January, they had ousted Pol Pot and replaced the Khmer Rouge with a Vietnamese puppet regime . The Vietnamese government overthrew Pol Pot .
 However, the Khmer Rouge continued to fight the Vietnamese, and its guerrilla forces returned once more to bases in the jungles . However, they continued their fight against the Vietnamese in the jungle .
 Cambodian cyclist passes broken cars on the roadside . Cambodian cyclists protest modernity in Cambodia .
 Cars were destroyed under the Khmer Rouge regime . One of many possessions associated with urbanization and the West was destroyed by the regime .
 The last United States citizens departed from Indochina in 1975, and Vietnam was reunified . The three nations, along with their Chinese neighbor in the north, had an ancient history of border disputes .
 Second Indochina War came to an end in 1975, with communist governments in power in all three Indochinas countries . The scars of the conflict were deep .
 Whatever levels of cooperation under the fraternal banner of communism might have existed during the war quickly fell apart, as historical animosities prevailed . The Soviet-Russian alliance was formed in 1940s and 1941s .
 The following decades were a dark and violent time in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos . Vietnam, Laos, Vietnam, Vietnam and Cambodia were ruled out of power in the 1970s .
 Centuries of antipathy between Cambodia and Vietnam resurfaced after the triumph of communist regimes in both countries in 1975 . Centuries were covered over during the Indochina Wars .
 Ethnic and border issues, as well as conflicting claims over islands, resulted in military skirmishes that escalated to major engagements . Ethnic, border issues and conflicting claims led to major military engagements .
 Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia sent six divisions into Vietnam's Tay Ninh province in September 1977 . Following months of attacks on Vietnamese villages, six divisions were sent into the province .
 The new Socialist Republic of Vietnam was Angkor Wat temples . Khmer troops pass through Cambodia's Angkorn Wat temples in Cambodia .
 Pol Pot saw Angkor Wat as proof of what the Khmer people could accomplish . The Khmer leader saw it as proof that his people could achieve anything .
 Bullet holes from battles between the Vietnamese and the Khmer Rouge can still be seen around the temples today . Bullet holes are still visible in some of the temples in Cambodia today .
 The final straw for China was Vietnam's 1979 takeover of Kampuchea, an ally of China . It was the takeover of the country's ally, which China had been supporting .
 That February, China launched a punitive invasion with 200,000 forces penetrating about 25 miles into Vietnam before they got bogged down and withdrew . The invasion got bogbled down and China withdrew after it got stuck .
 It is estimated that China suffered at least 7,000-8,000 deaths in the three-week war . It was estimated that the war killed at least 8,000 people in China .
 Vietnam never released military casualties but announced that 10,000 of its civilians died in the invasion . Vietnam's military casualties were never released . Vietnam never revealed military casualties, but said 10,00 civilians died .
 Border engagements continued through the 1980s until a settlement was reached in the late 1990s . Border engagements between the U.S. and Canada continued until the 1990s.
 A peace agreement signed in 1991 brought an end to Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia . It allowed the countries in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to increase their economic activity .
 Vietnam restored diplomatic relations with the United States in 1995 . In 1995, Vietnam became a member of the organization, and also restored diplomatic ties with the U.S.
 The Khmer Rouge disaster, Vietnamese occupation, and continuing civil war in Cambodia prevented stability and development in Cambodia . Cambodia's civil war prevented stability, development .
 In 1992, the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia amassed eight divisions, invaded Kampuchea, and by January 1978 its troops came within 24 miles of Phnom Penh before withdrawing . In 1978, the U.N. Transitional Agency in Cambodia was quick to respond .
 More border conflicts resulted in another Vietnamese incursion in June and a full-scale invasion was launched on December 25, 1978 . More border clashes resulted in more border conflicts in June .
 Vietnam wiped out half of the Kampuchean Revolutionary Army in only two weeks . Employed 13 divisions, 150,000 soldiers, and abundant artillery and airpower, Vietnam destroyed half the army in two weeks.
 Khmer Rouge political leaders fled to the western regions of the country . Khmer . Rouge political . leaders . fled to western . regions of Cambodia .
 On January 7, 1979, Vietnam installed a puppet government, the People's Republic of Kampuchea, headed by Heng Samrin and other former Khmer Rouge defectors . The puppet government was headed by Samrin, other defectors, and Vietnam installed it in 1979 .
 Despite China's support during the Vietnam War, Sino-Vietnamese relations also had a long history of Battling with China . China's backing during Vietnam War was seen as a major factor in Vietnam War .
 Chinese troops invaded the city of Cao Bang in 1979 . While the province's mountains had offered protection to Vietnamese communists for decades .
 Vietnam and China had border disputes and mutual claims to the Paracel and Spratly Islands . Vietnam and the People's Republic of China had territorial disputes . The islands were disputed by both countries in the 1960s .
 Vietnam made discernible political and economic progress as it moved into the 21st century . Vietnam's economic and political progress has been made since 1979 .
 Cambodia and Laos, two of the poorest, most corrupt, and dysfunctional countries in the world, continued to suffer from the impact and legacy of the Indochina Wars . negotiating Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia, accepted a mandate to administer the country, organize an election, and address the Khmer
 Laos remained under Vietnamese control, but had a civil war of its own to fight . The Lao People's Army fought a Hmong insurgency against the Hmong .
 Unexploded ordnance was one of many ways in which the landscape was weaponized during the First Indochina War .
 The two leaders worked to open trade and reconcile relations during the trip . The trip was part of the two leaders' reconciliation efforts .
 Indochina saw almost constant war for nearly 50 years, from World War II until the 1990s . The country was almost always at war until the end of the war .
 Indochina entered the 21st century with outmoded political systems, causing social and economic stagnation . While their Asian neighbors embraced modernization, their neighbors embrace modernization .
 Vietnam has since started down this path, but Cambodia and Laos still lag far behind . Cambodia has started down the path but Laos and Cambodia have not yet followed .
 Vietnam is one of only five remaining single-party communist countries in existence . Vietnam is the 14th most populous country in the world, with a population of more than 90 million .
 The establishment of diplomatic relations with the United States in 1995 opened doors, opened doors . The two have engaged in both military exchanges and joint exercises .
 Increasingly, American Vietnam veterans have returned to visit, and even though this is an aging cohort, the Vietnamese consider war tourism to be an expanding market .
 Modern imitations include Zippo lighters, dog tags, and grenades turned into key chains . Other imitations of Zippos include dog tags and grenades .
 Dan Sinh market in Ho Chi Minh City is full of supposed ""war surplus."" dissidents, state control over the media and judiciary, and harsh treatment of minorities . State control over media, judiciary and judiciary .
 In 2008, PricewaterhouseCoopers projected that Vietnam could become the world's fastest-growing emerging economy by 2020 . Vietnam's economic growth rate has been impressive since 2000 . Vietnam is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
 Vietnam has attracted significant foreign investment (including from Vietnamese people who now live overseas) Vietnam has seen a construction boom, and dramatically increased foreign trade .
 In 2007, Vietnam became a member of the World Trade Organization, which opened up new world markets . Vietnam is one of the fastest growing economies in the world to join the WTO .
 The stunning Ha Long Bay is popular Cambodia's most popular tourist spot . It has been a less optimistic story in Cambodia . Cambodia's economy has been hit hard by the rise of populist nationalism .
 Hun Sen has ruled with an iron fist since 1985, repressing several uprisings against him . Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge leader, has ruled since 1985 .
 King Norodom Sihanouk abdicated in 2004 . He had served as the titular head of the Khmer Rouge and as Cambodia's nominal monarch since 1993 . Cambodia's prime minister was ousted from power in 2009 .
 The actions of the U.N. Transitional Authority in 1992 did little to improve the situation in 1992 .
 Cambodia continues to have one of the worst records of corruption in the world . Human rights abuses, sexual exploitation of young girls, and HIV/AIDS in Cambodia continue to be the world's worst .
 Although very poor and largely agricultural, the country experienced one of the world's highest growth rates from 2004 to 2011 . Household consumption increased by 40 percent and poverty rate fell from 52 percent to 21 percent .
 Former Khmer Rouge head of state Khieu Samphan stands trial in Phnom Penh . Comrade Duch received a life sentence for crimes against humanity in 2012 . Nuon Chea, Pol Pot's right-hand man, is accused of crimes against human rights violations .
 Samphan maintained his innocence throughout his trial, calling the charges against him a fairytale . Samphan was convicted of sexual assault in 2007 .
 Khieu Samphan, Pol Pot's successor as leader as leader of the Khmer Rouge, were both arrested in 2007 and given life sentences in 2014 .
 Laos remains one of the world's poorest countries . In contrast to Vietnam, Laos has the lowest poverty rate in the world .
 It has one of the lowest annual incomes in the world, with a third of its people living below the poverty line .
 In 2015, the country ranked 29th among countries with the world's worst hunger problems . In 2015 the country was ranked 29 in the world of hunger .
 During the U.S. war, more than two million tons of bombs were dropped on Laos .
 An estimated 78 million pieces of unexploded ordnance in Laos are left behind . An estimated 30 percent of PERCENT The literacy rate in Vietnam in 2015. these bombs did not explode— leaving an estimated 78million pieces of undiscovered ordnance .
 The unearthing and sale of scrap metals from these bombs has become a major industry on the Plain of Jars . The sale of the scrap metal has also become an industry in the area .
 Scrap and unexploded bombs lie with megalithic burial urns in an area known as the Plain of Jars . Today, scrap and unexplode bombs lie in the area where they lie .
 All three countries have young burgeoning populations and some natural resources . All three have young populations and resources .
 All three Indochinese countries have the potential for further development and political liberalization . All three countries have potential to further development .
 Cambodia appears set to stagnate under Sen's leadership for at least the near future . Vietnam will likely continue its growth, while Cambodia will likely stagnate . Cambodia's growth is set to continue under Sen .
 In Laos, some foreign investment, the rapid expanse of tourism, and rich deposits of minerals offer some hope of improving its bleak status . Some foreign investment and rapid tourism are some hope to improve Laos's bleak status.
 Americans' antipathy to the war was shown not only toward the policymakers and generals, but also toward returning servicemen and women . After the war, Americans' attitudes toward the war were shown to be less forgiving .
 For some veterans, especially those who saw combat, homecoming was a difficult adjustment . For some, it was a tough adjustment, especially for some .
 Vietnam veterans returned to the U.S. to live stable, productive, and distinguished lives . Vietnam veterans are now living productive, productive lives in the United States .
 Studies demonstrate that 85 percent of Vietnam veterans made successful transitions to civilian life after their time in Vietnam . 91 percent indicated that they were proud of their service .
 Vietnam veterans enjoy a higher annual income, and a lower percentage of them have spent time in prison . Compared to their peers who did not serve in the war, Vietnam veterans have a higher income and fewer time spent in jail .
 There are no difference in statistics on drug addiction or homelessness . There is no difference between drug addiction and homelessness, the mayor says .
 Veterans Association reports that the number of Vietnam veterans making claims continues to grow . Many veterans still struggle to get compensation for disabilities caused by their service .
 More Purple Heart medals were awarded in Vietnam than in any other American war but World War 11 . More than 1,000 Purple Hearts were awarded during Vietnam .
 Many African Americans from the South had been forever changed by their war experiences, but their rural communities / expected them to return quietly to the traditional racial patterns of Southern life .
 Some urban black veterans found militant groups such as the Black Panthers appealing . The Black Panthers were a militant group in the 1960s and '60s .
 Unemployment was also a serious problem among African American veterans . Unemployment is also a major problem among black veterans .
 United States veterans organizations, dominated by those who served in World War II, did not welcome the new generation of veterans . They were especially resistant to African Americans, especially African Americans .
 The 6,400 female Vietnam veterans, who experienced an unusually high degree of trauma from the war, were often ignored and their experiences trivialized . Their experiences were often trivialized and ignored .
 Nurses' stories dominate the conversation about female Vietnam veterans . Those who served in other roles have found their experiences largely ignored . The Women's Army Corps records were lost, despite veterans' calls to find them .
 The Vietnam Women's Memorial depicts an Army nurse tending to a wounded soldier . Some female veterans have expressed their struggle to see themselves in the memorial .
 Thousands of men missing in Vietnam are still missing in In memoriam . The Vietnam Veterans Memorial was dedicated in November 1982 .
 The two-acre wall is inscribed with the name of every member of the U.S. Armed Forces who served in the war . It is inscribed in honor of the United States .
 Families grieved as the government appeared to give up on these men, treating them like inconvenient remnants standing in the way of new relations with former foes . Families mourned as they were treated as inconvenient remnants of the government .
 At the end of the war, change came quickly to America's armed forces . Change came quickly after the war . The U.S. military is now in the midst of a major overhaul .
 The draft was ended, an allvolunteer military inaugurated, and more emphasis was placed on improving reserve forces . The draft ended, and the all-volunteers military was inaugurated .
 The number of women in the military increased, from less than 2 percent at the end of the Vietnam War to over 15 percent in 2015 . Most combat positions are open to women, with most combat positions open to them .
 The dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., was a decisive event . Other memorials soon followed . Vietnam veterans memorials were dedicated to the nation's veterans .
 The GI Bill, inaugurated in 1984, expanded benefits for Vietnam veterans . It was named the GI Bill of the Vietnam War .
 The 1991 Gulf War elevated the honor of patriotic military service, a trend reinforced by 9/11 . The Gulf War was the first Gulf War to raise the honor .
 Vietnam veterans today stand alongside those who have served in the various theaters of the war on terrorism as worthy heroes . However shocking the new mantra of ""Thank you for your service"" may be to Vietnam veterans who experienced a totally different reception when they came home .
 For America, losing the Vietnam War provoked an intense re-examination of everything about the war . S. S' DESERT STORM VICTORY PARADE V_ S'
 The War in American Popular Culture is the portrayal of the conflict in popular culture . The deep divisions that the war created in American society are found in the portrayal . The Green Berets i Jj A YANK in VIET-NAM, 1964, 1964 GO THE GREEN BER
 Almost all the movies and novels about the war reflect subtle or overt proor antiwar bias . Almost all of the films and novels have a strong pro-war bias.
 Co-directed by and starring John Wayne, this took a clear pro-war stance . The Green Berets, 1968, was co-starring John Wayne and directed by John Wayne .
 The Deer Hunter, 1978, focused on the psychological impact of the war on veterans . This focused on a psychological impact on the war . This is the first time the film has been shown on the subject .
 Apocalypse Now, 1979 Francis Ford Coppola's acclaimed film offered a hallucinogenic rather than realistic view of the war . Apocalypse Now was released in 1979 and was released four years later . The film was a cult classic .
 Written and directed by veteran Oliver Stone, the movie was intended as a rebuke to 1968's The Green Berets . Platoon, 1986, was intended to be a rebuke of 1968's "Green Berets" Platoon was released in 1986 .
 The Hanoi W/7fon,1987 This movie tells the story of U.S. soldiers who were prisoners of war in Hoa Lo Prison . This movie was released in 1987 . It is the first time a movie has been shown in Vietnam .
 Stanley Kubrick's movie was based on veteran Gustav Hasford's semi-autobiographical novel The Short-Timers . Full Metal Jacket was released in 1987 .
 Containing comedic elements, this also examined the politics of the conflict within Vietnam . Good Morning, Vietnam, was released in 1987 .
 Oliver Stone adapted paralyzed Marine Ron Kovic's autobiography into a film dealing with the conditions facing wounded veterans . The film was released in 1989 on July 4th .
 HD The Ballad of the Green Berets, 1966 . This was a prominent pro-war song . The song was released in 1966 by the Army in 1966 .
 Born in the USA was Springsteen's seventh album, released in 1985 . It addressed the loss of American lives in Vietnam and the hardship faced by veterans . Springsteen was born in the U.S.
 Robert Mason's memoir is written by veteran helicopter pilot Robert Mason . The memoir was written by Mason .
 First Blood Part II, 1985 QD PLATOON, 1986 . For Americans captured in Vietnam, one war ended . For U.S. citizens captured, the war ended in Vietnam . First Blood, Part II is First Blood .
 Vietnam War tourism is a growing industry in Vietnam and attracts many veterans . Tags are often left at the wall, as are boots, photographs, and personal objects . Visiting Vietnam War tourists is a popular tourist destination .
 Visitors can tour museums, prison camps, and tunnels, or visit monuments and cemeteries, to learn more about the war or pay respects to the fallen . Today, visitors can visit museums, prisons, and prison camps .
 Con Son Island was first used as a penal colony during the French colonial period . The island was used to be a French penal colony in the 1930s and 1930s .
 In 1970, U.S. Congressional representatives reported seeing prisoners kept inside tiger cages . The prisons were visited by United States .
 Hang Duong Cemetery on Con Son is a site of pilgrimage, housing the remains of the 22,000 prisoners who died on the island . The cemetery is a place of pilgrimage to the island of Con Son .
 Binh Duong Binh An Cemetery was established in 1965 for soldiers of the South Vietnamese Army . It was established as a military cemetery for the Vietnamese Army in 1965 . It does not appear to have been used until 1968 when it was established .
 The cemetery's location on Highway 1 is marked with a sculpture, nicknamed ""Thuong Tiec,"" of a tired ARVN soldier . The cemetery is marked by a sculpture of a weary ARVn soldier .
 Battle of Phuoc Long began in December 1974 and was a key defeat for the ARVN . It was an important precursor to the final North Vietnamese offensive .
 Ho Chi Minh Museum is located on the banks of the Ca Ty River in Vietnam . The museum contains artifacts from the life of the Vietnamese leader . The small museum is located in Phan Thiet, Vietnam .
 The capture of the French commander's bunker was a key moment in the 1954 Battle of Dien Bien Phu . General de Castries' bunker was captured by the French troops . The capture was the first time the French had captured the bunker .
 The bunker has been preserved, and in places, reinforced with stronger materials . Information within is mainly presented in Vietnamese and French .
 Dien Bien Phu Military Cemetery contains the remains of Vietnamese soldiers who fought against the French in 1954 . The peaceful burial ground is located in a peaceful burial site .
 Memorial walls give the names of those who died in the battle, listed by province . While many graves are unmarked, many are marked with numbers .
 Military Museum contains objects, weapons, and photgraphs from the Battle of Dien Bien Phu . Military museum also contains some oddities, such as a bathtub owned by French commander de Castries .
 Day tours drive visitors around the complex to see the main gate and crumbling walls, as well as uphill to Buu Phong Pagoda . From which the base can be seen through binoculars, visitors can also see the base from the ground .
 The ""veterans return"" tour also drives by the bars frequented by United States pilots, and the major U.S. base of Long Binh Post .
 Dong Nai Province Museum is home to the original Long Tan Cross and other Vietnam War artifacts . The museum is located on Nguyen Ai Quoc Street in Vietnam War-era Vietnam . The Long Tan cross is one of Vietnam's most famous war artifacts .
 The Sixth Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment erected the Long Tan Cross in 1969 to commemorate the site of the August 1966 battle between the First Australian Task Force and the NVA and the Viet Cong .
 The current cross at the site is a replica of the original, which is now in the Dong Nai Province Museum . The original cross is now located in a replica in the region . The current replica is in a museum in Dong Nae Province .
 Visitors may not visit the battlefield site without official authorization . The battlefield site is located in the U.S. State Department of Civil War .
 Ma Da Cemetery is located in the old D military base in the province's Vinh Cuu district . Known as the ""cemetery of no tombs,"" this burial ground is located at the old military base .
 The cemetery gets its name from the fact that thousands of remains buried there during the war have not yet been discovered . Thousands of remains have not been discovered yet .
 Military Cemetery, Long Khanh, contains the graves of both Viet Minh and NVA soldiers . This cemetery, near the Xuan Loc Victory monument, contains both NVA and Vietnamese soldiers .
 The Battle of Xuan Loc was a key victory for the NVA during their final offensive of 1975 . The battle took place during the final NVA offensive of that year .
 Grand monument in Long Khanh, Vietnam, commemorates the battle . Monument is dedicated to soldiers of the North Vietnamese Army . Monument was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The plane's remnants were later removed to this nearby museum, which commemorates aerial combat during the Vietnam War, and specifically NVA antiaircraft artillery .
 Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum was built from materials gathered from across Vietnam to house the glass sarcophagus of communist leader . The marble building was built in Vietnam from November until September .
 Hoa Lo Prison is one of the most infamous sites to house American prisoners of war during the conflict . Called the Hanoi Hilton by its American inmates, HoaLo Prison is a notorious prison in Vietnam . The prison is located in Hanoa, Vietnam .
 The prison now contains exhibits on U.S. pilots who were imprisoned there . Senator John McCain was imprisoned there during the First Indochina War . The prison's use during the war in Vietnam is also on display .
 Built in 1956, this museum contains weapons, uniforms, and photographs from the Vietnam War . Vietnam Military History Museum was built in 1956 and contains weapons and uniforms from the war .
 It is a popular place for veterans and visiting foreign dignitaries to pay their respects . It is also popular place to pay respects to veterans .
 Vietnamese People's Air Force Museum has a substantial collection of aircraft, helicopters, and weapons from the Vietnam War . The museum has a large collection of weapons and aircraft .
 Collection includes aircraft lost by U.S. forces . Collection includes wreckage of USAF Colonel Joseph Kittinger's F-4 Phantom and gear he was wearing when taken prisoner .
 The most famous of the Viet Cong tunnel networks, the tunnels of Cu Chi, span a large amount of underground territory around Saigon . The tunnels were a major base for Viet Cong operations during the 1968 Tet Offensive .
 Day tours to Nui Dat, Long Tan, and Vung Tau of particular interest to Australian veterans are day trips from Saigon . Day trips to Saigon are also popular with Australian veterans .
 Private guided tours visit the former sites of Australia's Nui Dat Task Force Base, the location of Horseshoe fire support base, the Long Tan Cross Memorial, and the site of the Australian base at Vung Tau .
 Ho Chi Minh Campaign Museum is dedicated to the final NVA offensive of 1975 . Museum has outdoor exhibit with tanks and planes, such as a US-built F-5E Tiger .
 The museum is home to one of the very tanks that entered the grounds of the Presidential Palace to capture Saigon in 1975 . The museum also contains a tank that was used to capture the Vietnamese capital .
 Their service is memorialized on the second floor of this museum in Ho Chi Minh City . The museum is dedicated to the families of the soldiers .
 The current building at this site was built in 1962, after President Ngo Dinh Diem's own Air Force bombed the previous presidential residence . The current Reunification Palace is located in Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese President General Minh surrendered on the palace steps . South Vietnamese General Minnh surrendered in the early 1960s .
 South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem was arrested at this church as he took mass in 1963 . Diem tried to flee from the coup that would oust him from the country .
 Diem and his brother were executed at close range in the back of an armored personnel carrier . They were executed en route to Tan Son Nhut, Vietnam's first president .
 Two memorials stand at the site of the United States Embassy, which was demolished in 2002 . Tet Offensive memorials are located at the former embassy's site .
 One commemorates the efforts of the Viet Cong during the 1968 Tet Offensive . Another pays tribute to the fallen U.S. Marines and embassy employees who lost their lives .
 It also includes an outdoor exhibit featuring United States and ARVN planes . The exhibit also includes a display of planes from the U.S. to the Netherlands .
 War Remnants Museum is one of the most popular stops for war tourists in Vietnam . The museum is a museum of Vietnam's fallen war dead .
 The exhibits contain weapons, vehicles, and artifacts from both U.S. and Vietnamese veterans . The exhibits also contain harrowing photographs and accounts of the conflict .
 It also contains replicas of the notorious ""tiger cages,"" in which communist prisoners were confined on Con Son Island . The replica of the infamous 'tiger cage' is also contained .
 Xa Loi Pagoda is a key site of resistance to President Ngo Dinh Diem . The pagoda today has a shrine honoring the martyrdom of Buddhist monk Thich Quang Due, whose selfimmolation nearby captured the world in 1963 .
 Skull Slope Kontum was the site of a major battle between the NVA and ARVN during the Easter Offensive of 1972 . The battle took place in the area .
 Kontum does have a monument to the battle . While few visual reminders of the battle remain, there are a few visual signs of it .
 Monument in Dak To celebrates liberation of Dak To-Can Tanh base by North Vietnamese forces in 1972 Easter Offensive . Monument on a roundabout in the town celebrates the liberation .
 Two Russian-made tanks that took part in the offensive are on display at the monument . Placards pay tribute to the North Vietnamese soldiers who died there .
 Kim Lien Museum was the childhood home of Ho Chi Minh. who lived there between 1890 and 1895 . The free museum is a free museum . Ho Chi-Minh lived there from 1890 to 1895 .
 Visitors to Lang Sen can see a replica of the home he lived in there, and visit a local shrine to the beloved leader . He moved to nearby Lang Sen at the age of six .
 In March 1968, American soldiers massacred innocent civilians at a hamlet known as My Lai . The massacre led to the court-martialling of the leaders of the village's leaders . American soldiers killed civilians at the hamlet .
 The tranquil site is now home to statues and memorial walls paying tribute to the dead . But the scars of the massacre remain visible in bullet holes and the foundations of burned down houses .
 Vietnam was divided into two territories along the 17th Parallel in 1954 . Vietnam was split from Vietnam into Vietnam and Vietnam was declared a state of war-torn territory .
 The area around this division was technically a demilitarized zone . However, in practice it saw its fair share of military action . The area was known as a 'demilitary zone'
 Today, visitors to the DMZ can see the Rock Pile, which was used as a lookout and artillery base, and the remains of Camp Carroll . Camp Carroll was a U.S. base from 1966 to 1972 .
 Day trips to the area go past the Rock Pile, McNamara Line, Khe Sanh, and Hamburger Hill . The area is also known as the "Rock Pile"
 Guides into the DMZ territory mostly operate from the former United States Marine post at Dong Ha . Going into this territory without a guide is not recommended, due to the amount of unexploded ordnance .
 Hien Luong Bridge and Ben Hai River Museum Destroyed in 1967 . Bridge marked the division of Vietnam along the 17th Parallel . Bridge was painted half red and half yellow to acknowledge physical and ideological boundary .
 The bridge was reopened in 1975, now blue and yellow, as a symbol of Vietnam's reunification . The bridge is now blue-and-yellow as a sign of unity between Vietnam and Vietnam .
 Tourists can visit the Ben Hai River Museum, on the bridge's north side, for exhibitions on life in the DMZ territory during the war .
 This base near the DMZ was a major target of the NVA's Tet Offensive, with United States troops besieged there under heavy artillery fire . The base is now a museum .
 The Khe Sanh Museum commemorates the battle with a reconstruction of an American bunker, as well as vehicles, weapons, and objects . The museum also features a replica of the bunker .
 Truong Son Cemetery was built for those who died on the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The major supply route from the North to the South was known to them as the Truong S. Son Trail .
 The cemetery is home to around 10,000 graves, which are only two-fifths of the total number of people who died on the trail . It is only the cemetery home to about 10,500 graves .
 An entire coastal village was driven to seek refuge inside these tunnels, sometimes for days or weeks at a time, as shelter from American bombs . Vinh Moc Tunnels were used to shelter an entire village from American bombing raids .
 Vinh Moc's underground network has been partially reopened for visitors . More spacious than the Cu Chi tunnels, the network is more spacious than Cu Chi's .
 Hue Hue's museum focuses on the schooling of the revolutionary leader, who studied therefrom 1895-1901 and 1906-09 . Hue Hue studied in Ho Chi Minh Minh from 1895 to 1906 and 1909 .
 Hue Citadel was a major target of the 1968 Tet Offensive . The imperial city of Hue bears the scars of battle . Hue Citadel is one of Vietnam's most famous landmarks .
 Northern sector riddled with bullet holes, crumbling walls and crumbling walls . Northern sector is riddled with holes and bullet holes . Some of the buildings have been destroyed, but some of them are still standing .
 The Ho Chi Minh Trail was a key supply route into South Vietnam, making it a target for U.S. bombings during Operation Rolling Thunder . The trail was a target of U.K. bombing during the war .
 Ho Chi Minh Trail Museum in Hanoi, Vietnam, is located on the trail . Many visitors wanting to learn more about the trail visit the museum . The trail is one of the world's most popular tourist attractions .
 Motorcyclists can drive through scenic mountain passes, following the same route used during the war, which largely remains unchanged . The route is largely unchanged, with some of the same routes used in WWII .
 Even with a guide, the full tour of Laos and Laos takes around two weeks to complete . The full tour takes you two weeks and takes you around two .
 Many of the war's major battlesites, crash sites, landing zones, and the remains of former bases are now gone . The remains of these bases have not been well preserved, or if they were particular to U.S. troops .
 Many local guides specialize in ""veteran return"" tours, and will, for a fee, locate and take veterans to the places where they served .
 Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture, gift of James E Brown . Collection of photos by James Brown .
 Jacob F Field is a writer and historian specializing in early modern English and military history . He is also a historian and author of a book about the history of the British monarchy .
 Jeremy Harwood worked in publishing for many years before becoming a full-time history writer . Harwood is the author of a book called The History of Britain .
 His particular interests include World War II and France's post-war battles with its colonies .
 Grant is a history writer who has published more than 30 books about aspects of military conflict . Grant has published over 30 books, many of them on aspects of the conflict .
 Sergeant Major Donna Lowery was part of the first group of military women who went to Vietnam . She was one of the most famous female soldiers to go to Vietnam in the war .
 During her military career, she completed four tours as a First Sergeant, was a Senior Drill Sergeant, Personnel Sergeant, Administrative Supervisor, and the Inspector General SGM for Korea .
 The History of an Unwinnable War, 1945-1975, was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize and won the Henry Adams Prize in American history . It was written in a book nominated for a Pulitzer Prize .
 Joe Yogerst has written three books on Vietnam including the award-winning Land of Nine Dragons . He visited Hue, Da Nang, Khe Sanh, Dien Bien Phu, and other Vietnam War locations during the war .
 His writings on history, culture, and travel have appeared in 32 National Geographic books . He has also written books on travel, history and culture .