 No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner without the express written consent of the publisher, except in the case of brief excerpts .
 Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at special discounts for sales promotion, corporate gifts, fund-raising, or educational purposes . Skyhorse publishing books can be purchased at large at discounts .
 The Selection and Preparation of the Battlefield Eighth The Battlefield and the Tactics. Eighth and Twelfth Battle of the World War II. The Battlefield is the first time the U.S. military has been involved in a major war .
 Kennedy Versus the CIA: The Final Confrontation to the CIA . Kennedy versus the CIA is a final encounter between Kennedy and the CIA. Kennedy vs. the CIA will be a final confrontation. The final confrontation will take place in the final moments of Kennedy's life .
 Oliver Stone's The Secret History of the United States by Oliver Stone is published by Harper Collins . The film stars Oliver Stone as the author of Oliver Stone’s "The Secret History" and "The JFK Conspiracy"
 He will be erased from the present history books, his version of history suppressed, his credibility denied, his integrity scorned . His integrity will be scorned, he says, and his credibility will be denied .
 Colonel Prouty’s “Secret History” of the United States, circa 1944 to the present, is published in small publishing houses, lowcirculation magazines . Young students in the twenty-first century will come back to his writings .
 With this single volume, Colonel Prouty blows the lid right off our ‘Official History’ and unforgivably, sadly, inexorably . inexorable, for anyone who dares enter this cave of dread and shame, shines his torch forever onto the ug
 Behind everything you read or see from this point on will flicker forever your most paranoid and darkest fears of the subconscious motives beneath the killer ape that became man . Behind everything, you will never know what you see or hear from the end of this story .
 In every aspect, even my mother's tale was denied, ignored, and mostly forgotten . "In every aspect—even my mother’s tale—the truth was denied and ignored,” she writes .
 Klaus Barbie trial in Lyons, France, is "history" made, but it's not until events like the trial surface and tear and remind . Of such is ‘history’ made—until, of course, contrary events such as the trial surfaces .
 Vietnam was an Orwellian memory hole, to be forgotten, says author . Such was my experience in writing Platoon . Platoon is a memoir of the Vietnam War .
 In the mid-1980s in Central America, freshfaced American troops in green uniforms with no memories of Vietnam, save for embarrassed stares, lined up to shoot Nicaraguans . The invasion of 1986 that never was. never was .
 In the early 1980s, on another screenplay, I was talking to youngsters with no knowledge whatever of Stalin's crimes, and old people who denied their past out of fear . And again in Russia, in the early 80s, I wrote about the crimes of Stalin’s crimes
 There is about us a wall, alone, beyond which our conscious mind will not let our unconscious go . There is a wall that separates us from our unconscious, and we will never let it go again .
 As time changes so do our mindsets, as does our perceptions . That margin, however, fades with the quotient and fashion of time .
 Loss of fear allows the mind to drop its censors and think the unthinkable . The loss of fear gives the mind the freedom to think and imagine .
 It is that access point to history which every filmmaker, poet, artist, seeks entry to history . It is the access point of history that every filmmaker seeks entry into history .
 "To collide with the forces of history...to merge with the backbeat of its onward push" "To merge with history, we're going to collide with history"
 Jack London, John Reed, Upton Sinclair and Upton Sinclair clash with early-twentieth-century history . Jack London and John Reed were the most powerful men in the world .
 War readiness accounts for approximately a tenth of the output of the world’s total economy . War readiness is estimated to account for about one tenth of world's total economic output . The U.S. has been warned that war readiness is a problem for the future .
 In illustrating this proposition, Colonel Prouty traces the divergent paths of early 1950s Vietnam . The Saigon Military Mission, Ed Lansdale, Tom Dooley, and Archbishop Spellman, are shown below .
 Mao with his guerrillawar ideology deeply influenced our ‘civic action’ paramilitary concepts in Vietnam and Central America . Mao's guerillawar ideas influenced our paramilitary concepts . Mao’s ‘guerrilla action” paramilitary concepts were created in Vietnam .
 Boeing and General Dynamics' TFX fighter jets are the latest in a long line of fighter jets . The TFX fighters will be the first of its kind in the world . Boeing vs. General Dynamics has been a long-running battle between the two companies .
 President Diem’s failure with Buddhists and his own army, the disastrous ‘hamlet’ program that ruined the South Vietnamese peasant economy, the expelling of the Chinese mercantile society, the influence of Lansdale . America's racist Third World attitudes blinded us
 Colonel Prouty heartrendingly details the destruction of rural peasant life . Law was based on harmony and law was deemed less important than virtue, says Colonel .
 This tribal society presents a nonconsumerist code of life that does not depend on ‘the omnipresent paternalism of the international banker’ or the chemical agricultural revolution or modem politics . This presents a dangerous alternative and loss of market to capitalism, says author .
 Colonel Prouty points the finger of treason at McGeorge Bundy, then assistant to President Kennedy, who signed the key first draft of NSAM #273 on November 21, 1963 . The draft was in contradiction to all previous Kennedy policy .
 Bundy’s bizarre role in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, reexamined here in a shocking new light . Bundy's role in Bay of Pigeas fiasco is re-examining here in new light, re-imagined here .
 Lucien Conein, our chief CIA operative in Vietnam under Lansdale, conformed to Colonel Prouty’s version of events at the Diem killing in South Vietnam, he says .
 Colonel Prouty pushes on to the true inner meaning of Watergate and leaves you dangling with the clues . We have only heard some forty hours of four hundred hours of one of the most mysterious affairs of American politics .
 The enemy for the U.S. was no longer the Nazi movement but the more pernicious, property-stealing Soviet Communist world-around tribe . The Nazi movement was the real enemy in the United States, the author says .
 Colonel Prouty points to the infusion of Nazi personnel, methods, and ultimately a Nazi frame of mind into the American system . Once seeded, once seeded, changed forever the way we operated in the world, led to the paramilitary domestic coup d’etat in Dallas, November
 Colonel Prouty sets the stage for this horrible nightmare with his own personally documented dealings with the Pentagon . He also has a personal side glimpse at his involvement in a small coup in Bolivia . The Pentagon says he was involved in a coup in Bolivian coup .
 Prouty illustrates that in 1975, our government spent $137 billion on military operations in Third World country LDCs . The money is essentially funneled through American subsidiaries from our military-industrial complex .
 He explains the true inner myth of our most staged public execution, the “Reichstag Fire” of our era . Behind the proscenium, blinded by the light of surface-event television, the power of the throne was stolen and exchanged by bloody hands .
 Kennedy was removed, fundamentally, because he threatened the ‘System’ far too dangerously . He shows us that Kennedy's removal shows that he was removed because he was a threat to the system .
 Colonel Prouty says Kennedy was removed not only for his skittish policy on Vietnam and Cuba but because he fundamentally was affecting the economic might of this nation-planet, U.S.A., Inc., Inc. and its New World Order . It is Colonel .
 Kennedy undermined, as Prouty fascinatingly outlines, not only the Federal Reserve Board but the CIA and its thousand-headed Medusa of an economic system . The world-around economic lines of the “High Cabal” and its military-industrial complex were forecast by Eisenhower
 Colonel Prouty shows us what we must understand of world history . He probes beneath the Egyptian mast of events and scenery and thousands of Cecil B De Mille extras . The Phoenician sail lines, the industrial complex, the distribution of minerals and oil, the exploitation of the planet
 These are the key questions of our times, controlling the way you think, the way the media tells you to think, and how you must think if we are to resist the ultimate desecration of the planet at the hands of U.S.A. and its New World Order
 Read as companion pieces to Colonel Prouty the unofficial ‘histories’ of Buckminster Fuller in The Critical Path and Howard Zinn’s People’�s History of the United States . To fully understand the scope of the “octopus” we
 I'm not sure, after all these years, that Mr Churchill was being too dramatic. I am not sure after all this year, that he was being very dramatic. But I'm glad he was not being too much dramatic.
 This book reads like Gibbon’s Decline and Fall . We see inside the wheel of our history how our various “emperors” come and go and their relationship to the military machine .
 If Hitler had won the Second World War, the version of events now given to us would not be too far off the mark . If Mr Hitler won the WWII, the idea of Third World lower slave races for mineral-resource conquest and world-round economic-military power would be too
 Instead of Nazi jackboots, we have men in gray suits and ties with attache cases . “Lawyer Capitalism” Buckminster Fuller labeled it. ‘Lawyer capitalism’
 I thank Colonel Prouty, who is old now, in his seventies—on the verge of going to the other side . He says, "I thank him for his help. I thank him"
 Oliver Stone’s epic film JFK opened in Washington on the Friday before Christmas, in 1991 . Stone discusses his film JFK and introduces the real “Man X” in May 1992 .
 President Kennedy's death in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, has shocked the moviegoing public around the world . Shown in a theater on Capitol Hill for all members of Congress, their families and staffs .
 The movie speaks to all people, and its tragic ‘Crime of the Century’ story has had a global impact, and the dust has yet to settle . The movie is set to be released on Blu-Ray in October .
 Stone: "Had President Kennedy lived, Americans would not have become deeply involved in the Vietnam War" Stone has said so frequently, “Americans would not be deeply involved with the war in Vietnam War.”
 This book in its original form provided vital parts of the movie’s theme . This book was used in the original form as a guide to the movie .
 Both the movie and book prove beyond all doubt that the government’s Warren Commission Report on the Assassination of President Kennedy was contrived and is false . The government used the Warren Commission to cover up the facts of the crime with a diversionary story .
 The National Press Club invited Oliver Stone to speak before its members and a nationwide audience on C-Span television . Stone will speak to the group's members .
 From 1955 to 1964 he was in the Pentagon working as chief of special operations . He was with the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy years . He also served as the Pentagon's top special operations chief .
 He was responsible for providing the military support of the clandestine operations of the CIA . That is, ‘Black Operations. . that is 'Black Operations’
 Stone: "I understood his own shock and disbelief at what happened to the President and what happened in the years that followed" Stone added that he understood his shock at the events in Vietnam .
 Prouty had never met with Garrison, but over the years he had written many letters to him and had worked on Jim’s manuscript before its publication . Garrison's manuscript was published in 1998 .
 I took the liberty of having a meeting take place between Mr Garrison and Colonel Prouty . Jim Garrison had brought Prouti’s work to my attention. Jim Garrison was brought into the light of his work by Mr Garrison .
 Some people have misunderstood and claimed that Man X never existed and that he made him up . Some people claim that he never existed or that he was invented .
 He has been critical of the CIA’s illegitimate activities in the fifties and sixties .
 He briefed people like Allen Dulles, knew them, knew the atmosphere in the Pentagon and the CIA at the time, knew General Lansdale . He knows a lot about it, including the atmosphere of the CIA and the Pentagon .
 I have been accused by a number of people, some of them journalists, of a distortion of history . Some of those people have accused me of a distorted of history, I say . I have never been accused of distortion of historical events .
 If there is any common thread of attack running through those critics of JFK, it is a notion that somehow there is an accepted, respected, carefully thought out and researched body of history about the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 "I have set out deliberately to subvert the motion picture medium," he says . He says he is targeting impressionable young people who will believe anything as long as it is visual .
 This distortion of history has come at me from all quarters, although almost entirely, it must be said, from people old enough to know better . This distortion has come from people who know better, he says . It is not the first time he has been attacked by the public, he
 There is no accepted history of these events, and that these terrible times remain the most undocumented, unresearched, unagreed-upon nonhistorical period of our history . And it ignores, deliberately and carefully, the fact that there is no acceptance of the events; and
 John F Kennedy was shot by a lone gunman, who in turn was killed by another earnest vigilante and lone gunman . One can read in history books the standard two paragraphs that John F. Kennedy was . killed by a . lone gunman who was a . earnest vigilante, he said .
 Warren Commission put forward in twentysix unindexed volumes by the Warren Commission, from the day it was issued was never even believed by a majority of Americans . But that theory, put forward by the Commission, was never believed by most Americans .
 Is it sacred history that this sem-iterate high school dropout from Ft. Ft.W.C. dropout is a member of the U.S. military? "It's not sacred history. It's sacred history," he asks .
 To accept this settled version of history, which must not be disturbed, was to then call down the venom of leading journalists from around the country . To accept that history was settled, it was to accept that it was not disturbed, he said .
 One bullet caused seven wounds in Kennedy and Governor Connally, breaking two dense bones and coming out clean, no metal missing, no blood tissue or anything on it . One bullet broke two bones and came out clean . No metal missing . No blood or tissue was on it.
 The bullet entered Kennedy’s back on a downward trajectory, changing direction, exiting up through his throat, pausing for 1.2 seconds before deciding to attack Connally . It then turned right, then left, then right again, hitting Connally at the back of his right
 A bullet is found five miles from the scene of the crime on a stretcher, in a corridor at Parkland Hospital in pristine condition . Later, that bullet turns up five miles away in a pristine condition at the hospital . The bullet was found in a hospital corridor at the time of
 It is a myth that an esteemed generation of journalists and historians have refused to examine . Journalists and historians closed ranks to criticize and vilify those who do not .
 So long as the attackers of that comforting “lone gunman” theory could be dismissed as “kooks’ and “cranks” and the writers of obscure books that would not be published by “reputable publishing houses” not much defense was
 A well-financed and, I hope, a well-made motion picture with all the vivid imagery and new energy the screen can convey . But now all that is under attack by a well financed and well-funded motion picture .
 Now, either enormous amounts of evidence have to be marshaled in support of that myth or else those in question must be attacked . The myth is a myth, but evidence must have been marshaled to support it .
 Some journalists of the sixties are self-appointed keepers of the flame . Some journalists were self-described as 'keepers of flame'
 They talk about ‘our history’ and fight savagely those who would question it . ‘Our history is our history,’ they say. ‘They talk about 'our history. They talk savagely’
 Crime of the century, with no motive and hardly any alleged perpetrators, they stand here . But, confronted with the crime of the Century, they are here . They stand here. They face no motive or any suspects .
 "There is more truth seeking going on now in Russia than there is in our country," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: 'There are more truth seekers in Russia now than there are in the U.S. and Russia' Putin says Putin's government is seeking truth seeking .
 JFK has brought out that those who talk most of history have no commitment to it, says JFK . JFK's JFK brought out what JFK has shown is that most of the history is not history, says historian .
 Vietnam has become the bloody shirt of American politics, replacing slavery of one hundred years before . It is Vietnam which has become a bloody shirt for American politics . Vietnam has replaced slavery of slavery of a century before, says historian .
 The Vietnam War remains the watershed of our time, as well as the Civil War, when we passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . Just as we did not resolve, if we ever did, the great battle of slavery until a hundred years after the civil war, we didn't resolve
 The divisions in our country, among our people, opened up by it seem to get wider and wider with each passing year . And the divisions in the country, including those opened up, seem to be widening and wider . The division in our society seems to be getting wider and worse with
 JFK suggests it was Vietnam that led to the assassination of John F Kennedy . He became too dangerous, too strong an advocate of changing the course of the Cold War, too clear a proponent of troop withdrawal .
 Oliver Stone is relying heavily on his adviser, the author of this book, for these little known facts . With this emphasis on the Vietnam policy of President John F Kennedy, Oliver Stone relies heavily on the book's author .
 Colonel Prouty was one of the writers of Kennedy’s NSAM #263, which publicly announced his plan to have one thousand military men home by Christmas and all United States personnel out of Vietnam by the end of 1965 .
 This book explains those JFK "Vietnam policies" authoritatively and in considerable detail . This book also explains JFK's Vietnam policy in detail .
 Those who say it was no more than a call for a rotation of troops or a gimmick ignore the obvious question . The Johnson NSAM #273, issued within a week of the assassination, merely confirmed the policy, ignore the question .
 It was suggested in the motion picture that Mozart had not died peacefully; but had been murdered by a rival and second-rate composer . But these defenders of history had very little to say five years ago .
 Eighteenth-century Vienna, after all, is not twentieth century Vietnam . Vienna is not Vietnam, but Vienna is a city of contrasts with Vietnam .
 If John Kennedy were killed because he was determined to withdraw from Vietnam and never send combat troops to a Vietnam War, then we must fix the blame for the only lost war in our history . If Mozart was murdered, it would not change one note of that most precious music . If
 I've been ridiculed and worse for suggesting the existence of a conspiracy as though only kooks and cranks and extremists suggest such a thing . I’ve been ridiculed for suggesting such a conspiracy, but I'm not the only person to suggest it .
 This is the wrong city in which to ridicule people who believe in conspiracies . But this is the right city to ridicule conspiracies, he says .
 "We would have impeached him for it had he not resigned, just one step ahead," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be impeached for it," says Obama .
 Thomas Jefferson urged on us the notion that when truth can compete in a free marketplace of ideas, it will prevail . Thomas Jefferson urges on us to think that truth will compete with ideas in free markets .
 There is, as yet, no marketplace of history for the years before the Kennedy assassination and immediately afterward . There is yet to be known how much Kennedy's assassination affected the nation .
 What Eve tried to do with this movie is to open a stall in that marketplace of ideas and offer a version of what might have happened as against the competing versions of what we know did not happen .
 Nine million people have already seen the movie, and nine million have already heard it . "Our new stall in that marketplace of ideas is doing a very brisk business," says the director .
 "We expect by the time this film is played out in video cassettes, etc., that another fifty million Americans will have a little more information on their history. And we expect that by the way this film, etc. will have to be played out, and we expect another fifty
 "I am very proud that JFK has been a part of the momentum to open previously closed files in the matter of the assassination," says JFK's widow .
 Congressman Louis Stokes of Ohio is chairman of the House Select Committee on Assassinations . He has announced his willingness to consider the opening of the files . The files are closed until 2029 .
 Sen. Edward Kennedy endorsed a proposal to release all of the files from the House and CIA files . Judge William Webster, formerly the director of the FBI and of the CIA, has indicated his strong opinion that all the files should be made public .
 In the meantime, we are grateful to Congressman Stokes, Congressman Lee Hamilton, Judge Webster, Senator Kennedy, and others who have indicated a willingness to open these files .
 I hope the U.S. people will have the full truth of this assassination . Now if the army and navy intelligence services join suit, it is hoped they join suit .
 Preface the Cold War has ended, but the mystery lives on . The mystery of the origins of the "Battlegrounds" continues .
 In terms of the military-industrial interests there had to be a demand for their products . There had been attrition of that materiel, he said .
 One of the greatest casualties of the Cold War has been the truth, writes David Frum . "We have now begun to realize that one of the biggest casualties of this, the truth," he says .
 Ralph Waldo Emerson said, “There is properly no history; only biography,” and this may have been said in jest . It's not only history but biography, Emerson said .
 We have learned, with some frequency, that the biographer himself may have toyed with the truth . We have also learned that we have learned of the truth from a biographer . The biographer's biographer may have played with the facts .
 Perhaps “autobiography” is a better word for a factually correct history . Perhaps ‘autobiology’ is a more word for ‘factually correct’ history .
 The ‘Saigon Solution” is the long-range plan that was designed and employed by the international power elite to bridge, profitably, that first thirty years of the Cold War . The fall of Saigon, on April 30, 1975, was the fall of the Sa
 They took advantage of the so-called energy crisis of the seventies and the equally contrived financial crises of the eighties to make unbelievable sums of money from those valuable sources that must include the global trade in drugs . After that they took over from the energy crisis and the financial crisis
 There are some readers unaccustomed to this age-old concept of the power elite .
 R Buckminster Fuller described the idea in his Critical Path in his important book Critical Path . Fuller's idea was that the world's future is in the hands of the world .
 In our comprehensive reviewing of published, academically accepted history we continually explore for the invisible power structure behind the visible kings, prime ministers, czars, emperors, presidents, and other official head men . We look for the underlying, hidden causes of individual wars and the long, drawn
 It goes without saying that few, if any, credible historians are going to be able to name the individuals who comprise such an elite .
 They are not the Bilderburgers, the Trilateralists, or members of the Council for Foreign Relations . They're not Bilderbergers or Trilateralistists, they're not members of Foreign Relations, they say . But they are not .
 Much more is said on this subject in the chapters that follow, and even then we must realize that one of the greatest strengths of this power elite is that they have learned to live anonymously .
 Churchill made reference to a ‘High Cabal’ that has made us what we are, Denning reports . Churchill made the reference during a conversation among friends . Churchill was speaking to friends .
 Churchill made reference to a 'high, or higher, cabal' at the wartime peak of his public career . For a man in Churchill’s position, it would be difficult to describe a high or higher cabal .
 We live under the influence of such a cabal today, whether we realize it or not, we live under it . We live in such an influence today, says CNN's John Sutter .
 November 22, 1963, assassination of President John F Kennedy is remembered as the most significant event in American history . In general, this historical account follows a chronological format, and in so doing it recognizes the enormous significance of the assassination .
 Portions of this book appeared during 1985-1987 in the magazine Freedom . Portions were published in Freedom magazine Freedom.
 The author worked with Stone as a technical adviser and was portrayed as “Man X,” played by Donald Sutherland . Stone was portrayed by Sutherland in the film .
 The book documents the long-range, strategic planning of the Cold War, begun as early as the Cairo and Teheran “Big Four” Conferences of late November 1943 . It documents how that planning led directly, without a single day’s interval, from the
 These Conference plans also included the Korean war that began five years later, in June 1950 .
 Dulles confirmed in a speech made by John Foster Dulles before the American Legion Convention in St. Louis, Missouri . Dulles made the speech at the convention . Dulls' speech was made before the Legion Convention .
 Before that ‘no win” warfare had ended, not less than $570 billion had been channeled into the coffers of this warmaking High Cabal at a cost of 58,000 American lives . Before that "no win" warfare had been ended,
 The first of each of the original types of atomic bomb, Implosion and Gun-type, had been given its initial bloodbath public demonstration over Hiroshima and Nagasaki . As many have recognized, the war did not end .
 World-class planners realized they had made a terrible mistake in funding nuclear physicists and industrial backers to produce an atom bomb . Then, only then, did they realize that they'd made a huge mistake, he says .
 The atomic bomb demonstrated that effective warfare, as it was known since the dawn of mankind, has ended . From the time of the first use of nuclear weapons until the present, and even more certainly for the future, the atomic bomb demonstrates that effective war has ended.
 The next real, all-out, and unlimited war will lead to Armageddon on Earth . The next war will be the next real war . Armageddon will be on Earth.
 The fission-fusion-fission bomb permits unlimited destruction in a small convenient package . The bomb was designed to destroy a small amount of nuclear material .
 The radius of destruction is measured not in miles but in hundreds of miles . Civil defense by evacuation is useless, rendering any civil defense useless .
 The series of so-called wars since 1945 were never fought to achieve victory . Furthermore, the series of 'so-called 'war' wars never achieved victory, the author says .
 They were waged for dollars, without a true military objective, under the control of civilian leaders, with the generals in a supernumerary role . The generals were in a role in the creation of the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 The first twenty years of our “desperate struggle” in Indochina were fought under the operational control of agents of either the Office of Strategic Services or the Central Intelligence Agency . Ho Chi Minh helped establish the independence of Vietnam, and later supported the French .
 Few bona fide U.S. Armed Forces generals who were in Vietnam were limited to managing supporting activities . None of them, at any time, ever served in direct command of combat operations in Indochina .
 There was always an ambassador, and frequently a CIA agent—under the cover of a general—or both in superior positions . There were always ambassadors, and often CIA agents, in the White House .
 No single event of that thirty-year period has been a more serious indictment of the condition of our present government, of our media, and of those of the lawyer-capitalist system, who are in control of both, than the “cover story” fabrication about the assassination of
 The greater crime committed on November 22, 1963 was that of the coup d’etat of the government of the United States. The reason why it has been possible to maintain this enormous “cover story’s’ for decades is that the greater crime was committed on
 One World growth of a power elite of international bankers and industrial giants who totally disregard the sovereignty of nations and the individual rights of man . Paramount among the many other reasons for this deplorable condition has been the One World .
 The Cold War period that began before the end of World War II has been replete with fantasies . As a result, the history of the Cold War Period that began in 1950s and 1960s is replete of fantasies .
 A number of those whom we call ‘historians’ are no more than paid hacks with little or no practical experience, and a fixed agenda, says David Cameron . “Historians” are ‘paid hacks’, he says, ‘with little or
 Lodge flies to Washington the day after the conference and meets with the President of the United States .
 This massive study, containing countless other fabrications and significant omissions, was presented to the newly appointed Secretary of Defense, Clark M Clifford, on January 15, 1969 . It was officially presented to Clark Clifford, the then-secretary of defense .
 "In contrast, my book has been written utilizing a pattern of chronology and autobiography," he says . "I've written a book using chronology, autobiography and chronology," he adds .
 P. P pilot, I was on duty in Cairo and Teheran during those important, highest level conferences of late November 1943 . I was a pilot for the U.S. in the Middle East .
 I participated in one of the initial, pivotal moves of the Cold War in the Balkans during September 1944 while the Soviet Union was still publicly considered to be one of our wartime allies . The move was made in September 1944 .
 I was on Okinawa at the end of World War II and had made air transport flights into Japan before the official surrender on September 2, 1945 . I returned again to the Far East as commander of a Military Air Transport Service squadron based in Tokyo from 1952 through 1954 .
 During those years, I made many flights into Indochina and what became the nation of South Vietnam in 1954 . During those days, I traveled with the U.S. Navy .
 In 1955 I was designated by the chief of staff of the United States Air Force to establish an office of special operations within that headquarters . This was in compliance with National Security Council Directive #5412 of March 15, 1954 .
 This NSC Directive for the first time in the history of the United States defined covert operations and assigned that role to the Central Intelligence Agency . Active-duty Armed Forces personnel were ordered to avoid such operations .
 The Armed Forces were directed to “provide the military support of the clandestine operations of the CIA” as an official function . At the same time, the Armed Forces also directed to provide “military support’s clandestine operations .
 I established that office and created its global clandestine support system . "I established that . office," he said . "It created a global clandestine . support system"
 This book documents the ‘Saigon Solution’ -- that complex and powerful element of the Cold war master plan . The plan generated no less than six trillion dollars for its beneficiaries, who were in most cases many of the same members of the military-industrial complex . President Dwight D
 This book is a personal account of the characteristics of the power elite and of its activities on an international scale during the Cold War . It is the author's account of his experiences with the world's top power elite .
 The greatest war in the history of mankind came to a sudden and spectacular close with the detonation of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs . World War One came to an end with a spectacular end in 1945 .
 The Japanese surrender on the battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay on September 2, 1945, brought the Japanese to the surrender table . The highest cabal of this world realized they made an irreparable mistake when they permitted, yes, encouraged, nuclear scientists to create the nuclear weapon .
 From now on warfare must be limited, or all-out warfare will obliterate life on Earth . All-out war must now be limited to limited, says President Obama . "From now on, warfare must have limited," he says .
 During October 1943, I had been directed to fly a Geological Survey Team, under the leadership of Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . The team was part of a geological Survey Team .
 American Airlines founder and president of American Airlines and an ‘oil wise” Texan to Saudi Arabia. Smith .
 Roosevelt sent select team into Saudi Arabia to meet with representatives of California Standard Oil Company . Roosevelt had sent that select team in .
 Following that visit they had been directed to join the President in Cairo . They had been told to join him in Cairo following that visit .
 Roosevelt ordered the construction of a 50,000-barrel-per-day refinery on that site . Roosevelt ordered construction of the refinery in response to the discovery of oil .
 Soong had actively participated in Cairo in the planning for the post-World War II activities in the Far East . They flew on to Teheran, for that historic conference with Stalin . Soong and Soong attended the conference .
 The fact that immediately following the Cairo Conference the Chinese delegation was in Teheran for that meeting with Josef Stalin has not been recorded in the history books of this era .
 Ho Chi Minh declared the Independence of Indochina on September 2, 1945 . The date was the date of the surrender of the Japanese forces in Indochinia . The U.S. OSS man and United States Army general stood on each side of him .
 That date marks the beginning of the three decades of the Vietnam War, as it was called . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 The Cold War actually began even earlier while World War II was still being fought against the Axis powers . But the Cold War was actually started even earlier in the 1950s, when the war was still raging in Europe .
 In September 1944, while I was stationed in Cairo, I was asked by the commanding general of the Middle East Command, Benjamin Giles, and by my own Cairo base commander, Gen. Gen. Francis Francis .
 The American POWs had been shot down in the Balkans during air raids on the Ploesti oil fields . The POWs were shot down by air raiders during the war .
 The train traveled from Bucharest, Romania, via the Balkans and Turkey to the vicinity of Aleppo, Syria . It traveled from Romania to the region of Aleppo .
 Thirty transport aircraft were flown to the same landing ground north of Aleppo and close to the Turkish border where the railroad track enters Syria . That night, after returning from Aleppo, I arranged for about thirty transport aircraft to fly .
 We flew to Syria, met a freight train from Bucharest, loaded the POWs onto our aircraft, and began the flight back to Cairo . We met the freight train to Bucharest and loaded the prisoners onto the aircraft .
 They had been hidden in this shipment by the OSS to get them out of the way of the Soviet army that had marched into Romania on September 1 . The OSS had hidden them in a shipment to get rid of the Russian army .
 September 1944 operation was first major pro-German, anti-Soviet activity of its kind of Cold War . Operation was the first major anti-Russian activity of the kind of the Cold War. Operation in September 1944 was a major success for the U.S. military.
 With OSS assistance, many followed in quick succession, including the escape and carefully planned flight of General Reinhart Gehlen, the German army’s chief intelligence officer, to Washington on September 20, 1945 . OSS helped with the escape of General Gehlen . Gehlen's
 The war against the Germans ended on May 8, 1945, and an increasing allied force escalated the war against Japan . The war ended in May 1945 .
 Around the world, most believed the surrender of Japan four month later, that war-making had ended, despite the enormous shadow of nuclear weapons that loomed over the horizon . Most believed with the surrender four months later that war had ended .
 A new, limited, clandestine paramilitary type of warfare emerged in some of the hot spots of the world . Meanwhile, a new paramilitary type has emerged .
 The Korean War began in May 1950 and, almost immediately, United States Armed Forces accompanied by their new CIA associates became involved . U.S. armed forces accompanied by CIA associates become involved .
 By the time the North Korean forces surrendered, Indochina had flared up, on schedule . North Korea forces surrendered to the South Korean state of Vietnam .
 American participation was under the clandestine operational control of CIA agents, most of whom had valuable World War II military experience . Most of the CIA agents had valuable WWII experience .
 By 1954 the United States government for the first time found it necessary to define covert operations . The U.S. government was forced to declare covert operations in 1954 .
 National Security Council Directive 5412 of March 15, 1954, became the U.S. government’s basic directive on covert activities . The directive became the United States government's basic directive for covert activities in 1954 .
 The CIA became a member of the NSC 5412 Special Group . Responsibility for covert operations that had been directed by NSC was assigned to the CIA .
 Colonel Lansdale was sent to Vietnam in 1954 to create the Saigon Military Mission . Lansdale is one of five others being sent to Saigon to create a military mission .
 This unit was in place by July 1954 in time to support the new president, Ngo Dinh Diem, of the new country South Vietnam .
 Ho Chi Minh’s army defeated the French forces at Dien Bien Phu in May 1954 . In May 1954, the Vietnamese army defeated French forces in the battle . The war ended in a victory for the Vietnamese people .
 Geneva Conference convened to arrange an agreement between the new countries of North Vietnam and South Vietnam . Geneva Conference was convened in order to arrange agreement between new countries .
 Residents of the north who chose to move to the south could do so . One proviso of that agreement was that the same applied to those in the south . Those in the north were able to leave the north to move south .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles reported in 1955 that six hundred thousand people had fled from northern Vietnam . Dulles: "So far, about six hundred . hundred thousand persons have fled ... and before the exodus is over the number will probably approach one million"
 Navy transport ships and CIA’s Civil Air Transport airline from the north to the Saigon region in the south . The CIA's Civil Air . Transport airline .
 By late 1960 our own forces had created the concept of “counterinsurgency.” The U.S. government had created a concept of counterinsurgencies. “Counterinsurgentency”
 During the years since the end of World War II, he had been a member of the House of Representatives and a United States Senator . He had served on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee .
 He had met Ngo Dinh Diem during 1953 and had met the Cuban exile political leaders as early as August 1960 . He had also met Diem in 1953 and 1960 .
 Nixon knew as much about training of Cuban exiles under the CIA as Nixon did, perhaps more . He knew more about the training of exiles and of their plans for removal of Castro than Nixon did .
 Many believe this made it possible for him to be elected president in November 1960 . It was during the final television debate of the presidential campaign with Nixon that Nixon outmaneuvered Nixon, especially regarding anti-Castro policies .
 The CIA quietly upgraded the Eisenhower administration’s March 1960 approval of a modest Cuban-exile support program from small air-drop and over-the-beach operations to a 3,000-man invasion brigade . Kennedy inherited a plan that Kennedy inherited from Eisenhower .
 Preface is an outline of the national and world affairs of the U.S. government as Kennedy inherited them from the eight-year Republican administration under Eisenhower . In brief, this Preface outlines the national, world affairs .
 At that time, January 1961, President Richard Nixon was in the Pentagon . He was working in the Office of Special Operations, a direct function of the Secretary of Defense .
 This office was responsible for the CIA relationship and special operations . It was also responsible for reviewing the development and execution of plans and programs of the National Security Agency .
 The most noticeable characteristic of that ‘lame duck’ period was the dislike by the old-timers in the halls of the Pentagon for the new President . Kennedy newcomers began to replace the departing Eisenhower old-timerers .
 This developed as a result of his defeat of Nixon and the end of the Republican administration’s policies, he says . This developed after Nixon's defeat and end of Republican policies, the president says .
 It was further exacerbated by the representatives of the militaryindustrial complex who had been working so successfully with the tenants of the Pentagon since World War II . They had worked on the procurement plans for the high-cost “hardware” support of the warfare-to-come in Vietnam
 All of the die was cast with the sabotage of the Bay of Pigs operation in April 1961 . "All of the sudden the die had been cast," says President Nixon .
 Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles was out of the country on the day of the landings . Dulles, the man in charge of the operation, was not in the country at the time .
 Cuban Exile Brigade bombers from Nicaragua to destroy Castro’s last three combat jets that Kennedy, himself, had directed, had been cancelled . The essential, pre-dawn air strike on D-Day by Cuban exile Brigade bombers was cancelled by McGeorge Bundy .
 Bundy made the call just four hours before the Exile Brigade’s B-26s were to take off from Nicaragua on that Kennedy-ordered strike . Bundy's phone call by Bundy was made just hours before that strike was ordered .
 The policy dictated by NSC 5412, March 1954, positively prohibited the utilization of active-duty military personnel in covert operations . The Bay of Pigs invasion was the result of a decision by the NSC .
 At no time was an “air cover” provision written into the official invasion plan developed by an experienced and highly competent United States Marine Colonel and approved, with that stipulation, by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President .
 The “air cover’s story that has been created since the failure of the Brigade is incorrect. The air cover story is incorrect,” the author says. “The “Air cover” story that was created has been incorrect.” The "air
 President Kennedy reacted quickly and deftly, as soon as the Brigade was forced to surrender . President Kennedy responded quickly to the situation .
 He formed a Cuban Study Group one day after the Brigade’s defeat . He charged it with the responsibility of determining the cause for the failure of that operation .
 Allen Dulles, Gen. Gen. George W. Eisenhower and Gen. Dwight Eisenhower were the first Americans to study in the U.S. to study .
 Arleigh Burke, and Robert Kennedy, reported Bundy’s telephone call to General Cabell was the primary reason for the failure on the beach and surrender of the Cuban Exile Brigade . The Cuban exile Brigade surrendered to the White House .
 When fully implemented, as Kennedy had planned, after his reelection in 1964, it would have taken the CIA out of the covert operations business . The CIA would have been eliminated from covert operations after 1964 .
 This official record documents twenty-six highest level level meetings in the White House with President Kennedy during the period August 28, 1963, to November 13, 1963 . The official record was released in November 1963 .
 Victor H Krulak attended twenty-three of the meetings in addition to making a quick visit to South Vietnam . He also made a quick trip to the country to visit South Vietnam.
 Such a full schedule, in the White House and with the President among other high officials, in such a concentrated period is most unusual, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It shows clearly how closely Kennedy made an analysis of the Vietnam situation his own problem, and it relates precisely precisely the ideas he brought to the attention of his key staff on the subject .
 General Krulak would call several of us on his staff into his office each day, discuss notes he had made, and give us instructions concerning what he wanted done for the next day’s meeting with Kennedy . It is significant to note that as General Krulpak came and
 President Johnson intended Vietnam policy for 1964 and 1965, he says . "I was intimately aware of this planning process, its policies, and precisely what the President intended as Vietnam policy"
 The president considered it imperative for Secretary McNamara and General Taylor to visit Vietnam during that troubled time . One month before the Diems were to be removed from Saigon to Europe in accordance with his approved plan .
 General Krulak was responsible for producing the final document for President Kennedy that would be known as the McNamara— Taylor Trip Report, October 2, 1963 .
 It was carefully written by several of us in the Pentagon under General Krulak’s guidance, utilizing the notes and personal comments of the President . The book is carefully written and carefully vetted by several members of Congress .
 Charts and photos were added, as necessary, and it was bound in leather . Charts, photos and photos are added as necessary .
 It was not something produced by the two principals during their busy travels . Instead, it was a photo montage of the couple's travels .
 Krulak arranged for a jet fighter aircraft to rush it to Hawaii where it was given to travelers in order that they might become familiar with it before landing at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland .
 As soon as they landed, they boarded a helicopter for the White House, where they gave the report to the president . The report was presented to President Obama .
 The report of October 2, 1963, became NS AM #263 after acceptance and approval of the President and his National Security Council . The report was published in 1963 .
 U.S. plans to withdraw 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963 . Plan is the basis for a policy decision confirming that “presently prepared plans” are to withdraw .
 The Armed Forces newspaper Stars and Stripes carried the banner headline United States TROOPS SEEN OUT of VIET by ’65 .
 This was the official and carefully drawn policy of the Kennedy administration, as written under the eye of the President . The policy was written under President Kennedy's watchful eye .
 The policy was developed in the face of the fact that at the same time the Buddhist uprising in the country was alarming . This policy was . at the time of the . same time, the . country was alarmed by the growing Buddhist uprising .
 John F Kennedy's death all but telegraphed the death of JFK before his reelection . As such, it all but signaled the end of the Kennedy presidency .
 President Kennedy stood between them and their own goals . NSAM #263 and related policy actions, such as changes in military procurement methods, were clear that President Kennedy .
 It was clear that this latest “all out by ’65” policy was going to assure JFK’s reelection . It was also clear that . this latest . ‘All out by '65’ policy was also going to . assure JFK .
 "A gradual, firm, and positive consensual decision was reached. With that foremost in their minds, the decision was made," the author says .
 They wanted no more of Kennedy; and they could not abide the thought of a Kennedy dynasty . The Kennedy family was deeply unhappy with the idea of a dynasty .
 In March 1964, LBJ signed NSAM #288 that marked the full escalation of the Vietnam War that involved 2,600,000 Americans directly . 8,744,000 served with the U.S. Armed Forces during that period . In November 1963, President Johnson had signed
 "That is the historical and factually biographical material of this book. That is the factually . That is . The historical and facts of this . book .
 I do not believe we can avoid serious and unacceptable risk of nuclear war until we base all our military plans, defense budgets, weapons deployments and arms negotiations on the recognition that nuclear weapons serve no military purpose whatsoever .
 They are useless—except only to deter one’s opponent from using them . They are totally useless, except only for the use of them, says President Obama .
 If this nation is to be wise as well as strong, if we are to achieve our destiny, then we need more new ideas for more wise men reading good books in public libraries .
 We must know all the facts and hear all the alternatives and listen to all the criticisms . We must also hear all of the criticisms. We need to know the facts, hear the alternatives, listen to them. We must be very careful, very careful and very careful .
 For the Bill of Rights is the guardian of our security, as well as our liberty . For the first time, we have been in violation of the Constitution, the U.S. Supreme Court has been in breach of the law .
 The Bulletin of the Federation of American Scientists some years ago . So said the Bulletin . of the . Federation of . American Scientists . Some years ago, the Bulletin said .
 In the real world, more than six trillion dollars have been spent on military manpower, military equipment, and facilities since WWII ended in 1945 . The major battles of that Cold War were fought by Third World countries and terrorists .
 At the same time, the enormous military might of both world powers proved to be relatively ineffectual, because those multimegaton hydrogen bomb weapons are too monstrous, and too uncontrollably life threatening, to have any reasonable strategic value .
 The existence of these multimegaton hydrogen bombs has so drastically changed the Grand Strategy of world powers . The strategy is being carried out by the invisible forces of the CIA, what remains of the KGB, and their lesser counterparts around the world .
 Men in positions of great power have been forced to realize that their aspirations and responsibilities have exceeded the horizons of their own experience, knowledge, and capability . Men in power are forced to decide that they have exceeded their own horizons .
 "Because they are in charge of this high-tech society, they are compelled to do something," says the president . "They are compelled by the fact they're in charge, because they are ... compelled to ... do something"
 This overpowering necessity to do something creates an overbearing fear of the people, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The power elite fear the people . He says it creates an overpowering need for action .
 It is the fear not of you and me as individuals but of the smoldering threat of vast populations and of potential uprisings of the masses . The fear is not of individual individuals but the threat of a vast population, it is of the vast populations .
 This power elite is not easy to define; but the fact that it exists makes itself known from time to time . The power elite, however, is not hard to define, but it exists .
 Fuller noted also, “Always their victories in the name of some powerful sovereign-ruled country.” Fuller said . Fuller also noted that the U.S. has been involved in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The power elite is not a group from one nation or even of one alliance of nations, it is said . It is not only a group of nations but also an alliance of countries .
 It operates throughout the world and no doubt has done so for many, many centuries . It operates through the world, with many of the world's nations .
 The concept of “real property” is a function of ‘colonialism” that began with the circumnavigation of Earth by Magellan’s ships in 1520 .
 Locke described a ‘doctrine of discovery and rights of conquest’ in Locke’s philosophy of natural law . Locke described the doctrine of discovery in Locke's philosophy of law . John Locke's theory of discovery was described by Locke in his philosophy .
 Darwin’s theory of evolution, as enhanced by the concept of the survival of the fittest, is a theory of the evolution of the species . Darwin's theory is based on the concept that evolution evolved to survive .
 Heisenberg’s theory of indeterminacy, that is that God throws the dice, and similar barriers to the real advancement of science and technology today, are similar .
 The first of these schemes derives from the fact that the generally accepted ‘flat earth’ was, all of a sudden, proved to be a sphere by the voyage of Magellan’s ships around the world .
 It is not so much that certain educated men had not already theorized that Earth was round, but that with the return of the first ship Victoria the expedition’s wealthy financial backers had visual evidence that ships could circumnavigate the world and that because they could, Earth had
 Being a sphere, it therefore had to be a finite object, with a finite —that is, limited—surface area . The sphere had to have a finite surface area, and therefore it was a sphere .
 World trade and related colonial proprietary rights were born. With this awakening the ideas of world trade were born . World trade was the beginning of the colonial era of colonialism .
 It may be postulated that this single bit of physical awareness brought about the greatest change in the mind of man since the dawn of creation . It may also postulate that this . may be the greatest . change in . man's mind since creation .
 Before Magellan’s time, mankind had simply accepted as self-evident the fact that there was always more property “out there” over the horizon .
 From that date on , the powerful rulers of the seafaring countries assumed the ownership of all real property in those discovered lands . The natural resources on that property became one of the driving forces of mankind .
 Surveyor surveyor is a surveyor . Surveyor is an important surveyor in later years of life . Surveyors are important surveyors .
 George Washington was a surveyor, outlining vast unknown tracts of land deeded by the King to his favorites, as though the King and no one else—least of all those who inhabited these tracts—owned them .
 Most of the new land discovered ‘out there’ was, and had been, already populated by others for millennia . This paternalistic view of the right to the natives’ real property totally disregarded the fact that most of the . new land . discovered “out there
 The power centers of that period were taking over the real property of the world, no matter who was on it or who had been living there . The surveyor's chain, the missionary’s cross, and the explorers’ gun were used .
 By 1600, Queen Elizabeth had founded the East India Company, which was given charter rights to create proprietary colonies anywhere on Earth . Queen Elizabeth founded the company in 1600 .
 The East India Company was the structural mechanism of the most powerful men on Earth . During those long years when the British fleet maintained the global British Empire, the East India company was a key part of the British Empire .
 The East India Company founded Haileybury College in England to train its young employees in business, the military arts, and the special skills of religious missionaries .
 By 1800 it became necessary to initiate the task of making an Earth inventory, that is, to find out what was out there in the way of natural resources, population, land, and other tangible assets .
 The first man assigned the official responsibility for this enormously vital job was the head of the Department of Economics of Haileybury College .
 Thomas Malthus, in 1805, postulated that humanity is multiplying its numbers at a geometric rate while increasing its lifesupport capability at only an arithmetic rate . This man was Thomas . He postulated the idea that humanity's lifespans are multiplying at geometric rate .
 Only a relatively few humans are destined to survive successfully in generations to come . As a result, it has been universally concluded by the power elite that only a relatively . few humans will survive successfully .
 The Malthusian theory provides a rationalization for the necessity of somehow getting rid of large numbers of people, any people, in any way . Even genocide, the theory says, is necessary to get rid of people .
 With the Malthusian theory as the power elite’s guide, this becomes an acceptable objective . Earth will never be able to support the progeny of so many anyhow, anyhow .
 From this point of view, genocide is accepted as all but inevitable . Genocide—then as now, it's accepted as inevitable, says the author .
 Darwin persuades them to believe that because they survive, at no matter what cost to others and to Earth, they must therefore be—by definition—the fittest . Because they know they are the chosen, that is, the fittest, they are Earth’s assured survivors
 The fourth, Heisenberg’s nuclear age theory, provides an excuse for their errors and confusion . The theory of the nuclear age age theory is the basis for their error and confusion.
 If physical science is found to be indeterminate, economics can be, and so can everything else . Certainly, if physical science finds out, it can be indetermined, economics may be, too . Economics can be an example of how it is possible to think about the future of
 The one caution, the power elite later reasoned, was that new scientific discoveries and new technology must never be permitted to overwhelm the status quo as precipitously as the hydrogen bomb had done . The power elite reasoned that new . scientific discoveries must never overwhelm the . status quo .
 Each of these concepts has been conveniently contrived to fit the occasion . Each became the type of theory that is useful at certain times and in certain cases, but can never be proved . In most cases can easily be superseded by a more modern technology, a more . modern technology or
 Report From Iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of Peace attributed to “the Special Study Group in 1966,” an organization whose existence was so highly classified that there is no record of who the men in the group were or with what sectors of the government or private
 This report, as presented in the novel, avers that war is necessary to sustain society, the nation, and national sovereignty, a view that has existed for millennia . This report is based on the novel's conclusion that war was necessary for society and the nation to survive .
 The only kind of “real’s war” got bigger and better as time and technology churned on . World War II with the introduction of atomic bombs .
 World leaders were faced suddenly with the reality of a great dilemma . Not long after that great war, the world leaders faced suddenly faced with the . reality of the . great dilemma.
 Leaders have realized now that use of the thermonuclear, fission-fusionfission type of megaton-plus bomb will destroy mankind, nature, and Earth . These leaders have realized that use . of the bomb will . destroy mankind and nature .
 Since the dawn of that first realization, after the atomic devastation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in World War II, the H-bomb has emerged from the laboratories and has been used to atomize whole islands in the Pacific .
 It can be placed in the nose cone of a rocket-powered intercontinental ballistic missile and delivered, in minutes, to any place on Earth . It can also be placed inside a missile's nose cone and delivered within minutes of launch .
 It can be fitted into the trunk of an automobile and parked in an underground garage in any city in the world . Or, perhaps even more dangerously, it can be placed in the trunk and parked at any city .
 A simple telephone beeper rigged to the bomb’s initiator will activate that nuclear explosive and pulverize any city of any size and any location . The bomb's initiator can be activated by a phone beeper attached to the beeper .
 There can no longer be a classic or traditional war, at least not the all-out, go-for-broke-type warfare there has been down through the ages, a war that leads to a meaningful victory for one side and abject defeat for the other . There can
 The Gulf War in Iraq was a limited experiment with new weaponry . Vietnam, Korea and Vietnam were the first experiments with new weapons . Iraq was the first Gulf War to see new weapons in place .
 These are absolutely alarming questions, coming as they do from a man who had been an adviser to presidents from Truman to Johnson during the most challenging years of the Cold War .
 He knew that we had been in a war in Vietnam since 1945; yet at the very time that he was the secretary of defense, in 1968, he knew that U.S. forces in Vietnam had been increased to 550,000 men .
 America sacrificed 58,000 men and spent no less than $220 billion . Because of this failure of leadership at the top, the U.S. spent $220billion on the Iraq War .
 Clark Clifford and his associates were confounded by what they had inherited, from prior administrations, in the name of a “war” in faraway Indochina . No wonder Clark Clifford was confounded .
 This is what the hydrogen bomb and the clandestine services have done to the art of war . This is the result of the secret services' clandestine services, says David Cameron .
 Under these circumstances, no commander today can be given an objective such that if he begins to achieve it, he will force his enemy to resort to that weapon of last resort, the hydrogen bomb . The hydrogen bomb is considered a last resort in the war .
 Our six presidents of the Vietnam War era, 1945-75, were faced with this dilemma . Six presidents faced this dilemma between 1945-69: Vietnam War .
 Clark Clifford in his book, or Gen. Gen. Clark Clifford, has expressed it better than any of their staffs . Gen. Clifford: "None of them, or any member of staffs, have expressed it best than Clark Clifford"
 The power elite can see no assured survival for themselves and their class if hydrogen bombs are used in warfare .
 Up until the end of WWII, this power elite on both sides of the fray, who exist above the war, have always been assured of survival . The power elite, who live above the conflict, are assured of surviving .
 In any war in the future in which there is an exchange of Hbombs, there can be no assured Armageddon-type survival for the chosen, for mankind, for all of nature, or for Earth itself . The chosen will not be able to survive Armageddon-style survival for mankind
 As the hydrogen bomb has increased in power and been given a worldaround capability by rocket-powered ICBMs, or worse still, been put in the hands of terrorists, even this contrived ‘limited war” concept has been dropped .
 The present strategy is based upon what has been known as the Cold War . As a result, the present strategy has been based on what has to be known as Cold War.
 World leaders turned to an all-new type of invisible war to be waged under the cloak of propaganda, black budgets, and secrecy . Faced with this dilemma and with their continuing belief in the contrived theories of Malthus, Darwin, and Heisenberg .
 Before that contrivance ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union, it had already cost more than six trillion dollars and millions of lives . Millions of lives were lost in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 It will only assure the attrition of manpower and materiel, and it will dangerously pollute Earth, to a point that will be beyond the control of mankind and nature to reverse and control . It will not be controlled by mankind or nature, it will pollute the planet .
 "Its battles loomed everywhere, and its dead were counted in the millions," says the U.S. State Department . "It's a war of its kind, but its battles loom everywhere," she says .
 It consumed the population and the product of the munitions makers and was reasonably controllable on the side of the offense . It consumed population, product and product of munitions makers .
 The Cold War as an alternative to the real thing was a failure from a military point of view. But the Cold War was not a failure, he says. It was a failed alternative to a real thing, he adds .
 For one thing, there were no clear-cut victories; nor could there have been any . For one reason, there are no clear victories, nor were there were any clear-cuts victories .
 We have witnessed the deterioration of the concept of national sovereignty because of the existence of global communications, satellite networks, international finance, and the enormous power of transnational business enterprises . We have also witnessed the decline in the concept .
 We have seen the rise of the strange, nonmilitary power of the small nations of the Third World, writes David Cameron . The rise of non-military power has been seen in recent years, he says .
 The whole scheme of warfare is being turned upside down by bands of terrorists who defy the great powers . Terrorists defy the 'great powers' of the world, says Peter Bergen .
 If the tactics of terrorism were to be employed in strength in strength, it would create a situation that no one could handle . The situation would be difficult for the U.S. to handle .
 The greater potential victory, the closer the war would move to the nuclear threshold . The greater the potential victory would move closer to the brink of nuclear war .
 This is why the U.S. military leaders in Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf were not permitted to win . This is the reason why they were not allowed to win in Korea and Vietnam, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 They were told only to “kill” and to run up the “body count,” but not to fight a real war . The closer they got to an assured victory in Vietnam, the closer they would have been to the nuclear threshold, the author says .
 Our military leaders were never permitted to approach that barrier . Gen. Gen. David Perry: "Our military leaders never allowed to enter that barrier. That barrier is a barrier."
 Douglas MacArthur had to accept that strategic fact on the south bank of the Yalu River in Korea in Korea . Douglas MacArthur .
 Creighton Abrams learned it when he proposed to President Johnson that he be authorized to capture Hanoi instead of maintaining a perimeter around the Cercle Sportif club in Saigon . Abrams learned the secret of the capture in order to avoid a U.S. invasion .
 Terrorists use the knowledge to defy everyone, the big powers and their lesser neighbors alike . And now the terrorists have learned it and use it to defy them . The terrorists have now learned it, and now they've learned it .
 Even before the end of World War II, enormous intelligence agencies had the power to wage underground warfare, economic and military, anywhere . This is why, even before the war, the newly structured bipolar confrontation between the world of Communism and the West resulted in the employment of intelligence agencies that had
 These conflicts had to be tactically designed to remain short of the utilization of the H-bomb by either side . These conflicts were designed to avoid the use of H- bombs .
 There can never be victories in such wars, but tremendous loss of life could occur . There is the much-desired consumption and attrition of trillions of dollars’, and rubles’s, worth of war equipment .
 It will present an insider’s view of the CIA story and provide comparisons with the intelligence organizations of other countries . The book will be presented in New York and New York .
 More will be said about operational matters than about actual intelligence gathering as a profession . To be more realistic with the priorities of these agencies, these agencies themselves, say experts .
 This subject cannot be explored fully without a discussion of assassination . This subject can't be discussed fully without an assassination discussion . This topic cannot be discussed without discussion of assassinations .
 Since WWII, there has been an epidemic of murders at the highest level in many countries . Since that period, the number of murders in the world has risen .
 JFK was just one of many in a long list that includes bankers, corporate leaders, newsmen, rising political spokesmen, and religious leaders . Without question, the most dynamic of these assassinations was the murder of President Kennedy .
 The ever-present threat of assassination seriously limits the number of men who would normally attempt to strive for leadership, if for no other reason that they could be singled out for murder at any time .
 This is not a new tactic, but it is one that has become increasingly utilized in pressure spots around the world . This is one of the most common tactics used in pressure situations .
 There are two principal categories of intelligence organizations and that their functions are determined generally by the characteristics of the type of government they serve . Not by the citizens of the government, but by its leaders, the government's leaders .
 Under totalitarian regimes, the intelligence organization is a political, secret service with police powers . Under totalitarian or highly centralized nondemocratic regimes, it is a police force with police power .
 It is designed to provide personal security to those who control the authority of the state against all political opponents, foreign and domestic .
 These leaders are forced to depend upon these secret elite forces to remain alive and in power . These leaders must rely on these secret forces to stay alive, in power.
 Such an organization operates in deep secrecy and has the responsibility for carrying out espionage, counterespionage, and pseudoterrorism . The organization operates under the name of an organization that carries out espionage .
 This methodology is as true of Israel, Chile, or Jordan as it has been of the Soviet Union . This methodology has been applied to all countries, including Israel and Chile, as well .
 The second category of intelligence organization is one whose agents are limited to the gathering and reporting of intelligence and who have no police functions or the power to arrest at home or abroad . The other category is one that has no police function or arrest power .
 This type of organization is what the CIA was created to be; however, it does not exist . The CIA is not an organization that would be like to be .
 Over the decades since the CIA was created, it has acquired more sinister functions . Over the years, the CIA has acquired a more sinister role in the CIA .
 All intelligence agencies, in time, tend to develop along similar lines, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 CIA today is a far cry from the agency that was created in 1947 by the National Security Act . The agency was created by the act of 1947 by President Harry Truman .
 Truman's greatest mistake was signing the National Security Act of 1947 into law . Truman confided to close friends that his administration's biggest mistake was the signing of the act of 1947 .
 Enormous military and economic forces, on each side, were locked together in the greatest armed conflict in history . The U.S. was involved in the biggest conflict in the world .
 In June 1944,1 flew an air force transport aircraft from Tehran to the vicinity of Kiev in the Ukraine .
 One would think that as a result of the enormity of this combined struggle, such a union of forces, welded in the heat of World War II, would remain joined forever . The U.S. joined in the battle against the Nazis .
 Even before the surrender of Germany and Japan, we began to hear the first rumblings of the Cold War . However, even before the war, we heard the first hints of the conflict .
 The Office of Strategic Services nurtured the idea that the time had come to rejoin selected Nazi power centers in order to split the Western alliance from the Soviet Union . Allen W Dulles in Zurich and Frank Wisner in Bucharest were key agents behind the idea .
 Dulles OSS “intelligence contacts” in Nazi Germany during the war were for the most part German business associates with whom he was acquainted with . Therefore, the Dulles . OSS "intelligence contacts" in Nazi . Germany during . the war . during the . war were
 Once in neutral Turkey, the train continued to a planned destination at a site on the Syrian border . It was stopped to permit the transfer of Nazis and POWs to a fleet of United States Air Force transport planes for a flight to Cairo .
 As far as I know, this was one of the first visible clues to the emergence of the “East-West” Cold War structure . Even while we and the Russians were still allies and remained partners in the great struggle against the Germans, he says .
 It was this covert faction within the OSS, coordinated with a similar British intelligence faction, and its policies that encouraged chosen Nazis to conceive of the divisive “Iron Curtain” concept . The Nazis wanted to drive a wedge in the alliance with the Soviet Union as early as 1944
 I have always wondered whose decision it had been, back in mid-1944, to override the present alliances and to initiate a split between the West and the Soviet Union while we were still firm allies . I was only a pilot on that flight, and in no way involved in the
 This was evidence of a long-range view of Grand Strategy from a level above that of the leaders we knew in public . This first fissure in the wartime structure was . evidence of . a long range view of . Grand Strategy, writes David Cameron .
 The power elite had already set plans in motion for the post-World War II period that we have known as the Cold War . The Cold War period was known as "The Cold War" The power elites had already had plans in place for the war .
 This is one of the best examples I have found revealing the work of the power elite, as distinct from that of the men who are the visible national leaders . The power elite's work is revealed in this video, which was published in March .
 As World War II came to a close, the long-range Cold War plan was already in existence, filling the vacuum created by the end of that conflict . The plan was designed to fill the void left by the war ended in 1945 .
 Roosevelt-Churchill-Stalin decision had to have originated from a center of power above the level . It ignored the World War II alliance represented by those three wartime leaders and went its own way .
 Churchill did not coin the memorable phrase; he merely embellished it and exploited it . Churchill used the phrase to make his point of interest in the world .
 The German foreign minister used the Nazi-coined propaganda phrase “Iron Curtain” in the same context repeated later by Churchill in Missouri . Count Lutz Schwerin von Krosigk made a speech in Berlin in May 1945 .
 Three days after the German surrender, Churchill wrote a letter to Truman to express his concern about the future of Europe . This was a clever thrust by the old master, along the road to widening the tensions and splitting the alliance between the Soviet Union and the Western powers .
 Churchill planted the seed of a potent idea in the mind of the new president, early and at a most opportune time . Churchill's deft move planted the seeds of an idea in his new president's mind, early .
 Most historical publications and media sources would have us believe it was this memorable occasion that marked the end of the wartime alliance with the USSR and the beginning of the Cold War . However, this is not the case .
 The Grand Strategy decision to create a new bipolar world had already been made in 1944-45 . The partners in this new global power structure were to be the United States, Great Britain, France, Germany, and Japan, three of the WWII victors and two of the vanquished .
 The great array of forces of WWII were rapidly disbanded by President Truman in 1945 . President Truman disbanded many of the most important forces of the war in 1945.
 He created a new Central Intelligence Group to be jointly staffed and funded by the Departments of State, War, and Navy . The OSS was disbanded on January 22, 1946 .
 During the postwar years, a massive new propaganda line trumpeted across the land that the U.S. represents the world of free enterprise and that it would destroy socialism . During these postwar . years, the United States represented the free enterprise world .
 For this purpose, this new type of warfare was born, and its continuing battles were to be waged in Third World countries by a secret and invisible army . The new kind of warfare would be born for this purpose .
 The OSS, the CIG, and later the CIA constituted the advance guard of that secret army in the U.S. OSS and CIG were the advance guards of the secret army . The CIA and the OSS formed part of the Secret Army .
 Although the alliance between the West and the Soviet Union during WWII had been welded in the heat of battle, it had never been on too firm a footing . The alliance between Russia and the West never had a firm footing .
 The Chinese leader, Chiang Kai-shek, was as much of a dictator as either Hitler or Mussolini . He was the leader of China during the 1930s and '60s . He ruled the country from 1937 to 1945 .
 Mao Tse-tung was allied ideologically with Stalin and was allied with Stalin . He was our ally, and his greatest wartime threat came from the Communist faction under Mao . The U.S. had been allied with China's Communist faction .
 The fortunes of war began to shift from Europe to the Far East during the latter part of 1943 . It became essential that there be a ‘Grand Strategy’ meeting among the great Allied powers .
 President Roosevelt maneuvered to have Chiang Kai-shek join him in Cairo for a November 22-26, 1943, meeting with Churchill . The meeting took place in Cairo, Egypt, on November 22, 1943 .
 Roosevelt wanted to create atmosphere of a ‘Big Four’ by placing Chiang on the world stage . Roosevelt wanted the atmosphere of the “Big Four,’s atmosphere . Chiang is a former president of the United States .
 Churchill and Chiang "apparently" joking with each other on one side and an ‘apparently” convivial Churchill and Madame Chiang smiling together on the other side . Churchill and Roosevelt were seen laughing together on a side of the picture .
 Chiang promised to increase Chinese support of British and American plans to sweep through Burma to open a new, and more practical, road via Burma to China . U.S. would base units of its new giant B-29 bombers at the front in the ChinaBurma-India theater
 With the close of the Cairo Conference, the Churchill and Roosevelt delegations flew to Tehran for their own first meeting with Marshal Stalin . Marshal Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union in Iran .
 A fact that was not released, and that even to this day has rarely been made known, is that Chiang and the Chinese delegation were also present at the Tehran Conference of November 28-December 1, 1943 .
 With the agreement by the West to invade France a matter of priority, these other matters involved plans for the defeat of Japan . With the West's agreement by . the invasion of France a . matter of . priority .
 Stalin agreed to join the war against Japan once Germany surrendered . He agreed to do so once Germany had surrendered .
 In return, Mao Tse-tung agreed to help Chiang by speaking to Mao about relaxing military pressures against Chiang’s Nationalist Army from that front in China .
 Only one week after the Allies had invaded Normandy, Mao Tse-tung made a rare public public pronouncement that he would aid Chiang in his fight against Japan . Mao made the announcement only a week after invasion of Normandy .
 In other words, Roosevelt and Churchill had lived up to their promises made in Tehran, and Joe Stalin did . In other . words, Joe Stalin had lived . up to his . promises .
 These agreements have become public, but others that have had an enormous impact upon Far East developments since WWII have not . The agreements have been made public .
 Historians doubt that Chiang and his wife actually attended the conference in Tehran . Most historians doubt that they actually attended it in Iran .
 I was the pilot of the plane that flew Chiang’s delegation to Tehran . I can confirm that they did, because I was a pilot of a plane that took Chiang's delegation to Iran .
 Many of the developments that we have witnessed from 1945 to 1965 undoubtedly had their origins in Cairo and Tehran . During these important meetings, plans for the future of Southeast Asia were discussed, says the author .
 Madame Chiang was there to discuss important business . She was likely to have been at social gatherings because of the presence of her mother .
 Again we witness the ways of the power elite—and not necessarily those of the nominal leaders, who so often are no more than their puppets . The ways of power elite are reflected in the American society, says CNN's John Sutter .
 At the Tehran Conference in 1943, Stalin and Chiang Kai-shek both approved Roosevelt’s proposal for a trusteeship for Indochina, but Churchill was vehemently against the idea .
 Roosevelt said he told Churchill that Chiang Kaishek did not want either to assume control over Indochina or to be given responsibility for administering a trusteeship . Roosevelt said: "I told Churchill [Kaishek] didn't want to either assume control of Indoch
 Churchill replied, “Nonsense,” to Roosevelt . Roosevelt retorted, ‘Winston, this is something which you are just not able to understand.” Churchill replied . Roosevelt responded to Churchill’s ‘Nonsense’ to Roosevelt’
 "You just do not understand how a country might not want to acquire land somewhere if they can get it. You have four hundred years of acquisitive instinct in your blood," says President Obama . "I'm not sure how you can't imagine a country not wanting to acquis
 As Roosevelt confirmed, this has been a paramount driving force of British foreign policy since the days of Queen Elizabeth and the founding of the East India Company .
 They were well aware of the work of the British East India Company in the Far East since A D 1600 . They were also aware of their work in China since 1600 .
 World leaders realized that the surface of Earth was finite, and that the natural resources of Earth were limited, too . They began immediately to “stake out their claims” on all the land they could grab, regardless of whether or not it was already inhabited .
 Recently created borders have left the ancient Kurds with no homeland of their own . Evidence of the belief in this “right” exists to this day .
 Churchill gave evidence that this same East India belief in the proprietary colony was still alive when he and the other leaders discussed postwar plans for Southeast Asia . Churchill said the belief in East India still alive in the post-war era .
 He felt perfectly comfortable making such colonialist decisions about these countries, with or without their consent . He was perfectly comfortable with such colonial decisions .
 When oil is found in the Middle East, it is controlled by the petroleum companies . The Middle East has a history of oil exploration and exploration .
 When gold is found in South Africa, it is controlled by corporate mining interests . South Africa has a history of gold being found in the country .
 If such things of value cannot be controlled by direct colonization, they are controlled by the World Bank or International Monetary Fund . The World Bank is an equally powerful and oppressive economic force called the IMF .
 More than anyone else, Franklin D Roosevelt understood this characteristically “British instinct,” and when confronted with the grave issue of “postwar colonialism” at the meeting of the “Big Four” in Tehran, he spoke boldly to Churchill . That was truly
 Churchill never forgot, and never forgave, Roosevelt for this exchange . Roosevelt was the prime minister of the United States .
 During the Yalta Conference in early February 1945, the subject of "trusteeships" for various British, French, and Dutch colonies came up again . The subject of “trusteeship’s” for colonies was discussed at the conference .
 I will not have one scrap of British territory flung into that arena . As long as every bit of land over which the British flag flies is to be brought back into the dock, I shall object .”
 As I was flying the Chinese delegation from Cairo to Tehran in a VIP Lockheed Lodestar, I had to land at the airport in Habbaniya, Iraq, for fuel . I had landed in Iraq for fuel.
 Elliott and his pilot were refueled at the end of the refueling stop . Elliott and the Chinese were introduced to Elliott by the Chinese .
 Elliott told us that his father had invited him to attend the conference because he wanted him to meet Marshal Joseph Stalin . Elliott said his father wanted to meet Stalin because he was invited to the conference .
 This meeting in Tehran between Elliott and Stalin became part of a most unusual incident that took place only a few years later . Elliott's meeting with Stalin was part of the most unusual meeting of the two men .
 Elliott Roosevelt wrote that he had visited Stalin in 1946 for an interview . Roosevelt visited Stalin for a radio interview in 1946 .
 President Roosevelt’s sudden death less than two months after the Yalta Conference . This had reminded him of something quite extraordinary that had occurred at the time of President Roosevelt's sudden death .
 At that time, 1945, Soviet ambassador Andrei Gromyko had been directed by Stalin to view the remains of the dead President, but Mrs. Stalin had not allowed her to view .
 One of the best-kept and least-discussed secrets of early Cold War planning took place sometime before surrender of Japan .
 Even before the use of atomic bombs, the invasion of Japan had been considered to be an essential prelude to victory and to “unconditional” surrender .
 The island of Okinawa became available as the launching site for this operation . supplies and equipment for an invasion force of at least half a million men began to be stacked up, fifteen to twenty feet high, all over the island .
 With the early surrender of Japan, this massive invasion did not occur, the use of this enormous stockpile of military equipment was not necessary . The use of the enormous stockpiled military equipment is not necessary, he says .
 I was on Okinawa at that time, and during some business in the harbor area I asked the harbormaster if all that new materiel was being returned to the States . I asked him if he was returning the U.S.
 One-half of this stuff, enough to equip and support at least a hundred and fifty thousand men, is going to Korea, and the other half to Indochina . The other half will be going to Vietnam, and one-half will go to Korea .
 This is another one of those windows that permits us to see that some decision had to have been made in some detail by the power elite . Yet there is absolutely no record of who made the decisions and for what purpose .
 In such instances, circumstances bear more compelling witness than proof gained from other sources . In such cases, circumstances have more compelling evidence than other sources, says CNN.com .
 The U.S. involvement in Vietnam War began on the day of the Japanese surrender, September 2, 1945 . The United States involvement in what later became known as the Vietnam War started on that day .
 In 1945, OSS units working with Syngman Rhee in Korea and with Ho Chi Minh in Vietnam had set up and coordinated shipments of equipment into those two Japanese-devastated countries .
 The shipments forecast that in these two locales would be fought the two greatest conflicts of the Cold War to date and that both would be “Cold War style” without a military objective and to no victorious conclusion .
 By the end of WWII the great financial powers of the Western world, aided by their omnipotent Wall Street lawyers, had decided it was time to create a new world power center of transnational corporations . In the process, they destroyed the Soviet Union and socialism .
 To achieve this enormous objective they chose as their principle driving force the covert power and might of the CIA and its invisible allies . The U.S. government chose as its principal driving force .
 During 1947, the Congress worked on legislative language that would establish a new National Security Council . The new Department of Defense would have separate departments of the army, navy and air force .
 Almost as an afterthought, the National Security Act of 1947 provided for the creation of the Central Intelligence Agency . The agency was created as a result of the act . The CIA was created in 1947 .
 The United States had never before had, in peacetime, a full-fledged intelligence agency operating in the international arena . The U.S. had never previously had, before peacetime .
 Traditionally, there were intelligence organizations in the army, navy, FBI, and Treasury and State departments . But these were all specialist staffs designed to perform the work required for the functional support of their masters .
 The work of these traditional organizations was almost always limited to pure intelligence . It did not intrude into the area of ‘fun and games,” or clandestine operations .
 The language of the National Security Act of 1947 was designed to calm the waters . It was written by Clark Clifford, a lawyer-statesman . Clifford was the architect of the law .
 It was the intent of the sponsors of this legislation to have the CIA created, no matter what the language of the law contained, the sponsor of the legislation said . The CIA was created in order to get over the threshold, sponsor said .
 The CIA, under a cloak of secrecy, could be manipulated to do everything that was requested of it later . They knew that no matter what was written into the law, the CIA would be manipulated . The CIA knew that it could do everything they requested of them later .
 The law that was passed by Congress and signed by President Truman created this Central Intelligence Agency . The law placed it under the direction of the National Security Council .
 This modest language was chosen specifically to overcome objections expressed by such members of Congress as Rep. Rep. Tom Coburn . Coburn: "This modest language is chosen specifically . It's a modest language, chosen specifically because of concerns about the language .
 "Every now and then you get a man that comes up in power and that has an imperialist idea," he said . "I don't think it's a good idea. Every now and every now, I think it is a good thing," he added .
 President of the United States can be frustrated, misled, and confused . The CIA is up against a team of determined financiers, transnational industrialists, and Wall Street lawyers .
 Truman had never heard of the secret work on the atom bomb or of its creator, the Manhattan Project . Truman had been vice president under Roosevelt, but at the time he became President he had never known of the project .
 Harry Truman was not aware of, nor acquainted with, the reality of that invisible superpower elite that Winston Churchill called the High Cabal . Harry Truman did not know about, nor the reality, of that elite . Winston Churchill said the 'High Cabal' was a secret elite .
 He was told the details of the Manhattan Project on April 25, 1945, and learned about these other facts of public life through harsh experience . He says he was told of the project in 1945 .
 The war against Japan had been accelerated, culminating in the costly battle of Okinawa . It was the first time the war against the Japanese had been intensified .
 On July 19, 1945, Truman arrived in Potsdam, a suburb of Berlin, for his first meeting with the Soviet leader, Joseph Stalin, and the wartime leader of Great Britain, Winston Churchill . Truman's first meeting was with Stalin, Churchill and the war leader of Britain .
 He had to deal with them as equal allies despite the widening rift being created clandestinely between them . He said: "I'm not going to be able to work with them. I'm working to get them together"
 Truman took the opportunity to tell Stalin privately that the U.S. had successfully developed a major new weapon . On July 25, 1945, exactly three months after he had first learned of the atomic bomb, Truman spoke to Stalin .
 Stalin did not tell Stalin that this new weapon was based on a harnessing of the atom for explosive purposes . He did not reveal it to Stalin that the new weapon would be based on the atom .
 In response, Stalin showed no interest whatsoever and gave no substantive reply . Stalin showed "no interest whatsoever" in the question .
 Stalin ordered his own experts, under Igor Kurchatov, to accelerate the Russian nuclear program . Stalin did not reveal his hand, but as we have later discovered, he ordered his . own experts to accelerate Russia's nuclear program, he said .
 Truman’s low-key announcement about this new weapon to Stalin at Potsdam was, without a doubt, the starting point of the greatest and most futile arms race in history . The announcement was the beginning point of an arms race that began in 1945 .
 The world had moved into the awesome era of nuclear power and clandestine operations, says the author of the book . "The world has moved into a new era of clandestine operations," he says .
 Truman attended the sessions in Potsdam, Germany, in the 1960s and '60s . Truman was there to learn from the lessons he learned from his German counterparts .
 He learned to deal with Stalin, but also dealt with Winston Churchill's departure . Winston Churchill was Churchill's strongest ally . Churchill's party failed to win in the concurrent British elections in 1945 .
 He had first to meet and then to become acquainted with the new prime minister, Clement Attlee, and his newly assembled staff of British advisers during the course of a momentous series of meetings .
 The President was surrounded by his military and diplomatic staff, a coterie of longtime political cronies, and one other man who went generally unnoticed . The President is surrounded by military, diplomatic staff .
 Edwin Pauley, a prominent oilman from California, was a bank director, and a construction company executive . Pauley was also a banker, bank director and construction firm executive .
 His official position was head of the American delegation to the Allied Reparations Commission in Moscow . He headed the U.S. delegation to Russia in the aftermath of World War II .
 Pauley was the quiet representative of the world of finance, industry, and power . Pauley is a quiet man who was a quiet, quiet figure in the world .
 His job was to see that the new President adhered to the course already planned for the ‘Cold War’ world . He said: “His job is to see the new president adhered . He was in charge of ensuring that the course was already planned .
 Stalin looked around the room at Truman and his staff, Stalin, as he looked around Truman's staff . Stalin was a shrewd veteran of the Kremlin, Stalin said . We may be sure this very point was not lost on Stalin .
 The Truman team was formidable, belying the Truman “country boy’s image . Truman was a formidable team, not the country boy image .
 The post-World War II era, it was clear, would be managed and guided by the demands and specifications of those financiers, industrialists, and Wall Street lawyers who were so well represented at Potsdam . Post-war era, the post-WWII era,
 While in Potsdam in July, Truman received the news of the successful testfiring of an atomic device at Alamogordo, New Mexico, in July .
 During the next week, there were countless discussions among the American staff and with the British concerning whether or not to use the atomic bomb in Japan .
 He could modify the “unconditional surrender” terms of the Roosevelt policy toward Japan . He could refuse to modify the terms and give Japan no alternative but to continue to fight until the United States had used the atom bomb .
 The consensus that guided Truman’s decision was that the bombs should be used, as much to impress the Soviets and the rest of the world with their overwhelming power as to further crush the hapless Japanese .
 The rationale was that the use of the bombs to bring about the abject surrender of the Japanese would save millions of lives, American and Japanese .
 The first bomb was dropped on the already war weary Japanese population at Hiroshima on August 5 and a second over Nagasaki on August 9 . Hiroshima was the first bomb to be dropped on a war weary population .
 During the final stages of the war, the Japanese had been unable to send aircraft up to attack American bombers, because they lacked essential parts and fuel .
 As a gesture of hospitality, the Japanese opened the American prisoner-of-war camps in Japan weeks before the bombs were dropped . Hundreds of Americans wandered freely throughout Japan, waiting for the day when the first American transport aircraft would arrive to carry them away .
 I was a pilot of one of the first heavy transport aircraft to land at the only Japanese air base that had not been destroyed by bombs, near Atsugi, not far from Yokohama, during late August 1945 .
 U.S. Navy ships seen at anchor over Tokyo Bay, Japan . The battleship Missouri was in the midst of a major hurricane that had swept over Japan .
 The base at Atsugi was covered with new Japanese aircraft that had never seen combat . The base was covered in new aircraft that never had ever seen combat.
 They were operating on methane and were made entirely of wood, except for the most vital parts, which had to be made of steel . The most important parts were made out of steel, and they were operated on methane .
 Everywhere we looked, we found overwhelming evidence that the Japanese dream of empire had been shattered . Everywhere we look, there was overwhelming evidence of the Japanese Dream of empire shattered .
 It was clear that the longplanned invasion of Japan would have been unnecessary, even without the use of the two atomic bombs . It's clear the invasion would've been unnecessary without using the atomic bombs, he says .
 U.S. Marines were there to serve with General MacArthur’s bodyguard and flew low over Yokohama and Tokyo . Marines were stationed in Japan with MacArthur's bodyguard .
 "Firebomb" destruction of Tokyo compares to 'firebomb' destruction of other war-devastated cities . "I had never experienced anything to equal the ‘firebomb” destruction of the city," says author . Tokyo was destroyed by a massive firebomb in 1991 .
 More than fifteen thousand people had died by asphyxiation in a single city block where I rented a house during 1952-54, in the Shibuya-Ku district .
 Tokyo, Japan, flattened so much that, from our low-flying aircraft, we had an unobstructed view of trolley cars operating from one side of the downtown area to the other . Tokyo, that enormous city, had been so flattened that, as well as the city, we
 Almost every building had been destroyed, and the streets were a mass of rubble . The streets of the city were a 'mass of rubble' almost every building was destroyed .
 The Japanese people tied broad strips of white cloth to the ends of long bamboo poles . In one of the most memorable and stark manifestations of utter surrender that can be imagined, the Japan people tied the strips to bamboo poles.
 They had bound poles to the top branches of the ever-present pine trees . They had then bound these poles to top branches .
 In the school playgrounds, the children stopped their games and stood frozen, with heads lowered, as our big aircraft flew over them . The children stopped playing in the playgrounds and stood with their heads lowered .
 Russian city of Rostov at the head of his list of the most devastated cities . Rostov was always at the top of the list, with the shell of the Russian city at the heart of the city's devastation .
 Rostov had been destroyed four times, twice by the attacking Germans and twice by returning Russians . Rostov was destroyed during the ebb and flow of the great battles in Russia during the Great War .
 On the coast, at the end of a small valley, what remained of that beautiful city looked like the ashes of a bonfire that, all of a sudden, had been blown out by a massive gust of wind .
 Only the pattern of the streets and bridges preserved the identity of a once-proud city . Only the patterns of the roads and bridges were preserved by the city .
 Truman returned to Washington following his meetings in Potsdam, Germany . Truman announced the results of the conference in Washington .
 At the same time, it was announced that a second atomic bomb had been dropped on Nagasaki . Nagasaki was the first atomic bomb to be dropped on the Japanese capital .
 Japan surrendered on September 2, 1945, by all parties on the deck of the Missouri . Japan surrendered, and the necessary documents were signed on the ship .
 A historic era had ended with implications that no one in the world fully grasped at that time . The end of the era had implications no one fully grasped, the author says .
 Never again would be possible—or desirable—for those with the power over a nation or an alliance of nations to wage an all-out, unfettered, classic war on another group of nations with an expectation of victory that would include an assurance of their own survival . Never again
 World War I and World War II had ended with the advent of the atom bomb . That span of history, from man’s first use of clubs and spears to the mass destruction of World I and WWII, had ended . The atom bomb was the first weapon of mass destruction in
 The results of the hydrogen bomb tests in the fall of 1952 were announced in 1952 . If anyone in power was not convinced of this fact by 1945, he had only had to wait for the results .
 Mike Shot on Eniwetok Atoll blew a hole deeper than the height of the Empire State Building . That single blast was the Mike Shot . The Mike Shot is the largest hole in the world's largest known hole hole .
 During the postwar years, a number of important events took place as mankind was herded from the old era to the new . During the 1950s and 1960s, the world was moving towards a new age .
 The Cold War provided the basis for a new type of very lethal, global conflict that would depend upon large, invisible armies concealed under the benign cover of intelligence organizations . Cold War was based upon a structured East-West confrontation .
 Almost immediately after the end of hostilities, the great armed forces that had fought World War II were dismantled and disbanded . Almost immediately afterwards, the Great Armed Forces were disbanded and disbanded.
 Nearly all of their arms, ammunition, and other materiel were salvaged, sold, or given away to make way for new procurement . The U.S. Army was forced to pull out of the Soviet Union in 1994 .
 The Soviet Union became a wartime ally to a “peacetime” adversary . It became necessary to create an organization that could, in time of “peace,” continue the eternal conflict . The networks of agents and spies in Eastern Europe had been established by the Allies
 The utilization of the World War II Nazi agent networks in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union became a major characteristic of the new Cold War strategy . The use of the Nazi agent network in eastern Europe and Russia was a major part of the strategy .
 CIA was joined by “Allies’ foreign and domestic, governmental and civilian. The CIA joined forces with ‘Allies. Foreign and domestic. Government and civilian,’ says the CIA .
 In fact, “peacetime operations” became the new Orwellian euphemism for military-type covert operations, often on a mammoth scale . “Peacetime . operations’s new euphemism is “military-type . operations,” often on
 “peacetime operations” were carried out whether or not they were secret and whether they could be disclaimed plausibly, without benefit of a declaration of a state of war among the adversaries . “Peacetime’s operations’ are carried out without benefit
 Any country that employed undercover forces in peacetime, within the borders of another country with whom it was not officially at war, ignored and degraded the age-old concepts of the independence of nations and of national sovereignty .
 The Central Intelligence Group was established as an interim measure for the new defense establishment . President established the CIA as a temporary measure . The CIA was created as a result of legislation being debated .
 Gehlen’s surrender and subsequent flight to the U.S. were arranged by United States Army officers . Gehlen's surrender was arranged by the Army, but the details of his flight were not known .
 Walter Bedell Smith was the U.S. ambassador to Moscow during World War II . Smith served as the director of central intelligence in 1950s .
 The move, planned before the end of the war with Germany and directed from the top, was a classic example of the work of the power elite . The move was planned by the top of the German government and was directed from top .
 The National Security Council met on December 19, 1947, for the first time . Shortly after the passage of the National Security Act of 1947, the first meeting was held in 1947 .
 The council had hardly waited for the ink to dry on the new law before it ignored its stricture that the CIA limit itself to the “coordination” of intelligence . The agency rushed the fledgling agency into covert action .
 National Security Council Directive #4 directed the newly appointed director of central intelligence, Adm. Michael Hayden . The directive was directed by the newly-appointed director of national intelligence . Hayden: "I'm not sure what's going to happen"
 Roscoe Hillenkoetter, “to carry out covert psychological warfare,” much against his own professional desires. Roscoe . Roscoe had to carry out “counter psychological warfare” against his professional desires, he says .
 A “special procedures group” was set up immediately, and became involved in the covert “buying’s” of the nationwide election in Italy . To this end, a ‘special procedures’ group was established immediately, the government said .
 In deference to the language of the law, if not the intent, this new unit was named the Office of Policy Coordination . The new unit, the most covert of all sections, has been named the office of policy coordination .
 The OPC was headed by Frank Wisner, formerly the OSS station chief in Romania . The OSS was also known as the OPC's Romanian station chief .
 Frank Wisner and Allen Dulles were among the first U.S. officials to begin contact in 1944 with selected Nazis and Nazi sympathizers . The “Blowback” (“exfiltration” of former Nazis with desired technological skills) operation known as the
 The ostensible reason given in most instances for this unusual action was that these Nazis were scientists and technical experts whose skills would be useful in the United States . Of course, the ostensible rationale was that it was necessary to keep them out of the hands of the Soviets .
 Wisner arranged a transfer of a large number of prisoners of war from the Balkans via Turkey and Cairo in the fall of 1944 . It was Wisner who had arranged to transfer a number of POWs via Turkey, Cairo and Cairo .
 American flight crew members were shot down during heavy bombing attacks over the Ploesti oil fields of Romania . Among them were proNazi intelligence specialists who were fleeing the Balkans, scattering before the Russian army .
 Wisner was able to control a large group of Eastern European agents in a massive network of spies . In his new position with the OPC, Wisner had control of a large network of Eastern Europeans . Wisner is a former CIA director of operations in Russia .
 At the same time, he could protect them and their U.S. contacts against hostile, anti-Nazi, and Soviet capture . He could also protect them against capture, possibly even assassination .
 The OPC was a little-known, most unusual organization, especially within the U.S. government . Such deeply covert activity had never taken place before . OPC had never been seen before .
 As initially created, the OPC was totally separate from the CIA’s intelligence collection and analysis sections . The OPC is now a CIA intelligence agency .
 The OPC’s chief had been nominated by the secretary of state and approved by the defense secretary of defense . The chief of the OPC had been approved by defense secretary and secretary of states .
 The funds for this office were concealed, as were much of the CIA funds, in the larger budget of the Department of Defense . Much of the funds for the office were hidden, and were concealed .
 Policy guidance and specific operational instructions for the OPC bypassed the director of central intelligence completely and came directly from State and Defense . The OPC was tasked with conducting operations in Afghanistan in 2009 .
 It is in this example of the OPC that we discover most clearly how the new invisible army was brought into the government and created in secrecy . The OPC was created by the British government in secrecy in order to protect the public .
 There was no law that authorized such an organization or the wide range of covert functions it was created to perform . No law authorized such a covert operation .
 When it began, the director of central intelligence, if asked, could have denied that he had anything to do with it . No one would have thought—or dared—to ask the secretaries of state or defense if they had become involved in covert operations .
 As we see, this most covert office was buried as deep within the bureaucracy as possible, and its many lines to agents and secret operations were untraceable .
 The OPC grew from about three hundred personnel in 1949 to nearly six thousand contract employees by 1952 . Despite all this secrecy, the OPC had nearly 6,000 contract employees in 1952 .
 A large part of this sudden growth was due to the additional demands for covert action and other special operations that grew out of the Korean War and related activities . The Korean War was a major source of interest in covert operations .
 Walter B Smith did, when he returned from Moscow and became director of central intelligence, was to take over OPC completely . OPC severed its connections with State and Defense, except for concealment of funds in Defense .
 The CIA could always rely upon the military for additional personnel, transport, overseas bases, weapons, aircraft, ships, and all the other things the Department of Defense had in abundance . The CIA administered the operations of this fast-growing organization .
 OPC and other CIA personnel were concealed in military units and provided with military cover whenever possible . OPC was stationed in far-flung bases of the military around the world, even in Antarctica .
 The covert or invisible operational methods developed by the CIA and the military during the 1950s are still being used today despite the apparent demise of the Cold War . They include the preparation of �assassination manuals” of the type that was discovered in Nicaragua in 1984 .
 That manual was only a later version of one developed by the CIA in the 1950s . The manual was developed by a CIA manual .
 The Invisible Third World War was waged by the Soviet KGB and the American Central Intelligence Agency over the past fifty years . Today all of this clandestine activity amounts to big business, and the distinction between the CIA and the military is hard to discern .
 Underground warfare was secret, but so were its methods . The U.S. government kept it secret for years, including the use of underground warfare .
 TWO SPANISH OFFICERS SENTENCED FOR ROLES IN FAKE EXECUTIONS ZARAGOZA, Spain, July 24 . Officers herded villagers into a public square for mock executions .
 Similar events, using the same tactics, take place somewhere in the world almost daily, despite the apparent demise of the Cold War . Similar events still take place around the world around the globe almost daily .
 They have one unique characteristic, seldom if ever seen in regular warfare, that sets them apart from regular warfare . They are rarely seen to be seen, but they have a unique characteristic: They have never been seen before .
 Incidents like this one serve to incite warfare rather than to bring it to an end . Incidents such as this one, reported by the Times, serve to incite warfare .
 To give the ageold concept new meaning, “They make war . . . out of practically nothing. They make war. . from practically nothing,’s the author says .
 Tens of thousands of foreign “paramilitary” and Special Forces troops have been trained at various U.S. military bases under CIA supervision and sponsorship .
 Some of this training is highly specialized, using advanced weapons and warrelated materiel . Some of the training is very specialized, including advanced weapons .
 Some of it takes place at American universities and even in manufacturing plants, where advanced equipment for this type of warfare is being made . The U.S. government says it is working with the U.N. to develop the technology necessary for warfare .
 The paramilitary forces of other nations have been trained in the Soviet Union . Then there are other nations that have been training in the USSR .
 Today these graduates are the leaders of the ‘elite’ forces of many countries and the professionals used to breed a world of international terrorists . The graduates, by the tens of thousands, are the . leaders of . many countries .
 "For the most part, they are not individuals or members of some small groups, but participants in a most sophisticated, worldwide complex of organizations," the author says . The author says. "They're not individuals, but members of a most complex, worldwide . complex"
 The Spanish example is a perfect case study in describing the methods and tactics of such units . The Spanish military unit is one of the world's most successful units .
 The army was ordered to create a battle that would appear to support evidence of insurgency . The battle was ordered by the government to create evidence of an insurgency .
 It is as though the fire department were being used to start fires, the police department employed to steal and kill, and doctors ordered to make people sick, to destroy their brains, to poison them . It is like though the police were being employed to kill and steal and steal .
 Such clandestine operations are designed to make war, even when they have to play both sides at the same time . The U.S. has been involved in both sides of the war in Afghanistan .
 On a global scale, the Cold War required the USSR and the U.S. to have been enemies by need and by definition . The Cold War was a global war that required the Soviet Union and the United States .
 The world’s political, economic, and military system has had to be bipolar since the detonation of the hydrogen bomb, the U.S. says . Ever since the nuclear bomb was detonated, the world's political and economic system has been bipolar .
 Those without massive weapons and the means to deliver them could not possibly take part effectively in such global warfare . Those without such weapons and means of delivery could not take part .
 Both major powers knew that they no longer had any way to benefit from a traditional ‘all-out’ war . It has been politically necessary for each major power to have an enemy, writes Peter Bergen .
 Neither one could control its own destiny or its own society without the “threat” of the other . Neither could control their own destiny without the "threat" of the each other .
 The existence of “insurgents” lent validity to the charge of a “Communist-supported” insurgency, even though the scope of the “conflict” was purely local . On a lesser scale, as we shall see in the Spanish example,
 All leaders of all nations know that, as stated in Report From Iron Mountain, “The organization of a society for the possibility of war is its principal political stabilizer.” The organization of an organization for the . possibility of . war is the principal political stabilityizer.
 It is ironic that this primary function of warfare has been generally recognized by historians only where it has been expressly acknowledged, in the pirate societies of the great conquerors .
 The Cold War has been the primary reason for the necessary prosecution of the Cold War, author says . It has led to the creation of a Cold War in the minds of those who are unable to see that there are other reasons than conflict .
 The Spanish application of this tactic of the secret war is interesting and threatens us all. The Spanish use of the tactic of secret war was interesting and threatening us all .
 Two army officers were ordered to attack a town, with regular Spanish troops . In this case, the two army officers had been ordered to make it look realistic .
 Under other conditions, these trained men might have been told to hijack a civilian aircraft . They might have set up a mock carbombing; they might have run a mock car bombing; or set up mock carbombsing .
 "The only military objective of these battles, and of this type of global conflict, is to create the appearance of war itself," he says . The only military . objective of the battles, he says, is the creation of the appearance .
 The Spanish, for reasons of their own, had decided to teach this town a lesson . Now, the Spanish have decided to punish this town for its actions .
 To initiate this campaign, a psychological-warfare propaganda team arrived in town . "Psychological warfare propaganda team" has been deployed in the U.S.
 A firefight kit, prearranged to explode in sequence to resemble a true skirmish, was detonated on a nearby hillside . That night, as the movies were being shown before the assembled villagers, a firefight . kit was detonated by villagers .
 The “insurgents’s” attacked the town as the villagers fled into the night . The ‘insurgent’ attack was the first of its kind in the area .
 The “terrorists” looted the town and fired into the woods where the townspeople were hiding . The ‘terrorists looted the . town’s residents were hiding in the woods when they were attacked . The town was attacked by the terrorists, who looted the
 As the sun rose, an army unit in a convoy of trucks raced toward the town, entering it with guns ablaze . The army unit entered the town with guns on the ground .
 The others were rounded up and thrown into extra trucks under heavy guard .
 In short order, the victorious regular army captain had liberated the town . The town had been liberated by the regular army .
 The captain remained with his interrogators, questioning the prisoners, questioning them . Meanwhile, the captain remained at the center of the questioning .
 Two “insurgent’s leaders were discovered with false “terrorist” papers in their pockets . They were led back to the village square in chains .
 No sooner had the bodies hit the ground than they were picked up and tossed into the nearest truck . The bodies were tossed into trucks as soon as they landed .
 Before leaving, the captain turned to the town’s mayor and warned him against further terrorism .
 The townspeople cheered the heroic captain as he left the town in command of the convoy . The heroic captain was cheered by the crowd as he departed the town .
 The whole gang, loyal army and “terrorists” had breakfast together . They drove on a few more miles, and the whole gang had a break together .
 I have been to such training programs at U.S. military bases where identical tactics are taught to Americans as well as foreigners . Although I have added technical details to the Spanish scenario, I . has added technical detail .
 These are the same tactics that were exploited by CIA superagent Edward G Lansdale and his men in the Philippines and Indochina . As we shall see later, these tactics were used by the CIA in both countries .
 Recently it has been refined, out of necessity, into a major tool of clandestine warfare . Actually, it is as old as history .
 Lest anyone think that this is an isolated case, be assured that it was not . The case is not an isolated one, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Such “mock battles’ and ‘mock attacks on native villages’ were staged countless times in Indochina for the benefit of, or the orientation of, visiting dignitaries, such as John McCone . Such mock battles were staged for, or for
 A new secretary of defense, such as Robert McNamara, who had never seen combat, would be given the treatment . McNamara would have been given the same treatment as McNamara .
 During the 1952-54 time period, when I flew into the Philippines, I spent many hours talking with Ed Lansdale, his many Filipino friends, such as Juan C “Johnny” Orendain, Col. Col. Ed. Juan C "Johnny’s O
 Napoleon D Valeriano, and members of his CIA “antiQuirino’s team and heard them tell these same stories . Napoleon D. Valerino, and . members of . his CIA "anti-quirino" team and others tell the same stories
 Ramon Magsaysay related how he would divide his Special Forces into the “Communist HUKs” and the loyal military and then attack villages in the manner described above . They all worked together in those days and related to how they would divide Special Forces .
 Ramon Magsaysay had been ‘elected’ president of the Philippines . President Quirino was on his way out of office . Ramon had been "elected" president of Philippines .
 Lansdale would relate how he and his Saigon Military Mission teammates applied similar tactics in Indochina, both North and South . Lansdale worked in the same office with Lansdale in the Pentagon in the 1970s .
 National Security Council authorized supersecret Office of Policy Coordination to carry out covert operations . OSS was under OSS station chief in Romania, Frank Wisner, under the wartime OSS .
 The clandestine warfare in Greece and Bulgaria occurred at about the same time . OPC’s undercover work is another example of OPC's undercover work .
 Although there was no lawful basis for this momentous move, it was done without formal protest . Although there were no lawful grounds for the move, the move was not protested . The move was made without formal protests .
 The real reason for the creation of the CIA was to be the lead brigade of United States forces during the Cold War period . Everyone involved knew that the real reason was to create the CIA .
 Allen W Dulles was made the director of central intelligence in 1952 . General Smith became the deputy secretary of state, and John Foster Dulles became secretary . President Eisenhower made Dulles Secretary of State in 1952, with the election of Eisenhower .
 The high command for the Cold War was in place, and the stage was set for the CIA’s dominant role in the invisible war . The CIA's dominant role was in the CIA, which led to the CIA's dominance in the war .
 The Korean War, which had begun in 1950, had served to cover the CIA’s rapid expansion into that field . CIA had expanded into the CIA's rapid expansion of the CIA .
 By 1952 it had been decided that the time had come to replace Quirino as president of the Philippines . In 1952 it was decided that it was the time to replace him as president .
 Since he was, ostensibly, a good friend of the U.S. and avowedly an anti-Communist, it would require some delicate diplomacy to bring that about . It would require delicate diplomacy .
 The reasons for the forced removal of a national leader do not always follow ideological or political lines . The reasons behind the removal of national leaders are not always political .
 Quirino relaxed his business priorities with the U.S. in favor of other countries, thus reducing American exports to the Philippines . It is more likely, as in the case of President Obama, that he had relaxed business priorities .
 A leader in the big power game of the nation-states could be removed from power . And that could be sufficient grounds for the removal of a leader in a country .
 The United States maintained customary diplomatic relations with the Quirino government . The CIA station chief in Manila was George Aurell . Aurell was on his staff, one of the CIA station chiefs in Manila, Philippines .
 Elections would be good for Quirino and would serve to quell the opposition, said to consist of a Communist-supported HUK rebellion . HUK rebels are said to be Communist-backed by the Communist Party in Cuba .
 Quirino saw no opposition and no problems with the election, he said . Other than that, he saw no problem with the vote, he added .
 Unbeknownst to the ambassador and Aurell, the CIA slipped into the Philippines an undercover team headed by one of its superagents, Edward G Lansdale . Lansdale was one of the CIA's top superagents .
 The true reason for his presence in Manila was not divulged to senior Americans . This agent had access to certain anti-Quirino Filipinos, according to senior officials .
 His ostensible role was to train selected Filipino army troops in PsyWar and other paramilitary tactics . His primary role, in fact, was to oust Quirino and install Ramon Magsaysay in the office of president .
 The men selected for duty with Lansdale were put on regular training schedules with the United States Army . The men were trained outside of the Philippines .
 Then they were slipped back later into the Philippines and into their usual army units . The soldiers were then slipped back into their normal army units.
 At the same time, all throughout the islands, the ‘HUK insurgency’ was escalated by secret operations . At the time, the HUK insurgency in the islands was escalated .
 The rise of this notional “Communist” influence gave President Quirino what he thought was a strong platform . The rise in notional "Communist" influence gave him what he believed was a good platform, he says .
 Lansdale had selected a handsome young Philippine congressman, Ramon Magsaysay, to play the role in the above scenario from Spain .
 He was to stage ‘mock attacks’ and “mock liberations’ on countless villages throughout the islands . He was also to stage mock attacks on countless village sites throughout the island .
 Captain Magsaysay and his loyal band charged into town after town, killing and capturing the “HUKs’s” and liberating each village . Capt. Magsayay's loyal band killed and captured the ‘HUKS’ and liberated each
 This CIA agent had been equipped with the equivalent of a bookfull of blank checks that he used to finance the entire campaign . The CIA agent was equipped with . The equivalent of . a book of blank . checks .
 The CIA pumped out a flood of news releases, produced and projected propaganda movies to build up the reputation of the new “Robin Hood” Ramon Magsaysay .
 Magsaysay was made secretary of defense . The plot was a success, and soon he was made Secretary of Defense .
 President Quirino ran for president in 2006, then ran again for president . He was elected president of Argentina in 2008, but then ran for office in 2010 .
 Quirino was stunned by the entry of the “HUK Killer’s hero into the campaign . The ‘Killer’ has been dubbed the ‘HUK killer’ in the UK .
 Just prior to the election, the 'HUKs' stirred themselves and rekindled Filipinos’ memories of the gallant captain who had liberated their villages with a hot machine gun slung across his arm .
 The U.S. ambassador and CIA station chief were in attendance at the CIA station in Washington, D.C. State Department officials were also there . The CIA chief, George Aurell, was also in attendance .
 The CIA had kept them in the dark by concealing the true role of one of its most powerful undercover teams . They finally realized that the CIA had hidden their true role in the CIA .
 Another battle in the Cold War had been won over ‘the forces of communism’ – or so they were led to believe . Another battle was won over the forces of communist forces, the U.S. says .
 Magsaysay had become president as a result of the application, many times over, of the same scenario that those two officers in Spain had used in their mock attack . The scenario was the same as the scenario used in the mock attack in Spain .
 With Magsaysay president, the city was too small for the U.S. ambassador, CIA station chief, and CIA secret agent . The city was small enough for the United States ambassador and CIA agent .
 Cecil B deMille could not have staged it any better . These are examples of the new intelligence methods that are actually ‘make war’ tactics .
 The Spanish incident and the Magsaysay ‘election campaign’ serve to illustrate how they work . The Magaysay campaign and the Spanish incident are examples of how it works .
 The incidents recounted below will serve to broaden the reader's understanding of the CIA’s worldwide operations . The incidents are recounted below to broaden your understanding of CIA operations .
 During the late forties, there was trouble in Greece, and the fledgling CIA got a foothold there . CIA began to develop a major empire in that region . CIA was able to get a foothold in Greece and develop an empire there .
 Secret airfields were used in Greece and in Turkey; and from the time of the murder of Premier Muhammad Mossadegh of Iran, in 1953, the CIA was the most potent force behind the Shah of Iran .
 Foreign nationals from all over the world were trained in the methods of secret operations at military bases in the U.S. under CIA sponsorship .
 The CIA developed many of its own facilities around the world . The agency concealed its presence on military facilities in one guise or another . The CIA had a long history of covert operations .
 Many of the skilled saboteurs and terrorists of today are CIA students of yesterday . Many of today's dangerous saboteur and terrorists are former CIA students . CIA students were students of today .
 Many skilled terrorists in Iran have gone to CIA schools and other training facilities . They have become experts with the weapons and tactics of the trade .
 The first aerial hijackings were publicly solicited by the U.S. in return for big cash awards, plus sanctuary . The first air hijacks were publicly solicitued by the United States in return of big cash .
 Chuck Yeager was sent to Okinawa in 1953 to fly a MiG fighter plane that had been flown there by a Chinese pilot in return for a large cash reward . Yeager flew the plane that was flown by an unidentified Chinese pilot .
 In the state of Virginia, CIA saboteur and explosives training at a secret facility, not too far from Colonial Williamsburg, created so much noise that wealthy neighbors complained .
 The CIA had that training site moved to a more remote area in North Carolina . It was used later for the Bay of Pigs operations .
 It was ripe for the application of the tactics of the CIA’s invisible war . It was freeing itself from Japanese occupation and French control . It appeared to be “threatened” by Communists, so it was ripe .
 The battleground of the Cold War was being moved from one region to another . The battleground was moving from one to another.
 More than one-half of all military materiel once stockpiled on Okinawa for the planned invasion of Japan had been reloaded in September 1945 and transshipped to Haiphong, the port of Hanoi, Vietnam’s capital .
 This stockpile had amounted to what the army called a 145,000 “man-pack” of supplies . This stockpile was enough of everything required during combat to arm and supply that many men for war .
 Once in Haiphong Harbor, this enormous shipment of arms was transferred . The arms were transferred under the direction of Brig. Brig. Nguyen . Nguyen .
 Philip E Gallagher, who was supporting the OSS, and his associate, Ho Chi Minh. The OSS was supported by the U.S. and the Vietnamese government .
 They had come from China to mop up the remnants of the defeated Japanese army . They were mop-up with remnants of Japan's defeated army .
 Vo Nguyen Giap, quickly moved this equipment into hiding for the day when it would be needed, says Giap . Giap quickly moved it into hiding in the hope it will be used in the next few days .
 The Vietnamese Independence League or Vietminh, well armed with all this new American-made equipment, were waging a relentless guerrilla-type war against the French . The French had no idea that these rebels were so well armed or where such a vast store of arms had come from .
 In 1946, the French, thinking they would easily have their way, had reneged on giving the Vietnamese their freedom and independence . The French had given the Vietnamese the right to independence .
 The British had withdrawn from India and Burma and the Dutch had left Indonesia, but the French had refused to leave Indochina . The French refused to withdraw from the region .
 By 1954, sporadic guerrilla warfare had escalated and the French forces were in deep trouble . French forces faced a series of guerrilla warfare in northern France .
 Dien Bien Phu refugees had been trapped in a valley at the end of the war . They were seeking more direct aid from the United States. They had gotten themselves trapped in the valley and were seeking direct aid .
 The Cold War rumbled on, while the H-bombs remained in storage, gathering dust . The H-Bombs were still in storage .
 By mid-January 1954, the beleaguered French had 11,000 troops in fifteen battalions at Dien Bien Phu . The opposing Vietminh had 24,000 well-armed men in nineteen battalions .
 The National Security Council believed this number of Vietminh was insufficient to take Dien Bien Phu and defeat the French . Nevertheless, the government did not believe this number was enough to defeat France . The French were defeated in the war .
 Allen Dulles, director of central intelligence, drew up a contingency plan in the unlikely event of a French defeat .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles proposed that the U.S. prepare to carry on guerrilla operations against the Vietminh if the French were defeated . Dulles: "To make as much trouble for them as they had made for the French and for us"
 He said such a plan would provide an opportunity for the U.S. in Southeast Asia . The costs of such operations would be relatively low, he said .
 The National Security Council agreed that the director of central intelligence should develop this plan for certain contingencies in Indochina . The plan was approved by the NSC .
 The warfare in Vietnam grew out of the events of this meeting just as assuredly as the explosion of a stick of dynamite is caused by the ignition of the fuse . The war in Vietnam began as a result of the meeting, and the war grew out as well .
 The Koreans, taken completely by surprise, wondered what he meant by those words . The Koreans were taken completely surprised by the words .
 Less than one week later, when the North Koreans invaded South Korea, they found out . The North Koreans found out. Less than a week after the invasion, the North Korean invasion .
 The next Sunday, while Dulles was still in Japan, the Korean War broke out with an attack on the south by the North Koreans .
 His predictions were surpassed only by his “prediction” of the outbreak of the Korean War at that time .
 Few there are who have held the same opinion of President Rhee and Generalissimo Chiang, particularly the latter . As for his other statement about “Christian gentlemen,” few there are . Few there were who held the . same opinions of President .
 John Foster Dulles, Walter B Smith, and Allen W Dulles were busy moving the center of operations from Korea to Indochina in January 1954 . That was 1950; by January 1954, the same trio of Cold War activists had been busy moving operations to Vietnam .
 On January 29, 1954, a meeting of the President’s Special Committee on Indochina convened in the . office of the deputy secretary of defense, Roger M Kyes .
 The ostensible purpose was to discuss what could be done to aid the French, who had made some urgent requests for military assistance . The French had made an urgent request for military help .
 A major item on the agenda of this meeting was the reading of the “Erskine Report” on Indochina . The meeting was also discussed on the Erskines report on the Vietnam War .
 Allen Dulles suggested that an unconventional-warfare officer, Col. Col. John MacIntosh, should be considered for the CIA . MacInthes says he was impressed by the idea of an unconventional warfare officer .
 Gen. Edward G Lansdale will be added to the group of American liaison officers . Lansdale is a liaison officer with the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C. He will be the first liaison officer to join the American liaison officer .
 Henri Navarre, the French commander, had agreed to accept in Indochina . Henri Navara was the first French commander to take part in the war .
 The committee thought this arrangement would prove to be acceptable and authorized Dulles to put his man in the Military Assistance Advisory Group , Saigon .
 The start of a new phase of the OSS/CIA activity in Indochina, this step marked the beginning of the CIA’s intervention into the affairs of the French government . The move marked the start of the . beginning of . the CIA's intervention into . the affairs
 Vietminh took over the reins of government from the French after their victory at Dien Bien Phu under the leadership of Ho Chi Minh . It was not long before the French were wrested from the government by the VietMinh .
 With this action, the CIA established the Saigon Military Mission in Vietnam . The CIA established this mission .
 Its mission was to work with the anti-Vietminh Indochinese and not with the French . The French were not interested in working with Vietnam's government .
 With this background and these stipulations, this new CIA unit was not going to win the war for the French, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "It was not going to win the war for South Vietnam, either, or for the U.S. As we learned the hard way later, it was not winning the war, either . It was going to fail to do so, but it did, and did not win the
 They move unobtrtrusively with a small team, plenty of money, and a boundless supply of equipment as backup . The team is small enough to get around the world, but have a lot of money to spare .
 They make contact with the indigenous group they intend to support, regardless of who runs the government . They meet with indigenous people regardless of whether the government is in power .
 The CIA is not equipped or sufficiently experienced to handle such an operation when combat intensifies to that level . The military generally is called upon for support .
 The level of military support has risen to such an extent that this action can no longer be termed either covert or truly deniable . At that time the level of . military support . is no longer considered covert or deniable, it is said to have increased .
 Both sides weary of the cost in men, money, materiel and materiel, and noncombatant lives and property . At that point, operational control is transferred to the military .
 There can be no clear victory in such warfare, as we have learned in Korea and Indochina . There can't be a clear victory, as well as in Korea .
 "As we have said above, that is the objective of these undercover tactics," says CNN.com.com . "We are not going to be surprised by the success of the undercover tactics."
 Each nation emerges as a self-contained moral personality, he said . He believed that each nation emerged as an individual moral personality .
 Might certifies right, and war is a legitimate expression of the dominant power of the moment . War is an expression of might, and might certifies the right, the author says .
 It is a force for the good of the state since it discourages internal dissent and corruption . It fosters the spiritual cement of patriotism, says the author of the book .
 They were the deadly skirmishes of the undercover armies of the Cold War . "They were the deaths of the under-cover armies of Cold War"
 This enormous, smoldering cauldron is still boiling and will not stop as long as warfare remains synonymous with nationhood . This is not the end of the war, but it is the end to the war. This will continue to be a source of tension for generations of people .
 The elimination of war, in our structured society that is so much dependent upon superstition, implies the inevitable elimination of national sovereignty and the traditional nation-state, writes Andrew Hammond .
 You will have noted during the 1992 election campaign the frequency of the suggestion that the President may resort to ‘another’ war in order to strengthen his popularity before the election . You will be noted during 1992 election .
 There is no way to wage war with the H-bomb, there is no proper strategic role for today’s armed forces, says David Cameron . The U.S. has no way of waging war with a nuclear bomb, he says .
 Thus, WWIII must be directed covertly by the so-called intelligence services . Thus, the CIA must direct WWIII by directing it covertly .
 It has been a war between the CIA and the KGB, as one might expect; but as we have seen in these examples from Spain and the Philippines, it is sometimes no more than a conflict of the “make war” scenario, with the CIA creating and supporting both sides
 On September 2, 1945, the representative of the Emperor of Japan signed the surrender papers laid before him by Gen. Gen. Hirozumi . The Opening Wedge was the opening day of the war .
 With that ceremony, the great drama of history called World War II came to a close . World War I came to an end with that ceremony .
 Allied forces of the United States, China, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union declared themselves victors . Hitler, Mussolini, and Hirohito were declared to be the vanquished . At that time, the U.S., China, and Great Britain were declared victorious .
 Historians have recorded the end of the war, but what they failed to note is that this historic ceremony did not so much mark the end . It simply ended that chapter, that scenario, with that cast of characters. That is what historians have recorded .
 Behind the scenes, American and Soviet intelligence services had plotted the next chapter in the book of war . Behind scenes, U.S. and Soviet spy services plotted next chapter of the book-book-war .
 The Soviets had already begun to drape an ‘Iron Curtain’ over the borders of Eastern Europe to widen the split in the wartime alliance between the Soviets and the Western powers . The Iron Curtain was already draping over the . borders of eastern Europe .
 It had already been decided by these clandestine services that a new bipolar world would be created, divided on the issue of communism . "It had already decided by [the clandestine services] that [the] world would become a bipolar world," he said .
 By September 2, 1945, this power elite had learned of its monstrous oversight, the greatest error of its lengthy hegemony over mankind . The power elite learned of this monstrous oversight by September 2 .
 Unwittingly, they had encouraged their scientists and engineers to design and produce nuclear weapons . They had encouraged them to make nuclear weapons, it was claimed .
 These weapons had been detonated over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and with the dropping of these two nuclear bombs, a horrifying realization crashed down upon the members of the power elite . The bombs were dropped over Nagasaki and Hiroshima .
 War, their most essential and valuable tool, had been taken from them by their own scientists . War had made it possible for them to control society and to maintain the existence of nations and of national sovereignty .
 A war waged with hydrogen bombs would most certainly annihilate the combatants and end life on Earth . A war of hydrogen bombs could annihilate all of the world's inhabitants .
 With the signing of that now-famous document on the deck of the battleship Missouri, a new form of war was launched in a world that believed what it read in the newspapers—that “the Last Great War” had ended .
 From September 2, 1945 forward and for as long as mankind could be manipulated through the media that fully controlled what people would be told, the great powers would go through all of the motions involved in the preparation for war and in making war .
 War would henceforth be victoryless conflicts in controlled and limited scenarios . But wars would henceforward be victoriesless wars in controlled, limited scenarios.
 The distinction between “us” and “them” would have to be created arbitrarily . Even the distinction between . “friend’s and ‘foe’ would need to be . created arbitrarily, says CNN.com .
 To lend this new warfare credibility, the power elite would create a bipolar world with two major superpowers, declared to be deadly enemies, armed to the teeth, and violently opposed to each other .
 All that remained was to mold the opinion of the world, changing it from the mind-set of World War II to a new alignment based upon a massive East-West confrontation .
 The declaration began with the famous words “All men are created equal’s created equal.” As incredible as it seems today, the declaration began today .
 Before the ink was dry on the documents being signed on the battleship Missouri, the first major battlefields of this new Cold War, Korea and Vietnam, had been selected and were being stocked with arms . The first major battlegrounds of the Cold War had already been selected, and were
 All that remained was to create the political climate for the bipolar world and to line up the combatants, who, at this time, remained unaware of their new roles . The world's bipolar world was created in order to create a political climate .
 Great Britain, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had been allies against Germany, Italy, and Japan . All of this was going to change, even before World War II had ended .
 Ho Chi Minh had good reason to believe his days of fighting to end French domination of his country were coming to a close . After his long struggle on the side of the United States and the Chinese against the Japanese, the U.S. supported the Japanese .
 The French had been defeated by the Japanese and would not return—or so he thought . The Japanese had defeated the French and would never return . The French thought they would not be able to return to France .
 Agents of the Office of Strategic Services continued to work with the Vietminh, who had rapidly taken control of North Vietnam when the Japanese war effort had collapsed . Meanwhile, in the streets of Hanoi, agents of the OSS worked with the Vietnamese .
 Vo Nguyen Giap, Ho’s brilliant military commander, delivered a speech describing the United States as a good friend of the Vietminh . Ho was Ho's military commander and minister of the interior .
 It would take a few years of skillful propaganda to prepare the world for the new scenario . The world is not ready for a new scenario.
 Time would pass before the power elite could create a new enemy—the Soviets and communism; and new friends—the former Fascists, Germany, Italy, and Japan, who were now to be known as friendly “anti-Communists.”
 Most of Dulles’s remarks focused upon the final stages of the Korean War, which had ground to a frustrating stalemate . He included a most significant statement regarding communism and Indochina .
 The armistice in Korea does not end United States concern in the Western Pacific area . U.S. still has concerns in the region, including the Korean Peninsula .
 A Korean armistice would be a fraud if it merely released Communist forces for attack elsewhere . The North Korean conflict would not be a success if it was merely released for attacks elsewhere .
 We are already contributing largely in materiel and money to the combined efforts of the French and of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia . The French government is already contributing to the development of the region .
 It was also almost eight years to the day when the first American casualty was killed . Maj. Maj. Gen. Robert S. Eisenhower died in the Battle of the Vietnam War . The first U.S. casualty of the war was Maj. John Sutter, who was killed in
 He was killed in a skirmish on the outskirts of Saigon on September 26, 1945 . He was shot in the head by the South Korean troops .
 September 2, 1945, was officially the date of the start of that ‘desperate struggle” in Indochina . John Foster Dulles, President Eisenhower’s secretary of state, recognized that September 2 was the date .
 The anti-Communist climate had been tuned to a hysterical pitch, both at home and abroad . More importantly, during those eight years, the anti-communist climate in Russia was tuned to an hysterical pitch . The country's anti-Russian-style of anti-Putin rhetoric was
 South Korea had been invaded by “Communist” forces from the north, and through an intimate new medium known as television, moving pictures of an ongoing war were brought into the homes of millions of Americans for the first time .
 Joseph McCarthy detailed internal threat of communism in government and industry . McCarthy detailed the internal threat in government, industry and government . McCarthy also detailed the threat posed by industry .
 Ho Chi Minh and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam were no longer our friends, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Ho Chi-Minh was assassinated in 1968 .
 Secretary of State Dulles confirmed that the superpowers had been involved in a great invisible war and that it actually had begun on the same day that World War II ended . No one seemed to notice that the war had begun .
 World War did not end, but only the sides changed, and that only sides changed . The majority of the victims of that new type of warfare were the noncombatants of the Third World .
 A new invisible war based on East-West alignments was dependent upon the justification provided by a propaganda line that stretched all the way back to the early nineteenth century, to the genocidal theories of Malthus and Darwin .
 This is a gross number that could match the casualty figures of almost any other period in history . This is the gross number of people killed in this period of history .
 For those who agree with Malthus, such enormous losses are to be expected . For Darwin, those who survive are by definition the fittest . Those who survive survive are the survivalists .
 The chain of events in Indochina from 1945 to 1965 that had led to the intervention of regular United States military forces there reveals the methods employed by the invisible services to produce this scale of global warfare and destruction .
 During the years 1945-53, the years alluded to by Secretary of State Dulles, the web was being drawn, and new alliances were being craftily woven .
 Whole new governments were formed to provide the political linkages essential to the requirements of the new bipolar structure of the world . Whole new government was formed in order to provide linkages to the new world's bipolar structure .
 In many cases, the U.S. or the Soviet Union armed both sides of a conflict at different times . The United States or the former Soviet Union has been involved in many conflicts .
 U.S. has been contributing to both sides of the newest “desperate struggle,” that is, “to the combined efforts of the French and of Vietnam” -- a rare admission, and true .
 As major manufacturers of military supplies and equipment, it mattered not all to the great industrial combines of the U.S. who bought their products . It mattered not at all to those who bought the products .
 CIA made arrangements to have Soviet tank parts manufactured in the United States and delivered to the Egyptian army . The Egyptian army was equipped with Soviet-built tanks . The move was an attempt to prove that the U.S. was a more reliable friend and supplier to the Egyptians than their ally
 One of the fundamental purposes of the Cold War has been to escalate arms production and sales on a global basis . The Cold War was designed to increase arms production, sales on global basis, experts say .
 During all of these years, it was the American presence and influence that continued . The American presence continued .
 On the next several pages, I introduce several subjects that I know need more elaboration . On the page, you can find out more about the topic .
 The OSS had been active in Indochina since World War II . It did not take long for its successor, the CIA, to influence the flow of military equipment into that region .
 Ho Chi Minh expected to be able to administer his new government in Vietnam without further opposition . U.S. supplied him with a tremendous stock of military equipment by the United States . He expected to administer the new government without any further opposition.
 Former French troops staged a local coup d’etat and seized control of the administration of Saigon . Armed with Japanese weapons stolen from surrender stockpiles, they staged a coup d'etat .
 This move returned the Cochin—the southern sector of Vietnam—to French domination . It had been agreed at the Potsdam Conferencethat the British army was to have administrative control of the area .
 British army remained outside the flow of events and Ho Chi Minh’s Democratic Republic of Vietnam in the north . Now there were two governments in South Vietnam, with the British army remaining outside .
 Based on the record of those years, the Vietminh hoped for American assistance or mediation in attaining their independence from the French, the Vietnamese .
 A number of French families had been born and raised there, as their parents had been . A French family was born in France, as was their parents, as they were .
 There were major French business interests there, such as the great Michelin rubber industry .
 It was one thing to remove the French army; it was an entirely different matter to remove French interests . The French army was removed from the French Army, but it was also removed from French interests, says historian .
 His speech confirms the earlier agreement and gave credence to Vietminh expectations . His speech confirmed the earlier deal .
 All remaining Japanese forces had surrendered to the British military command in Saigon by November 30, 1945 . Japanese forces were rounded up and surrendered to British military .
 By January 1, 1946, the French had assumed all military commitments in Vietnam . The French assumed responsibility for all of their military commitments .
 On January 28, 1946, command of all French forces in Vietnam passed from the British to Gen. Gen. Jean-Claude . Gen. Jacques-Duft was the first French officer to take command of Vietnam in 1946 .
 Thus began another phase of U.S. military aid in Indochina, this time to the French .
 Negotiations between the French and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam began early in 1946 . French and DRC negotiations began in 1946, but ended in 1950 .
 Ho Chi Minh traveled to Paris in mid-year, but the conference failed due to French intransigence . The conference was meant to be held in Paris but failed .
 He continued his own efforts at negotiations until September, without obtaining the agreement he sought . He continued to try to reach an agreement with the government .
 Fighting broke out between the French and the Vietminh in late November 1946, and by the end of the year guerrilla warfare had spread all over Vietnam .
 All hope for settlement of this French/Vietminh dispute evaporated in 1947 . By the end of 1949 the war had become a major international issue . The war had also become an international issue in 1949 .
 We do not have precise answers as to why we gave U.S. arms to Ho Chi Minh in 1945 and then a few years later provided Ho’s enemy, the French, with $3 billion of our arms .
 The plan made before the end of World War II was to make war in Indochina . This was the way it was done, says President Nixon . The plan was to war in Vietnam, Nixon says .
 Behind the scenes, the French, with United States acquiescence, were forming an anticommunist national puppet government under the leadership of the former emperor, Bao Dai . The French formed an anti-communist government with the United States .
 As early as 1947, the “anti-Communist’s national elements of government included Ngo Dinh Diem, the man whom the U.S. would make president in 1954 .
 This three-way structure was quite essential to the long-range plan for the invisible war, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 They were becoming seriously involved in Algeria, much closer to home, and their own internal political problems were severe . The British government was becoming involved in the Algerian conflict .
 If the French had withdrawn before the U.S. was ready to enter the contest, the only government in Vietnam would have been the Democratic Republic of Vietnam .
 The invisible war game required a new government to offset the Democratic Republic . Therefore, the invisible war needed to be realized, the government said .
 By February 1950, both Great Britain and the United States had established diplomatic relations with the new State of Vietnam in the south . Each relationship was no more than an empty shell .
 When all these details had been formalized, the situation was ready for development as a war front, it was ready to be developed as a new front .
 On May 8, 1950, Secretary of State Dean Acheson announced that the U.S. would give both economic and military aid to France and to the State of Vietnam .
 One month later, we were at war in Korea, and the war in Vietnam had become another international crisis—in reserve . One month after the war, Vietnam was declared a major international crisis in reserve .
 The same ponderous glacier that had been set in motion on September 2, 1945, had never stopped moving . It was set to leave Okinawa for Korea and Vietnam .
 By mid-1950, important military action, short of nuclear force, was under way . By 1950s, major military action had been under way in the Middle East .
 What had begun as a realignment of forces and the production of a bipolar world had become a full-fledged ‘hot war’ on the two chosen battlefields, Korea and Vietnam . Vietnam .
 It was during these two wars that the CIA developed from a fledgling “intelligence” agency into its true form as master of American clandestine services . The CIA developed as a fledgling "intelligence" agency .
 "Right behind it comes its strong and everpresent allies, the rest of the government infrastructure, along with the willing support of the entire military-industrial and financial community" Right behind it is the government-industrial community, the U.S. military, financial and financial industry .
 Eisenhower presided over a meeting of the National Security Council with twenty-seven top-echelon national security advisers in attendance . Eisenhower had been President of the United States for one year and was presiding over the meeting . Eisenhower was one year old when the meeting occurred .
 There is just no sense in even talking about U.S. forces replacing the French in Indochina, says President Obama . "There is no sense" in talking about replacing French forces, he says .
 If we did so, the Vietnamese could be expected to transfer their hatred of the French to us, the French . The Vietnamese could also have a hatred for the French, according to the Vietnamese .
 I cannot tell you how bitterly opposed I am to such a course of action, I said . "I am bitterly opposed to such an act of action," he said .
 This war in Indochina would absorb our troops by divisions . It must be added here that one of the great weaknesses in the approach to South Vietnam taken by the U.S. in those early days was an oversight .
 It has been the failure to recognize that the piece of real estate historically known as Cochin China but that we call South Vietnam was not, and never has been, a sovereign nation-state . South Vietnam has never been a sovereign state, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Indochina has a history of thousands of years but has never truly governed itself . It has never governed itself, despite the fact that it has a long history of not truly governing itself .
 All attempts at “Vietnamization’s” were made by Ho Chi Minh, little more than words . The Democratic Republic of Vietnam to the north was held by Ho . Chi . Minh . Ho Chi-Minh was little more . than words,
 A new country was being created and being asked to fight a major war, both at the same time . The war was being fought in Afghanistan and Afghanistan . The U.S. was asked to create a new country in Afghanistan .
 At the time of Eisenhower’s comment, the region of “South” Vietnam was under French military control . The French army was at war with Ho Chi Minh and his “Vietminh” government .
 Eisenhower made a powerful and correct statement of policy, but he seriously overlooked these basic facts of Vietnamese history . Eisenhower's statement of support for the Vietnam War was a mistake, he says .
 Eisenhower wanted “to get the Vietnamese to fight” their war for their own country, he says . Eisenhower wanted to get ‘to get’ Vietnam to fight' their war, he adds .
 Ngo Dinh Diem and his brother Nhu died on November 2, 1963, in Vietnam . Diem's death was a serious setback for South Vietnam's self-government .
 Most of its mral populace had no concept of, or allegiance to, a government in Saigon, other than memories of the one hundred years of French rule, which they loathed . Most of Saigon's mral people were loathed by the French rule .
 Clifford Clifford was no one closer to the policy and thinking of our six “Vietnam era” presidents . Clifford was a key adviser to the Vietnam War . Clifford helped shape the policy of the Vietnam era . Clifford: "There is no one better than Clifford. Clifford"
 They seriously overestimated the ability and character of this either nonexistent or very new Diem government of South Vietnam, and 2.2. They seriously underestimated the ability of this or nonexistent government of Vietnam, or 2.3.2 .
 Not one of these six presidents ever stated a positive American military objective of that war . The most serious oversight of all was that not one of the six presidents said a positive U.S. military objective was achieved .
 The generals sent to Saigon were told not to let the ‘Communists’ take over Vietnam, period, period . The generals were told to not let the "Communists" take over .
 Former Secretary of Defense under President Lyndon Johnson in 1968 . He served as secretary of defense under President Johnson .
 Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy's comments made little sense given that the South Vietnamese were not a nation . What they meant in their comments was clear enough under conventional circumstances, but their views made no sense .
 Even when Ngo Dinh Diem had been established as the president of South Vietnam, in 1954, he had no governmental structure, no armed forces, no police, no tax system, etc. Even when he was established, there was no government structure . Diem was established as
 "We provided billions of dollars in aid, but doing all those things does not make a government that can stand on its own feet," says President Obama . "A skilled and dedicated adversary that wanted to create a free Vietnam," he says .
 In 1933, he had been minister of the interior in the Bao Dai government under French colonialism . In 1933 he was the interior minister in the government of China under colonial rule .
 After the Japanese had been defeated in 1945 and driven from Indochina, Diem was active against the French . He was active in the fight against the Japanese .
 In 1950 he left Vietnam for exile in the United States and lived at the Maryknoll Seminary in New Jersey . He washed dishes at the seminary where he worked .
 Mike Mansfield, Mr Newton of the American Friends Service Committee, Mr Costello of the Columbia Broadcasting System, and Edmund Gullion and Gene Gregory of the Department of State.
 Ngo Dinh Diem discussed Indochina for about an hour and answered questions, chiefly from Douglas and Kennedy . Diem also answered questions from Douglas, Kennedy, Kennedy .
 Ngo Dinh Diem himself may have initiated that theme . President Eisenhower’s comment before the National Security Council on January 8, 1954 .
 Official account: “He thought that the French military understood the problem better than the French civil government.” According to the official account, “he thought that . He thought that he thought that French . military understood . better than French civil . government .
 In any case, the French could not beat the Communists and would have to rely on the Vietnamese to do it . The French would not be able to defeat the Communists in any case .
 Diem left the United States in 1953 and continued his exile from Vietnam in a Benedictine monastery in Belgium . He left the U.S. in 1953 to continue his exile in the country .
 Bao Dai asked Diem to become premier in his government in 1954 . On June 18, 1954, Diem became premier in the country's first government . He was asked to be premier in 1954 by Dai Dai .
 Diem arrived in Saigon on June 26, 1954, met Lansdale on June 27, and formally assumed that office on July 7, 1954 . Diem died of a heart attack on July 4, 1954; his wife died of her injuries .
 After an election campaign carefully orchestrated by the CIA and Lansdale, Diem became president of South Vietnam on October 1954 . Diem was elected president of Vietnam in 1954 after a CIA-led campaign .
 We had been aiding the French from 1946 up until their defeat by the Vietminh at Dien Bien Phu in May 1954 . Another thing we must remember is that we had been aided by the French .
 Ngo Dinh Diem was installed as the new president of this previously nonexistent country . In other words, we had been helping the enemy of the South Vietnamese people right up until a few months before we installed him . The Vietnamese people had been helped by the West .
 President Eisenhower wanted to ‘Vietnamize’ the war in January 1954, six months before the new government, under Ngo Dinh Diem, had been established . It was during a period when we were still aiding the French. It seems strange that Eisenhower .
 Such factors had a great impact upon the actions of this emerging country during the period of the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was fought in Vietnam .
 This oversight, not only on the part of Eisenhower and Kennedy, seriously handicapped both countries during the thirty years of support of the Vietnamese and their warfare in that piece of real estate . This oversight handicaps both Americans during the 30 years of American support of Vietnam and Vietnam .
 Something had to be done to create a viable government and to coalesce the populace before it could act on its own behalf . The government had to create an alternative government to the people's will, says President Obama .
 More than a century and a half elapsed between the landings at Jamestown and Plymouth Rock and the battle with the redcoats in Lexington and Concord .
 Americans were not simply an aggregate of English, German, Irish, and French people . During that time those early settlers evolved into Americans, and were not just an aggregate .
 Despite this critical oversight, that was the commander in chief speaking during that important National Security Council meeting of January 1954 to the secretary of defense, secretary of state, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the individual chiefs of each military services .
 President Eisenhower could not have expressed his views on the subject of a ‘Vietnam War’ more forcefully . Eisenhower could have expressed these views more forcefully than he did in his speech .
 On January 29, 1954, many of the same officials who had been at that meeting ignored the President and made plans to get on with the business of making war in Indochina .
 In the south, Vietnam was under French control simply because there was nothing else for that area . The south of Vietnam was also under French rule simply because of that .
 French used Bao Dai as their puppet-in-command; but he reigned from the Riviera and was seldom in Vietnam . The French used him as a puppet in Vietnam, but he was rarely seen in the country .
 U.S. installed Ngo Dinh Diem as president of South Vietnam in mid-1954 . South Vietnam began to have a government, at least in name, in 1954 .
 Diem had no congress, no army, no police, no tax system—nothing essential to the existence of a nation . Diem's government had no constitution, army, police or tax system .
 At the same time he had a strong, skilled, and experienced enemy—Ho Chi Minh’s North Vietnamese army . At the time, he had to face a strong and skilled enemy: Ho Chi-Minh's army .
 Many of the requests made upon the Diem government during the period from 1954 to 1963 were quite unrealistic . For this reason, many of the . requests made by the . Diem . government in the period between 1954 and 1963 was quite unrealistic.
 The leaders of the government and those who tried to carry out liaison with Diem’s government, as though it were, and had been, an equal member of the family of nations . But this fact never seemed to occur to the leaders of our own government or to those who
 Lest there are still some among us who believe that the President runs this country . Let them witness this action, and the results of this blatant disregard for all elements of government, as we find it on the record .
 Allen W Dulles, director of central intelligence and brother of the secretary of state, was at the January 8, 1954, meeting of the National Security Council . President made his views known at the meeting .
 Allen Dulles could have misunderstood the words of President Eisenhower’s. There was no way he could have mistaken the words . Eisenhower's words of Eisenhower's.
 There was no way that any of the others at that meeting could have misunderstood or have had any question whatsoever about “how bitterly opposed” the President was to placing United States troops in Indochina. The President was bitterly opposed to placing U.S. troops there .
 This is not how things work when modern underground warfare is involved . But this is how it works when it comes to underground warfare . It is not the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a major war zone .
 This is not how the CIA and its counterpart, the Soviet KGB, have waged their worldwide invisible wars, says Julian Zelizer . The CIA and the KGB have waged invisible wars in the past, he says .
 "Nothing whatsoever has ever deterred them from the essential business of making war," says President Obama . "They have never been deterred from making war" says Obama .
 Ambassador George V Allen said Dulles spoke as if he had his own line to God and was getting his instructions from a very high source . Ambassador Allen: “Dulles spoke like if he was getting instructions from God”
 The brothers were in touch with the power elite, and a mere President influenced them not at all . "A mere President" influenced the brothers not all the time, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Winston Churchill, Buckminster Fuller, Prof. Fuller and others have worked "close to the seat of power" So many qualified people who have worked ‘close to power’ are qualified .
 Joseph Needham and Ambassador Allen—confirm that these so-called leaders get their instructions from a very high source . Needham: "They get their [leaders] instructions from very high sources" Ambassador Allen: "I'm sure they get their orders very quickly."
 These “leaders” are all fine actors, and certainly not true rulers, as we witness in the example of this National Security Council meeting of January 1954 .
 This is true not only in the world of politics but also in banking, industry, academia, and religion . This is also true of banking and industry, as well as academia, academia and religion. This is not just politics, it's also a matter of religion and banking .
 This explains why so many of the visible activists in high places are lawyers . Lawyers are key to activists' success in the U.S.
 In that profession they are trained to work under the direction of their clients . They are trained in that profession to work with clients .
 They have been educated for such service in the higher universities, many of them with courses designed for just such purposes . They have also been educated to such service, says the author .
 Many of their skilled ‘partners’ for top-level government service, for directorships on bank boards, and for major industrial positions . And they are further trained in the major international law firms that make a business of providing many of their skills for government service .
 In Vietnam, the course followed by the U.S. government was established by international Wall Street lawyers, John Foster Dulles and Allen Welch Dulles .
 Review of the record of the early days of the war in Vietnam will reveal how they did it . A review of the history of the Vietnam War will show how they achieved it .
 If we could carry on effective guerrilla operations against this new Vietminh government, we should be able to make as much trouble for this government as they had made for our side and against the legitimate governments of the Associated States .
 An opportunity will be open to us in Southeast Asia even if the French are finally defeated by the Communists. Accordingly, an opportunity will still be open for us even if we are defeated, he says .
 We can raise hell and the Communists will find it just as expensive to resist as we are now finding it. We can . raise hell . We can. raise hell, and it will be just as difficult to resist .
 Dulles assumed, as we all did, that there would be some government in existence in the south that could take care of itself .
 This is how U.S. intervention and direct involvement in Vietnam War began . This is in opposition to the words of the President and compliance with the longer-range Grand Strategy of the power elite .
 President’s Special Committee on Indochinamet to discuss plans developed by director of central intelligence . Two weeks later, on January 29, the committee will meet to discuss these plans .
 Colonel Lansdale was added to the group of five liaison officers accepted by the French commander, General Henri Navarre . During this meeting, it was agreed that he could add “an unconventional-warfare officer” to the list of five .
 CIA created the Saigon Military Mission and sent it from Manila to Indochina . In this manner, the mission was sent to the Philippines .
 This “military mission,” undoubtedly the most important single “war-making” American organization established in Indochina between 1945 and 1975, was seldom in Saigon . This ‘military mission’ was seldom visited by Americans in Vietnam .
 It was not a military mission in the conventional sense, as the secretary of state had said . The mission was not military mission, as Secretary of State said .
 It was a CIA organization with a clandestine mission designed to “raise hell” with “guerrilla operations” everywhere in Indochina . The CIA was a skilled terrorist organization capable of carrying out its sinister role in accordance with the Grand Strategy of those Cold War years .
 By 1954, the French had created a fragile, basically fictitious government of the State of Vietnam under Emperor Bao Dai . The French government was created by the French in 1954 . The state of Vietnam was created in 1954 under the name of Emperor Dai .
 This made the issue quite clear to the Vietnamese, even if it could be concealed from the rest of the world . The issue was made clear by the Vietnamese government, even though it could not be concealed .
 Through seven years of war, the Vietnamese people’s choice was between the French and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . The French chose to defeat Ho Chi Minh's regime in Vietnam .
 The Vietnamese government that Eisenhower believed ought to be fighting the Vietminh on its own behalf did not exist in 1954 . Eisenhower believed that the Vietnamese government should be fighting for its own interests .
 The choice of the predominant number of these Indochinese was overwhelmingly Ho Chi Minh . The majority of the Indochines in Vietnam were overwhelmingly from the South .
 They felt no loyalty to Bao Dai, who lived in Paris, and hated the French, they said . They said: "They were loyal to the French. They were not loyal to them, they hated them"
 CIA created the Saigon Military Mission on January 29, 1954 . Saigon military mission was created by the CIA in 1954 .
 Charles P Cabell; George Aurell, formerly chief of station in Manila; and Edward G Lansdale, formerly Chief of Station in Manila . Edward Lansdale. Charles P. Cabell, George G. Aurell; George G . Aurell . Edward G. Lansdale .
 Lansdale had been in the Philippines since 1950, working as an agent of the CIA with Ramon Magsaysay and others to defeat President Quirino . He had been ordered by the CIA to return to Washington for this series of meetings on Vietnam, preparatory to returning to
 Dulles said he was to go to Vietnam to help the Vietnamese, much as he had helped the Filipinos . Dulles turned to me and said that it had been decided that it was decided that . I was going to Vietnam, much of which I helped the Vietnamese .
 I was to assist the Vietnamese in counterguerrilla training and advise as necessary on governmental measures for resistance to Communist actions . I was in charge of training and advising on government measures to resist Communist actions.
 Lansdale would continue in Vietnam, as he had in the Philippines, to exploit the cover of an air force officer . Lansdale was assigned to the Military Assistance Advisory Group for “cover assignment” purposes .
 "As far as I knew, this still was almost impossible for an American to do," she says . As far as she knew, "this still still still is almost impossible to do"
 The French ran Vietnam as a colony, with a minimum of Vietnamese self-rule . The French ruled the country for more than 20 years .
 The French issued and controlled Vietnam’s currency, ran the national bank, customs, foreign affairs, armed forces, and police . France had said that Vietnam was independent, but Vietnam was not independent . Vietnam's currency was controlled by the French .
 I had met Ed Lansdale and many of his Filipino associates in Manila in 195354 . We were both assigned to the Office of Special Operations in the Pentagon during the late fifties and early sixties .
 I have heard him speak of his serious problems with the French in Saigon, which were so severe that he thought he might be killed by them, he said . He said he feared he might die by the French .
 Saigon Military Mission and its tough, experienced team managed to “raise hell,” weather the storm, and present the U.S. government with a full-fledged, ready-made war by spring 1965 .
 The Saigon Military Mission entered Vietnam clandestinely to assist the Vietnamese, rather than the French, in order to help the French . The mission was launched by the Saigon military Mission in the 1970s .
 As members of that team understood their orders, they were to wage paramilitary operations against the enemy and to carry out psychological warfare . The team was ordered to wage psychological warfare against the enemies, and wage paramilitary .
 They might not have known who their friends were, but they knew who their enemy was, the Vietminh . They might have known their friends, but knew who they were, the enemy .
 It must be kept in mind that the SMM was a CIA activity and that when its members said they were going to promote PsyWar and propaganda they had a different concept than did the military .
 They promoted sabotage, subversion, labor strikes, armed uprisings, and guerrilla warfare . They saw their role as promoting sabotage and subverting, subverting and labor strikes .
 Their propaganda activity included the use of radio and newspapers, newspapers, leaflets delivered by the millions from converted USAF B-29 bombers, posters, slogans, slogans and slogans .
 "They attempted to do everything possible to exploit the nationalistic feelings of the people in an attempt to unite this new country," the president said .
 Another characteristic of their work was the use of paramilitary organizations . They used to use paramilitary organizations in their work .
 Such units are no more than a private army whose members accept some measure of discipline, have a military-type organization, and carry light weapons . Such units accept discipline and have military-like organization .
 The book contained the doctrine of guerrilla warfare as practiced during the Cold War . That book contained a doctrine that was used in guerrilla warfare .
 Lansdale made speeches at the various war colleges after he returned home from Vietnam . Lansdale later became a prominent speaker at the war colleges .
 Almost without exception he enumerated the “three great disciplinary measures” and the ‘eight noteworthy points” of Mao Tse-tung’s great Chinese Eighth Route Army .
 I was the pilot of U.S. Air Force heavy transport aircraft on many flights from Tokyo to Saigon via the Philippines from 1952 to 1954 .
 Lansdale’s team members were on board the plane during some of those five-hour flights between Manila and Saigon . They discussed the Magsaysay campaign being waged by the CIA against Quirino and the plans that were being made for a new government in Vietnam .
 Saigon Military Mission did not begin until January 1954 . Other CIA activities in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos long before 1954 . Some members of SMM had participated in these earlier activities as far back as 1945 .
 The SMM was formally endorsed by the agreement to create the SMM in 1954 . The agreement was formally agreed in 1954, with the creation of SMM .
 There was no real South Vietnamese government for the SMM to support during the early months of 1954 . There was going to be one; the Dulles brothers would see to that .
 The Saigon Military Mission was sent to Vietnam to preside over the dissolution of French colonial power and over the bursting of the Bao Dai “State of Vietnam” bubble . The mission was sent by the Saigon military mission to Vietnam .
 The Dulles brothers knew, by January 1954 if not long before that, that they would be creating a new Vietnamese government that would be neither French nor Vietminh . This new government would then become the base for continuing the decade-old war in Indochina .
 The Dulles brothers were in a position to make sure that both the French and the Bao Dai interests were defeated . The brothers were able to defeat the French in Vietnam .
 Thereafter, the introduction of arms, equipment, and personnel was prohibited, except for normal rotation of military personnel and for the replacement of items in kind . The introduction of weapons, equipment and personnel is prohibited .
 I flew military equipment, such as ground radars made in Italy, into Saigon during this period . We had to paint out the original addresses and retype the manifests while the plane was in the air . We also had to retype our manifests while we were flying .
 India was a member of the International Inspection Team in Saigon . India was also a part of the inspection team in Vietnam .
 At the time of the Geneva accords, the U.S. had delivered aid to Indochina at an original cost of $2. billion . The United States had delivered $2 billion in aid at the time .
 Edward G Lansdale, chief of the SMM, arrived in Saigon from Washington via Manila on June 1, 1954, less than one month after the defeat of the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu .
 All over Vietnam, the Vietminh and other nationalist villagers were quickly consolidated in the north and other areas where they predominated . All over the country, they were quickly consolidating in Vietnam .
 The defeated French units were disarmed, and their equipment and supplies were taken over by the Vietminh, thus increasing their arsenal enormously . The defeat of the French forces in Vietnam was a major success .
 Every night, during my flights to Saigon, I could hear explosions in and around Saigon and other stronghold areas . Every night in Saigon during my time there, I would hear explosions . I was able to hear explosions from Saigon's stronghold areas.
 At times the Saigon River, the only supply channel into South Vietnam, became impassable as a result of enemy attacks and the number of ships that had been sunk in the channel . At times it became impassesable due to enemy attacks .
 Despite this precaution, the French World War II aircraft parked there were destroyed by explosions set by Vietminh sappers night after night .
 This was the climate in which the Saigon Military Mission began operations . The Saigon military mission began operations in Vietnam in 1968 .
 The Geneva accords called for a political division of the 1,600-mile-long country at the 17th parallel . Roughly an equal half-and-half split, north and south .
 The report was written just as though there were a South Vietnam and a South Vietnamese army— neither of which existed in any form until at least July 21, 1954 .
 The Saigon Military Mission began operations on the ground in Indochina on June 1, 1954 . Saigon began operations in Vietnam in 1954 .
 Ngo Dinh Diem, the newly appointed president, arrived in Saigon on July 7, 1954 . Diem was the first Vietnamese president to arrive in Vietnam .
 More than 30 million people in ancient Asia divided over millennia into villages, regions, and loosely knit nations .
 Except for the ten-year-old Democratic Republic of Vietnam, Vietnam had never had an opportunity to get itself organized in peace . This entire region had no government, except Vietnam .
 The Chinese, who for centuries had provided for the simple village economy, were frustrated and, under Diem, were being sent away . The Chinese were frustrated .
 Fighting and rioting were actually a form of basic banditry to obtain the most basic needs of life, says historian . The fighting and riots were actually an act of bandiry, he says .
 Saigon Military Mission stepped in and helped Diem gradually extend his authority in the creation of a central government . This is where the Saigon military mission stepped in to help Diem .
 The SMM’s greatest weapon was a blank U.S. government checkbook from the CIA that enabled the mission to do, and to buy, anything, anything . SMM's greatest weapon is a blank United States government check book .
 What was done in those earliest days of 1954 set the stage for the warfare that followed over the next twenty years . The first World War Two began in 1954 .
 No American was closer to the Diem brothers than Lansdale . Lansdale was the CIA’s CIA counterpart and strongman of South Vietnam .
 He became concerned that the Public Administration Advisory Program planned by the American embassy was going to be too slow . Something had to be done quickly to fill the void left by the French and the Vietminh, who had returned to the north .
 This is an interesting development for an organization that had been created to go to Vietnam and “raise hell,” to use Foster Dulles’s words . This is a development for the organization, which was created to raise hell .
 Lansdale joined the Office of Strategic Services shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor . Lansdale had joined the OSS after the Japanese attack on December 7, 1941 .
 He said later that he left that organization and joined United States Army Intelligence . He said he joined the U.S. Army Intelligence.
 It has been my experience that few men have actually left an intelligence organization and joined the military . Few men actually leave intelligence organizations and join the military, he says .
 More likely, they have simply arranged things so that they could exploit ‘military’ cover . More likely they have just arranged things to exploit military cover .
 During World War II, after the Italian army had surrendered, the cities and towns of Italy had been so long without effective government that they needed assistance in order to reestablish some sort of local administration . Be that as it may, we learned .
 The army set up units for this work, called Civil Affairs and Military Government .
 CAMG units proved so successful that they continued on into the north of Europe as Allied armies rolled into Germany . CAMG forces were so successful they continued to carry out their operations .
 In a little-known development, the OSS noted what was being done and began to develop a similar capability for Asia . The OSS began to work secretly on the project in secret .
 As you may recall, General MacArthur had not permitted the OSS to operate in the Pacific Theater . General MacArthur was not permitted to allow OSS operations .
 The OSS managed to get into the Pacific with its Civil Affairs and Military Government idea via U.S. Navy channels .
 Richard Stilwell—realized the potential for such an activity during the Cold War . Richard Stillwell—the man who helped develop the project in the 1950s and '60s .
 Sam Wilson and I wrote much of that doctrine into the new Army Special Forces manual . Sam Wilson, and I. Wilson, said much of the doctrine was written in the new manual .
 When Lansdale was sent to the Philippines in 1950, he created a Civil Affairs Office there . Lansdale created an office in the Philippines .
 Inevitably, Lansdale moved this concept of civil affairs to Vietnam with him . Lansdale: "Inevitably it was a good idea for Vietnam to be civil affairs"
 Lansdale headed Pacification, which ostensibly had a civil affairstype role . Lansdale was the head of Pacification . He was also known as the leader of the Democratic Party .
 They well knew that it had been a most sinister French colonial practice, devised by Gen. Gen. Jean-Louis-Daurey .
 Louis-Hubert-Gonzalve Lyautey in North Africa and used later by the Chinese in Northern Indochina, meaning that a region was “pacified” when all of its people had been killed . The region was "pacified" when all
 Other parts of the civil affairs program became known as the Strategic Hamlet project of later years . The project was part of the Civil Affairs program .
 CIA had set up the Phoenix program, supposedly along civil affairs lines, before the war was over . It became one of the most brutal and murderous creations of the war . The Phoenix program was supposed to be civil affairs .
 As a result of the Phoenix program alone, tens of thousands of Vietnamese were killed . Tens of thousands were killed as a result .
 It is necessary to understand this side of the Vietnam campaign in order to realize why we were never able to win the minds and hearts of the people . This type of warfare did not lead to victory .
 It reminds us again of the days of the British East India Company’s lack of concern over genocide because of their inbred training in the theories of Malthus and Darwin .
 These are strong forces once inbred, and they show themselves in campaigns such as that which occurred in Indochina between 1945 and 1975 and again in the Middle East “Gulf War” of 1991 . These forces were once inbreeding, and showed themselves in such campaigns as
 Almost from the beginning, Diem faced with an attempted coup d’etat . Diem was faced with attempts to oust him from the country .
 This did not get Diem a needed army and a palace guard for his own protection . But this did get him a much more powerful army .
 There were in the vicinity of Saigon some independently powerful sects . There were also independent powerful sects in the area .
 By early 1955, the CIA was able to buy off the leader of this sect and place his army under Diem . Diem's army was placed under the control of the CIA .
 In June 1955, the army of another sect, the Hoa Hao, was defeated with money . Its leader was bought off and his forces joined the government army . Then, in June 1956, the government bought off its own sect's forces .
 A third sect, the Binh Xuyen, had been running the vice racketeering and the casinos in Cho Lon, a suburb of Saigon . The third sect is known as the “Bandits’s”
 The “Big Bandit’s” leader, Le Van Vien, was able to give up his forces and travel to Paris . The CIA arranged for its leader, the ‘BigBandit,” to travel to France . The ‘Bandit�
 All of the wealthy ex-generals from Vietnam on the French Riviera are now wealthy in France . "All of a sudden there were a lot of wealthy ex . ex-generalals from . Vietnam," says former French general .
 In Asia, as in most of the rest of the world, nothing talks like the American dollar, and the SMM checkbook had begun to create a government army for the almost defenseless, and totally powerless, Ngo Dinh Dinh Diem .
 Most of the history books about the earlier days of warfare in Vietnam present rather elaborate accounts of how the Diem administration acquired these “sect” armies .
 The "sect" armies were actually nothing more than modest paramilitary forces . The U.S. dollar was easily bought up by the American dollar as a price of doing business in Vietnam .
 It is interesting to read Lansdale’s account in his own book, In the Midst of Wars, and his biography, Edward Lansdale, by Cecil B Curry, by . Cecil B. Curry .
 Both books are burdened with a very heavy coating of “cover story” over these events and cannot be taken as realistic accounts . Both of these books are . burdened . with a heavy . coating of "cover story"
 Most Asian armies of that type are no more than groups of men with families that are one day ahead of starvation . Most of the Asian armies are small groups of people with families one day before starvation .
 They have joined the army for a bowl of soup and some rice, per day, for themselves and their destitute families . The soldiers have joined army for soup and rice per day for themselves .
 Saigon Military Mission said it was rushing through a course in “Combat PsyWar” among other things . It was this kind of army that the Saigon military mission said it had to rush through the course .
 One of the first “classes” of these troopers was flown to the vicinity of Hanoi, put in native garb, and told to run around the city spreading anti-Vietminh rumors .
 They were ordered to pass out leaflets that had been written by members of the Saigon Military Mission . They were also ordered to perform acts of sabotage, such as putting sugar in the gas tanks of Ho Chi Minh’s trucks and army vehicles .
 Later, the Saigon Military Mission discovered that these ‘loyal’ troops usually just melted away and lined up for soup with some of Ho Chi Minh’s forces .
 By midsummer more men had joined the SMM, and its mission was broadened . The SMM's mission has been broadened to include more men and women .
 "Catholic" Vietnamese from the north were now teaching “paramilitary” tactics, today called “terrorism’s” members . They were trying to promote the movement of hundreds of thousands of “Catholic” Vietnamese from north with promises of safety .
 The movement of Catholics from the northern provinces of Vietnam to the south became the most important activity of the Saigon Military Mission and one of the root causes of the Vietnam War . The SMM called “Catholics” under the provisions of the Geneva Agreement .
 The terrible burden these 1,100,000 destitute strangers imposed upon the equally poor native residents of the south created a pressure on the country and the Diem administration that proved to be overwhelming .
 What Americans fail to realize is that Southeast Asian natives are not mobile people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Southeast Asian natives aren't mobile people. They are mobile people"
 They are deeply involved in ancestor worship and village life; both are sacred to them . The village is also deeply involved with ancestor worship .
 Nothing could have done them more harm than to frighten them so badly that they thought they had a reason to leave their homes and villages . Nothing more harm could have been done than frightening them, they say .
 Some 660,000 or more were herded into Haiphong by the Saigon Military Mission and put aboard U.S. Navy transport vessels . They were put aboard United States Navy ships .
 About 300,000 traveled on the CIA’s Civil Air Transport aircraft, and others walked out . Others walked out of the program .
 They were transported, like cattle, to the southernmost part of Vietnam, where they were turned loose upon the local population . Despite promises of money and other basic support, they were left loose on the local .
 These northerners are Tonkinese, more Chinese than the Cochinese of the south . The north-easterners are more than Cochinese .
 There was no way these two groups of people could be assimilated by a practically nonexistent country . There were no way they could be accepted by a nonexistent country.
 It's easy to understand that within a short time these strangers had become bandits, of necessity, in an attempt to obtain the basics of life . It is easy to see how quickly these strangers became bandits .
 The local uprisings that sprung up wherever these poor people were dumped on the south were given the name “Communist insurgencies . Much of the worst and most pernicious part of the twenty years of warfare that followed was the direct result of this terrible activity that had been
 1,100,000 Tonkinese Vietnamese were, of course, the “enemy” in the Vietnamese scenario . Moreover, these 1,000,000 of them were also northerners —that is, the enemy’s in the Vietnam scenario .
 The Diems were more closely affiliated with natives of the north than the south . It was not long before a large number of these so-called “refugees” had found their way into key jobs in the Diem governmental infrastructure of South Vietnam .
 Much of the Vietnamese ‘problem’ had been ignited by our own people shortly after the Geneva Agreements were concluded, says H.N. Korea . When one thinks about this enormous man-made problem, he or she begins to realize that .
 1,100,000 “Catholics” from the north to the south at a time when the government of the south scarcely existed . Nothing that occurred during these thirty years of warfare, 1945-75, was more pernicious than this .
 The Saigon Military Mission was tasked with keeping Ngo Dinh Diem alive for ten years in Vietnam . The mission was a typical CIA operation in a typical way .
 If the truth were known, the chief of state of most Third World countries today —under the rules of the superpower world game —owes his job and his life, day by day, to an elite palace guard that he can control and, he hopes, trust .
 Diem had none of these essentials of power, so the Saigon Military Mission turned to the Philippines, where it had just succeeded in ousting President Quirino and putting Magsaysay in the Presidential Palace . The mission turned to Vietnam in order to get Diem back in
 This amazing Filipino would later play an important part in the Bay of Pigs operation in 1961 . He would play a key role in the operation in which he would be captured .
 He arrived in Saigon with three junior officers from the same Filipino elite guard to begin the process of selecting Vietnamese who for one reason or another could be expected to be loyal to Diem .
 These candidates were flown to Manila for training and indoctrination . These candidates are then flown to the Philippines for training .
 One way to guarantee loyalty to the ruler is to employ only those men who have wives and children . Then provide a place for those women and children to live, as hostages, as hostage .
 "Slowly, Diem was able to act more and more as the head of state, just like his more experienced counterparts in Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, and Burma, all had been beneficiaries of similar CIA elite guard assistance .
 During this period, relations between the nominal chief of state, Bao Dai, and the premier, Diem, worsened . During this time, relations with the premier worsened . The relationship between Dai and Diem worsened .
 In 1955, Ngo Dinh Diem, the CIA’s newcomer, called for a popular referendum in South Vietnam to decide whether Bao Dai should continue as chief of state or whether the country should become a republic under his own leadership as president .
 It was quite an experience to prepare for an election in a new country that had never had a real one before, especially when many of its millions of residents did not know the country existed or where its borders were located .
 The CIA felt quite certain that this “free, democratic” election would favor its man . With its recent experience of a similar nature in the Philippines, however, the CIA felt confident that this free, democratic elections would favor him .
 In any case, the leaders of the SMM were going to see that their men counted the ballots . In any . case, it was going to be a matter of business .
 It was in response to challenges like this that SMM’s special talents revealed themselves, says the SMM . The SMM's special talents reveal themselves, he says .
 They were delivered with a brief political speech recorded by Ngo Dinh Diem . The speech was recorded by the former president of Vietnam . The speeches were recorded by Diem's wife, who died in 2003 .
 The villagers, who had never seen or heard of anything like this before, were astounded . The villagers had never heard or seen anything such a thing like this .
 Diem received 98 percent of the vote, and on October 26, 1955, he proclaimed the Republic of Vietnam . The legal line of demarcation was the river known as Song Ben Hai .
 As a result of this election, Ngo Dinh Diem became the first president of Vietnam . The country's first president was elected in 1964 .
 The Dulles brothers laid plans for the creation of a new nation that would be backed by the United States . The then “nine-year” war in Indochina was the focus of the National Security Council meeting in 1954 .
 It had taken almost two years to witness the defeat of the French, the dissolution of the Bao Dai government, the movement of Ngo Dinh Diem from exile to the position of premier in Saigon . Diem was installed as president and “Father of his Country�
 None of this could have happened without the skillful undercover work of the CIA and its experienced Saigon Military Mission .
 Nine years of the manipulation of the American war-making machine in Indochina began to pay off for the power elite in 1954 . Genocide by Transfer—in South Vietnam began in 1954.
 By that time, American blood had been shed in Indochina, and nearly $3 billion had been spent . By that point, the U.S. had already spent $2 billion in the region .
 By the end of the Indochinese phase of the Cold War, the cost would be estimated at more than $500 billion, 58,000 American lives, and a serious decline of U.S. prestige . The cost of the war in Indochina would have been estimated at
 The French were defeated at Dien Bien Phu in May 1954 and were on their way out . The French had been in Indochina since 1787 and had been defeated in May 1953 .
 Geneva Conference convened on April 26, even before the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu on May 7 . Geneva Conference was to work out a cease-fire between the French, the Vietminh, and the State of Vietnam .
 This conference established a demarcation zone at, or near, the 17th parallel . It divided the former French colonial land into two nearly equal sections of land .
 The north would be the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and the south would become the State of Vietnam . On October 26, 1955, the Republic of Vietnamese was formed . The Republic was later known as the Vietnam Republic .
 The CIA’s SMM had begun its political, psychological, and terrorist activities against the native population in the northern regions in the summer of 1954 .
 Using a well-equipped cadre of saboteurs, it performed many terrorist acts in Hanoi and surrounding Tonkin . A well-armed cadre was used to carry out many of the terrorist acts .
 SMM agents polluted petroleum supplies, bombed the post offices, wrote and distributed millions of anti-Vietminh leaflets, printed and distributed counterfeit money . SMM also printed counterfeit money and bombed post offices in Vietnam .
 As was intended, these clandestine activities played right into the hands of the war makers by creating a growing rift between the Vietminh and the Tonkinese Catholics . The clandestine activities were intended to create a rift .
 No blame was laid upon the SMM until later, when SMM-trained Vietnamese turned themselves in to the Vietminh . The SMM trained Vietnamese later turned themselves into the Vietnamese government .
 Catholic northerners and its unwelcome impact upon the population of the south had more to do with the scope, severity, and duration of the war in Vietnam than anything else .
 Most news sources and historical reviews have either avoided or neglected these subjects . Most of these subjects have either been neglected or neglected by historians .
 At the time this exodus began in mid-1954, the State of Vietnam as a government was all but nonexistent . At the same time as this exodus, Vietnam was still a governmentless .
 It was placed in charge of all the real estate south of the 17th parallel and of its ancient, settled, and peaceful population, variously estimated at from 10 to 12 million . Yet it had been placed in . charge of . all of its real estate .
 The influx of hundreds of thousands of strangers on the already war weary southern population pushed them to the breaking point . There can be no denying the fact that the influx of these hundreds of . thousands of . strangers pushed them both to . breaking point.
 Europeans invaded their North American homeland and decided they would take it over for themselves . They were not the victims of a civil war in the classic sense so much as they found themselves in a situation analogous to that of the American Indians .
 With Catholic Ngo Dinh Diem in power, these intruders actually thought they had that right . With the Catholic government of Vietnam, they thought they could have that right?
 The confused situation in Vietnam following Geneva was marked by the exodus of refugees from the zone north of the 17th parallel . As reported in the book Vietnam Crisis, Vietnam Crisis .
 The refugee movement was encouraged by the State of Vietnam and was carried on with substantial aid from the United States . The refugees were encouraged by Vietnam and the U.S.
 France had first thought the movement would be limited to a few thousands of people, but it soon took on mammoth proportions . France first thought it would only be a small group of people .
 The influx of refugees in the zone south of the 17th parallel contributed to the existing political confusion . The influx has also contributed to an increase in refugees .
 The authority of the central government of the State of Vietnam was badly factionalized by years of war and political turmoil . The army and “sects” virtually constituted states within a state .
 This quite typical interpretation of events that involved one million people leaves many crucial, as yet unanswered questions . This is a typical interpretation, but many crucial questions remain unanswered .
 The account says a little about the plight of the refugees and nothing about their reluctant hosts . It says little about their hosts, the people of the south . The account is not the first of many refugees to flee south .
 They could not pack the family into the old Chevy and head down the road for some unknown destination a thousand or fifteen hundred miles away . The family could not leave the family behind the vehicle and drive to some unknown destinations .
 They had no superhighways with convenient fast-food stops and welcoming motels . But they also had convenient fast food stops and welcome motels. They were not the only places to stop and stay .
 At that time, the one north-south railroad line was inoperative and not an alternative . At that point, it was not a viable alternative to the one inoperative line .
 Vietnam was old in the days of the early Egyptians, Babylonians, and Persians . Vietnam was once a thriving colony in the region .
 To those settled, village-oriented people, obligations to parents and to the emperor were the cement of the Confucian order . The emperor was the emperor of China and the emperor .
 Cochin China, the French colony, had changed somewhat as a result of the French occupation that took place between 1861 and 1867 . Annam and Tonkin had not changed since the occupation .
 It was the "unchanged" Tonkinese who were fleeing, and this was what made it all the more remarkable . Yet it was the ‘unchanged’ Tonkin’s fleeing, it was also remarkable .
 In the village, the clans were strong, and the basis of the clan was the veneration of ancestors, which ensured strong attachment to the village and to the land . The clans are strong in the village .
 Each village had a shrine, the ‘dinh’, which contained the protective deity of that village . Each village was protected by a protective deity, the "dinh" was a shrine .
 The cohesive force of the village was the sense of being protected by those spirits of the soil . The village was protected by the spirit of its soil, the author says .
 Village affairs in the hands of a council of elderly notables, but there was a considerable degree of autonomy . Village affairs were in the . hands of an elderly . notables .
 The village did pay a tax to the higher authority and did provide young men for military service . Village did pay tax and did pay for young men to be sent to service .
 In Vietnam, law was not based on authority and will but on the recognition of universal harmony . Law was based on recognition of harmony, not authority, will, but on universal harmony, he says .
 As in all parts of the world, rural government was to provide security . The basic object of rural government in rural areas was to protect the people, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In Vietnam the traditional demand was not for good laws so much as for good men . As a result, in Vietnam, Vietnam's traditional demand is not for laws, but for good people .
 This describes the village and the land-based society of these natives who had become refugees in their own homeland . Eaw was deemed less important than virtue.
 By all accounts, they had to be the least likely people who ever lived to leave their ancestral soil for some unknown and inhospitable alternative . They had to leave ancestral soil to find some unknown alternative .
 Little has been said about this clandestine provocation that created such deep fear, but it has to be considered one of the primary causes for the Americanization of the Vietnam War . Little has yet been revealed about the clandestine provocation .
 CIA’s SMM and its unconventional political and psychological warfare techniques not only in Vietnam but elsewhere . Once we realize this, we begin to have a much deeper appreciation and understanding of the power of the SMM .
 To use John Foster Dulles’s phrase, the SMM knew how to “raise hell,” and the fury of its threats caused 1. million of this village-based people to leave .
 The other side of the coin is that among the fugitives were thousands of fifth-column Vietminh . They concealed their movements southward within the greater mass of refugees, the author says .
 Throughout the long history of the warfare, and in Cochin China especially, it was always difficult to tell friend from foe . Throughout the history of warfare, it is always difficult .
 The Vietnam War was marked by internal strife . More than anything else, the Vietnam war was marked with internal strife. More than that, it was a war of internal strife, the author says .
 Some of the most vicious fighting during the early years of that struggle took place in the Camau Peninsula and other remote southern areas that had always been relatively wealthy farmland, peaceful, and, by geography, most removed from the Tonkin strongholds .
 The reason for this was partly due to the impact of the infiltration by the Vietminh fifth column and the troublesome impact of hundreds of thousands of refugees . The Vietnamese fifth column has been infiltrated by the majority of the population in Vietnam .
 It was just the sort of situation the CIA and the KGB desired in order to keep the invisible war boiling . The CIA and KGB wanted to keep an invisible war simmering in the Cold War .
 SMM reported that it had been able to arrange for the transport of these refugees . After its first year in Indochina, the SMM has arranged for transport of the refugees . The SMM said transport were all there was to this enormous exodus .
 Civil Air Transport Airlines to provide airlift to augment navy transport operations . Contract was let, through U.S. government sources, to Civil Air Transportation Airlines .
 CAT Airlines was a CIA proprietary corporation chartered in Delaware and based on Taiwan but available for CIA needs anywhere in the world . For those who have not heard of this airline, and the many other airlines like it, CAT Airlines .
 SMM arranged for the U.S. Navy to provide a sealift from North Vietnam to the south . SMM also arranged to provide the United States Navy with the aid .
 CAT's primary aircraft were the World War II, Curtiss-manufactured United States Air Force C-46 type, in civilian dress . CAT’s primary aircraft are the World . War II . Curtiss made the Curtiss C.46 type .
 It would have taken more than ten thousand flights or more than one thousand U.S. Navy boatloads carrying one thousand refugees each to move one million people one thousand miles .
 The burden on CAT Airlines and on the United States Navy was made somewhat more reasonable . By sharing the load, many of these fleeing refugees walked to the south, the burden on the airlines and the Navy was reduced .
 It still remains one of the major mass movements of people in modem times . The movement still remains a major mass movement of people .
 Geneva Agreements had guaranteed there was to be an election in order that the people might choose the government of a single unified Vietnam . The election was held in order to ensure the people would choose the new government .
 Ho’s Democratic Republic of Vietnam used force against ‘Catholics’ who were attempting to flee from north to south . There were many ‘incidents’ as a result of this exodus, such as the one in Ba Lang in January 1955, when Ho�
 Most Americans believe that if an agreement is reached by concerned governments at a conference, that agreement is going to be fulfilled . In Geneva in 1954, a conference was held in Geneva, Switzerland .
 The agreement did provide for transfer of natives from one zone to another . But war makers working at the command of the power elite read that small paragraph in a much different way .
 "They had decided to make a big conflagration in Indochina, and this was a certain way to do it," he said . "This was the only way they would do it"
 The delegates to the Geneva Conference did not plan this deadly confusion . "The delegates to Geneva Conference didn't plan this ... confusion," says CNN.com .
 Their unseen mentors did—and, as circumstances prove, their mentors won the day . The children's mentors did .
 Despite these uprisings in the north, the CIA’s CAT aircraft and the U.S. Navy ships operated in and out of northern ports and transported a major share of these people to the south . The Cochin Chinese near Saigon were dumped there upon the Cochin
 The people themselves were subjected to massive rumor campaigns and other PsyWar batterings by the SMM and by the Catholic hierarchy in the north .
 The evacuation of hundreds of thousands of Catholic Tonkinese had begun in southwestern Red River delta areas in Tonkin, under the urging of the Catholic bishoprics of That Dien and Bui Chu . Hundreds of thousands had been evacuated .
 This started one of the most amazing episodes of the entire thirty-year war and provided one of its least-known and least-understood causes . This is one of many of the least known causes of the conflict in Afghanistan .
 The United States Department of State said it had not been informed of this massive and crucial action . While it was happening, the U.S. government said it did not know about it .
 The Americans, British, and French knew about this mass exodus and kept it very secret . The U.S. and British kept it a secret .
 Geneva Conference on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam concluded its work on July 20 and 21, 1954 . The Geneva Conference was held in 1954 .
 A cease-fire was scheduled to take place in southern Vietnam at 8:00 A.M. on August 11, 1954 . As a result of the conflict, the Vietnam War ended in 1954 .
 The brutal and sinister meaning of this “genocide by transfer” was skillfully concealed under the cloak of gentle words . The brutal means of this genocide by transfer is concealed under a cloak, gentle words, the author says .
 Geneva Agreements speak of those people “who wish to go and live,” as though they were being kind and thoughtful by providing a means for those who had lived all their lives in a settled village environment .
 The people of the world, most of whom had never even heard of the Tonkinese and had no idea of their ancient village history, were supposed to think this offer to transfer these poor people a thousand miles or more was a most benevolent gesture .
 The people of the world were never supposed to learn that this movement of one million people was really intended—by the war makers—to provide all the elements for a bitter chapter of the Cold War . And, what is even worse, the people of . the world . were . never
 One million settled, peaceful, penniless people were uprooted in this manner and moved to southern Vietnam . Looking back over the decades, it is incomprehensible to think of one million .
 CIA overthrown the government of Guatemala, the Philippines, and Iran . CIA had overthrown Guatemala, Philippines, Iran, Guatemala, and the Philippines . The CIA overthrew the governments of Guatemala and Iran in the 1980s .
 Vietnam was simply the unlucky place chosen for the next major phase of the Cold War . Vietnam was . simply simply chosen to be . chosen for a major phase .
 "The role of these refugees in the creation of the intensity of this warfare was important," says David Cameron . "These refugees were important," he says of the refugees .
 The French military had left, on orders from Diem . The huge Michelin rubber interests were still there, and the French banking interests and other commercial establishments still there . So all was well for the French .
 "They were in place to benefit immeasurably from the Americanization of the war," says the author of the book . "They're in place in place now, and they're in the right place to be," he says .
 One million refugees left northern Vietnam to take up homes, land, and key jobs . It was one thing for one million refugees to leave northern Vietnam; it was entirely different matter for them to arrive in South .
 Diem was an outsider from Annam who had long been living in exile . Diem, who was premier and later president of Vietnam, was a leader of the country .
 The economy had been shattered with the ouster of the Chinese in response to a Diem edict . The Chinese ouster had shattered the economy with the collapse of the economy .
 The nation had no army to protect its leader or defend the republic. And the nation had . no army . to protect itself or defend its leader, or the republic . The nation was not protected by an army .
 Long before the war era, more than 13. million acres of land had been planted with rice . Long before war, rice was planted in rice fields in China .
 As far back as 1931, Cochin China had been growing more than two million tons of rice a year . Cochin now grows more than 2 million tons a year in rice .
 South Vietnam had been a major exporter of rice . Under Diem, with the economy in chaos, it was forced to import rice to feed the people .
 The village-type local government had been perfected over thousands of years . They lived comfortable, peaceful lives and their village-style local government was perfected .
 The outside world scarcely knew they existed. They needed little from the outside world, and they needed little help from the inside world .
 About six hundred thousand persons have fled from northern Vietnam . Before the exodus is over, the number of refugees will probably approach one million . So far, about six hundred . thousand persons . have fled .
 Officials closest to the action, the International Commission, thought that eight thousand people were moving . It is exceedingly strange to look back at that time and discover that the officials closest to that time .
 The French, who were still very much on the scene, estimated the number at three hundred thousand . The French estimate the number of people killed at the site of the attack .
 As refugees moved into the south, the Diem government began to place many Catholics in key offices . The U.S.-advised Diem Government began to put many of them in key government offices .
 Tran Kim Tuyen, a northern Catholic who had left Tonkin China in 1954, was made chief of the Office of Political and Social Affairs, the secret government apparatus that had been organized by the CIA .
 It is an oppressive, omnipresent internal spy organization that uses teachers to gather information from children, wives to tell on husbands, and employers to inform on employees . It is the oppressive and omnipresent spy organization, it says .
 Thousands of northern Catholics were put into such positions of responsibility by the CIA and the Diem government . Thousands of these northern Catholics have been put in such positions .
 It didn't take long before the friction between the southern natives and the Diem-favored northern intruders broke out into fighting and riots .
 These peaceful southern farmers and villagers rebelled against the intrusion of these refugees on their land, in their villages, and in the new Diem government, which none of them liked anyway . The peaceful southern . farmers rebelled .
 Before long, the “friends” according to the Diem brothers and their CIA backers in Saigon, were the one million northern Catholics . The “enemy” was the native southerners, and the ‘enemy’— or at least the . enemy
 The time was right to fan the flames into war and to bring in the Americans. The time should be right, says George W Bush .
 All kinds of Americans were brought into Indochina to work with the CIA and its Saigon Military Mission . The U.S. was trying to create a new nation with police and an army, to develop its agriculture and economy .
 The plan was to destroy the ancient villages and replace them with all the advantages of the Western way of life . The plan to destroy ancient villages was to replace the ancient village with the modern world .
 Someone decided it was time for the Vietnamese to have the luxury of fast-food hamburgers and fried chicken, not to mention Cadillacs and TV, served up with the American brand of home-view violence and ideology .
 There is, and has been for centuries, in the highest-level power structure, a determination to destroy mankind’s traditional way of life, that is, that of the village . There is a determined effort to destroy the village, says author .
 It is, above all, self-sufficient, something that American urbanization is not . It is something that U.S. urbanization not. It is self-sustaining, something .
 Villagers have solved the problems of the necessities on a modest scale . Villagers do not need the omnipotent paternalism of the international banker, the chemical revolution, or the politics of the modem jungle .
 They are not dependent upon the next eighteen-wheel, semitrailer truck for today’s food, either . They’re not dependent on the next 18-wheeler, but they’ve learned how to make their own way of life .
 Indochina was slated to be the next area for Malthusian destruction, and the Americans and the Vietminh knew how to do it . The Americans and Vietnam knew what to do, and how to destroy it .
 Their mentors in the CIA and KGB saw that they did it according to the planned international scenario . Their mentors saw it as a planned scenario . The CIA and the KGB were behind the success of the mission, he says .
 Diem's edicts raised the level of internal warfare and assured the destruction of the Vietnamese village-type economy and way of life . These edicts, which appeared to make sense, made sense from the Diem perspective, raised . The edicts were aimed at destroying law and order
 CIA master planners paved the way for the entry of the U.S. into the Vietnam War . The CIA’s master planners and the ambassador remained in Saigon on the job, despite the nondiplomatic formalities .
 A dog-eared copy of a 1931 National Geographic likens Vietnam to a Garden of Eden . Vietnam is now the world's most populous country .
 Decisions of such magnitude would have to have been made by such men as Roosevelt, Truman, Churchill, Clement Attlee, Stalin, and Chiang Kai-shek . But these men weren't making ‘Cold War’—that is, “communism vs.
 Questions like these require that we begin to think of the Cold War and its half century in terms of an awareness of a super power elite that can, and does, make such monumental decisions .
 Lest it appear that I am making these allegations out of thin air, may I suggest that others, now and at other times, have come to similar conclusions . I suggest others have also made similar conclusions, and I'm not alone .
 The dean of American military correspondents, Hansen W Baldwin, wrote, in the foreword to Adm. Hansen's Vietnam War, he asked, why did the Vietnam War cause the dean of U.S. military correspondent, Hansen, to write, in his foreword, he
 When we accepted defeat. . . . We seemed to be clearly saying to the world that what we had ultimately lost was our concern for the responsibilities, indeed the honor, that goes with a leadership role.
 Victor H Krulak, USMC, former commander of the Fleet Marine Force Pacific, tells a similar story in his fine book First to Fight .
 Former Secretary of Defense Secretary Robert McNamara worked for General Krulak . He served in the Office of the Secretary of the Defense under both Thomas Gates and Thomas McNamara .
 I have worked closely with Allen Dulles and his brother, Foster Dulles, for decades . Allen and Foster Dulls' brother, Allen Dulls, worked closely together .
 "I feel that it is essential to set forth important elements of this historical period in a way that will be most useful to the reader," says author . "It is essential that we set out important elements in this way," she says .
 We need to know why we were in Vietnam, or at least what caused us to be there, so that when we arrive at the year 1963 and the “1,000 Days of Camelot” we shall be ready to understand the true handwriting on the wall .
 These next chapters have the creation of that awareness as their objective. These next chapter will be the next chapter .
 Paul Harkins was head of the U.S. Military Assistance Command in South Vietnam from February 1962 to June 1964 . He said he had never been told what the American military objective was in that war .
 The objective should issue from the highest authority in the land . Furthermore, that objective should be issued from the top authority in land .
 There was no official U.S. government directive and objective, of a military nature, in Vietnam at any time . As we shall see here, there were no official United States government directives and objectives in Vietnam .
 Gen. Abrams was appointed by President Lyndon Johnson to replace Gen. George W. Johnson . Abrams was one of the great armored force commanders of the Army's armored forces .
 William Westmoreland was commander of U.S. military forces in Vietnam . He was the first president of the United States during the Vietnam War . He died in 1968 .
 During a rousing “halftime” speech for the benefit of the general and his staff officers at the White House, Johnson said, “Abe, you are going over there to win.”
 You will have an army of five hundred and fifty thousand men, one of the most powerful air forces ever assembled, and the invincible Seventh Fleet of the United States Navy offshore . You will also have a powerful air force and the strongest air force ever assembled .
 General Abrams, good soldier that he was, remained silent as he reached out to shake the President’s hand .
 Abrams’s staff member, a member of his staff, was with him during WWII . In the rear of that room, however, another army general, a man who had been with him, spoke up .
 LBJ remained silent as he ushered the general and his men out of the Oval Office . LBJ stayed silent as the general left the Oval office .
 That, in a nutshell, is the story of the military role in that long, terrible, winless war . That is a nutshell of the story about the military's role in Afghanistan .
 For General Westmoreland, the objective of the war became the “body count” The number of dead “enemy” reported in a given period of time was the number of bodies reported . Westmorelands: The war's objective was to kill the enemy .
 A related objective was “enemy strength estimates” -- the number of enemy troops calculated to be in the field . A related goal was to estimate enemy strength .
 It was assumed that if the body count was going up, the strength of the enemy must be going down, it would have been going down .
 The more “bodies” that could be counted, the closer we were supposed to be getting to victory . The more bodies “could be counted” could help the team win,’s goal was ‘to count the more bodies’
 Lt. Gen. John H. Johnson had more experience with the inner workings of Vietnam policy, at the Washington level . Lt. Johnson: "Few men, if any, had more experienced with Vietnam policy"
 He served as special assistant for counterinsurgency and special activities on Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy years, 1962-63 .
 The general was a rare and gifted man who might well have been appointed commandant of the Marine Corps had President Kennedy lived . President Kennedy would have been able to appoint him as commandant .
 He left the Pentagon in 1964 to serve as commanding general of the Fleet Marine Force Pacific . He was in charge of all marines in the Pacific Ocean area .
 Gen. Sharp was the commanding general over the marines fighting in Vietnam . He was the commander in chief of the Pacific, but not the commander of the Marines .
 William Westmoreland had ambassador and CIA station chief looking over each of his shoulders in Saigon . He had ambassadors, CIA station chiefs and ambassador looking over his shoulders .
 Kmlak came up with a strategic plan designed to achieve ‘victory’ in Vietnam . He drew upon his combat experience in World War II, which included those final heavy battles on Okinawa .
 With this plan, he flew to Saigon to present it to General Westmoreland . The plan was a success in Vietnam, but it was never realized .
 Krulak returned to Honolulu and presented the plan to Admiral Sharp, who liked it . Admiral Sharp directed him to take it to Washington to present it formally to the U.S. Marine Corps commandant, Gen. Gen. Jan. Steve Kerulak says .
 General Greene approved the plan and made arrangements for Krulak to present it to Robert S McNamara, secretary of defense . The plan was approved by General Greene and presented to McNamara .
 Krulak knew McNamara well from his long service with the Joint Staff in the Pentagon . He worked with McNamara from his time as a Joint Staff member with the U.S. Joint Staff . Krulaks: "I'm not surprised that McNamara was a genius"
 McNamara agreed with the plan, but then did something that uncovers the real source of power with respect to top-level decisions affecting activities in Southeast Asia during the sixties .
 Averell Harriman, formerly ambassador to the Soviet Union, was then serving as assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs . He was in charge of the U.S. State Department of Far Eastern Affairs .
 Harriman invited General Krulak to join him for lunch at his elegant home in Georgetown, Georgetown . The general invited the general to his home for lunch .
 Governor Harriman invited the general to present his strategic plan for achieving victory in Vietnam . Following their luncheon, governor Harrimans invited him to present the general's strategic plan .
 "I know General Krulak to be a dedicated American and a tough, battlehardened marine," says Marine Corps general . "He is a dedicated U.S. Marine," he says .
 He did not stop with this rebuff in that drawing room of Governor Harriman’s home in Georgetown, Georgetown .
 The commandant of the Marine Corps arranged for Krulak to meet with President Johnson in the White House to discuss the same strategic plan . President Johnson also held a meeting in the same place .
 At that point, Krulak writes, Johnson got to his feet, put his arm around his shoulder, and propelled him to the door . Krulk writes: "Mr Johnson pushed me firmly toward the door. Mr Johnson was very cool"
 It was plain to me that the Washington civilian leadership was taking counsel with its fears . "It's plain to be clear that the D.C. civilian leadership is taking counsel," she said .
 Sharp wrote his own book about Vietnam in retrospect, he wrote it under the title Strategy for Defeat . Sharp wrote the book about the Vietnam war .
 America had been told by such experienced men as Generals of the Army Omar Bradley and Douglas MacArthur, Gen. Douglas MacArthur and Gen. Omar Bradley . America had told the U.S. to prepare for the invasion of Afghanistan .
 Matthew Ridgway said that we could never win a Vietnam-style land war in Asia . Ridgways said that the U.S. could not win a land war on Asia . He said that it would never be possible to win a war in Vietnam style .
 They recalled the old story from the days of the Japanese war in China during the 1930s . They recalled an old story .
 The Japanese, with their greater firepower and attack aircraft and more mobile mechanized divisions, wrought terrible destruction on the Chinese . The Japanese were able to defeat the Chinese with greater firepower .
 The headlines posted on bulletin boards throughout China gave the figures for battle after battle . The headlines were posted in bulletin boards across China .
 It was said that one old man, reading these totals of Chinese and Japanese losses on the ratio of 10 to 1 and 20 to 1 in favor of the Japanese, turned to a friend beside him and said, “Look at those lists, from city after city; just look at
 Many older, more experienced American generals looked at the hopeless conflicts in Korea and Vietnam and remembered that story . Many of the older . more experienced U.S. generals looked back at that story and remembered it .
 At the rate it was going, the American casualty rate was becoming similar to that of the Japanese . Pretty soon, no more Americans would be Americans, the author says .
 Note carefully that it was not the story of the ambassador and of the CIA’s chief of station . The story is not about the ambassador or CIA chief .
 Westmoreland had to fight for, that is the body count . On the other hand, that was all he had to do was kill himself .
 During wartime, during wartime, the adversary, by tradition, is supposed to be in uniform . First of all, during war, during . Tradition, by . tradition, was supposed to . be uniform, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Former director of central intelligence, William Colby, appeared on Larry King’s late-night talk show in 1985 . Colby is a former CIA director and CIA director .
 At one point, King brought up the subject of assassinations by the CIA, while making reference to political assassinations and to the agency’s assassination manual, which was discovered in Nicaragua .
 He said that there had been a time when the CIA had set up certain political assassinations, but that as DCI from 1973 to 1976, he was proud of the fact that he had been responsible for ending that practice .
 Colby then said that he did not approve of killing anyone in cold blood . Colby said he does not approve killing anyone with cold blood. Colby: "I don't think anyone should be executed without permission"
 This is the same man who, when he headed the dreaded Phoenix program in Vietnam, took credit for the fact that at least sixty thousand Vietnamese had been killed “in cold blood” by his American, Korean, Filipino, Taiwanese, Taiwanese and Vietnamese agents . The same man took
 These people had been moved as the result of a hypothetical humanitarian cause in order to create an enemy scenario . These people were moved as a result of an imaginary humanitarian cause . The move was created to create a hypothetical enemy scenario for the purposes of creating a hypothetical scenario .
 This situation by itself created riots, unrest, and general disorder wherever these hordes of people settled . This situation created riots and riots, and caused riots, riots wherever they settled .
 U.S. advisers to Ngo Dinh Diem tightened the screws a few more turns . Then the American advisers to the Vietnamese leader tightened the screw up the screws .
 All French local government officials had to turn over their responsibilities to Vietnamese and leave the country . Vietnamese officials must turn over responsibilities to local authorities and leave country .
 The French had been administering the village constabulary system for decades . Among other things, they have been administering village constables for decades.
 The Chinese maintained the local, grass-roots economic system of the rich agricultural countryside . For the most part the Chinese maintained their local, grassroots economic system .
 The ostensible reasons for both of these directives seemed reasonable enough . But they were not so easy to follow .
 The French had agreed to leave anyway, and there was no reason why they should delay their departure just because they were involved in local government . The French were already due to leave already, and should not have been delayed too long, says David Cameron .
 Basic law and order, especially in the rural farming regions, had been administered by the French . But basic law and . order was . administered by French .
 With their departure this essential government service disintegrated, it was not adequately replaced by the newly formed Diem government . The government was not properly replaced by Diem's new government, he says .
 A rumor campaign was started to explain that the Chinese were, no doubt, spies for the Chinese Communists and the Vietminh . If they were not spies, they were at least supportive of communism, the rumor campaign said .
 French and Chinese directives were forcefully carried out, and before long, they had departed . The French, Chinese and British have left the country .
 Many of them were members of families that had been in Indochina for generations . Many of the families had been there for generations. Many were in the country for decades .
 In every village, those who had been friends of the colonial French or the entrepreneurial Chinese were moved closer to the “enemy” category . The results of these directives marked another broadening of the definition of the .
 One cannot understand too completely the strength of the village way of life for these ancient people . The village is one of the world's most ancient villages .
 Family loyalty is regarded as the most respected value in Vietnamese life . It began with family loyalty, which is regarded by Vietnamese people as most respected .
 The most significant religious ceremonies of these people were the rites regarding family ancestors .
 A farm consisted of village property cultivated by that family for centuries . The farm was cultivated by the family of centuries . A farm was established by the same family in the village .
 For millions of Indochinese the village was the only political structure they knew . After the family and farm came the village, the village became the main political structure . The village is the only structure they know .
 Theirs was the last word required for the settlement of significant financial and juridical problems . Theirs were the settlement for significant financial, juridic problems .
 The loosely knit, French-monitored constabulary system provided an adequate framework for most legal matters . The loosely-knit French-controlled system provided a . adequate framework of most . legal matters.
 The Chinese had, for centuries, been the local entrepreneurs. On the other hand, the Chinese had . For centuries, the . other . local entrepreneurs, they had been local entrepreneurs .
 The only outside influence from the source of higher authority was that of the tax collector and the military draft .
 Under French control there was not much difference in the communal organization and administration of these thousands of villages, whether in Tonkin, Annam, or Cochin China .
 Diem and his U.S. advisers were not even aware of this fact and so did not bother replacing it . "Diem" and his American advisers did not even bother replacing the original document .
 One million Tonkinese Catholics thrust into South Vietnam in the late 1950s . The collapse could have been expected even under normal conditions . But in South Vietnam, law and order vanished, it was predictable .
 There was widespread banditry as the Tonkinese flocked together to steal food and other necessities, including farmland . Banditry was widespread throughout the 19th century .
 There were riots, and before long many formerly peaceful villages had become a no-man’s-land . The native owners were the enemy in the eyes of the intruders and their friends in the government of Saigon .
 The definition of “enemy” was being broadened to include the longtime stable natives . The definition was being widened to include longtime stable native natives .
 Ngo Dinh Diem’s new government was being urged by its American advisers to organize and pacify the country and to drive out the Communists .
 Diem’s forces raced across the land in American trucks and American helicopters . They decided that “anyone who ran” was the enemy, Diem says .
 In ancient art and practice of warfare, especially at the most basic local level, there is a brutal system of interrogation and control for the purpose of identifying “friend” and “foe” that has come down through the years . In the ancient art of interrogation,
 The French were using this system in Algeria, and it was passed through the clandestine services from the French to the American CIA and thence to their Vietnamese ‘elite guard” that had been trained by the Filipinos . The system was used by the French in Algeria .
 An armed group rushes into a village and immediately intimidates its people by burning huts and shooting a few random people, if necessary . Then rounds up everyone else in the center of the village in the village .
 The invaders know that the elders are the leaders, so they single out the oldest active male and order him to point out the members of his family . Then have them stand by him in one group, then have them in another .
 The invaders may have brought with them some informer or agent who will select this elder for them . This elder may have been selected by the invaders .
 The elder elder is asked who are his own enemies or persons he does not trust . The elder is also asked to explain who he trusts to .
 The others in the village are asked which group they are closest to, and the elder is asked to verify this . The elder is then asked to confirm this to the others . Then the others are asked to identify their closest friends .
 Those who belong to none of the above groups become Group 3 . This is usually the largest of the five groups . Those who are in Group 3 are usually in the smallest group .
 The chosen elder is responsible for the administration and defense of his village . The invaders tell the chosen elder that he will be responsible for his village's defense .
 Group 3 and 4 must be moved closer to his trusted circle, or they will be eliminated . Then they order the chief to “train’s groups to ‘train” Groups 3 and ‘4’
 This places the village in the hands of the elder and leaves no “enemies” there . This places no ‘enemies,’ there. The elder’s role in the village is important .
 In the Five Fingers system, the invaders, perhaps with prior knowledge, had selected a Tonkinese "refugee" as the leader of Group 1 in the village . The natives and owners of the village property would automatically be put in Group 5 and either be killed or removed
 The system was used all over Vietnam during those terrible early days when there was no true government and after the one million northerners had moved in, before anyone had ever heard the word “Vietcong” and its Communist connotation . This process made it possible for the
 With the departure of the Chinese, an even more fundamental problem was created, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The ancient economic system was destroyed and with it the basic food and necessities-of-life economy that had supported millions of otherwise prosperous Cochin Chinese . The ancient economy was destroyed .
 When the Vietnamese farmer harvested his plentiful crop of rice, he filled baskets woven of rice straw by the women of the families . The women of Vietnamese families filled the baskets with rice straw . The baskets are woven by women of families .
 He loaded rice-filled baskets into his sampan (flat-bottomed boat) and poled it along one of the ever-present canals to the central village . His crop was converted into a certain amount of the basic necessities of his and his family's life .
 It had long been the custom for each farm family to go to the village and pile their baskets of rice beside the others . Each farm family piled their rice alongside the others in the village .
 Each farmer, by long custom, had a supply of small black sticks with his name or symbol on each stick, and he would place one in each of his baskets of rice .
 All rice baskets, removed from the village square, would be loaded onto the village elder's boat . The village elder would collect all of the marker-sticks .
 The Chinese merchant then bought the rice, based upon the going price per basket multiplied by the number of sticks . The rice was bought by the Chinese merchant based on the price of each basket .
 Village elder buys salt, tools, fabrics, and other supplies from merchant account . Village elder bought salt from merchant for village's needs from account .
 If there was a balance to the credit of the village, the Chinese merchant paid it in silver coinage of intrinsic value . The Chinese merchant would pay the balance in silver coins .
 This age-old system created the market for the farmer’s produce and provided him with the basic necessities of life in exchange for his labor . Until the impact of the Diem edicts that ousted the French and the Chinese, the market was created .
 The farmers from these many villages knew nothing about the edict or about the departure of the French and Chinese . The farmers knew nothing of this edict, or about their departure .
 First rice harvest and first market day after the edict . Then came the first rice harvest . First market day .
 By market day, they had cut the rice, woven the baskets, poled the sampans into town, and placed their sticks in each basket in the village square .
 Their harvests of rice rotted where they lay in baskets in the village . Their harvest was left to rot in baskets . The village's rice harvest was the worst of all in the region .
 One crop cycle could pass, perhaps two or three, but eventually these villagers had to have necessities . The villagers were forced to live with basic food and water supplies .
 Even though they were knee-deep in brackish rice-paddy water all day, they frequently had to buy their drinking water . Even though the water was muddy, they often had to purchase their water .
 After the Chinese left, when the villagers had no water, they had no place to go . The villagers were left without water and had no where to go after they were left .
 When they did not get enough rainwater to fill earthen jars every family owned for their supply of drinking water, they drank brackish water . When they didn't get enough water to fill their jars, they used brack water .
 Diem’s fragile new country was falling apart in the most unlikely of places . The regions that had always had the most prosperous farms and in the zones farthest from Hanoi were falling apart . Diem's fragile new nation fell apart in unlikely places .
 Unrest spread through the most fertile, most stable, and most wealthy regions of the new State of Vietnam . Unrest was spread through most fertile and most stable regions of Vietnam.
 Diem government and its American advisers were totally unaware of the true causes of this unrest, but they were ready with their Pavlovian interpretation . Back in Saigon, Diem's government was totally unaware that the unrest was caused by unrest .
 Chronologically, this situation began to be identified and studied by the Americans at just the time that Kennedy became President . The situation was studied at the time of Kennedy becoming President .
 The concept of “counterinsurgency” had been heard in the Pentagon before the end of the Eisenhower administration . It came into full flower with the arrival of the Kennedy administration .
 The Americans’ only embarrassment, if they considered it, was that the most serious rioting was taking place in the southernmost regions of the State of Vietnam .
 The Diem government and its American advisers had created the causes of the rioting, but they wanted the rest of the world to believe otherwise . Diem's government wanted to create the cause of the riots, but the world believed otherwise .
 The Diem government was not close to the citizenry and had no idea what to do about the rioting, banditry, and boiling unrest . With no system of law and order to replace that used by the French, with . no organized means of merchandising to replace
 The rice-producing villagers raced everywhere in a crazed search for essential necessities . Rice-growing villagers race everywhere in the search for necessities .
 They overran other communities—rubber plantations, fishing villages, lumber villages, etc. etc. — in fierce, uncontrollable local battles . They fought for control of other communities, including rubber plantations .
 One million strangers from the north have arrived in the UK . The influx of the one million strangers has caused trouble in the north .
 They had left their homeland and found themselves in a new land that was seething with unrest . They had been left behind a new homeland that had been seethed by unrest .
 The Communists, they reported, had infiltrated the refugees and now were linking up with an underground fifth column of natives to create havoc and to embarrass the new Diem government in Saigon . The Communists were reported to have infiltrated refugees .
 The CIA’s Saigon Military Mission and its undercover terrorism and propaganda campaigns were paying off splendidly for the creators of the Cold War . The Saigon military mission was paying off for the CIA's success .
 All of Indochina had been prepared for war by them and their undercover activities, and the American armed forces were coming . The American armed force was coming, and it was coming .
 This had been the objective of those who’d ordered the movement of the 1,100,000 Tonkinese natives in the first place . This was their objective of the movement .
 The general perception was that the fighting in Laos was actually much more serious than the rising problems in Vietnam . During this period, as in the late 1950s and the closing years of the Eisenhower administration, the fighting was more serious .
 CIA and its U.S. Armed Forces “Special Forces” allies were playing a monumental role, behind the scenes, in Laos, Burma, and Thailand . The CIA and the United States Armed Forces "Special Forces" allies were .
 Dwight Eisenhower told John F Kennedy that the biggest trouble spot would be in Laos . With Ngo Dinh Diem in Saigon, he had little to worry about there, he said .
 It began the evolution of an entirely new set of tactical characteristics of that warfare . It began to be an entirely different set of tactics .
 A full squadron of U.S. Marine Corps helicopters had been secretly transferred to Udorn, Thailand, just across the river from Laos . The move was at the request of the CIA .
 The helicopters that saw combat in Laos were based and maintained in Thailand by U.S. Marines . The helicopters were based in Thailand .
 National Security Council Directive #5412 kept U.S. military and other covert assistance at a level that could be “plausibly” disclaimed . In those days, in accordance with the provisions of the directive, every effort had been made to keep United States military and
 The theory was that if these operations were compromised in any way, the U.S. government should be able to “disclaim plausibly” its role in the action . The theory is that the United States government should not be involved in these operations .
 There were no United States Marine Corps insignia on them, there were no serial numbers, no marine serial numbers . No marine pilots, no U.S. Marine insignia, and no marine pilots on them .
 This was at best a thin veneer; but it was needed to make it possible to use the marine equipment . This was needed, but it's needed to be able to use marine equipment, the author says .
 Back in Saigon, CIA operators wanted those helicopters transferred to Vietnam . The helicopters were wanted by the CIA, but were never found .
 Many of the CIA agents who had been infiltrated into South Vietnam, contrary to the provisions of the Geneva Agreements, had been moved there secretly from Laos . The CIA agents were moved to South Vietnam from Laos and had been secretly moved there from Laos.
 While in Laos they had become accustomed to the use of the use and convenience of this large force of combat helicopters .
 They wanted them in Vietnam, where they proposed to use them to transport South Vietnamese army troops to fight the fast-growing numbers of ‘enemy’ who were rioting for food and water in rice-growing areas of the Camau Peninsula .
 This helicopter movement was planned to be the CIA’s first operational combat activity of the Vietnam War . It was planned for the CIA to use it as part of an anti-Vietnam strategy .
 It turned out to also be the first step of a decade of escalation of that war . The first step was also the beginning step of the escalation of the war .
 All American military aid to South Vietnam was strictly limited by the “one for one” replacement stipulation of the 1954 Geneva Agreements . At that time, all American . aid to . South . Vietnam was limited to one-in-one military aid .
 The CIA could not move a squadron of military helicopters into South Vietnam, because there were no helicopters there to replace . The CIA was unable to move helicopters into Vietnam because of the lack of helicopters .
 So movement of those helicopters from Laos would have to be a covert operation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Any covert operation could be initiated and maintained only in accordance with a specific directive from the National Security Council and with the cooperation and direct assistance of the Department of Defense .
 The CIA’s first attempt to have these helicopters moved for combat purposes came in mid-1960 and was an attempt to beat the system . The CIA's first attempt was to move the helicopters in the 1960s .
 Charles P Cabell, the deputy director of central intelligence, called one of his contacts in the Office of Special Operations to see if these helicopters could be moved to Vietnam quickly and quietly, on an emergency basis, because of the outbreak of rioting all over the country . Cabell's
 In those days, the Office of Special Operations followed the policy set forth by Secretary of Defense Thomas Gates, which closely followed the language of the law, that is, the National Security Act of 1947 . In the 1970s, the office followed the law closely closely .
 At the time of General Cabell’s call, OSO had received no authorization for such a move, and the request was denied . OSO was denied on the ground that such a covert move would be covert and that the NSC had not directed such an operation into Vietnam
 During the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, the letter of this law was followed carefully . The letter of the letter was followed closely by the Kennedy and Eisenhower administrations .
 CIA did not possess enough assets in facilities, people, and materiel to carry out the operations it wanted to perform . In most cases, the CIA didn't have enough assets to carry on the operations they wanted .
 CIA had to come to the military establishment for support of its clandestine operations . Therefore, the CIA needed to come . CIA had come to military establishment to support clandestine operations, says CIA .
 The Defense Department would not provide this support without an agreed-upon NSC directive for each operation, usually without a guarantee of financial reimbursement from CIA .
 This kept the CIA at bay and under reasonable control during these more “normal” years . This kept them under reasonable controls during these "normal" years . The CIA was under control during this period .
 President Eisenhower's personal concern with clandestine operations is revealed in an anecdote from the Eisenhower era . Eisenhower was concerned about clandestine operations in the U.S.
 During the early part of Eisenhower’s first term, the NSC approved a directive . NSC 10/2 governed the policy for the development and operation of clandestine activity . The directive was approved in the early 1950s .
 NSC did not want covert operations to be the responsibility of the military . The NSC said covert operations should not be the military's responsibility .
 It said, quite properly, that the military’s role was a wartime, not a peacetime, one . It said: ‘It said quite properly that . The military's role is a wartime . not peacetime one.’
 The CIA did not have adequate resources to carry out such operations by itself, it said . At the same time, it had long been realized that it was better that it didn’t .
 The NSC ruled that when such operations had been directed, the CIA would turn to the Defense Department for support . The CIA would then turn to other departments or agencies of the government for support, the NSC said .
 He saw that it would create, within the organization of the CIA, a surrogate military organization designed to carry out military-type covert operations in peacetime . In peacetime, the CIA would be able to conduct covert operations .
 It would follow, he thought, that the CIA might, over the years, become a very large, uncontrollable military force in itself . He thought it might become an uncontrollable force . The CIA might become a large military force .
 This stipulation by the President worked rather well as long as the Office of the Secretary of Defense enforced it strictly . The President's stipulation was not strictly enforced by the Department of Defense, but it worked well .
 Some elements of the military turned this directive around and began to use the CIA as a vehicle for doing things they wanted to do . As with the Special Forces of the United States Army, Special Forces could not do, because of policy, during peacetime .
 President Kennedy confronted seriously by President Kennedy after the failure of the Bay of Pigs operation in April 1961 .
 President Eisenhower had similar thoughts, and he did everything he could to place reasonable controls on the agency . President Eisenhower did so .
 Both of these men feared the CIA because of its power to operate in secrecy and without proper accountability . Both men feared it because of the power of the CIA .
 Eisenhower administration was careful to limit support to that needed for the current operation . Defense Department was usually scrupulous about this note .
 The result was that there was always close cooperation and collaboration between the agency and the Defense Department on most clandestine operations . The result of the agency's clandestine operations was close cooperation, the author says .
 CIA was given operational control of clandestine operations during the Cold War . Joint operations carried out during that period were usually what might be called joint operations, with the CIA being given control .
 This applied to the development of all ‘military’ activities in Vietnam, at least until the marines landed there in March 1965 . The marines landed in Vietnam in 1965 . This was the first time the marines had landed there .
 This NSC policy applied to that request for helicopters from General Cabell of the CIA . Cabell's original request was vetoed by the Defense Department . The original request from the CIA was rejected .
 This veto required the CIA to prepare its case more formally and go first to the NSC with its request for the helicopters . The CIA has requested the helicopters for the U.S. military .
 In those days, the NSC had a subcommittee, the “5412/2 Committee, or “Special Group,” that handled covert activities . The NSC now has a subcommittee that handles covert activities, the subcommittee .
 In 1957, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff also became a member of the board . The current members include members of the U.S. military and European security councils .
 The Secretary of Defense authorized the Office of Special Operations to make arrangements necessary with the Marine Corps to move the aircraft to Vietnam . The movement of a large combat-ready force in 1960 marked the beginning of the true military escalation of the war in Vietnam .
 Each new action under CIA operational control moved America one step closer to intervention with United States military units under U.S. military commanders . From that time on, each new action would move America closer to involvement in the war .
 By 1960-61, the CIA had become a surrogate U.S. military force, complete with the authority to develop and wage warfare during peacetime . The CIA was fleshed out with United States military personnel .
 It put CIA civilian officials in actual command of all operational forces in the fast-growing conflict, at least until 1965 . The CIA was in charge of operations in the early 1960s .
 The concealment of military personnel in the CIA led to many of the problems that the armed forces would later delegate to the League of Families of Prisoners of War in Southeast Asia . As an additional factor, the concealment led to the problems of the CIA .
 The “strategy” of warfare in Southeast Asia had become so stereotyped that such true military commanders as Generals Westmoreland and Abrams found little room to maneuver . By the time this policy giving the CIA “operational” control over all American pseudomilitary
 The NSC ordered the Marine Corps unit at Udorn to be returned, with its own helicopters, to Okinawa .
 New helicopters of the same type were transported from the United States . New procurement orders were placed with the helicopter-manufacturing industry, which was almost bankrupt .
 At the same time, the CIA had to put together a large civilian helicopter unit, much larger than the original Marine Corps unit . Maintenance and flight crews were for the most part former military personnel .
 Combat wage scales were paid to everyone in the unit, at a cost many times that of the military unit it replaced . This meant that overseas, combat wage scales paid to all in the . unit, which was replaced by a new military unit, were paid more than the military .
 CIA’s “army” began training with elite troops of the new South Vietnamese army .
 They were being hurried into service against those villages where the most serious ‘refugee-induced” rioting was under way .
 Operation opened a new chapter of the thirty years of war in Vietnam . Operation opened an entirely new chapter in Vietnam's 30-year war . Operation began in 1968, when the US entered Vietnam .
 With the passage of time and with the incitement of low-level warfare in South Vietnam while this helicopter campaign was being prepared, the "enemy" was more and more the native population of the villages .
 They were indeed fighting; but they had been forced to fight to defend their homes, their food, and their way of life against the starving refugees from the north . They had been fighting, but they were forced to .
 In that mixing bowl of banditry, everyone was the “insurgent” Everyone was the enemy . In that mix bowl, everyone is the enemy. In this mixing bowl, the enemy was everyone .
 Diem’s two edicts driving out the French and the Chinese exacerbated the problem across the land . Diem's edicts also exacerbated the situation across the country .
 As things developed, many of Diem’s newest and finest troops were members of that one-million-strong invading force of ‘Catholic refugees .
 As discussed earlier, the CIA’s Saigon Military Mission had arrived in Saigon in 1954 . The mission was the CIA's first to arrive in the country .
 President Eisenhower was winding down his two-term administration . Senator John F Kennedy was organizing his own group of friends, relatives, and experts to gain the office of the presidency .
 We have prepared the way for the main focus of this book with a detailed discussion of the origin and activities of the CIA . We have a systematized review of the buildup and early escalation of the warfare in Vietnam . The main focus will be the origin of the origins, activities of
 These events present a significant view of the Cold War and what challenges the new President would face . The events present an important view of what challenges a new President faces .
 A brief look at a few other CIA-related activities will serve to broaden the scope of the scene in Washington on the threshold of the sixties . A look at some of the activities of the 1960s .
 In May 1960, President Eisenhower had planned to culminate his dream of a ‘Crusade for Peace’ with the ultimate summit conference with Nikita Khrushchev in Paris . Eisenhower had hoped for a summit conference in Paris in May 1960 . Eisenhower's dream was to culmin
 Francis Gary Powers at the controls, overflew the Soviet Union from Pakistan and made a crash-landing at Sverdlovsk in the heart of Russia . By so doing, he wrecked the hopes of the summit conference and the dreams of Eisenhower and Khrushchev .
 Allen W Dulles himself gave testimony before a closed-door session of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . Dulles said the Powers U-2 had not been shot down but had descended because of engine trouble .
 This important statement by Dulles has been little noted by the press, and little thought has been given to exactly why that aircraft had “trouble” at such a critical time .
 Eisenhower confirmed that the spy plane had not been shot down by the Soviets and had indeed lost engine power and crash-landed in Russia . The spy plane crashed in Russia after losing engine power, Eisenhower confirmed .
 Its unauthorized flight was another part of the Cold War game designed to deny President Eisenhower his Crusade for Peace . The unauthorized flight of the plane was part of a Cold War plot to deny Eisenhower his crusade for peace .
 President Eisenhower approved the beginnings of a clandestine campaign against Fidel Castro in Cuba in March 1960 . As another chapter of the Cold War, President Eisenhower had approved the beginning of the clandestine campaign .
 Vice President Richard Nixon secretly met with the NSC, urging more action against Castro . Later, during the summer of 1960, Nixon was stepping up his campaign to succeed Eisenhower, the VP secretly met .
 At the same time, Senator Kennedy, with equal secrecy, was meeting with the eventual leaders of the Cuban exile brigade that landed on the beaches at the Bay of Pigs . Senator Kennedy met with leaders of Cuba's eventual exile brigade .
 Manuel Artime Buesa, the beach commander, met with Senator Kennedy at the Kennedy home in Palm Beach, Florida, and in his Senate offices on Capitol Hill . Manuel Antonio de Varona and Jose Miro Cordona —both former premiers of Cuba—and other Cuban exile
 There would be no acceleration of anti-Castro activity during the lame-duck period of his administration, so that the new President, whether it was Nixon or Kennedy, would not have to confront a situation that had already been decided upon .
 Nixon felt that he had to play down the anti-Castro rhetoric because of his personal involvement and the requisite bonds of secrecy . During the crucial TV debates between Nixon and Kennedy in late 1960, Nixon had been attending all the NSC meetings on Cuba .
 JFK was not bound by secrecy but was well aware of the subject matter because of his closeness to the Cubans . On the other hand, JFK forcefully challenged Nixon and took the initiative on that subject .
 The edge gained from that single subject may have provided JFK with the votes that gave him his narrow victory in November 1960 . The edge may have helped JFK win the election .
 After the election, some quick moves were made by the CIA to “lock in” its projects before the new administration took over in January 1961 . The CIA made quick moves after the election to "lock in" its projects .
 All-new U.S. Army Special Forces organization was hastily increased in size . Its secret mission was enlarged to include “peacetime” covert activities .
 At the same time, an international school was set up at Fort Bragg to provide training for troops from many nations through-out-the world .
 This school, although later called the John F Kennedy Center, was not initiated by President Kennedy, as many believe, but was opened in late 1960 by the then deputy secretary of defense, James Douglas . This school was opened by Douglas, the then Deputy Secretary of Defense .
 The Green Berets of Vietnam fame were born there and shortly thereafter were ready to begin their long march to Saigon . They were born on the site .
 Similar clandestine camps were rushed into being in Panama, Guatemala, and Nicaragua for the brigade of Cuban exiles, along with other training sites in Miami, at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida .
 Aircraft of various types were brought in from CIA assets all over the world, as were CAT pilots . CAT pilots were also involved in the mission .
 The old, reliable Filipino clandestine experts joined the underground teams . The old and reliable Philippine clandestine experts have joined the clandestine teams .
 In December 1960, President-elect Kennedy made a surprising announcement about the Vietnam War . Then, he announced that he was going to be the president of Vietnam .
 With this announcement, the stage was set for the 1960s—the decade in which hundreds of thousands of American fighting men would see action in the escalating war in Vietnam . The Vietnam War would be the first decade of the Vietnam War .
 With the election of John F Kennedy to the office of the President of the United States, there was an influx of new men into the higher appointive echelons of the government .
 McNamara’s Office of the Secretary of Defense and, from there, throughout the Pentagon. Nowhere was this change more pronounced than in McNamara's Office of Defense .
 It was said that there were more Phi Beta Kappas in that office than ever before . The Phi Beta Kappa president's office is said to be the largest in the country's history .
 The students overcame their lack of military experience and knowledge through study and dedication to their jobs . However, they overcame the lack of experience through study .
 "They learned from their environment, among the older and more stable bureaucrats," she says . "They learn from them," she adds .
 "They brought with them new ideas, new perspectives, and new goals," says President Obama . "Most important is that they brought new ideas and new perspectives," says Obama .
 The U.S. was involved in the Cold War and its greatest battlefield at that time, Indochina . Nowhere was this more evident than in their approach to the unconventional problems of that war and its great battlefield .
 They laid out long-range plans through the first four years . They clearly intended to be there for the second four, when their work would come to fruition . The first four of the years will be through, including the second two .
 As a businessman, he ran the Pentagon and the military establishment as a businessman would. He ran it as a businessman would. President Obama ran it, and it's a good businessman .
 Harvard professor had been a Harvard professor and had gone directly to a high position with the Ford Motor Company . He had been Harvard professor .
 Kennedy selected the president of the Ford Motor Company to be the secretary of defense . Much was made of the fact that Kennedy had selected Ford Motor Co. to be defense secretary .
 McNamara had been the president of Ford no more than a month when he was appointed . Few noted at the time that when McNamara came into the Pentagon as the appointee to the job, he had been president of the Ford administration .
 I was called to brief Mr McNamara on a military activity related to CIA operations on the second or third day he was in office . I was briefed on military activity in the days before he became president .
 As had been the custom under Mr Gates, I prepared a briefing paper on the subject . It was only two or three pages long, but it was only 2 or 3 pages long . Mr Gates has been criticised for his handling of the matter .
 Mr McNamara had read my brief paper, liked it, and wanted me to go back and write up the whole business . When I arrived, his executive officer — an old friend of mine — informed me of his interest in the project .
 Over the course of the rest of the day, I composed about twenty-five pages and returned them to the secretary’s office . Over the next few days, he composed about 25 pages of notes .
 I have thought of that small, introductory incident many times, and I recall that I had said to myself, That man is the secretary . That man was the secretary. That man, the secretary, was the president of the United States' first lady .
 If he wants long briefs loaded with statistics, instead of short summaries, he will never make it . He will never be able to make it if he wants to focus on statistics .
 JFK would rather discuss a serious matter with a roomful of friends than with the National Security Council or any of the other committees that proliferate in official D.C. Washington . JFK would have preferred to discuss the matter with his friends rather than the NSC or other committees .
 He had grown up as the son of the American ambassador to Great Britain . After all, he grew up as an American citizen of Britain .
 Since World War II he had been a member of Congress, first as a representative and then as a senator . He had been in Congress since 1945, serving as a congressman and senator .
 As the record shows, he was a voracious reader, and he involved himself in a broad spectrum of interests . He was a "voracious" reader and a "passionate reader," he said .
 His decisions concerning those projects created the tensions and pressures that brought about his sudden and untimely death . His decisions about those projects create the tension and pressures he died .
 Had Kennedy lived, America would not have become militarily involved in Vietnam . America's involvement in Vietnam would have been avoided .
 Had he lived, he would have been re-elected to a second term, his plans and goals would have reached fruition, he says .
 Only his assassination in Dallas on November 22, 1963, kept him from achieving those goals . His assassination was the only way he could achieve his goals .
 When he took office, he was confronted with the immediacy of the CIA’s plan to invade Cuba . The CIA planned to use a brigade of U.S.-trained Cuban exiles to attack Cuba .
 President Obama listened to two important briefings about the situation in Vietnam . He also listened to briefings on the country's security situation .
 President Eisenhower had told him that the Southeast Asian problem nation would be Laos . Vietnam was no place to become involved with American troops, he said .
 Edward G Lansdale has just returned from a long visit with Ngo Dinh Diem . The other Vietnam briefing came from Lansdale, who had just returned .
 Some believed Kennedy intended to make Lansdale the next ambassador to Saigon . Some of those who were at the briefing believed that Lansdale would be next ambassador .
 Almost everyone in the new administration was inclined to believe unconventional warfare was likely to be vitally important during the decade of the sixties, as we shall see . We shall see how unconventional warfare helped the U.S. in the 1960s and 1960s .
 Kennedy knew that the conflict in Southeast Asia had been instigated under the covert leadership of the World War II Office of Strategic Services and CIA on one side and by the Soviet KGB and the Chinese on the other .
 Khrushchev’s challenge was ominous, and Kennedy did not doubt that it focused on Cuba and Vietnam . Kennedy: "Khrrushchev's challenge is ominous" Kennedy: 'Khrushchev's threat was ominous'
 Even before the JFK inauguration, McNamara and a team of close associates moved into a suite of offices in the Pentagon . McNamara moved into the Pentagon before JFK's inauguration .
 McNamara attended the “Pre-Brief’s intelligence-report sessions every morning . McNamara was a member of the U.S. intelligence community .
 OSS and CIA on one side and the KGB, with Chinese assistance, on the other, all led to the inevitable Americanization of the war . Four major steps in this development of conflict in Southeast Asia were taken by the OSS, CIA and KGB, all leading to the American
 The first step along this Cold War trail had begun in September 1945, the month that the Japanese surrendered to end World War II, with that shipment of arms and other war materiel . One-half of that had been scheduled to have been used by American troops during the invasion of Japan
 American OSS team turned them over to Ho Chi Minh and his military commander, Col. Col. Gen. Ho-Chi Minh . Ho-Minh's military commander turned the OSS over to the Vietnamese .
 "None of us were able to discover, during these early McNamara sessions, who had made that decision in 1944 or 1945," says McNamara .
 It was an enormously important decision at the time and had monumental impact on the development of the Cold War over the next thirty years . The decision was made by the U.S. State Department in 1961 .
 During the next decades, the Vietminh would become a truly formidable foe . During those years, the Vietnamese government would be a formidable force .
 The Vietminh defeated a full array of American military power, including an army of as many as 550,000 men . In the process, they destroyed more than five thousand U.S. helicopters . One thing we should have learned from that costly experience in Vietnam was that the Viet
 With no air force or navy, the Vietminh proved tough enough to outlast both the U.S. Seventh Fleet and the mighty United States Seventh Fleet . Vietnam was equipped with everything from fighter-bombers and U-2 reconnaissance aircraft to strategic bombers .
 They took all we could muster, short of nuclear weapons, including the horrendous Christmas 1972 bombing of Hanoi, and survived to hoist their own flag over Saigon . They took the country's best weapons short of nukes, including those bombed in 1972, but survived .
 This tragic debacle of U.S. arms brought to mind the words spoken by Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "This tragedy of American arms brought me to think of Sen. Cruz .
 Step number two was an amazing operation, unnoticed by almost everyone on the new Kennedy team . Step number one was the amazing operation to take place in the Kennedy Center .
 During the mid-fifties, more than 215,000 half-terrorized Tonkinese natives had been flown to South Vietnam . 660,000 more had been transported there by sea with the U.S. Navy .
 This horde of destitute people flooded the south and began to take over villages, jobs, the police organization, the army, and many of the top jobs in the new Diem government . Many of the most important jobs in Diem's government were in the army .
 Diem ordered the civic action teams and the army commanders to work together on a “pacification” campaign . Diem: The civic teams and army commanders are working together on the ‘pacification campaign .
 Catholic invaders were often the main beneficiaries of the effort . As a result, the immediate beneficiaries of this effort were, more often, the northern Catholic invaders .
 The “enemy,” as often as not, turned out to be the southern natives, while the government was augmented by the Catholic invaders . This situation, as was intended, created the matrix of war, as well as the enemy .
 Between 1955 and 1960 this inflammatory situation became worse every year, and it was exacerbated by steps three and four, to follow . The inflammatory situation in the U.S. became worse each year, according to reports .
 The third step came when Diem ordered the French to turn over any government positions they held and leave the country . The French were ordered to leave their government positions and leave their country .
 This order destroyed the effective, but fragile, constabulary system, and in a short time there was no law and order in the new country . This order destroys the effective but fragile system, says the author .
 A second edict directed the Chinese to leave, on the assumption, it said, that they were Communists or Communist sympathizers . A third edict was issued, the Chinese were ordered to leave the country .
 This had a destructive impact on the economic system, as mentioned earlier . This had to be seen as a destructive effect on the global economy .
 They purchased the rice, other crops, lumber, etc. and provided money and the necessities of life for the village . The village provided money for the villagers .
 This simple, basic village-oriented economic system had kept a most effective political system alive for centuries . This simple economic system has kept a village-based political system in existence for centuries.
 Diem was so inexperienced and so poorly advised that each time he came out with new orders, the situation worsened . The situation worsened each time Diem came out of new orders .
 In villages where the council form of government had existed for centuries and was the supreme political authority, Diem abolished all elections in June 1956 . In villages that had been ruled by the council of government, elections were abolished in 1956 . Diem's government was abolished in villages where council form
 These errors tended to help thrust the northern Catholics into positions above the local people . These errors helped thrust the . Catholics into . positions above . local people.
 As we have said earlier, the natives of southern Vietnam were rapidly being made into an enemy, known as the Vietcong . The natives were rapidly becoming an enemy of the enemy .
 The troubles that had been created by Diem’s edicts played directly into the hands of the Vietminh . Diem's edicts were created by his edicts . The troubles he had created by the edicts led to the collapse of the country .
 If anything, the Vietminh were the greatest beneficiaries of this terrible situation . Vietnam is the greatest beneficiary of the terrible situation, says CNN's John Sutter . Vietnam's government has been accused of corruption .
 The CIA was ready by 1960 to come out into the open in what was known as “the war to save South Vietnam and all of Southeast Asia” from the onrush of communism . Khrushchev had vowed to fight the type of “war of national liberation”
 This Cold War intrigue, abetted by ‘domino theory, was ready to pay off with its first series of moves, which would eventually put hundreds of billions of dollars into the pockets of the military-industrial complex of the world .
 The CIA’s first major operational plan involved the movement of a U.S. Marine Corps squadron of twenty H-19 Sikorsky helicopters from Udorn, Thailand, to the vicinity of Saigon .
 In doing so it ignored the restrictive terms of the 1954 Geneva Agreement . It introduced a major unit of modem equipment into South Vietnam . It ignored the restrictions of the Geneva Agreement in 1954 .
 In retrospect, it may seem unbelievable that somewhere in Vietnam lie the rusting hulks of five thousand helicopters lost by U.S. forces . Most of the helicopters were lost after Kennedy’s death in 1963 .
 This was a stark tribute to one of the most foolhardy chapters in the long history of warfare . It was the most foolish chapter in the history of the British Empire .
 The loss of five thousand helicopters with crews and passengers makes the “Charge of the Light Brigade,” with all of its tragic overtones, seem like a rainy day by comparison .
 The massive deployment of helicopters in Vietnam was spawned by a secretary of defense who preached "cost-effectiveness" while his department practiced utter waste . The helicopter itself is a symbol of that war .
 It is scarcely conceivable that so little tactical effectiveness, across the board, could have been achieved at so horrendous and staggering a cost . The cost of the World Cup was so high that it has been a 'staggering and horrendous' cost .
 Helicopter is the symbol of waste, mindlessness, and extravagance, says author . Helicopter has to stand head and shoulders above all others as symbol of wasteful and wasteful war .
 Moshe Dayan went to Vietnam as an observer and writer during the war . The famous Israeli general led his forces in a dash across the Sinai in the 1967 war against the Egyptians .
 General Dayan went out into the battle zones with U.S. troops and studied the combat he found there . No stranger to Vietnam, Dayan visited the battle zone with United States troops .
 The general made his conclusion clear that his “lightning war” tactics would not work in Vietnam . “Helicopters may be first-class equipment, but the way they are being used in Vietnam, they are wasted,” he said .
 Using a very conservative approach, we can estimate that the loss of five thousand helicopters resulted in no fewer than fifteen thousand to twenty thousand deaths, based on average crew size and taking into account that many helicopters were lost on the ground, and many others were destroyed without loss of life . Many
 A great number were destroyed with a full crew and a load of American troops . Yet a great number of American forces were destroyed .
 Even if the lower figure of 15,000 is accepted, it represents a little less than one-third of all American fatalities in Vietnam .
 Many of these helicopter and human losses were operational, but a surprising proportion of them were nonoperational . The vehicles just crashed by themselves, without enemy action . The U.S. military says it has lost many of the most of its most recent operations .
 It's entirely possible that the helicopter was instrumental in creating a situation that had much to do with the unfortunate and unnecessary escalation of the war . Not only was the helicopter a tragic and costly adjunct to an altogether tragic, costly war .
 By all standards, the demand for manpower to support helicopter operations proved massive . Helicopter operations proved to be the biggest challenge in the military's history .
 Helicopters sent to Vietnam in 1960 for what had appeared to be a noncombatant role resulted in the broad exposure of Americans to hostile fire . Americans were exposed in Vietnam for the first time in the 1960s .
 This whole helicopter saga had begun with a brief telephone call from the deputy director of central intelligence to the Office of Special Operations in December 1960 . He sought to obtain the transfer of a squadron of U.S. Marine Corps helicopters from Udorn, Thailand, to Vietnam .
 This movement of “cover-unit”helicopters caused the displacement of the first few pebbles that became a major avalanche in South Vietnam . The avalanche was caused by the movement of "cover-units" helicopters .
 It should be noted that this initial call in 1960 from the deputy director of central intelligence, Gen. Gen. John Eisenhower, was made by Gen. Eisenhower in 1960 .
 First National Bank of Boston arranged for Textron Corporation to acquire Bell Helicopter Company . Textron acquired the Bell helicopter company from the First National bank .
 CIA arranged a meeting in the Pentagon in order for a vice president of the Boston bank to discuss Cold War uses of, and demand for, helicopters before it recommended the merger to Textron . The CIA had arranged the meeting in order to meet with Textron's vice president .
 Bell-built ‘Huey’ helicopter became the most-used helicopter in Vietnam . It was the most used helicopter in the country's history .
 In earlier days, these old Sikorsky helicopters had been used to provide transportation for the indigenous security forces of the Saigon government . They would range over the villages of the lush rice-growing country of the southernmost Camau Peninsula .
 At that time, rioting and banditry had broken out because the Chinese brokerage system had collapsed . Rioting and bandits broke out because of the collapse of the country's brokerage system .
 "This had nothing whatsoever to do with the Vietminh, the Vietcong, or communism," he says . "This is not a problem. This is a problem," he adds .
 These were simply desperate people deprived of food and water by the removal of the Chinese. The Chinese were simply deprived of water and food and electricity .
 CIA helicopters were used in an attempt to suppress a “violent” situation . Thus, the CIA’s helicopters were . used in a ‘violent’ situation . The CIA helicopter was used by the CIA in an effort to suppress the situation .
 American advisory personnel flew the helicopters, and American ‘civilians’ maintained them . The helicopters were flown by U.S. advisory personnel and maintained by the U.N.
 It is worthwhile to note how fundamentally important an offshoot of this action became . It was important to remember how important it was to take part in the action .
 These villages were surrounded by water, but the water was brackish and undrinkable . These villages are surrounded by brack water .
 Huge earthen jars, passed down from generation to generation, were used to store fresh water . As a result, huge jars were passed down to generations of people .
 During dry periods these jars were replenished by shipments delivered by the same Chinese-owned sampans that came at harvest time to pick up the rice .
 Diem’s police machine-gunned these lifesaving earthen jars in the so-called Communist villages . Working with the brutal logic of the ignorant, Diem's police machine gunned them down .
 Villagers became maddened by the lack of potable water and by the tragedy of their situation . From this time on, these villagers became . maddening by the . lack of water and the . tragedy of the situation .
 Tens of thousands of these terrorized and desperate people became homeless migrants, called “Vietcong” and subversives, in their own homeland . They were terrorized, desperate people who became refugees in Vietnam .
 Without intent and without choice, they fell upon residents of other villages that still had water and food . Without intent or choice, the villagers fell upon others who still had food and water . They fell upon other villages without intent .
 The CIA had been working for 15 years to bring this struggle to the point where American forces would have to become involved . The CIA was working to bring the struggle to a point where the U.S. forces would become involved, bringing all their expensive military equipment .
 It became tactically expedient to make use of these helicopters as a throttle on the pace of the war . It became 'tactical expedient' to use these helicopters to throttle the pace on the war, says the author .
 Whenever villages were attacked, “insurgency” flared up among the people . Whenever villages attacked, the people would see an increase in the violence .
 This created an active “enemy” and gave the new Diem Self Defense Force units, and the new army and its Philippines-trained elite units, plenty of action . The new army has been trained by the Philippines, with many of its elite units trained in China .
 From this modest and ostensibly innocent beginning, the U.S. followed up by sending helicopters by the thousands into Vietnam . From this humble start, the United States followed up with sending helicopters .
 McNamara created Combat Development Test Centers in Vietnam to study firsthand how the war should be waged . The test centers were created in 1961 to study the war's effectiveness .
 A wild, carefree helicopter sweep was more thrilling than a motorcycle race along the California oceanside, and ten times as hell-raising . A wild helicopter sweep is more thrilling .
 American and Vietnamese gunners armed with automatic weapons sprayed indiscriminate barrages into villages and forest havens from one end of the country to the other . U.S. and Vietnam gunners sprayed indiscriminately .
 When more action was desired, they dropped napalm to set the flimsy huts of the villages on fire . The villages were set ablaze by napalm .
 It was at this time that Agent Orange was introduced as a military weapon . Agent Orange has since been banned from being used as a weapon .
 McNamara’s ‘Whiz Kids’ defoliated the jungles of Vietnam so that the gunners in the helicopters could better seek out their targets, that is, those Vietnamese who ran away as the helicopters approached .
 Helicopter crews dashed out on missions, little knowing where they were going or what they would find when they got there . Helicopter teams dashed out to find out what to do when they arrived .
 Those were the days of deadly ambushes of American helicopters and of blind attacks upon any target . Those days were days when the U.S. helicopters were ambushed . Now, they are ambushed by the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Because of the helicopter’s slow speed and vulnerability, the crews soon learned how costly a 55-mph flight at gun-range altitude could be . The helicopter's speed is slow, and the crew learned how much it cost to fly .
 They abandoned higher-altitude flights and resorted to very low level “nap of the earth” tactics . The U.S. Air Force is now using low-level ‘nap-of-the-earth’ tactics .
 This put the odds in their favor, because they were able to reduce their exposure time if they remained consistently below treetop level over the rice fields . This put them in the best position, as they could reduce exposure time by staying low over the fields . The odds in the odds
 The tactic generally paid off, except for chance encounters with wily ground teams . The tactic usually pays off, but it can't be repeated .
 The battle-wise bandits found a way to turn this tactic to their favor . For a while, losses were cut, but then the bandits turned this tactic into a victory .
 The combat helicopter of the 1960-66 period was overtaxed when it had to fly two hundred miles in a round-trip with any more than ten passengers and their military equipment . The helicopter of that era was overt taxed when it was flying two hundred .
 The bandits learned that if they struck a target village in order to set up a helicopter counterattack less than sixty or seventy miles from the helicopter base, they would allow the helicopter pilots discretion to fly a deceptive and devious flight path to the target, providing the helicopters with a margin of
 When they attacked a target that was eighty to one hundred miles from the helicopter base, the pilots were forced to fly a more nearly straight-line flight path at low-altitude, “nap of the earth” levels to the target and back .
 In such situations, it was much more feasible for the bandits to set up an ambush . In such cases, the bandits would have been able to get away from each other .
 They knew where the helicopter base was, and they had the option to attack any village they wanted in order to set up a situation that would lure a helicopter response . They had the choice of attacking villages they wanted to attack, but not any villages .
 By observing the preparatory action at the base, they could alert the ambush parties by radio that the helicopters were en route . They could alert them by radio to the ambush party by radio .
 Teams of natives equipped with any weapons they could find would lie in the tall grass in fields along the intended flight path of the massed helicopters . Teams would lay weapons in the grass along the flight path .
 One of their most effective tactics involved the use of a bow and arrow barrage . One of the most successful tactics involved using a bow-and-arrow barrage .
 These archers had none of the style and color of Robin Hood, but they were just as lethal as Robin Hood . The archers were not Robin Hood archers, but were more lethal .
 They would lay upon their backs in the fields with crude, heavy bows across their feet, upraised to the aerial target . The men would lay on their backs with crude bows across the feet . They would lie on their back with crude arrows aimed at the target .
 When helicopters approached, they would load their bows with heavy, clublike projectiles . The projectiles were fastened to twine, wire, rope, or vines . When the helicopter approached, the men would load the projectiles .
 The air would be filled with trash, which would catch in the rotor blades, bringing down as many as fifteen helicopters at one time . Helicopter operators would be able to bring down up to 15 helicopters at once .
 As the years passed and escalation of the war took place, more and more airfields were built and covered with helicopters . More and more of the airfields have been built in the years of war .
 The battle helicopter ‘gunships’ were developed, and these aircraft, bristling with machine guns and rockets, gave better than they received . These aircraft were developed in the 1930s and 1940s . They were the first battle helicopter "gunships"
 This situation gave rise to the next level of enemy tactical measures to prey upon the ever-lucrative helicopter target . The situation gives rise to a new level of tactical measures, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To these homeless men in the bush, the helicopter was still the best and most worthwhile target . The helicopter is still the most important target for the homeless men .
 This was just the type of target that a small, stealthy band could attack, hit and mn, with little fear of loss and great expectation of spectacular results . This is just the kind of target you could attack with little .
 With great care and stealth, the enemy moved mortars and short-range rockets close to the airfields . The airfields were attacked by the enemy with great care, stealth and great care .
 Without warning, a wild barrage of weaponry would descend from the sky, and large numbers of sitting-duck helicopters would be lost . The U.S. military says it has never seen such a large number of helicopters lost .
 Total helicopter losses have climbed into the thousands in recent years . Helicopter losses have now reached thousands .
 "The primary objective of guerrilla forces in this type of warfare is not to become involved in major battles but to keep hitting the enemy where he is most vulnerable, to make him bleed to death," says the Taliban .
 The objective of the Communists in Southeast Asia was to see the U.S. sacrifice men and money in tremendous quantities while they themselves gave up little money and no men . Vietnam was the ideal situation for the Communists, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Kremlin didn't want to see Asians die along with Americans, it says . It bothered the Kremlin not at all to see Americans die, it's said .
 In fact, as long as the war continued, the Soviets won on a relative basis over Asians and Americans at the same time . The Soviets won in the war on relative terms, even though the Soviets were losing relative terms .
 The war in Indochina was a classic example of how this modern concept of “war by attrition” could prove successful . The war by attrition is a modern idea of how modern warfare can be won by attrition .
 The Indochinese were the innocent victims in this struggle, because their homeland had been chosen as the battleground for this impossible contest . The battle earned more than $500 billion for the military-industrial power elite . Indochina was the innocent victim of this struggle .
 The helicopter war exemplified the success of this guerrilla strategy, both from the Pentagon’s point of view and from that of the detached, chess-playing men in the Kremlin, who understood that you must give up a little to win a lot .
 The good and the glory, if any, were seen at the top; the cost and the tragedy were submerged . The cost and tragedy were also submerged in the tragedy .
 Statistics are not always always the best resort, but they serve a useful purpose . Statistics are a useful tool for people who want to know more about their history .
 A helicopter-augmented war machine would churn out big dollars . Those statistics forecast that the helicopter-powered war machine will churn out huge dollars .
 For many, many years, all military helicopter operators in the army, air force, and marines had attempted to maintain their ungainly machines at a 50 percent or better “in-commission” rate .
 This means that, at that time, one out of every two helicopters on hand, was expected to be flyable . This was the case at the time, when helicopters were flying out of control .
 The army, for example, for years plugged away at a 49 percent rate and strived for better . The army's rate is 49 percent .
 A great number of helicopters in the field were factory-new, making it nearly certain they would be in commission . Such a rate was affected by many factors and would most likely have been lower than 49 percent .
 Newer models may have exceeded this rate for brief periods, but then their high support costs created problems of their own . High support costs have also created problems for some models .
 The significance of this 50 percent in-commission rate is felt most when evaluated in terms of operational factors . The significance was felt most by the operational factors, according to the report .
 To move one hundred men one hundred miles in one day at the rate of ten men per helicopter actually took twenty helicopters . For example, to move one 100 miles one day took 20 helicopters . The U.S. military says it takes up to 20 helicopters a day .
 50 percent, or ten helicopters, would not be available at any given time . This ensured that ten would be ready to perform that job, because 50 percent was not available .
 In the typical Vietnamese tactical situation, it was no more than one hundred miles to the operational site, and then another 100 miles back, and there was no fuel at that base in the hostile zone .
 Moving one hundred men two hundred miles in one day for a mission at midpoint took twenty helicopters . As a result of the mission, moving 100 miles in a day took 20 helicopters . The mission was a mission of two hundred men .
 Two or more of these squadrons required supply and maintenance units of an additional two hundred men each . The food, housing, and fuel elements essential to support their operations .
 A base with forty helicopters and close to one thousand operational, medical, headquarters, and support personnel required a base with 40 helicopters . The base also required housing, food, fuel services, transportation, and transportation, not including housing .
 Between 1960 and 1962, when the U.S. military advisory strength in South Vietnam was limited to 16,000 men, Gen. Gen. David Perry was in charge of U.N. forces in Vietnam .
 Paul Harkins complained bitterly that with a ceiling of 16,000 men, he could get only 1,200-1,600 effective combat advisers . Most of the rest were confined to logistical support work, he said .
 An analysis of the Harkins complaint led to the Okanagan study of helicopter operations in Vietnam . Earle Wheeler, then director of the Joint Staff, was at the time . Wheeler was at that time .
 The study revealed that a major segment of the oversized logistics contingent was directly involved in the support of helicopters that General Harkins himself had requested, little realizing the resultant burden of his action .
 Most of the helicopters in Vietnam were assigned not to the army but to the CIA . Much of the maintenance was being performed by highly paid contract civilians .
 The helicopter mushroom mushroom grew, and it generated greater demands of its own . It was the first helicopter mushroom to be seen in the world .
 "noncombatant" U.S. military personnel are needed to protect the nation from terrorism . The United States has had a heavy demand for non-combatant military personnel .
 The perimeter guard elements were sparsely positioned and were immobilized by the nature of their task . They became centers of little wars of their own, thus heating up the intensity of combat throughout the land .
 As opposition increased, helicopter formations were seeded with gun-carrying helicopters . Helicopter formations became more sophisticated .
 The ratio of men carried, per aircraft per mile, dropped. Because the gunships carried no combat troops at . ah, the ratio of man carried per mile dropped .
 The cost per man transported, related to the number of helicopters per mission, has skyrocketed again . With this, the cost of transporting the men has also skyrocketed .
 There is much that can be said in support of the tactical employment of the helicopter in warfare . The helicopter is the most powerful weapon in the field of warfare in modern warfare .
 There are very few missions of such high priority that they can best and most profitably be performed at the cost that helicopters incur . But there are few missions that can be done at such a high cost .
 "We have not scratched the surface. We have noted the loss of five thousand helicopters, the . loss of fifteen thousand or more American lives, and the loss . of not less than $1 billion in direct cost," he says .
 The helicopter is one of the most costly vehicles to maintain and operate of any device ever built . In South Vietnam the cost per hour of civilian maintenance and facilities was without equal .
 The helicopter is a voracious consumer of engines, rotors, and spare parts . It had to be airlifted from the United States, halfway around the world, to the helicopter .
 Large numbers of helicopters must be gathered onto major airfields in order that supplies, fuel, and other services may be brought to them efficiently . Helicopter can land in a space roughly equal to its own length, but large numbers of choppers are needed to land at major airports . Helic
 The vast number and expense of helicopter airfields must be added to all the above . Helicopter airfields are a key part of the problem .
 All helicopter crews must be specially trained to carry out helicopter operations . But these men (and now women) cannot be used for helicopter operations.
 All of these helicopter-related requirements cost heavily in men, money, and material things . Helicopter-related issues cost men and money .
 The helicopter was found to be the biggest contributor to both cost and attrition on each side . The measure of victory and defeat must be measured in terms of the cost of the war .
 The Russians, the Chinese, the North Vietnamese, and the Vietcong never had to contend with anything like it on their side . In retrospect, we discovered that the Russians and the Chinese had never faced anything like this .
 Imagine the havoc and devastation that could have occurred if a real, first-class enemy had been able to mount effective air attacks on those airfields where the helicopters were massed .
 We could not have justified having created such targets in the first place in the face of sophisticated opposition. We could never have justified creating such targets. We are not justified having such targets created in the .
 The copters were introduced by the CIA and used by the agency to cause the escalation of the war . The CIA introduced the copters and used them to cause escalation in the war.
 Once the pattern had been set, military commanders who came later, in 1965 and thereafter, were caught in a tactical bind they could not break . The pattern was set, and it was not changed until 1965, when the war began .
 Many blame Kennedy for the escalation of Vietnam conflict on him . Kennedy was president of the U.S. during the early 1960s .
 As I have shown above, there was a ceiling of 16,000 personnel during the 1960-62 years . There was also a ceiling in the 1960/62 years when the RAF was at full strength .
 General Harkins complained about the few combat-effective men he had available . Only 1,200 to 1,600 of the 16,000 personnel in Vietnam were in that category . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 The rest, more than 14,000, were support troops, and most of them for helicopter support . The rest of the troops are support troops . Most of the support troops were in helicopters .
 This was a relatively small number of combat troops . The overall total rose to 550,000 within the decade . The number of troops in the U.S. rose to more than 500,000 .
 Kennedy objective was announced scarcely one month before his untimely death . That was the carefully planned Kennedy objective announced scarcely a month before he died .
 It was not until President Johnson had signed NSAM #273 on November 26, 1963, that the course of the Kennedy plan began to be changed, and this trend became most apparent with the publication of #288 in March 1964 . This trend was most apparent when it was published in March
 The directed escalation of the war began under Johnson, as we shall see . Johnson's war on the Vietnam War began under the Johnson administration .
 Had Kennedy lived, all the madness that happened in Vietnam after 1964 would not have taken place . Kennedy would have died in 1964 .
 President Kennedy vowed to bring one thousand Americans home from Vietnam by Christmas 1963 . President Kennedy had vowed to have all U.S. personnel out of Vietnam by the end of 1965 .
 Kennedy’s death brought about a total reversal of that carefully structured White House policy and that sincere promise to the American people . Kennedy's death brings about a complete reversal of the carefully structured policy .
 One of the BITTEREST electoral battles of the century was fought in 1960 . The CIA in the Days of Camelot was a key CIA operation in the 1960s .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy of Massachusetts was elected President over the incumbent vice president, Richard Milhous Nixon . Kennedy was elected president of the United States in 1964 .
 For Nixon and his longtime backers, the defeat on November 8 proved staggering and unexpected . Nixon and longtime backersin and out of government, the loss proved staggering .
 They had many concrete plans for the next four years, and their dreams had been deflated by that “half-a-vote-per-precinct” loss . “Half a vote’s per cent’ loss.”
 Nixon wrote one of the most unusual articles ever published for the millions of readers of Reader’s Digest . Under the title “Cuba, Castro and John F Kennedy,” the article appeared in the November 1964 issue of Reader's Digest .
 Nixon had been Dwight Eisenhower’s vice president during the 1950s . Before that, going back to 1947, he had served in both the House and the Senate .
 He knew Washington well, and knew the great industrial, legal, and banking combines that are so closely enmeshed with the government . He knew D.C. well .
 Fidel Castro 3. the death of the President, John F Kennedy 4. the alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald is accused of being the assassin of President Kennedy . Oswald was accused of killing JFK JFK in 1963 .
 He wrote almost nothing about the growing warfare in Southeast Asia . He knew very well that it had been under way since 1945, when a vast shipment of American arms was put in the hands of Ho Chi Minh .
 Nixon’s article was published just one month after the release of the report of the Warren Commission, which made public the incredible finding that Lee Harvey Oswald, acting alone, had been responsible for the death of John F Kennedy .
 It is worth noting that a member of the Warren Commission also wrote an identical finding before the report was published . It is not the first time the report has been published .
 Gerald R Ford’s article “Piecing Together the Evidence” appeared in Life magazine on October 2, 1964, before the Warren Report came out . Ford: "Piecing together the evidence"
 Presidents of both sides put on the record as soon as they could and before the official publication of the Warren Commission Report, they supported the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin .
 Anyone with a few minutes of spare time can prove that Lee Harvey Oswald was not the lone assassin . Oswald was the sole assassin of the July 4,1919, assassination .
 It has been established that Nixon was in Dallas on the day, and at the exact time, that JFK was shot—12:30 P.M., Central Standard Time, November 22, 1963 . Nixon was reportedly in Dallas at the time of the shooting .
 A man ran over from the street comer and said that the President had just been shot in Dallas, Texas . We were waiting for a light to change when a man ran . A man said that President Obama was shot in a Dallas suburb .
 I rolled down the cab window to ask what the matter was and when she saw my face she turned even paler . When she saw her face, she turned paler, she said: 'I don't know what it's like to see your face.'
 Nixon's version of that day is not the end of that busy day . This time a woman told him the news .
 Nixon covered up the important fact that he had been in Dallas at the very time Kennedy was killed with that erroneous recollection which he included in the Reader's Digest article .
 It is uncanny that he so positively linked Cuba, Castro, Oswald, and Kennedy, while completely omitting other important events . "It's uncanny that [Kennedy] completely omits important events," he said .
 JFK’s ascendance to power was a much more ominous transition than many have understood . The CIA's role in the warfare in Southeast Asia is at the threshold of the Kennedy era . JFK's rise to power in the 1960s was more ominous than many understood .
 Castro and the Cuban situation in 1960 were the major foreign policy issues during the Nixon-Kennedy campaign . Nixon had made them so, principally because he had made it so .
 On March 17, 1960, President Eisenhower approved a modest CIA proposal for “A Program of Covert Action Against the Castro Regime” The proposal was approved by the Special Group .
 As an ex-officio member, Vice President Nixon was almost always present at these meetings .
 Nixon not only knew of the President’s approval but, as vice president, was one of the prime movers of that top-secret CIA project . Nixon also knew of approval of the project and knew of his involvement .
 During the campaign, this inside awareness of a highly classified CIA operation created a cruel dilemma for Nixon . Nixon faced a difficult choice: whether to keep the operation secret or not .
 Both Democratic and Republican headquarters knew, as they approached the fourth television debate of that campaign, that the presidential race was neck and neck . The debate was the fourth of the presidential debates in 2008 .
 Kennedy attack had been released in time to appear in the afternoon papers, before the television debate went on the air .
 Each candidate was battling with all guns blazing; as in love and war, there are no limits in a political contest . Each candidate battled with all . guns blazing .
 He should have known that after that very same American Legion convention, he had easily been outfoxed by Jack Kennedy . Jack Kennedy was easily fooled by the American Legion .
 Kennedy proved his wide knowledge of this CIA project by his comments during the 1960 TV debates and during the progression of events that followed . Kennedy proved that he knew about the CIA project in the 1960s .
 Top-ranking Cuban exile leaders flew to Washington for strategy meeting . Some of the Cuban exile community had been on the platform with Nixon at the convention .
 Right in the private confines of Senator Kennedy’s Capitol Hill office . Senator Kennedy's office is located on Capitol Hill .
 He made himself aware of all that was going on in that top-secret CIA program . When the time came to fire the big guns, during the fourth television debate, he did .
 His handling of this major issue was so effective that he won the television debate handily and then won the closest presidential election in history over the outgunned Nixon .
 Most old-line bureaucrats know that the time to make huge gains is during that ‘lame duck’ period . The election in November and the inauguration of the new President in January is a time to gain huge gains .
 At no time is this gambit more opportune than at the end of an eight-year presidential cycle . The gambit would be more likely than at no time when the election cycle is over .
 The CIA and its bureaucratic allies in key government positions made some telling moves that, retrospect, show how astute they had read the presidential tea leaves . The CIA, the CIA and others in government positions, were astutely read the president's tea leaves and acted accordingly .
 Eisenhower had approved the CIA "Cuban exile" proposal . Eisenhower had one thing in mind when he approved it, he said .
 Since the Castro takeover on January 1, 1959, tens of thousands of Cubans had fled the island .
 Ike’s view was that the best way to provide for refugees was to put them in the army or in an army-type environment . The refugees would get food, clothing, and shelter while they became oriented to the American way of life . Ike: In Ike's view,
 President Obama approved a plan to put thousands of them into an “army’s training program .
 Preparations have already been made for the development of an adequate paramilitary force outside of Cuba . Preparations are already being made to develop a paramilitary force in the country .
 Initially a cadre of leaders will be recruited after careful screening . They will be trained as paramilitary instructors . Initially, they will be part of a group of leaders .
 In a second phase paramilitary cadres will be trained at secure locations outside of the United States . They will be available for immediate deployment into Cuba to organize, train and lead resistance forces recruited there .
 The creation of this capability will require a minimum of six months and probably closer to eight . The creation will need to be six months or more .
 In the meantime, a limited air capability to resupply and for infiltration and exfiltration already exists under CIA control . The CIA can easily expand if and when the situation requires .
 Within two months it hopes to parallel this with a small air supply capability under deep cover as a commercial operation in another country .
 This is precisely how the CIA presented its proposal, and this is the way such clandestine operations generally begin . This is the case of the CIA, which has a history of clandestine operations .
 At the time of approval, the President believed the concept of paramilitary action was to be limited to the recruitment of Cuban exile leaders and to the training of paramilitary cadres of exiles .
 Let no one be misled into believing President Eisenhower approved an invasion by a handful of Cuban refugees . Not the man who had led the massive and successful Normandy invasion on June 6, 1944 .
 When this Cuban exile program was initiated, the CIA and its allies in the military had prepared a curriculum . The curriculum provided background information on Cold War techniques .
 We Americans are not very well acquainted with this type of organization because we have not experienced it in our own country. Paramilitary Organizations: We Americans have not seen it in their own country . Paramilitary organizations: We are very well aware of this .
 The members accept at least some measure of discipline, and have military organization . They may carry light weapons, and may carry some light weapons .
 In Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s the parties of the right and the Communists had such organizations with membership in the hundreds of thousands . In Germany, in the 1930s and 1930s, such organizations were in the thousands of people .
 It is readily apparent what a force this can be in the political life of a country, particularly if paramilitary forces are armed . The supremacy of the army itself may be threatened by the paramilitary forces, writes David Cameron .
 The CIA recruited three hundred Cuban exiles for covert training outside the United States . The White House Special Group, which included Nixon, authorized the operation .
 CIA began in accordance with NSC directives to come to the military for support . As with most such programs, the CIA came to the NSC for support, the program began .
 An inactive U.S. military base in Panama, Fort Gulick, was selected as the initial training site .
 The CIA put together a small unit to reactivate the base and provide paramilitary training that the agency employs for similar units at certain military-covered facilities in the U.S.
 President Eisenhower was winding up his eight-year term in office when the CIA-Cuban exile program took place . It must be understood that these events were taking place while he was in office .
 Eisenhower had had high hopes for his Crusade for Peace, based upon a successful summit conference in Paris during May 1960, and for a grand visit with Khrushchev . Eisenhower had hoped for a postsummit invitation to Moscow for a post-war visit .
 The visit to the Soviet Union was to cap his many triumphant tours of other countries . Ike had drawn crowds of more than one million in other countries, where crowds of over one million attended .
 White House directed all aerial surveillance activity of Communist territory to cease until further notice . No U.S. military personnel were to become involved in any combat activities during that period .
 Cuban exile training facility began cautiously because of restrictions on Cuba . The Cuban exile facility is a training facility in the Cuban exile .
 Aircraft that had been ordered for a Cuban exile air force were being processed under the terms of an Air Force contract . Aircraft that was ordered for the Cuban exile Air Force air force was being processed .
 In the Far East, an enormous overflight program that had been delivering vital food, medicine, weapons, and ammunition to the Khamba tribesmen in the far Himalayas of Tibet was curtailed . In Tibet, the program delivered vital food and medicine, and weapons, to the
 A U-2 spy plane flown by Francis Gary Powers left Pakistan on May 1, 1960, on a straightline overflight of the Soviet Union . The plane was en route to Norway, contrary to Eisenhower orders .
 This incident destroyed the effectiveness of the summit conference and brought about the cancellation of the invitation to President Eisenhower to visit Moscow . President Eisenhower's visit to Moscow was cancelled .
 Richard Bissell, deputy director of plans for the CIA, was the man who ran the U-2 program and who, ostensibly, sent the Powers flight over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960 . Bissell was in charge of the Cuban exile program .
 Through this crescendo of events, the CIA kept the pressure on Vietnam and moved the Cuban exile project along . The CIA kept pressure on the Vietnamese government and kept the project alive .
 On August 18, 1960, the President and a few members of his cabinet were briefed by the CIA on these developments . A budget of $13 million was approved for the CIA .
 Military personnel and equipment were made available for the CIA’s use .
 Those familiar with day-to-day developments noted a change . The plan was devised after Kennedy’s election seemed to be the same as the original one .
 A number of Cuban overflights had been flown, usually in Air AmericaC-46 or C-54 transport aircraft .
 They were scheduled to hit selected drop-zone targets at night, based on signals from the ground . The U.S. Air Force says it is targeting targets based on ground signals .
 There were a number of over-the-beach landings from U.S. Navy ships that targeted sugar refineries, petroleum storage sites, and other prime targets .
 The CIA and Cuban exile leaders either underestimated or did not believe in the total effectiveness of Castro’s ‘block’ system . They could not get through its surveillance, they say, and they could not .
 Certain key CIA planners took advantage of the lame-duck administration to change the approved concept for the Cuban paramilitary operations . Faced with the reality of this situation, the CIA planners changed the concept .
 By midsummer, moves were designed to build a Cuban exile strike force to land on the Cuban coast . The Cuban exile strikes force is expected to land in mid-summer .
 The three-hundredman operation had grown to a three-thousand-man invasion . The operation was originally planned to be a three hundred-man operation .
 By June 1960, the CIA obtained a number of B-26 aircraft from the United States Air Force . Each modified with eight .50-caliber aerial-type machine guns in the nose section .
 World War II aircraft were aerodynamically ‘cleaner’ with fewer antennas and protrusions to slow them down, and hence faster than the original WWII models . Those planes were aerodynamicically “cleaner,” with fewer . antennas and other . protrus
 Many of these B-26s had been used by the CIA in the aborted Indonesian rebellion of 1958 . They were moved from Far East hideaways for use by the Cuban exiles .
 The CIA had already consolidated its rather considerable covert air apparatus from air bases in Europe and Asia to a semisecret facility on Eglin Air Force Base .
 CIA made a deal with president of Guatemala to begin the improvement of a small airport at Retalhuleu in western Guatemala . Air force was being assembled at modification facility in Arizona and an operations base in Florida .
 By summer 1960, around-the-clock construction was under way, under the management of a “nonexistent” firm known as the Cornwall-Thompson Company .
 A large assembly of C-46s and C-54s from Air America, along with the B-26s, took shape . All further training was keyed to the landing operation on Cuban soil .
 The CIA and its allies in the Pentagon took advantage of the political hiatus . While the Cuban program was being escalated, the CIA and allies in Washington took advantage .
 They had so many covert programs under way and so many more planned that they had to make some arrangements for an enormous increase in available manpower . They had to increase the number of covert operations under way .
 The National Security Council’s 5412/2 Committee approved the limited use of military personnel for Cuban training . The committee was empowered to direct covert operations .
 That approval opened the door to other cases and other clandestine operations, officials say . The operation was approved by the U.S. government, officials said .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles used to call “peacetime operations,” meaning clandestine operations . This is what he called ‘peacetimes operations’ and ‘secretaries’ .
 It is traditional that uniformed armed forces of one nation are not to be used in or against another nation, except in time of war, without some specific agreement, such as NATO .
 Up to 1960, as a result of the specific prohibitions of NSC 5412, the U.S. government honored this tradition, with very few exceptions, and limited the use of arms to specific actions . The United States limited arms use in the 1960s to only specific actions,
 The Bay of Pigs tactical plan did not include any reference to “air cover” to be provided by U.S. forces . This is one reason why the Bay of Pigeas tactical plan didn’t include air cover . This was one reason for the plan to
 Nations, and nationalism, survive because of the existence of the fragile structure called sovereignty . Nations and nationalism are fragile, but sovereignty is essential to nations' survival . Nations, nationalism, and sovereignty are fragile and fragile, says David Cameron .
 If sovereignty is not recognized by the entire family of nations, nationalism will crumble . The larger nations will devour smaller ones before the last act, when those left will begin to devour each other, like scorpions .
 To be truly sovereign, a state must not be limited by external authority or influence, says David Cameron . State must in no way be limited to external authority, he says .
 The United States is, in one way or another, under some degree of influence from other nations every day, and vice versa . The U.S. is under influence from every nation, including Russia, Iran and China .
 The fact of the existence of the H-bomb and its uncontrollable power denies sovereignty to all nations . The fact . of the . existence of . the . H-Bomb and its . uncontrollable . power deny sovereignty to . all nations, he said .
 A small country can boldly destroy a nuclear power plant in Iraq and a revolutionary camp in Tunisia, and demolish Lebanon, at will . This fact has eroded sovereignty to the point that a small country such as Israel, such a . small country, like Israel, can boldly . destroy a
 We have had the increasing use of military forces in nonmilitary roles, as in the indiscriminate carpet bombing of defenseless Cambodia . Thus, we have had to use military forces as well as military forces .
 The CIA has been the leading edge of this change, and by 1960, it saw a way to make elements of the military available to itself for its everincreasing “covert” operations .
 Of course, in this context the whole idea of ‘covert,” ‘clandestine,’ or ‘secret” operations became ridiculous . Of course the idea of "covert" and “clandestine” ops became ridiculous. Of course .
 Such operations could not be kept secret; they were called “secret” to avoid accounting for the vast sums of the “black” budget expended to support them . Such operations were used as a means of disciplining the media and any possible whistle-blowers . Such
 The first step in this move for military support was for the CIA to join with the Office of Special Operations . Lansdale and other CIA agents were assigned to rebuild and enlarge the army's Special Forces units .
 The army’s Special Forces units had been allowed to decline, and morale had deteriorated at Fort Bragg, sources say . The army had allowed the Special Forces to decline in the past .
 Lansdale found a way to bypass conventional U.S. Army channels to reinvigorate the army’s Special Forces with the help of the CIA and friends in the Defense and State departments . Lansdale was chief of the Saigon Military Mission .
 He won approval to activate a new Special Forces school and to increase the size of the Special Forces center at Fort Bragg . The school will be activated to train Special Forces personnel from foreign armies .
 He could not be sure of top-level U.S. Army approval and support for his bold plan, so he went around them . "I'm not sure of the Army approval," he says. "I could not go around them"
 Lansdale, his longtime associate Col. Col. Bob Lansdale died at the age of 92 . Lansdale was a longtime associate of the late Sen. Joe Biden, who died in 2008 .
 Sam Wilson, and this writer flew to the U.S. Army Civil Affairs and Military Government School at Fort Gordon, Georgia, in October 1960, for a meeting .
 Lansdale arranged to get a copy of the curriculum of that school, which he converted into a “Cold War” curriculum . In the space of one week, Lansdale converted the curriculum for use at the Special Forces center .
 Lansdale, the CIA, and their Special Forces associates rushed this curriculum into print . Lansdale and his Special Forces colleagues rushed it into print.
 The then deputy secretary of defense, James Douglas, cut the ribbon for the center . The center became known as the Army Special Forces John F Kennedy Center .
 "instructors" were reading and “teaching” from lesson guides they had never seen before, and the foreign “students” were so few in number that they were rushed from one classroom to another . Deputy Secretary Douglas was being shown Special Forces weapons .
 CIA deputy director for plans, Richard Bissell, made more moves during lame-duck period . Bissell is the CIA’s deputy director of plans .
 The departing members of the 5412/2 Committee would no longer have any interest in the covert Cuban exile training program . They would have no interest in a covert program .
 Cuban exiles, time after time, did not accomplish their projected goals in Cuba . They would be glad to forget the many failures they have had, they say .
 CIA dispatched a cable to the Bay of Pigs project officer in Guatemala, directing a reduction of guerrilla training and the introduction of conventional training of an amphibious and airborne assault force . The election was set to take place four days later .
 Operation Trinidad was named “Operation Trinidad,” after the beach on which the invaders were originally supposed to land . Operation Trinidad is named after ‘Operation Trinidad’ and was named for the beach where the invasion landed .
 CIA officials made this major change without specific approval . CIA officials did not have specific approval, but made the move without it .
 JFK reappointed Allen Dulles as CIA director, they figured they could go ahead with invasion planning . They knew that if Nixon became President, he would go along with their decision anyway, since he had been the most vehement anti-Castro agitator at the top level .
 CIA leaders were confident they could work with, or around, Kennedy . They contrived to lock him into as many programs as possible . Dulles continued as head of the CIA .
 Dulles briefed the President-elect on November 29, 1960, and the new plan was formally presented to the outgoing NSC 5412/2 Committee on December 8, 1960 .
 There is no record of that Special Group’s approval on December 8, but the CIA continued with Operation Trinidad . Operation Trinidad was approved by the Special Group .
 I was the last officer to brief the outgoing secretary of defense on the subject of Operation Trinidad on his final day in office . Operation Trinidad took place while a major blizzard raged over Washington .
 President Kennedy approved final tactical plan for invasion that was approved by President Kennedy on Sunday, April 16, at about 1:45 P.M. It can be stated emphatically that the plan for the invasion could well have succeeded .
 It was based on the prior use of four Cuban exile-piloted B-26s to destroy Castro’s small combat air force . The mission was based fundamentally on the use of the four B-27s .
 The first attack had been made on April 15 and had put most of the planes out of commission . The first attacks had put some of the aircraft out of the air force .
 The concept behind the Bay of Pigs tactical plan was similar to that of the 1956 British-French clandestine attack on Nasser’s air force in Egypt, which destroyed his entire combat air force first, making it possible for Gen. Gen. Nasser .
 Moshe Dayan’s Israeli army was able to dash across the Sinai to the Suez Canal without attacks from the air . The Israeli army crossed the Sinai without being attacked by air strikes . The Suez canal was the first time the Israeli army had been able to cross the
 JFK approved a similar plan for the Cuban brigade that was sabotaged from the inside, however, after JFK had approved it that Sunday afternoon of April 16 . This similar plan is sabotaged by the inside .
 Zapata, the beach on the Bay of Pigs, had been selected on purpose because there was an airstrip there suitable for B-26 operations against Castro’s ground forces . Zapata was selected because of the airstrip on the beach, which was used to launch B-
 The beach was isolated and could be reached only via causeways or the narrow beach itself . It was isolated .
 The brigade could take over the airstrip after securing the beachhead . Cuban B26s flown by Cuban pilots operating from that strip could have overwhelmed any Castro force approaching .
 The plan was predicated upon the total destruction of Castro’s entire force of combatcapable aircraft . But this excellent tactical plan was based on the destruction of his entire force, the author says .
 A second attack was scheduled to knock out Castro’s three remaining aircraft at dawn on Monday morning . The brigade hit the beach and alerted Castro's air defenses and alerted the air defenses .
 "It was absolutely essential that those three aircraft be eliminated first," says CNN's John Defterios . "It's absolutely essential," he says of the elimination of the aircraft .
 Kennedy understood that key element of the strategy when he made the decision to proceed with the Monday, April 17, landing . He approved the dawn air strike by four B-26 bombers from Nicaragua to wipe out those last three jets .
 The overall second phase of the plan, now called “Operation Zapata,” included a Cuban government-in-exile, on the beach if necessary, after the brigade had held Cuban soil for at least seventy-two hours .
 It had been planned that the Cuban government-in-exile would call upon the Organization of American States for support of the brigade . The United States, with nominal OAS assistance, would sustain the brigade and its new government .
 CIA forecast tens of thousands of Cubans would rise to join the brigade and revolt against Castro . With this show of strength and determination, the CIA forecast that tens of thousand would rise .
 President Kennedy’s special assistant for national security affairs, McGeorge Bundy, called off the strike . Bundy: The time for the release of the B-26s from the Hidden Valley base at Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, was called off . Bundy's home phone rang in
 "Anything after a two A.M. departure will destroy the whole plan," he says . "Our B-26s will not be able to arrive before sunrise," he adds .
 He urged me to call General Cabell at the Operation Zapata office and, using OSO/OSD authority, demand the immediate release of the B-26s .
 I could hear the planes’ engines running in the background of the telephone conversation . I could also hear the plane’s engines running as we spoke .
 I was unable to reach General Cabell, and Allen Dulles was out of the country . I was . unable to . reach General . Cabell and Allen . Dulles, who was not in the country at the time, were unable to call .
 After that call, I reached the CIA’s Zapata office and suggested they release the B-26s “on Kennedy's orders” or the whole effort would fail . After that, I called the CIA and suggested the release was on Kennedy's "on Kennedy�
 CIA tactical commander says situation “is in the hands of” the President’s special assistant for national security affairs, McGeorge Bundy; Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Charles P Cabell; and Secretary of State Dean Rusk . The CIA”s tactical commander told me
 "The B-26s in Nicaragua did not leave very soon, the entire plan would fail," says President Obama . "We all understood that if . if . the B-25s in Nicaragoland were not leaving very soon it would fail. We all understood," he says .
 Someone else called Nicaragua and said not to worry, other B-26s would knock out the T-33s . We learned later that someone else had called Nicaragua .
 The pilots believed there would be no air opposition—least of all from those superior T-33s . The pilots were confident they would not face any air opposition .
 Three T-33 jets shot down 16 brigade B-26s, sank supply ships offshore, and raked the beach with heavy gunfire . The planes were scarcely to be considered combat aircraft, yet ever so much better in aerial combat .
 The cancellation of the dawn air strike had created Kennedy’s defeat and brought the whole burden down on the shoulders of the new President . That cancellation of an air strike created Kennedy's defeat .
 The plan was similar to the sabotaged flight of Gary Powers’s U-2 spy plane over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960, which destroyed Eisenhower's Crusade for Peace . There was much about that sabotaged plan, which damaged Kennedy so drastically, that is similar to
 Neither defeat nor defeat had been the result of a normal or expected turn of events . Neither defeat was expected to be a normal result of an expected outcome .
 Some of the same men, in high places, were in key positions in both projects . Nixon had worked closely with all of the men involved in the projects .
 Nixon believed that Castro had ‘become the most momentous figure in John F Kennedy’s life’ and that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin . We have wondered why, in 1964, Nixon believed Castro had become ‘most momentous’ figure in Kennedy
 We have just read how Castro came into JFK’s life; the Lee Harvey Oswald scenario will come later . We have read the story of Castro and Oswald .
 Over the years since that fiasco on the Cuban beaches in April 1961, there have been many explanations for its failure . Some reasonably accurate and some totally wrong, some reasonably accurate, some wrong . The U.S. has never been able to find out what caused the disaster .
 President Kennedy was quick to accept overall blame for the failure of Operation Zapata . President Kennedy accepted overall responsibility for the failed operation .
 Some have said JFK himself caused the failure because “he denied United States air cover” for the embattled men on the beach . JFK denied U.S. air cover .
 U.S. military aircraft manned by United States military personnel . The men on the beach were airlifted to the beach by the United States .
 The National Security Council established the policy that U.S. military forces cannot be used operationally in peacetime . The policy was established by the N.N. Security Council .
 This was established policy when Kennedy became President, and he knew it . He knew it. This is an established policy .
 U.S. Marine Corps officers drew up the invasion plan for the CIA and for the Cuban exile brigade . They were not allowed to include any supporting role for the United States military . Therefore, the plan was not included in the plan .
 All of Castro’s combat-capable aircraft would have been eliminated before the men hit the beach . Still, this posed no real problem for them, as long as they could predicate the tactical plan .
 CIA requested a number of modified World War II B-26 bombers, says Air Force historian . CIA requested the modified bombers, he says . Air Force chief: "CIA came to my office in United States Air Force headquarters"
 By means of intelligence data and aerial photographs, it had been determined that Castro had ten combat-capable aircraft . Castro was determined to have ten combat aircraft .
 Two days before landing, group of modified B-26s flew over Havana area and destroyed seven of these aircraft .
 One of the CIA’s U-2 spy aircraft located them parked wingtip to wingtip on a small air base . That afternoon, one of the U.2 spy planes located them on the base .
 The President had been well briefed on the significance of that prelanding air strike and had directed that B-26 attack . President had directed the attack .
 This failure has been erroneously blamed on President Kennedy for three decades in various contrived stories, some of which appear to have a bearing on the overall assassination story . Some of these stories have been made up about the Kennedy assassination .
 McGeorge Bundy, the author of the Cuban Study Group, made the call that directed the CIA to cancel the B-26 bomber strike against Castro’s last three combat aircraft . Bundy was the former special assistant to Presidents John F Kennedy and Lyndon B Johnson .
 Kennedy had never placed the fault for the brigade on anyone else but himself . Kennedy had always placed the blame for the Brigade on anyone but himself.
 Maxwell Taylor, in association with Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and Admiral Arleigh Burke, and Allen Dulles, to give him a report on the “Immediate Causes of Failure of Operation Zapata,” that is, the Bay of Pigs .
 Taylor submitted an elaborate report to JFK in the form of a lengthy letter on June 13, 1961 . Taylor's report was submitted to JFK by the President in 1961 .
 The existence of that report has been denied by those principals and was one of the best-kept secrets of the Kennedy years . However, during 1979, the same year Bundy wrote his op-ed piece, a book about the Bay of Pigs appeared .
 In Wyden’s book there are several quotes that he attributes to the “so-called Taylor Report,” and with that revelation the longburied report became public . With that revelation, the Taylor Report became public.
 Sen. Wyden mentions McGeorge Bundy no less than seventeen times and quotes liberally from the long-missing Taylor Report . Wyden says Bundy is a "legitimate victim" of the federal government .
 Bundy finally made his long-overdue statement in October 1979 . Bundy's statement was released in 1979 . This is why Bundy finally released the statement .
 He most assuredly had read the Wyden book— and had heard people discussing his critical role in the Bay of Pigs drama . The book was published by Sen. Wyden in 2010 .
 The Taylor Report placed the blame for the defeat of the brigade on one telephone call . Bissell, Bundy, and Wyden were all referring to a few specific lines from the Taylor Report .
 Kennedy had approved the dawn air strike at 1:45 P.M. April 16, 1960 . Kennedy had approval of the dawn strike .
 U-2 photos taken late Saturday, April 15, show three T-33 jets parked wingtip to wingtip on a small airstrip near Santiago .
 The CIA’s operational commander at Puerto Cabezas was sending four B-26s to do the job that one could have done easily, provided the T-33s were caught on the ground .
 Castro’s air warning system and T-33s in the air would alert Castro . That would send the T-31s into the air . Castro says he's not sure if Castro will send them in . Castro: "I’m not going to go to war
 Bundy's call to Cabell stating that no air strikes could be launched until after the brigade had secured the Giron airstrip constituted a total misreading and a complete reversal of the approved tactical plan . Bundy called Cabell to say no strikes were launched until the brigade secured the airstrip
 The dawn air strikes were essential to destroy the three T-33s on the ground . They were the only way the slower B-26s could destroy them . The dawn strikes were needed to destroy them, the Pentagon says .
 The brigade would have been subject to no air attacks, the ‘air cover’ issue that some revisionists have raised would be totally irrelevant . The brigade's supply ships would have also been safe, and the air cover issue that has been raised would not be relevant .
 The “never written” Taylor “Letter to the President” had finally been released . He realized then that, after eighteen years, the “Never written’s been released, he realized then .
 Bundy saw the undeniable evidence that it was he who had canceled the dawn air strike and caused the failure of the brigade’s gallant effort . Bundy said he was the only person to blame for the failure . Bundy: "I am not satisfied with the result of the failure"
 There was nothing he could do to alter those facts except counterattack . "There is nothing he can do to change those facts," he said .
 Any alert reader seeing that title would immediately connect it with the Bay of Pigs brigade and its failure . "Bay of Pigs" is a reference to the failure of the failed Bay of the Pigs War .
 He used the word “brigade,” but in a contrived context of the later event . The word was used in the context of a later event.
 The Taylor Report was written right before the eyes of Robert F Kennedy, who reported the group’s findings to his brother every day . It was clever, but it doesn’t wash — especially not after the release of the Taylor Report .
 Bundy furnishes two numbers of military unit strength, 22,000 and 2,600 . Bundy has two military units, both numbers of unit strength . Bundy also furnishes a number of military units that can be deployed in the U.S.
 Neither one is pertinent to anything, and neither represents a “brigade” of anything . Neither one of these things are pertinent to nothing, nor are relevant to anything else . Neither is relevant to nothing .
 Two ex-Presidents and a national security assistant to two Presidents have written the book . They are all written by men who have held high positions . Two of the authors are former national security assistants to two presidents .
 Warren Commission says the Magic Bullet passed through both President Kennedy and Texas governor John Connally before it mysteriously came to rest among the sheets on a stretcher in Parkland Hospital . Warren Commission: "Magic Bullet" passed through President Kennedy, Texas governor Connally .
 This research has become such a mad game that few people ever think of basic facts and causes . This research is such a game that many people don't even know basic facts about causes .
 It is clear from the abundant evidence that Lee Harvey Oswald did not kill President Kennedy . Oswald did nothing to kill Kennedy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: It's clear that Oswald killed Kennedy .
 Such actions are an utter waste of time and serve to obfuscate the truth. Such actions, such as this, are an absolute waste,’s author says . ‘Such actions are a waste of money,' he says .
 The first two requirements were relatively simple ones and were the work of professional professionals . The other two requirements are simple ones: The first and second are simple and professional .
 Once the decision had coalesced within the power elite, the die was cast. The die was set to be cast. Once the die had been cast, the decision was made .
 The “mechanics” were from “Murder Inc.,” the international specialist group that is maintained by the government . Ex-President Lyndon B Johnson confirmed in his interview with Leo Janos that appeared in the July 1973 issue of the Atlantic Monthly .
 The continuing cover story, on the other hand, was difficult to create and manipulate and is by far the most important factor . The cover story is difficult to make and manipulate, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is this third factor that reveals the nature of the top echelon involved and the power and skillful determination of the plotters who benefited by gaining control of the presidency . The third factor is the power of the . plotters .
 The members of this cabal were able to control a commission created by a President and headed by the chief justice of the United States . After all, the members of the . members of . this cabal are able to . control a panel created by . a . President .
 "They have controlled the media and congressional activity, to the extent that the assassination has never been investigated adequately," the author says . The assassination has been never investigated adequately .
 By law, a trial for the murder of President Kennedy should have been held for Kennedy's murder . The Kennedy family has controlled the judicial system of the state of Texas where by law a trial should be held .
 This chapter will attempt to link the assassination with the Vietnam War—a link that unquestionably exists . The chapter will probe this subject within the scope of the parameters of that time . It will be the first attempt at linking the assassination to Vietnam War .
 John F Kennedy was elected President of the United States of America by a margin of 112,000 votes . It is the slimmest margin for the presidency since 1884 .
 Press pressures that had built during the election had become even greater during those intervening three years . Pressures that had been built during that election had increased during that time .
 To maintain that cover story has taken real power, those responsible for the assassination have that power . To maintain the cover story, they must maintain real power . Those responsible for that power have real power.
 It is relatively easy to assassinate a President; there are ways to beat the defenses . There are ways of beating the defenses of the White House, President Obama says .
 FBI owned four FBI agents; Secret Service had never asked for one . Secret Service has never had one of the four . FBI owns four of the FBI's 4,000 FBI agents .
 The actual killing of the President is relatively simple, but shielding the gunmen and those who hired them, arranging for their safe and undetected removal from the scene, creating a “patsy” to take the blame, takes a cabal with the power and longevity .
 The deft way it has been orchestrated reveals the skill of the plotters, the author says . Those responsible included top-level government officials, plus their powerelite masters, he adds .
 The fact of conspiracy is revealed by the discovery of such circumstances, says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.S.
 "This cover story was not designed for the sole purpose of concealing the identity of the killers and their supporting team," the author says . "More important by far by far, this cover story is not designed to conceal the identities of the killer and his supporting team. More important by
 It was designed to make possible the total takeover of the government of the U.S. of America . The cabal was able to control a series of Presidents from Lyndon B Johnson to the present day .
 Kennedy had just established the first plank in the platform for his reelection with his promise to bring one thousand men home from Vietnam by Christmas of 1963 and to have all Americans out of Vietnam by the end of 1965 .
 His trip to Texas with Johnson and Connally marked the beginning of his 1964 reelection campaign . The trip was part of his campaign for reelection .
 The die had been cast, and the shots had to be fired in Dallas that day . "The die had already been cast. The shots had been fired," the author says .
 There can only be only one reason powerful enough to cause the almost spontaneous coalescence of such a cabal for that single purpose .
 The alternative was to take control of the power of the presidency at all costs, he said . "The alternative was taking control of power at all at all levels," he said. "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it," he added .
 In raising the age-old question “cui bono ?”—who benefits?—we must examine the nature of the fatal pressures that enveloped the days of the Kennedy administration . We must understand how they stood in the way of other plans by other peoples in their
 LBJ called his trusted friend and confidant, J Edgar Hoover, longtime director of the FBI, to the White House for a heart-to-heart discussion . Hoover was LBJ's longtime confidant and longtime FBI director .
 LBJ and Hoover lived across the street from each other in Washington, D.C., for 19 years . LBJ, Hoover lived in the same place in Washington for 19 months .
 Hoover had been a frequent visitor to the Johnson ranch on the banks of the Pedernales River in Texas . Hoover had visited Johnson ranch several times in the past .
 They needed each other; they understood each other . They had been through fire together; they had to be together . They were together in the fire together. They had to work together .
 A record of this meeting is contained in a memorandum written and signed by Hoover on the day of the meeting . Hoover signed the memorandum . Hoover was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Johnson asked him if he was familiar with the proposed group he was trying to get to study his report on JFK murder . The JFK murder was JFK's murder .
 Johnson asked Hoover what he thought of the proposed members of the group . Hoover: "I'm not sure what I think of the members of this group"
 Lauris Norstad, Gerald Ford, Hale Boggs and Gerald Ford were all members of Congressmen . Senators Richard Russell and John Sherman Cooper were also in attendance .
 President Johnson did not discuss with Hoover the name of the man he wanted to head the group, Chief Justice Earl Warren . Norstad was able to remove himself from the final commission list .
 The commission served to deter legal action in Texas and silenced the threat of a major congressional inquiry . The commission also served to discourage legal action against Texas .
 The alleged assassin was the man Jack Ruby had killed in Dallas while the alleged killer was being moved from one jail to another . Ruby's alleged killer had been moved from a jail to a jail .
 The commission may have begun its investigation with the FBI “study . . and its files and report” But by the time it published its own report, in September 1964, it had been carried away by the entrancing cover story designed by the power cabal .
 The first thing that President Johnson ought to have done was to demand that a trial for the murder of JFK be held in Texas, he says .
 The fact that Lee Harvey Oswald was dead was no barrier to the legal requirement . Oswald's name was not the only reason for the request . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1945 assassination .
 It would have been utterly impossible for the Dallas police to explain what truly incriminating information they had that was of sufficient merit to warrant the arrest of that young man while he was seated in a distant theater .
 The Warren Commission was competent enough to understand that . Certainly the members of the Warren Commission were competent enough .
 They were victims of pressure brought to bear by those orchestrating the cover-up . Instead, they were the victims of great pressure brought out by those who orchestrated the cover up . The victims were victims, not victims, but those who were under pressure .
 It is important that the “Days of Camelot” be reviewed and analyzed . Because it is apparent that enormous pressure at the highest level had been generated during those thousand days of the Kennedy era, it is important .
 The very word “Camelot’s” as a definition of the Kennedy “thousand days” needs review . The word ‘camelot,’ as definition of Kennedy ‘thousand-day’ needs review.
 Many army officials were quite vocal about their dislike of JFK-McNamara . Some of the Kennedy-Namara treatment of the army was based on what the army perceived that treatment to be during the Kennedy period .
 Think tank members of army-contract think tank were unfriendly to Kennedy . Not surprisingly, then, this study by the members of that think tank was unfavourably to Kennedy.
 It used the word “Camelot” in a derogatory sense, and its title was purposely intended to be a bit of a sarcastic rebuke of the President . It was created in a sarcastic way to make fun of President Obama .
 This derogatory term has now lost that meaning for most . It has become a public symbol of Kennedy and the presumed style and grace of his presidency .
 Eisenhower left office on the wave of a substantial federal budget surplus and with a tip of his cap to the dangers of the military-industrial complex . He left office in 1953 with a substantial budget surplus .
 The master manipulators had held billion-dollar items back from the budget of 1961-62, knowing full well that they could do better with a reliable old friend as President in 1961 . As a result, these master manipulations had held .
 He responded to a want ad in a Los Angeles newspaper that had been placed there by a moneyed group seeking a young, malleable candidate to run for Congress . As he likes to tell it, he responded to the ad while he was still in the navy during World War II
 The remainder of his storied political life was lived under the shadow and tutelage of moneyed power centers . The rest of his political life is lived in the shadow of the power centers, he says .
 Nixon does not say how he got into a position to take on that role in the first place . Nixon: "I'm not sure how I got into that position, but I'm sure I'm going to have a job"
 In 1941, he worked in the Office of Price Administration alongside another up-and-coming young lawyer, Irving S Shapiro .
 Both men learned the ways of serving big business and the value of an ‘anti-Communist’ stance .
 Nixon attacked Alger Hiss and Helen Gahagan Douglas viciously on his way to the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the vice presidency . Nixon attacked Hiss, Douglas, Hagan Douglas in the early 1950s .
 Nixon's years of public life gave him some popularity, but they did not win him the presidency against John F Kennedy in 1960 .
 President Kennedy inherited many big-money projects deferred from the Eisenhower era . Heaped upon the shoulders of President Kennedy, heaped upon his shoulders .
 The greatest of these multi-billion-dollar packages, as described in previous chapters, was to be the war in Vietnam . Vietnam .
 It had been kept almost dormant during 1960, but it was ready to flare up on call . It was the first time it had been active in the U.S. during that period .
 Eisenhower told Kennedy that his only concern in Southeast Asia would be Laos . Laos was the tiny kingdom of Laos . Eisenhower spoke privately to Kennedy before the inauguration .
 Time magazine carried only six articles about Vietnam during 1960 . Time magazine had carried six articles in Vietnam during that period .
 The conflict in Vietnam had been moved along clandestinely since 1945 . It was still just simmering when Kennedy came into office . The conflict was still simmering .
 Just after the election, the CIA had made its move to increase its secret Cuban project from a small, three hundred-man operation to a three thousand-man, “over-the-beach” assault .
 By the time of the inauguration of Kennedy, the momentum of that effort was harder to contain than to just let the Cuban exiles loose in an attempt to free their country .
 There were even bigger budget matters bottled up in anticipation of Nixon inauguration . Nixon inauguration was a time capsule of sorts .
 For several years, the air force had wanted a new jet fighter aircraft . The air force has wanted several years of new jet fighters .
 Eisenhower, determined to go out with a budget surplus, would not allow the awarding of any major contract that could be charged to his term . Eisenhower was determined to end his presidency with a surplus .
 By the time of Kennedy’s inaugural, there was the promise of a $2—$4 billion air force budget item that could be used for the biggest military aircraft procurement award ever made . The award is expected to be worth $2 to $4 billion .
 The entire aviation industry knew this, and pressures ran high in an attempt to win that prime contract . The entire industry knew that, and pressure ran high .
 World War II air force statistician and Harvard Business School professor was president of Ford Motor Company . Ford was part of a group known at Harvard as the “whiz kids” as the "whiz kid”
 McNamara had become president of the Ford Motor Company on November 9, 1960, the day after Kennedy’s election . McNamara was president of Ford Motor Co. on that day .
 McNamara was not familiar with aircraft or with the complex system of procurement used by the military . But he had a pretty good idea of what the availability of $4 billion meant politically .
 The Boeing Aircraft Company and a joint proposal presented by General Dynamics and the Grumman Aircraft Company won the award for the jet fighter .
 The air force wanted an extremely unconventional aircraft, with wings that could be swept back in flight for higher speed . The aircraft was designed to be extremely unconventional with wings swept back for speed .
 The air force and navy specifications differed widely, but there ought to be enough ‘common’ parts to lower the unit aircraft cost, he said .
 By this time, the total program had been increased to 1,700 aircraft, 235 of which would be for the navy . The total initial procurement cost of $6 billion was $6. billion .
 This was the largest single procurement contract ever put together in peacetime . The contract was awarded to the U.S. government in 2007 .
 Kennedy and his inner circle had their own ideas of what they were going to do with the vast amount of money . Kennedy had his own ideas .
 $6.6 billion would pave a lot of streets on the road to reelection, says President Nixon . Nixon and Nixon realized that $6 billion was needed to pave the way to reelection .
 Kennedy added Labor Secretary Arthur Goldberg, a World War II OSS veteran, to the TFX team . Kennedy added Goldberg to the OSS team .
 He had not confided in Goldberg before the Bay of Pigs decision, a mistake he was not going to repeat . He had confided to Goldberg that he would not repeat the mistake he made .
 It was to use this $6.6 billion potential in every possible way, in selected “politically” marginal counties throughout the United States, to strengthen the Democratic party. It was intended to do this in selected "politically" marginal counties .
 McNamara set up a suite of offices, one corridor ring in from his own in the Pentagon, with a staff that had nothing else to do than plot the course of the TFX program .
 I had an office a few doors down the hall from this new suite . I visited them frequently to join its chief, Ron Linton, and other Pentagon “whiz kids” for lunch . The new suite is the Pentagon's first new office .
 The walls of this suite of offices were lined with maps of the U.S. showing all the states and counties . I noticed that the walls of the offices were lining with maps .
 Goldberg's maps show every county Kennedy had carried in 1960 and every county that had gone to Nixon . In short order, at Goldberg’s suggestion, one set of those maps was colored to show each county that Kennedy had won in 1960 .
 A single proposal for some military items would arrive at the Pentagon in a large delivery truck . "Quite frequently a single proposal ... would arrive in large delivery trucks," Pentagon says .
 This process of “mapping’s” the proposals included the prime contractors, that is, Boeing or General Dynamics/Grumman, and from them right on down to the smallest subcontractor . The process of "mapping" the proposals includes the prime contractor,
 Goldberg’s team marked the site of each facility, taking into account how many people it would employ, how much money would be spent there, and how much new construction was involved . Goldberg: “In a short time it was possible to get a visual plot of the impact
 Through confidential handling of copies of these charts, senators, congressmen, and local politicians throughout the Democratic organization were able to capitalize on the outcome .
 The charts were developed in McNamara’s office . Within no time, word that these charts were being developed reached contractors themselves .
 One of the prime contractors plans to open a new facility in a remote county in Utah . I happened to visit the office one day when word had been received from one of the . contractors .
 The process of wooing future Republican votes in this manner was repeated all over the country . Needless to say, the process was repeated .
 Six and a half billion dollars is a lot of money, and it goes a long, long way in a campaign . It's not just a small amount of money that can be spent on campaigns .
 While studies of the political impact of the award of the contract were being made, McNamara was forced to draw out the routine selection process .
 He had two of the nation’s industrial giants, with their vast array of subcontractors and sub-subcontractors, locked in the biggest battle in corporate history . He had the nation's industrial giants .
 He managed to string out four full evaluation studies, each one of which nitpicked every item in each proposal . He sent the whole package to the Source Selection Board, made up of senior officials from both services .
 The contract was awarded to the U.S. Army in 1963 . Gen. Gen. George S. Eisenhower said it was a mistake to award the contract .
 Curtis LeMay, chief of staff of the air force, told a Senate subcommittee . LeMay told the panel that the Air Force had been involved in the deaths of more than 100,000 people .
 275,000 man-hours of work had been poured into this selection process . John L McClellan said some 275,00 man hours of work were poured into the selection process.
 Everything had been ready for a quick decision, in favor of Boeing, right after the Kennedy inauguration . Boeing had been expected to make the decision after the inauguration . The decision was expected to be made right after Kennedy's inauguration .
 The decision was pushed back month after month in every county across the nation . But with the addition of the navy money and the Goldberg-McNamara political selection concept, the decision has been pushed back months .
 The Source Selection Board made the decision on November 23, 1962, more than two years after the election . The decision was made more than a year after the vote .
 Most of the senior officials at that meeting came away believing that the decision had been made in favor of Boeing . Boeing is expected to win the contract to build the Boeing 777 jetliner .
 Eugene Zuchert, the secretary of the air force, confided to a few friends that evening that the decision had been made in favor of Boeing . Boeing was chosen to fly the Boeing 777 jetliner . The plane was the first of its kind in the history of aviation .
 Behind the scenes, however, another decision had been made, and it overruled the entire military system . The decision was made behind the scenes . The U.S. military system has been overruled by the public .
 Any major change of the military procurement system, especially as it pertains to a $6.6 billion contract, is bound to have the impact of someone attempting to rewrite the Holy Bible . The Pentagon is expected to make a major announcement on Monday .
 "It cannot be done without an intense, prolonged, and very heated argument," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Source Selection Board voted in favor of Boeing . McNamara already knew the results of the final political survey of the two proposals .
 He had to be sure that the choice he was going to make would fly . He had a choice he had to make .
 Alfred W Blackburn, an experienced test pilot, was hired in 1959 by the Defense Department’s Bureau of Research and Engineering specifically for the TFX project . Blackburn had a man on his staff, Alfred W. Blackburn, who was an experienced pilot .
 McNamara could not discuss his personal problem with Blackburn . Blackburn, however, favored the Boeing proposal, so McNamara couldn't discuss his problem with him .
 McNamara called an old friend and asked for the name of a man who could vouch for the design of the General Dynamics model . McNamara asked the man's name, and he said it was a friend of his .
 A friend suggested Lockheed’s Kelly Johnson, head of the famous “Skunk Works,” a shop where many of the finest aircraft built by Lockheed had been designed . This friend suggested a friend suggested that Johnson would be the head of Lockheed's famous ‘Skunk
 McNamara had the General Dynamics specifications delivered to Johnson and asked him to verify their suitability . McNamara asked Johnson to verify the specifications .
 The fate of the $6.6 billion TFX project had been placed in the hands of a man who had devoted a lifetime to building superior aircraft . Boeing and General Dynamics were building TFX in direct competition with each other .
 Roger Lewis, chairman of the board and president of General Dynamics, had worked at Lockheed . Years before, Roger Lewis had worked for Lockheed, worked at General Dynamics .
 Lewis was an old aircraft professional who had been around the business since its golden years in the 1930s . Lewis was around the aircraft business since the 1950s .
 Kelly looked over the General Dynamics design very carefully, thinking how much this meant to his old associate . Kelly looked carefully and carefully, looking at the design of the aircraft . Kelly's former boss was proud of the project .
 Johnson called McNamara and told him that the plan from General Dynamics was acceptable . General Dynamics assured McNamara that the aircraft would fly .
 McNamara scheduled a meeting for November 24, 1962, to announce the decision . The Goldberg review in hand, and supported by the call from Kelly Johnson confirming the airworthiness of the design .
 He ignored the vote of the Source Selection Board and all its senior military members and announced his choice of the General Dynamics design . The decision was made by President Obama .
 He authorized the start of the engineering-design work, wind-tunnel testing, construction of a model of the plane, and all the other actions essential to the development of a total weapons system, he says .
 Curtis LeMay later testified that no one from the original air force-navy evaluation teams had ever recommended the General Dynamics model . LeMay said no one had recommended the Boeing design, including himself, to recommend it .
 The Source Selection Board, which had voted for Boeing, was stunned by the development . The members of the board were stunned by Boeing's decision to pull out .
 This is to say nothing about the shocked feelings at Boeing and its long list of subcontractors . This is not the first time the company has been forced to make changes to its contract with Boeing .
 The decision sent tremors throughout the aeronautical industry and the business world . The decision was made by the U.S. government .
 If Boeing, traditionally the number-one defense contractor, could be set aside, anyone could be excluded from any contract, for what seemed to be arbitrary political reasons . Boeing is the top defense contractor in the world .
 LeMay added, “I was surprised that the decision was made without consultation. LeMay said she was surprised by the decision . LeMay: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I'm not surprised"
 He said he had chosen the General Dynamics model of the TFX because that company’s proposal showed a better understanding of the costs involved and offered a minimum divergence .
 The services did not like the General Dynamics version of the plane . Of course, this only added fuel to the fire, because this was the very reason the services disliked it .
 A carrier-based aircraft had to be designed much differently from a landbased one . They all knew that a carrier . based aircraft must have been designed much different .
 In testimony before Congress, McNamara came back again and served notice on the generals and admirals . He said that the TFX decision process was a sample of a new policy .
 The day had passed when the services would be allowed to develop their own weapons systems, he said . He said that the services had to develop weapons systems for themselves .
 He added that Boeing had fudged and actually had planned to build different planes for the navy and the air force . He said he picked General Dynamics over Boeing because Boeing had planned for different planes .
 Kennedy forces were pressing their point firmly, but cloaking it in equable terms . In the heat of battle, the Kennedy forces pressed their point but cloaked it in terms of the battle .
 Because of Kennedy they had been given the power to make these decisions despite the desires of the old military-industry team in high places . The decision was made by Kennedy because of Kennedy .
 The impact of the changing defense program on the U.S. economy was actually more pertinent than his audience expected it to be, he says .
 He spoke to bankers and the media at a time when this was a white-hot subject . He spoke about the TFX decision to bankers .
 He moved along to a rationale for the TFX decision . He said the decision was a "rationale for the decision"
 If his listeners understood what he meant, they knew he was getting very close to the Goldberg procurement policy . If he meant it, he knew it was getting close to Goldberg procurement policies .
 The reference to “depressed areas” to mean “areas that voted for Nixon and therefore are needed in the Democratic column,” is closer to the truth . But translate the reference to the depressed areas to ‘depress areas’ and you’
 Despite this statement, that is precisely what the implementation of the Goldberg policy had just indrectly done . Despite this, that was precisely what was exactly what was said to be .
 Both he and McNamara avoided any direct mention that they had arbitrarily gone along with the Goldberg formula augmented by the assurances of Kelly Johnson at Lockheed at Lockheed .
 Kelly Johnson’s role in this selection has not been mentioned elsewhere . Indeed, Kelly Johnson's role is not mentioned elsewhere in this article .
 I was a friend of Roger Lewis’s, president of General Dynamics, and was told this account of the ‘Skunk Works’ role by Mr Lewis himself .
 Kennedy’s thousand days were marked by repeated and violent eruptions among power-elite elements within the government and its multinational corporate environment, and this is one that stands out .
 It is chillingly coincidental that Kennedy’s murder in Dallas one year later occurred not too many miles from the Fort Worth factories where the TFX and the Bell helicopters were being built .
 Kennedy was a World War II veteran and had been a member of Congress for most of the years since that time . Kennedy was also a WWII veteran .
 He had seen nearly $3 trillion poured into the military-industrial machine during those years . He said he had seen those weapons systems come and go . He had also seen $3 billion poured into weapons systems .
 McNamara said that the day had passed when the services would be allowed to develop their own weapons systems . This is why Gilpatric made the speech he did to the assembled bankers, and this is why McNamara made it clear .
 The services and the great industries for whom the military establishment existed were staggered by these developments . The Services and the . great industries, including the . military establishment, were staggered . by the developments .
 The one-two combination of punches they had suffered had them on the ropes . The fight had been going on for more than two rounds .
 On January 17, 1961, Dwight Eisenhower gave a farewell address to the nation . Eisenhower urged vigilance regarding the dangers to liberty implicit in a vast military establishment .
 President is taking their dollars away to use them as he chooses, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he's not just talking about that danger, but he's taking their money away from them .
 The Kennedys were counting on at least eight years in office to move mountains . They had been counting on eight years of office to make mountains .
 At the same time, their determined opposition was keeping an eye on the same clock . At the time, they were keeping a watch on the clock .
 At the beginning of this book, reference was made to a novel by Leonard Lewin, Report From Iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of Peace . At the end of the book, references were made to the novel by Lewin .
 Book concerned a reputed top-level study that was officially commissioned in August 1963 but actually dated back to early 1961 . Study was commissioned in 1963 but was actually commissioned in early 1961, the book says .
 Lewin: The study process started after the inauguration of John F Kennedy and his new administration . In other words, Lewin says the study started with the arrival of JFK and his administration .
 A purported member of the Iron Mountain Special Study Group believes that the group’s mission was delineated by McNamara, William Bundy, and Dean Rusk .
 The members of the Kennedy circle were concerned that no really serious work had been done by any government instrumentality in planning for peace .
 The chronology of these developments, which are very cleverly woven into this novel by Lewin, is important . It is important to know the chronology and chronology behind the development of this novel .
 President Richard Nixon's inauguration in 1962 stretched from inauguration to November 1962 . That orchestrated solution was stretched from January to November 1963 .
 The reaction of the military, of the aeronautical industry, and of Congress was predictable . The reaction to the decision was predictable. The reaction was predictable, the author says .
 A few days later, Gilpatric made his important speech, and the Special Study Group was selected in August 1963 . The group was selected for the first time .
 President Obama was going to ride on the TFX $6.6 billion into a second term, he says . "They were going to prepare America for peace," he says of Obama administration . Obama's administration was "prepared for peace"
 Vietnam War and its hundreds of billions of dollars in expenditures were nowhere in their plans . The Vietnam War was nowhere in the plans for the U.S. government .
 Nothing, absolutely nothing, could have had a greater impact on the enormous military machine of this nation than the specter of peace . "Peace" was "a greater impact" on the nation's military machine, he says. "It's absolutely nothing," he says .
 This Kennedy plan jeopardized not hundreds of millions of millions, not even billions, but trillions of dollars, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy's plan jeopardizes billions of dollars .
 It shook the very foundation upon which our society has been built over the past two thousand years, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It shook the foundations of our society," says Sutter. "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 Kennedy and his advisers were playing a dangerous game as they expertly moved along the calendar toward reelection in 1964 . It accounts for approximately a tenth of the output of the world’s total economy .
 The duel, perhaps the greatest in the history of this country, had begun . The duel was perhaps the most famous duel in American history .
 To begin with, he needed a strong plank upon which he needed to build his platform for reelection . He needed to start with a strong platform upon which to build himself .
 He chose Vietnam, the cessation of all American military involvement there . President Obama chose Vietnam as the cause for the end of U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 Maxwell Taylor and Secretary McNamara traveled to Saigon in September 1963 . The trip was part of a tour of Vietnam .
 They returned to the White House and presented him with their voluminous report on October 2, 1963 .
 One thousand troops were already slated to come home in time for Christmas 1963 . One thousand of them were slated to return home from the war .
 Kennedy planned to get out of Vietnam and to turn the war over to a new leader in South Vietnam . Kennedy wanted to end the war in Vietnam and hand over the war to the new leader .
 To his adversaries, this confirmed the nature of the course he had chosen . To those who oppose him, he said: 'I'm not going to go to war'
 Ngo Dinh Diem, the first president of South Vietnam, was killed on November 1, 1963, and Kennedy was killed November 22, 1963 . Diem was killed by Kennedy in Vietnam .
 Former Presidents Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon have written that President Kennedy was killed by a lone assassin named Lee Harvey Oswald . Former Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford wrote that Oswald was responsible for Kennedy's assassination .
 Political power is like nuclear energy available to create deserts or make them bloom . As James David Barber states in his book The Presidential Character: “Political power is . like nuclear power available to . create deserts . or create deserts, or make . them bloom.”
 John F Kennedy came to the office of the presidency with style and enough experience to know that he would have to fight to wrest political power from entrenched interests of enormous strength .
 Kennedy blamed himself and believed that he should not have authorized the invasion . Kennedy believed he should have authorized invasion of Vietnam .
 Cuban Study Group concluded that cancellation of the cmcial air strike was the cause of the failure of the Zapata operation . On the other hand, the Cuban study group concluded that the cancellation was the reason for failure .
 CIA director Allen Dulles had not been there at the time of the final decision making or at the times of the invasion itself . CIA director Dulles was not present at the decision-making .
 This was a most unusual absence by the man responsible for the entire operation . This was an unusual absence from the man behind the operation . It was the first time he had been in charge of the operation.
 Kennedy failed in his attempt to gain full control of the CIA and its major partners in the Defense Department . However, Kennedy did fail in his bid to take over the CIA .
 He recognized his adversary during his first term, and as he related confidentially to intimate acquaintances, “When I am reelected,” he said. “I will be reelected. When I am . reelected."
 Former President Harry S Truman was deeply disturbed when he learned of the murder of Jack Kennedy in Dallas . Truman was disturbed by the assassination of JFK in Dallas, Texas .
 Truman wrote a column that appeared in the Washington Post on December 21, 1963 . One month after that terrible event, he wrote about his thoughts in a column .
 For some time I have been disturbed by the way the CIA has been diverted from its original assignment . The CIA has not been able to focus on the mission of the CIA in Afghanistan, writes John Avlon .
 I never had any thought that when I set up the CIA that it would be injected into peacetime cloak-and-dagger operations . I never thought that . when I . set up . the CIA, CIA chief says . He says the CIA has been injected into . peacetime
 Some of the complications and embarrassment that I think we have experienced are in part attributable to the fact that this quiet intelligence arm of the President has been so removed from its intended role that it is being interpreted as a symbol of sinister and mysterious foreign intrigue .
 Truman’s characterization of the CIA as “a symbol of sinister and mysterious foreign intrigue” is, unfortunately, quite accurate . The CIA was a symbol of ‘mysterious foreign intrigue,’ says Truman .
 ‘Foreign intrigue’ involved Cuba, Castro, and John F Kennedy, at least in the minds of Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford, as is evidenced in their later writings about the assassination . That ‘foreign intrigue” involved Cuba and Castro, as was evidenced in later writings
 Lyndon B Johnson said the government operated a “Murder Inc.” in the Caribbean . And it was Lyndon B . Johnson who said the . government operated . a ‘Murder . Inc.
 The CIA was involved in JFK's murder, but the CIA was not involved . JFK's four presidents wove a fabric of sinister intrigue that included the CIA in the scenario of his death .
 The power of any agency that is allowed to operate in secrecy is boundless, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Only three days after the disastrous Cuban defeat, Kennedy set up a Cuban Study Group headed by Gen. Gen. John Kennedy . Kennedy also set up an American-Cuba Study Group .
 The President declared war on the agency after the agency took action against him .
 The Cuban Study Group was one of the most important creations of the Kennedy presidency . It was the source of pressure points on the way to Dallas on November 22, 1963, Dallas .
 Eisenhower learned that he was not strong enough when a U-2 went down in the heart of Russia despite his specific “no-overflight” orders in 1960 . Eisenhower had learned that .
 Kennedy set out to prove that he was “strong enough,” and he might have done so had he had a second term in office . Kennedy's second term would have been a presidential term, but he would have had another term .
 Each member of the Cuban Study Group was chosen for a particular reason . The study group is based on a study of Cuba .
 Maxwell Taylor, for example, had been in retirement since he had differed, in public, with the Eisenhower policy concerning the strength of the United States Army . Taylor had resigned as its chief of staff .
 He had not been involved in any way with the decision-making process for the Cuban invasion . He said he did not participate in the decision making process .
 Arleigh Burke is considered by many to be the finest chief of naval operations the navy has ever had . He is considered to be one of the best naval chiefs in the world .
 Admiral Burke had been among the Joint Chiefs of Staff who had been most closely involved in the military elements of the Bay of Pigs planning process .
 The actual tactical training for the invasion had been placed in the hands of a U.S. Marine Corps colonel . The transport ships had been assembled in the Norfolk, Virginia, area .
 Another appointee to the study group was the President’s brother and attorney general, Robert F Kennedy . The study group also included the President's brother and Attorney General .
 Kennedy’s next choice for the group was Machiavellian in its political implications . Kennedy's next choice was Machy and Machy in the political implications of the group's selection .
 Allen W Dulles gave President-elect his first official briefing on the plan for the overthrow of Castro in November 1960 . Dulles appointed CIA director Allen W. Dulles, the man who had flown to Palm Beach with his deputy, Richard Bissell, to give him his first briefing
 Dulles gave another briefing on the developing plan on January 28, 1961, to the newly-inaugurated President . Dulles was joined by Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense .
 Allen Dulles sat through the ordeal of this detailed study from beginning to end, to relive the whole scenario . General Taylor interrogated selected officials who had been connected with the operation . Kennedy had decided to sit through the entire study from start to end .
 Allen Dulles was the director of central intelligence when the plan was first presented to President Eisenhower in March 1960 . He was the man who briefed Kennedy before and after his inauguration . Dulles had not been present at the White House on April 16, 1961, when the final discussions took place
 Dulles was also not in Washington during the crucial period of the invasion itself to control the activities of his agency .
 It is made up of men who are presidents of their own companies and under forty years of age . It is the first time the group has been formed by men under 40 years old .
 CIA arranges meetings for them with young leaders in foreign countries for the purpose of opening export-import talks and franchising discussions . CIA: The meetings will be used to open export-importation talks .
 The Young Presidents Organization met in Puerto Rico on the weekend of April 15 and 16, 1961, and Dulles was the principal speaker . Dulles spoke at the YPONO meeting in Puerto Puerto Rico in 1961 .
 Why he accepted— and kept—that appointment at such a crucial time has never been properly explained . The appointment was never properly explained by the president .
 Taylor’s letter never mentioned the Dulles absence, but it discussed this “breakdown of leadership” during the study group meetings with both Allen Dulles and Bobby Kennedy present . In its guarded language, the letter was guarded language .
 We may be sure it did not go unnoticed by the President during those after-hours meetings with Bobby and his other ‘Irish Mafia” friends .
 CIA chief Dulles was responsible for the success of the anti-Castro program . Dulles' absence that weekend of Dulles became the biggest issue . CIA command element failed to cope with the air strike issue .
 The President had approved the landings and the air strike to destroy the last three combat aircraft in Castro’s air force at dawn before the brigade hit the beach . The landings were carried out at dawn .
 Later that evening, McGeorge Bundy had canceled the air strike by calling Cabell Cabell . Bundy canceled the strike that night .
 The last mentioned was probably the most serious as it eliminated the last favorable opportunity to destroy the Castro air force on the ground . The last time it was possible to destroy Castro's air force, the Cuban air force was destroyed .
 The cancellation seems to have resulted partly from the failure to make the air strike plan entirely clear in advance to the President and the Secretary of State, but also by misgivings as to the effect of the air strikes on the position of the United States in the current UN debate on
 The members of the study group saw this cancellation as the clear cause of the failure of the whole anti-Castro program that had been initiated in March 1960 . The cancellation of the program was seen as the reason for the failure .
 The former president of the United States has been involved in many of the world's most important decisions . He has been a key figure in the decision-making process of the White House .
 This man was a key Cuban exile named Manuel Antonio de Varona, premier of Cuba before the Batista regime . The CIA tried to monopolize him. He was the leader of the Cuban exile. This man is a key figure in Cuban exile .
 There is no record of what he said behind closed doors, but a record was unnecessary . "There was no record, but there was unnecessary. There was a record, and it was unnecessary," he said .
 Despite this maneuver by the Kennedys, however, Dulles still controlled the moves . Despite this, the move was still controlled by Dulles, however .
 Few people have the experience to know how such things work under the cloak of secrecy . Few people in the world have the knowledge of how things work in secret .
 The CIA cannot be stopped, short of eliminating all of its money, says Julian Zelizer . This is the great weapon of the CIA, he says, and it is why the CIA can't be stopped .
 All the people who worked on the Bay of Pigs project—Cuban and American, did so under deep cover . All of the people involved in the project were Cuban, and American .
 CIA agents and military supporting-cast members all had pseudonyms and lived cover-story lives . CIA agents, military support-councils all lived under pseudonyms . The series is based on the lives of CIA and military operatives .
 The Cubans with whom they worked had no idea who these agents were, and their own American associates did not know their true names and identities . The agents' Cuban associates were not aware of their true identities and identities, they said .
 After the anti-Castro program had failed and all participants had been dispersed, they themselves did not know who had been there with them . Thus, after the program failed, all participants were dispersed .
 General Taylor had no alternative but to ask Dulles for the names of people who could be called to testify before the group . The CIA, military, and Cuban were among those asked to testify .
 Dulles weeded out the ones who could tell too much and padded the list with those who knew very little . Dulles: "Dulles' list padded out the list of people who knew too much"
 Bobby Kennedy sat there and listened to all of the dialogue, he had no way of realizing that he was hearing a carefully structured scenario . Bobby Kennedy was not aware that he sat there listening to all the dialogue .
 The book he wrote several years later revealed how little he really knew about some of the actual activities .
 Dulles and the CIA shifted the blame to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the military . This advantage enabled Dulles to shift the blame for the CIA to shift blame to military .
 Dulles kept quiet about the shortcomings of his own agency and made it appear that Kennedy’s denial of the employment of U.S. Navy fighter aircraft as “air cover” was the real reason for the failure of the project . Dulles also kept quiet .
 Many of them were of different political backgrounds and social levels and did not get along with each other . Many of the men did not share a common sense of humor .
 The CIA put some units in the forefront of the brigade and landed them on the beach . When it came time to set sail for Cuba, the CIA sent some units to Cuba .
 Other units were "lost" at sea and never reached Cuba . At the same time, other units were ‘lost’ at sea .
 The U.S. military returned to their separate base in Louisiana on Monday . They were the first to return to Louisiana .
 The emotional story of the failure to use their units on the beaches has led to much of the misunderstanding of the tactics of the operation . Their emotional story has led many to question the effectiveness of their units .
 CIA played this up and blamed the U.S. military for the oversight . The CIA played up the oversight, blaming the military for oversight .
 It happens that the Louisiana elements of the Cuban exile groups and their “mercenary” American trainers became suspect during the investigation of President Kennedy’s assassination .
 Many of them had been recruited in the later, and much larger, anti-Castro program Mongoose under the CIA’s most experienced paramilitary leader, Gen. Gen. John Allen .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was selected to be the "patsy" in Kennedy’s murder . Oswald was a former United States Marine Corps enlisted man . Oswald is a former member of the U.S. Marine Corps .
 He was born in New Orleans and had been active with a Fair Play for Cuba organization during the early 1960s . He was also active in the New Orleans area during the 1960s.
 Many assassination theorists have carried this presumed assassin’s trail from Dallas through the ‘Oswald’ scenario to New Orleans and then to Cuba and Castro himself . Castro himself.
 This is a futile exercise, because Oswald was only the “patsy, not the murderer,” not the ‘patsysy,’ not the killer . Oswald was the "patriarch," not the "patsies" not the murderers,
 This trail of diversionary “golden apples” continues to divert the unwary and the overeager . Yet this trail of . diversionary . apples continues to . divert the . unwary, overeager.
 In an earlier chapter, I mentioned an unusual article that appeared in the Reader’s Digest of November 1964 in which the author, Richard Nixon, tied Cuba, Castro, and John F Kennedy together .
 A single assassin does not have to have a motive for murder; a conspiracy must have a why . A single killer doesn't need a motive to commit murder . A conspiracy must be a why for a single assassin to commit a murder .
 The “lone assassin’s scenario is a cover story to preclude a conspiracy and its inevitable why . The ‘lone assassins’ scenario is the cover story for a conspiracy, the author says .
 At another time, Nixon wanted the American public to believe that he and Henry Kissinger had valid reasons for their genocidal bombardment of Cambodia with B-52s . Nixon wanted to be able to convince the public that he had legitimate reasons for the bombing .
 He did not get to the root of the disaster of the Bay of Pigs invasion, and as a result he became a victim of the sinister power of those agencies of the government .
 Kennedy was not wise to the ways of Washington or that he could not mount extremely shrewd political maneuvers of his own . None of this should be taken to mean that Kennedy was wise to Washington .
 He was up against impossible odds. He was, and he did—but, despite this experience, he did . He was able to overcome the odds .
 When he created the Cuban Study Group, he made it appear as if he were investigating a failed operation and nothing more . He made it look like he was investigating an alleged failed operation .
 The Cuban Study Group’s real directive was what Kennedy wanted to discover for himself, then and for the future . Kennedy wanted the truth, and it is what he wanted to learn for himself . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Cuba .
 As he moved to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, a huge tidal wave that had been set in motion loomed up to engulf him and his new administration .
 The new President had been critical of the way covert operations had functioned during the 1950s . He had previously criticised the CIA's covert operations .
 As a long-term member of Congress, he was fully aware of the record of failed intelligence operations throughout the years .
 Kennedy directed General Taylor to dissect the entire system and come up with something better . The Bay of Pigs disaster was a case study of the system . Kennedy directed Taylor to create a better system .
 This was an issue that divided the study group and widened the abyss between Kennedy and Dulles . This was the issue of Kennedy's relationship with Dulles, says the former president .
 Kennedy continued to make use of Dulles in his desire to probe the real depths of the murky business of intelligence and clandestine operations . Kennedy used Dulles to help him understand the nature of intelligence .
 The Cuban Study Group gathered a remarkable series of documents . By the middle of June 1961, the group had collected a remarkable collection of documents.
 Key materials have been concealed, ignored, and sometimes purposely misinterpreted, for decades . For decades, these key materials were concealed and ignored, sometimes intentionally misinterpreted . The key materials have never been seen in public view .
 To fully understand the forces at work during Kennedy’s presidency, it is necessary to lift the curtain of secrecy on a part of top-level government activity .
 The work of the Cuban Study Group was "unprecedented in its level of confidentiality" The group was unequaled in its confidentiality, the author says .
 The reason for this lies in the delicacy of certain types of intelligence activities, namely, covert operations by one government against another . This is the case of covert operations against each other .
 Sometimes the target is an otherwise friendly, allied government, when it is deemed essential to acquire information or to confirm information that cannot be obtained by any other means . The target is often a friendly or allied government .
 The U.S. has flown the U-2 over many friendly countries, such as Israel, to confirm certain situations with our own eyes and ears . For example, the U.2 has flown over Israel to verify certain situations .
 In today’s world national sovereignty has become an archaic and unworkable sham . Although it is always assumed that national sovereignty is inviolate, it is not inviolated .
 It does not exist even among the great powers, and it is continuously violated—secretly . The United States is violating the law, the U.S. is violating it, the author says .
 It has always been the unwritten rule that any covert U.S. operation must be performed in such a manner as to remain truly secret . The rule is that the role of the government must be able to be plausibly disclaimed .
 The United States has spent untold tens of millions of dollars to “sterilize’s entire aircraft and other equipment . The U.S. has not been able to find the slightest evidence in the wreckage to incriminate the United States .
 All labels, name tags, and serial numbers are removed in such circumstances . Crew uniforms are even made out of nonUnited States fabric to enhance denial .
 Weapons used are “sterilized’ at a special underground facility overseas and are foreign-made . Weapons used in the U.S. include weapons made in China, Russia and Russia .
 The CIA operates at the direction of the National Security Council . The National Security Act of 1947 established the CIA under the provisions of the 1947 law .
 The intent of this law is to place the origin of any covert operation at the top of the law, the law says .
 This neutralizes and eliminates lesser matters and emphasizes the importance of those that the NSC actually originates and directs . The NSC is the most powerful body in the world, and the most important matters are those that it directs .
 The NSC can direct any designated department or agency to carry out a covert operation . The CIA can direct the operation, not necessarily the NSC, to carry it out .
 These operations are normally done on a small scale, or else they could not be kept a secret . The operation is normally carried out on a very small scale .
 Being small, they can usually be handled by the CIA, sometimes augmented by the resources of the Defense Department . Being small they can often be handled with the CIA .
 These are legal considerations that, by the way, serve to underscore the foolhardiness and deceit of those activities that have been under way in Central America and the Middle East in recent years . The legal considerations underscore the foolishness and deceit that these activities are under way .
 Allen Dulles was director of central intelligence and his brother, John Foster Dulles, was secretary of state . Over the years, this legal precision had become more and more vague, he says .
 Allen Dulles became accustomed to taking proposals that originated with the agency to the NSC for approval . Dulles was accustomed to take proposals to the “10/2” or ”5412” Committee .
 In most cases, he would receive the committee’s approval, sometimes with stipulations . The committee's approval is usually followed by a decision to approve him .
 The CIA had originated these plans, not the NSC, the law says . This is a highly significant point with respect to the law . But it was the CIA that had originated the plans .
 The difference between a plan of highest national interest that originates within the NSC and a plan that is originated within the CIA and then presented to NSC for its ‘approval” can be enormous .
 These questions were foremost in Kennedy’s mind when he became President . Kennedy was the President of the United States in 1963 .
 At that time, Bissell had gained approval for a rather modest program . Bissell's program was approved by the U.S. government .
 CIA turned over-the-beach landings and paradrop operations into an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . It was the CIA that took this approval and turned this approval .
 Kennedy inherited the accumulated actions of one full year of this program . Kennedy inherits the accumulation of one year of actions .
 He did not approve the invasion until the day before it actually took place . He had such strong convictions about it that he did not approved it .
 The CIA had launched its invasion fleet a full week before the day of the landing . The invasion fleet was small though it was, and the CIA launched it a week before .
 President was faced with a virtual fait accompli before he had an opportunity to make a decision . The President was therefore faced with an almost impossible decision .
 Even then Kennedy knew he had been had, and it did not take him long to confirm it . Even then he knew he'd been had .
 The enormity of the schemes that had been set in motion long before he was elected was staggering . Moreover, the enormity . of the various schemes . had to be set . up before he had been elected, he said .
 By May 1960, after the anti-Castro program had begun, the stage was prepared for the entry of U.S. troops into Vietnam War . The stage was also prepared for entry of American troops into the Vietnam War.
 The master war planners took advantage of the period when the country was involved with a presidential election, when the powers of the presidency were at their lowest ebb . The master strategists used the time of the election to take advantage .
 Eisenhower was not told what was going on, and it would be some time before the new President would be able to do anything about it, once he was informed .
 After eight years of peace, the national mood for detente was strong, and the incident was needed to reverse this, says the author . After eight . years . peace, it was needed, he says .
 On May 1, 1960, a CIA U-2 spy plane piloted by Gary Powers was launched on what would have been its longest flight ever, directly across the Soviet Union from Pakistan to Norway . The plane would have made the longest flight of its kind ever .
 Khrushchev concluded Eisenhower had deliberately wrecked what had been planned as the “ultimate summit conference” in Paris . Eisenhower accepted the blame for the crash-landing of the plane . The incident served to reverse the trend toward detente that had been carefully orchestrated .
 With the summit conference disrupted, the road to Saigon, and disaster, was clear . The road to disaster was clear, with Saigon's summit conference interrupted .
 The road to Saigon was meticulously planned by experts in the war-making business . The road was paved meticulously in Vietnam's pre-war planning .
 The powers-that-be formulated a counterinsurgency plan for Vietnam . In order to set this plan irrevocably into motion, the powers that be formulated a plan for the country .
 The events that followed the formulation of this plan constitute an intriguing series of incidents . The events in which the plan was formed are an intriguing set of events .
 Just prior to Kennedy’s election, the U.S. Army Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, was rejuvenated . The Special Warting Center is located in North Carolina .
 A new curriculum was written that combined counterinsurgency with pacification tactics that were already being employed by the French forces in Algeria . It was combined with Civic Action programs borrowed from the United States Army’s Civil Affairs and Military Government school at Fort Gordon, Georgia .
 This new Special Forces Green Beret school at Fort Bragg received substantial aid from the CIA, as well as from the Office of Special Operations .
 The Special Warfare Center opened a new counterinsurgency school for U.S. and foreign military students in November 1960 . The strength of the forces was increased .
 Kennedy asked Dulles to stay on as the director of central intelligence . Two days later, on November 10, Kennedy asked him to stay . Dulles was the CIA director of Central Intelligence .
 Three battalions of President Diem’s elite guard had taken part in a coup d’etat at the presidential palace in Saigon . The incident was quickly suppressed by Diem's forces .
 President Diem ordered the arrest of what was known as the Caravelle Group, eighteen political opponents of the Diem brothers’ dictatorial regime . Under the cover of that contrived action, the president ordered the arrests of 18 political opponents . The arrests were under the cover
 They had published a scholarly ‘Manifesto of the Eighteen,” and for this they were thrown in jail . For this, they were throwing them in jail for publishing a scholarly 'ManifestO of the 18'
 Edward G Lansdale was a leader in the development of the new Special Forces curriculum for the Special Forces in Vietnam . Lansdale is the author of a new curriculum for Special Forces at Fort Bragg .
 He took advantage of Kennedy’s election and of Dulles’ reappointment to make a sudden, unannounced trip to Saigon . The trip was a surprise visit to Vietnam .
 The trip was for the purposes of winning Diem’s support and cooperation for the counterinsurgency program in Vietnam . Lansdale's trip furthered his chances of being named ambassador to Saigon by Kennedy .
 Lansdale wrote a stirring report on the situation in Vietnam for his boss, the secretary of defense . Lansdale's visit to Vietnam set the stage for so many of the events that followed .
 This report was brought to the attention of key members of the new Kennedy team at the time of the inauguration . The Kennedy team was aware of the report before the inauguration of President Obama .
 Lansdale was summoned to the White House to meet with President Kennedy and officials from the Departments of Defense and State . In late January 1961, Lansdale met with new people who had come into the administration .
 He was warmly greeted by the President and commended for his excellent report . The President was also warmly welcomed by the president .
 On April 12, 1961, a memo was written by Kennedy adviser Walt Rostow that was supportive of the Lansdale report . Kennedy also informed him that he could expect to be sent back to Vietnam in a high capacity .
 Lansdale, on April 19, submitted another memo to his new boss, Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara . Lansdale's memo was sent to McNamara, the secretary of defense, for the first time .
 Lansdale’s strongest support had come from Allen Dulles and Ngo Dinh Diem . Up to this time, Lansdale had strongest support from Dulles, Diem and Dulles .
 The anti-Castro project and the counterinsurgency program for Vietnam had been running simultaneously . For more than a year, the project was running simultaneously in Vietnam . The program is now being conducted in Vietnam for the first time .
 The dates of the surrender of the brigade at the Bay of Pigs and the turn toward Saigon are noteworthy . The Americanization of the warfare in Vietnam in Vietnam also began on April 20, 1961 .
 On April 20, 1961, President Kennedy accepted the counterinsurgency program for Vietnam . President Kennedy was distraught over the disaster in Cuba . He directed Deputy Secretary of Defense to make recommendations .
 Gilpatric and Lansdale headed a task force established to carry out those instructions from the President .
 April 20, 1961, was the day Kennedy began to understand how the CIA and the Defense Department operated in this amazing world of clandestine operations . The day Kennedy learned of the CIA's clandestine operations was April 20 .
 It was also the day Allen Dulles’s influence in the Kennedy administration ended . The day was the day the Dulles' influence in Kennedy administration was ended .
 Lansdale’s dream of being ambassador to Saigon collapsed . With the eclipse of Dulles and the CIA, Lansdale's dream to be ambassador to Vietnam collapsed .
 Kennedy adopted the concept of counterinsurgency as his own, as he shifted his thoughts and energies from the failure in Cuba to the future in Indochina .
 The Joint Staff would be dedicated to counterinsurgency and special activities . Earle Wheeler, and Secretary McNamara decided to create a new section within the structure of the Joint Staff . The section was created in 1961 .
 The counterinsurgency element of that office was to be the cap on all military services in support of that program for Vietnam . It was intended to cap the number of military services supporting the program .
 The special activities were a combination of special operations and plans, the special art of military cover and deception . The special operations were the military support of the clandestine activities of the CIA . To balance the rapid growth of the U.S. Special Forces program and its new Special Warfare Center at
 A combat-crew training squadron was activated at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida in April 1961 .
 The mission of that special squadron included counterinsurgency, unconventional warfare, and psychological warfare operations . The squadron's mission was to combat the Taliban .
 Shortly thereafter, this cadre was expanded significantly to become a Special Air Warfare Center . This included an Air Commando wing and a Combat Applications group . Shortly thereafter it was expanded to include an Air Command Wing .
 Special Air Warfare units from the center at Eglin were deployed to South Vietnam . It should be noted that both the Green Berets of the Army Special Forces and the Air Commandos had been developed and trained in close cooperation with the CIA .
 President Reagan later duplicated during his administration with some of the same people in Central America . They were what President Reagan duplicated .
 Reagan was unable to create a Nicaraguan George Washington . Reagan was not able to create George Washington, but what he failed to create was a George Washington.
 Fansdale created a ‘Father of his Country’ in the person of Ngo Dinh Diem . Fansdale had created a father of his country in Vietnam . The first thing Fansdale did in Vietnam was to create a “Father of the Country”
 By the end of April 1961, a revised counterinsurgency program— had been submitted to President Kennedy, without the Fansdale material .
 The deployment of a four-hundred-man Special Forces group to South Vietnam was made to accelerate training of the South Vietnamese army .
 By April 20, Kennedy knew that if he was ever going to gain full control of the CIA, he would have to understand what went wrong with the anti-Castro program and what he had to do to take over control .
 With the collapse of the brigade in Cuba, Kennedy lost no time in getting to the heart of the matter . Kennedy lost his interest in the matter of Cuba .
 This is a revolutionary statement when one considers who wrote it and the circumstances under which it was promulgated, it says . It is a revolution in the history of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The Cold War was a massive global struggle that existed only in vague terms . It was only vague terms, but the Cold War existed in a global struggle . The U.S. has been in the midst of a global war since the 1950s .
 A “Cold War operation” was a very specific term that referred to a secret, clandestine activity . A ‘Cold War’ operation, however, was a Cold War operation .
 Traditionally, the uniformed services of this country have not been authorized to become involved in clandestine activities in peacetime . Uniformed services not allowed to become . involved in . clandestine activities .
 President Kennedy was making the Joint Chiefs of Staff—the military forces of the United States—responsible for the Cold War, just as they would be responsible for a real, declared state of war among nations . Therefore, with NSAM #55, with . President Kennedy, with the Joint
 This was a radical departure from the traditional rules of warfare among the family of nations . This was the first time the U.S. has taken a direct lead in the fight against the Taliban .
 Kennedy directed that U.S. military forces be used against any Cold War adversary, whether or not there had been a declaration of war . Kennedy was directing that . United States military forces should be used .
 If these presidential directives had become operationally effective, they would have changed the course of the war in Vietnam . This was a revolutionary doctrine, especially for the U.S. President Richard Nixon's administration .
 They would effectively have removed the CIA from Cold War operations . They would have limited the CIA to its sole lawful responsibility, the coordination of intelligence, the author says .
 In many situations, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would have been the day-to-day counterpart of the secretary of state . This would have made the chairman of the Joint chiefs of Staff the day to day counterpart .
 Documents stated Kennedy's position, clearly setting forth his battle plan . At the same time, these documents stated the Kennedy position . Kennedy said the documents stated his position .
 Kennedy was taking charge, if he could, and he was relying upon the Joint Chiefs of Staff for assistance . Kennedy was in control of the situation in the early days of the war .
 He did not know it at the time, but with the . issuance of these directives, he had only eighteen months left to win his battle against the CIA and its allies, or to die in the attempt .
 Kennedy chose the Joint Chiefs of Staff over the CIA to become his strong right arm . Kennedy chose them over CIA to be his strong arm in the wake of 9/11 .
 He did this because of the strength and courage of Maxwell Taylor’s letter, he said . He said it was because he was inspired by the letter .
 By midsummer, Taylor had become Kennedy’s military and intelligence adviser in the White House . Taylor had been Kennedy's military and intel adviser .
 Kennedy appointed him to be chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in October 1962 . Kennedy was appointed as chairman of Joint Chiefs in October of 1962 .
 Taylor wrote a long-hidden “Letter to the President” that Taylor wrote on June 13, 1961 . Those words, along with many others like them from the same series of documents, were taken verbatim from the document .
 Kennedy asserted a power of the presidency that he assumed he had, but when his orders were delivered to the men to whom they were addressed, he discovered that his power was all but meaningless . Kennedy asserted that he thought he had the power he assumed .
 I was told to have them put in the chairman’s file, where they remained . During that meeting, I was . told to put them in the . chairman's file . The chairman of the committee put them back in the file .
 President Kennedy learned that his weapons were powerless and his directives unheeded . In the great struggle between Kennedy and the entrenched power sources of Washington, as personified by the CIA and its allies in the Defense Department and the military-industrial complex, the President learned .
 On June 28, 1961, three top-level White House directives, National Security Action Memoranda, were published . National Security action Memoranda was published by the White House in 1961 .
 NS AM #55, “Relations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the President in Cold War Operations,” was signed by Kennedy and sent directly to the chairman of the joint chiefs of Staff .
 Ordinarily it would have gone to the chairman via the secretary of defense . The secretary of state and the director, central intelligence, would have been given copies of the document .
 The directive was the most important single act of the first year of the Kennedy presidency . Without doubt, this directive was most important .
 He had determined to limit the CIA’s role in clandestine activities, perhaps eliminate it altogether . The CIA chief says he wants to reduce the CIA's clandestine activities .
 This was the first in a series of such top-level policy directives issued by Kennedy that culminated in NS AM #263, issued one month before his murder . Kennedy issued the first such directive one month earlier .
 The Cuban Study Group report contained in a “Letter to the President” from Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . As far as I know, they have never before this work been linked with their source document .
 The White House did make a copy of NS AM #55 available separately to the secretary of defense . NSAM #55 was made available to Secretary of Defense .
 No copy was sent to either the secretary of state or to the director of central intelligence . No copy of the document was sent by either of those involved in the decision .
 Kennedy’s no-nonsense policy directives marked the first steps in his ambitious plan to change the course of Cold War operations, which, for the most part, had been made the responsibility of the CIA since 1947 .
 These remarkable documents led directly to Reagan decision to do away with Eisenhower-period “plausibly deniable” covert operations . Reagan decided to come out into the open with Cold War operations, such as his action against Grenada .
 The Bush administration has continued this “overt’s policy with its attack on Panama and Desert Storm operation . Bush administration continued this "overt" policy with Panama and the Desert Storm attack .
 Whether or not this new military policy has been formally proclaimed the official guideline of the United States, it is being practiced today, as evidenced by the Gulf War . The Gulf War was the first Gulf War of the Cold War .
 This policy means, in effect, that national sovereignty no longer exists and that a nation’s independence and borders are no longer sacred . This policy is a violation of the U.S. Constitution, Sen. Marco Rubio says .
 As this newer doctrine becomes more widely implemented, the traditional family of nations will dissolve into a shambles of raw power .
 This doctrine was adopted from the writings of Mao Tse-tung, first attained prominence and a measure of legitimacy under the signature of John F Kennedy, who clearly and unhesitatingly stated his intentions in NS AM #55 .
 I regard the Joint Chiefs of Staff as my principal military adviser . I regard them as responsible for initiating advice to me and for responding to requests for advice .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff have a responsibility for the defense of the nation in the Cold War similar to that which they have in conventional hostilities . Joint Chiefs have responsibility for defense of nation in Cold War .
 As used in these directives, the term “Cold War operations” generally referred to covert operations, although it was not entirely limited to secret activities .
 President was bringing the experienced military Chiefs of Staff into an area of operation that had been declared to be outside the scope of the uniformed services in peacetime . NSC Directive #5412 declared that such an area was outside of the scope .
 A first step in this direction had taken place in 1957, when the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was made a member of the NSC #5412 “Special Group” that had been empowered to approve clandestine operations .
 JFK signed policy statements that arose from a study of the Bay of Pigs operation . It must be noted that these policy statements arose directly from the study . JFK signed the policy statements in response to a study into the operation of the operation .
 President Kennedy directed an essential, covert air strike against Castro’s last three combat aircraft . President Kennedy had directed an important, covert, covert strike .
 Others have charged that Kennedy should have provided U.S. military ‘air cover’ for Cuban exile brigade on beach . NSC #5412 stipulations of NSC#5412 apply only to Cuban exile .
 Those who make this charge do not realize that the NSC had prohibited the utilization of regular military forces in support of clandestine activity . That prohibition had established the parameters of the overall strategy, says the author .
 He was making it possible, when necessary, to turn to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for just such purposes as had previously arisen at the time of the Bay of Pigs operation . The Joint Chiefs' role was similar to that of the time .
 NS AM #55 is an important statement, and much could be said about it as it has reappeared during succeeding administrations . Thus, much has been said about the statement .
 In conventional hostilities, as defined by Clausewitz^ or in the traditional sense, the military establishment takes over from the diplomats and is made responsible for total war against the citizens, territory, and property of the enemy .
 The doctrine has the effect of raising the Cold War to a higher and more overt level and prescribes a role for the U.S. military that it has never had before . Converting this doctrine for application during time of peace, albeit during the . Cold War, however, has
 When these three directives hit the Joint Staff, the wheels within wheels of the Pentagon began to grind . The Joint Staff began to begin to grind after the directives were issued .
 The situation was exacerbated by the fact that no immediate explanation for this significant policy change had reached the CIA or the Department of State . No immediate explanation had been given to the CIA, the State Department or the CIA .
 The first thing that is done is to dispatch secret investigators in all directions to discover the origin of the new policy and to determine what the change means . Within the bureaucracy, whenever a major shift in policy occurs, it is done .
 A new President and a new presidential staff rarely come equipped with sufficient experience to produce such major changes on their own in one swift stroke .
 It was thought that Ted Sorensen, the President’s counsel, and Bobby Kennedy must have been the source of these directives . Ted Soresen was thought to be the source .
 The Pentagon, the CIA, and the Department of State -- each for their own reasons -- probed the White House . The Pentagon and the CIA are among the agencies involved in the probe .
 They were unable to find any person, or any prior work, that gave clues to the origin of these very special papers .
 The problem was made worse by the fact that very few copies of these NS AMs had been made available to anyone . The NSAMs were made available for anyone to download .
 The true source was not discovered for many years, and therein lies a story of great importance, one that has threaded its way through the Cold War era for decades . "The true source of this story was discovered by the Soviets in the 1970s and '80s, but it was
 During this period the whole concept of warfare, the role of the military, and the nature of the modern nation-state have been drastically altered, at a cost, to United States citizens alone, of no less than $3 trillion . The cost of the U.S. citizens alone
 President Kennedy created an explosive force within the environs of the government and its allies such that the resulting mass went critical on the streets of Dallas on November 22, 1963 .
 As this secret is exposed, it will reveal how it happened that select elements of the United States Army and their CIA associates became interested in the Chinese Communist leader Mao Tse-tung's undercover warfare tactics .
 Historians have failed to note that Chiang Kai-shek and his wife, May Ling, and a special Chinese delegation had accompanied them from Cairo . This secret originated from the fact that Winston Churchill and Franklin D Roosevelt had gone to the Tehran Conference in late November 1943 to meet with
 This was a most important summit meeting not only for the purposes of advancing war planning in Europe but for much longer range planning in the Far East . Planning has spilled over into the Cold War era with the Korean and Indochinese warfare of later years .
 This select Chinese delegation had a delicate task to perform that involved Stalin and could not be made public for several reasons . The task was not made public because of several reasons, including Stalin .
 The Chinese forces of Chiang Kai-shek had a more complex problem than the Soviets, British, and Americans opposed the Japanese in Europe and in the Pacific .
 Chiang's men were threatened also by the formidable Chinese Communist army under Mao Tsetung . While Chiang was faced by an external force from Japan, his men were also threatened by the Communist army .
 The British and Americans wanted Chiang to put more pressure on the Japanese on the mainland . Chiang wanted to put pressure on Japan on the Chinese mainland .
 If he moves troops facing Mao, in China, to engage the Japanese, he would expose the rear elements of his army . But if he moved troops facing . Mao, China, would expose his army, it would expose .
 He could not move his army from its positions against Mao’s forces in order to aid the Allies against the Japanese and hope to survive the threat of the Chinese Communists . Therefore, he couldn’t move his forces from their positions to help the Allied forces .
 The other part of the problem was that as British and American forces were moved in increasing numbers onto the mainland of China to help Chiang against the Japanese . It was inevitable that somewhere along the line they would encounter Chinese Communist forces that were ideological allies of the Soviets .
 Such complex affairs do not digest well in time of war, when the friendversus-enemy scenario is supposed to be as clear as black and white . Such complex matters don't digest well well in times of war .
 This is why the four powers could not meet publicly at one time in one place, and this explains why there had to be two conferences, one in Cairo and one in Tehran .
 Chiang Kaishek’s Chinese won a concession from Stalin to have him prevail upon his ideological ally, Mao Tse-tung, to withhold his forces from further pressure on Chiang, at least until the war with Japan ended . And it further explains why the
 Such intricate diplomacy in the heat of the war demanded true statesmanship all around . Such diplomacy is needed in order to keep the peace in the world .
 It is not within the scope of this book to venture into the areas of diplomacy and political intrigue that grew out of this most important meeting .
 U.S. military doctrine emerged and shaped itself during the Cold War years . We shall pursue its impact upon the development of a new trend in United States military doctrine that emerged from that period .
 NSAM #55, #56, and #57 series of presidential directives that John F Kennedy issued in June 1961 as he initiated his objective of bringing the CIA under his effective control by putting the military into the “Peacetime Operations” business .
 American military aid to and participation with the Chinese on the mainland increased enormously . Following the Tehran and Cairo conferences, U.S. military aid increased .
 A group of B-29 Super Fortress bombers was flown from the United States via Africa and the Middle East to bases in the Assam Valley wartime airport complex of eastern India .
 They were flown to advance bases in China for direct operations against the Japanese home islands . From there they were flown . From then they were . flown to bases in . China .
 It was during the post-Tehran Conference period that selected American military leaders ran up against conditions in China that were totally uncharacteristic of the U.S. military practices and doctrine of the United States. The U.N. has been in China for more than a decade .
 China was fighting a conventional war against the Japanese and a civil war with Mao . In China, military force was deeply involved in a political role at the same time as it was fighting conventional war .
 This necessarily political role of the military opened the eyes of the more traditional U.S. military observers, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The United States had sent a number of its finest military leaders to China . The U.S. had sent many of its best military leaders there .
 A number of these officers and their key subordinates came home from the war in Asia deeply impressed with what they had experienced there .
 U.S. military men once thought warfare was something that took place overseas, beyond our borders . World War II was the first World War I, and even before it, military men viewed warfare as something beyond borders .
 The British and French military traditions of our allies in Europe were generally true until the closing period of the war . This, they found, was also generally true of the military tradition of Britain and France in Europe .
 After the surrender of Italy, the United States Army began to help the Italians, who had been under Fascist totalitarian rule for a generation or more . The U.S. Army began helping the Italians in 1945 .
 They needed help not only to obtain food, shelter, and clothing, but also to restructure local governments . They needed money not only . But they also needed help to rebuild local governments, they said .
 American servicemen pitched in to get public water supplies flowing again, to get transportation rolling, and even to form a political structure that could take over the local administrations .
 This function spread all over Europe as cities and towns were liberated, one after the other, by the advancing U.S. armies .
 If the future of warfare was going to face up to reality, it would have to recognize that whole countries, or at least major regions, would be devastated by nuclear weapons and their lethal fallout .
 During the late 1940s and early 1950s, the War Colleges, where military doctrine is developed, began the study of nuclear weapons and their immense power, with the idea of placing these weapons into wartime Grand Strategy . During the 1950s and '50s, War Colleges' began the
 The nuclear weapon extended the spectrum of power almost to infinity . The B-29 bomber extended the power of warfare from hand-held clubs to the nuclear weapon .
 The curriculum of each of these schools for senior officers contained major segments on nuclear warfare . The curriculum included major segments of nuclear warfare, including nuclear weapons .
 This new nuclear-age strategy recognizes a type of warfare initiated by a sudden exchange of nuclear weapons, followed by a time of shock and stagnation . This new strategy recognized a new kind of warfare .
 The urban areas of the Soviet Union, it was contemplated, would be devastated, and transportation and communications would be totally disrupted . It was planned for the urban areas to be devastated and transportation would be disrupted .
 The daily activities of the surviving population would be at a standstill, with no voice of leadership from the Kremlin; the survivors would be on their own . The survivors would have to rely on the help of the Kremlin .
 War Plans forecast that the first nation that could introduce, by airlift, its military forces into this shocked and devastated area would seal victory . The first nation could reestablish law and order, along with a new political and economic system, could seal victory.
 The newly established CIA was brought into the warplanning activity . The CIA was visualized as a fourth force in wartime . For this purpose, the newly established agency was brought in .
 The CIA was asked to oversee the development of these special activities in peacetime and to manage their operation in time of war . The CIA has been tasked with developing the special activities .
 The air force was ordered to create a huge, global air transport system that could be rapidly augmented at the outbreak of war by CRAF aircraft from the airlines .
 This huge air armada would airlift the army and essential supplies into enemy zones that had been specifically avoided by nuclear strikes to be sanctuaries and rallying zones following the nuclear deluge . The armada airlifted the army into enemy areas that were specifically avoided .
 "Special Forces" units would begin to create a government that would include a new economic and political system . Those army “Special Forces” units would work with the CIA and its "stay-behind" assets .
 The United States Army was directed to create, in peacetime, a Special Warfare section, to train Special Forces . The U.S. Army would then disperse Special Forces to strategic locations around the world .
 CIA directed to establish networks of foreign agents, in peacetime, far behind the borders of potential enemy countries . CIA had been directed to do everything possible to establish . networks of . foreign agents .
 With the outbreak of war, the CIA would activate these “stay-behind” networks in preparation for the arrival of U.S. armed forces . The networks would activate in the event of a war .
 ARC Wings possessed airborne printing facilities that could be operated in flight . ARC Wings were designed to be able to print and print in a controlled environment . The ARC Wings had airborne printing capabilities .
 Leaflet drops provide psychological-warfare edge and communications substitute required to reorganize populace . They were able to make areawide blanket leaflet drops to provide psychological edge .
 Mao doctrine was shaped expertly to become the Cold War doctrine and the tactics of the Vietnam era, among other applications . On reflection, it is amazing to see how these two widely divergent concepts became a Grand Strategy war plan .
 This planning was behind the “Strategic Hamlet’s concept that will be described later . For example, this planning was . behind the "Strategic . Hamlet concept .
 Military action was a main theme of the military action concept of the 1980s and 1990s . It is even more fascinating to see how all this has been shaped in the hands of later administrations .
 This new doctrine needed eyes and ears and, if possible, reliable contacts within the denied areas of Soviet, or other potential-enemy, territory . The new doctrine was needed to be successful, and it would be a success .
 The relatively new CIA, concentrating for the most part on its mission of intelligence, had none of the bases, military equipment, manpower, storage sites, etc., required for such a task .
 The CIA made a characteristically clever and self-serving decision . It sorely wanted to be the Fourth Force, but did not possess the wherewithal to pull it off .
 The agency placed the burden of support right back on the military system . The agency said it was placing the burden on military personnel .
 As the years passed, the CIA amassed enormous stockpiles of War Plans-authorized equipment in warehouses . The equipment was ostensibly to await either a military exercise to flex its muscles or the real thing .
 This is the way the CIA got its toe in the door to flesh out its early clandestine operations . This was the CIA's first clandestine operation in the U.S.
 These two strategic concepts, one gleaned from the China of Mao Tse-tung and the other arising out of the wartime devastation of Europe, began to merge with the nuclear reality .
 American military officers with Asian experience began to soak up the European concept of Civic Action and Special Warfare . U.S. officers with . Asian experience . began . soaking up the concept of . Civic Action .
 This change of direction became the central theme of the warfare in Indochina during the 1960s and 1970s . It later became the dominant theme of President Reagan’s military policy, as evidenced in Central America, Africa, and the Middle East .
 In earlier days, such “Peacetime Operations” were secret, and every attempt was made to keep them that way . Now, the U.S. government is trying to keep such operations secret .
 Today they are called “covert,” but they are as overt as the attacks on Libya . The attacks are, of course, readily attributable to the U.S. They are, for example .
 "This situation marks the end of the principle that honored national sovereignty among the family of nations," says President Obama . "It is not the first time this has happened, but it is the end to the principle," says Obama .
 By 1958, senior military officers at the Army War College heard lectures on these subjects presented by the new breed of U.S. military strategist . The lectures were lectures on the subjects presented to senior officers .
 Mao Tse-tung explained the importance of the Communist politico-military forces in the new modern warfare . Mao's political and military forces are key to the Communist Party's success .
 Main purpose deals with the armypeople relationship for winning over people to unite with the armed forces . Their main purpose is to win over people who want to join forces .
 They can be adopted by all other armies, especially guerrilla forces . They can also be adopted as a model for guerrilla forces, especially in guerrilla warfare .
 There are those who cannot imagine how guerrillas could survive for long in the rear of the enemy .
 They do not understand the relationship between the people and the army, they say . But they do, they do . But, they don't understand the . relationship between people and army .
 In other words, all of the teaching of Mao, the Chinese Communist leader, had become part of the doctrine of the new U.S. military strategy . "All of a sudden the teaching . of Mao had become . part of a . new United States military strategy."
 This example of the “fish in the water” was repeated thousands of times in thousands of lectures . The example of this example of . the ‘fish in . the . water’ was repeated . thousands of . lectures . This example . of the . fish in the
 There are often military elements who care for only military affairs but not politics . There is often a lack of interest in politics in politics, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Such one-track-minded military officers ignore the interconnection between politics and military affairs . They must be made to understand the correct relationship between the two, he says .
 All military actions are means to achieve certain political objectives, while military action itself is a manifested form of politics . The U.S. military has been involved in Iraq and Syria in the past .
 There are of course differences between political and military affairs, each with its special characteristics, but the one should not be disconnected and isolated from the other . There are also differences between the political, military affairs and the military .
 The world today is already in a new era of evolution and today's war is already approaching the world’s last armed conflict . The world is in an evolutionary state of flux, and the world is about to enter a new age of evolution .
 No matter how long this war is going to last, there is no doubt that it is approaching the last conflict in history . No doubt that the war in Iraq and Syria will be the last in history, says CNN's John Sutter .
 After such a prolonged, ruthless war, there will emerge an unprecedented new era for mankind in which there will be no more wars, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "There will emerge a historically unprecedented new age for mankind"
 These are the written comments of one of the greatest military leaders of modem times . The comments were made by one of America's most famous military leaders .
 They knew it did not have immediate application within the United States, but they saw ways to create armies of this type in other countries, particularly in the emerging Third World nations . The U.S. saw ways of creating armies that could be used in emerging countries, they said .
 The next step on the road to full implementation of this new doctrine involved the joining of the teaching of Mao with the curriculum of the Civil Affairs and Military Government School at Fort Gordon, Georgia .
 Senior army officials began to see that the United States Army had a Cold War role . From army platforms such statements as “the kind of peace we have today is too important to entrust to the career diplomats and professional economists” became common as U.S. Army officials began
 This new doctrine proposed that somehow a strong army under a powerful leader such as Gen. Gen. George W. Bush would be able to defeat the Taliban in Afghanistan . A strong army, such as a powerful Gen. Bush, would have to be strong enough to defeat a Taliban insurgency,
 Augusto Pinochet of Chile was supposed to build “representative” government . Pinochet’s government was meant to be a representative of the Chilean people . The Pinochet government is supposed to be one of the world's most powerful .
 The seat of government becomes engulfed by this new army, and the people are subjugated . The people were subjugated by this army, says the historian .
 "Once in power, and with that army under his control, the tables were completely turned," he says . "The tables are completely turned. Once in power ... the tables are turned"
 Some of these developments in U.S. military doctrine since World War II may seem obscure . To those who are not students of the evolution of warfare and the history of war, these developments may seem complex and obscure .
 The regular armed forces have always been regarded as a base or cadre upon which the much larger forces required for overseas warfare could be built . The U.S. has always been seen as an important military force for the United States .
 The role of the regular armed forces, between wars, has been to train and equip themselves for war, and no more . The role is to train, equip and prepare the troops for war and not more, says David Cameron .
 In the past, the United States has never used armed forces, during peacetime, for political or diplomatic reasons, other than for an occasional show of force externally . The U.S. never uses armed forces for political, diplomatic reasons .
 The emergence of U.S. military doctrine tailored to the policies of Chairman Mao is quite a departure, especially when flavored with the “Civil Affairs and Military Government” concept . Therefore, the emergence of United States military doctrine .
 The U.S. armed forces have, for the most part, been cautious about this role . The United States has been cautious in the past, but it has taken on the role .
 Over the years they have associated themselves with the armed forces of Third World nations, in support of this concept of the army being the ‘fish” in the “water” of the populace .
 Tens of thousands of leaders in the armed forces of Third World countries have attended U.S. military schools . They have been taught to adopt an Americanized version of Mao’s ideas of the politico-military relationships .
 This was the case in Indochina between 1954 and 1965, and this is how it happened that the tactics of the Vietnam War were so closely allied with these Maoist ideas . The tactics of Vietnam War was so closely aligned with Maoism ideas, the author says .
 In other examples, covert operations were run, as much with a blank checkbook as anything else, to build up a new, popular military leader, as in the case of Ramon Magsaysay in the Philippines .
 As described in earlier chapters, Magsaysay’s CIA-supported rise placed him at the head of the military forces in the Philippines . The CIA supported his rise to power in the country . As described earlier chapters of this book, this is the first chapter of the book
 Once Magsaysay reached that level of military power, he also became the head of state, with the support of a strong army . And the fact is that once . once . he reached that . level of . military power . He also became . president of the Philippines with the
 Other examples of the theoretical application of these principles have involved such countries as Iran, Chile, Guatemala, . Guatemala, the Congo, Indonesia, Tibet, Vietnam, and Laos .
 In every case where the intent was to create a model ‘Mao-defined’ army has failed, it has failed . In all cases, the intention was to make a model of a Mao-defined army, it failed .
 Proponents of the doctrine continued their work . In spite of this, however, proponents of this work continued their efforts .
 Since World War II, the Department of Defense had become the perennial biggest spender in the government . Since that time, the department has been the biggest spending spender .
 If such a level of spending was to be continued, Cold War or not, there had to appear to be some reason for the vast procurement orders other than for actual warfare . Even more important, there must be some way to consume military hardware so that it would have to be replaced from
 Military hardware that is sent as “military aid’s” to other countries and maintained overseas . These same figures, perhaps even higher on the average, apply to the average of military hardware sent overseas .
 On such a scale, a modest $50 million order may grow to $500 million over time . The order could be a modest order, but it could grow to an order of $100 million .
 The industrial complex needs to have as broad a base as possible throughout the world in the armed forces of as many countries as possible . With this in mind, it is essential—from the point of view that the industrial complex supports, and in turn is supported by, the military—to
 At one time, Egypt was firmly in the “Communist” camp and purchased its military materiel from the Soviets . Egypt has purchased some of the world's most valuable military equipment from the Soviet Union .
 Soviet manufacturers were notoriously poor managers of essential follow-up supply requirements . However, the Soviet manufacturers did not manage to follow up supplies .
 The CIA sent a letter to the Defense Department suggesting that some armament suppliers should acquire Russian-made spare parts . The letter suggests that it might be wise for some armaments suppliers to acquire spare parts and to produce them for the Egyptians .
 It did not make any difference who was going to get military hardware or whose it was as long as the dollars flowed through the industry . "It did not matter who was getting military hardware," says President Obama .
 The “Mao doctrine” had been developed and preached at the War College level during the late 1950s by U.S. military experts steeped in Asian military lore . Two of them wrote one of the most influential military documents of the past half century .
 Army General Richard G Stilwell, who served as a member of this committee, and Air Force general Edward G Lansdale, were the principal authors of this report .
 The two generals were sponsored by Allen W Dulles, the director of central intelligence, and by the resurgent Army Special Warfare elements at Fort Bragg, North Carolina .
 It was most influential during the Vietnam War and in other Third World developments since that date .
 CIA had skillfully extricated the Dalai Lama from Tibet ahead of the invading Chinese Communist army . CIA was setting up a massive overflight program of support for the Tibetan Khampa tribesmen, who were fighting a losing battle against the Chinese .
 Maxwell Taylor served as chief of staff of the U.S. Army, from 1955 through 1959 . Taylor resigned because of differences with Pres. Eisenhower .
 This was the climate in which the new U.S. military doctrine reached the White House . The new US military doctrine was created by President Barack Obama . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Report paid lip service to “the essentiality of properly trained and motivated manpower” without using the word “military” Any observant reader could see through this thin smoke screen . In deference to the generalpurpose civilian Mutual Security Program, this report paid lip .
 It should be kept in mind that this was the context of army thinking at the time Gen. Gen. David Cameron was in charge of the Army .
 The military would be used to further “political stability, economic growth, and social change” in peacetime . In peacetime, the military would help further ‘political stability and economic growth’ in the U.S.
 For military forces in most Third World nations, such a function was unheard of . Such a function is unheard of in the Third World countries .
 It is not enough, however, to restrict leadership inputs to United States norms . It's not enough for the U.S. to limit leadership input to the world's leaders .
 Our Armed Forces have no operative responsibilities within national frontiers . They are not an integral part of the mechanism for maintenance of law and order . Except in specifically defined circumstances, our Armed Forces do not have operative responsibilities .
 The prevailing concept is expeditionary, an instrument of latent power, ready for projection abroad if the exigency arises . It is not only expeditionary but also expeditionary and expeditionary .
 "Their role has additional dimensions and their missions are actual as opposed to contingent," says President Obama . "Their roles have additional dimensions," he says of the military .
 They are a key element in the maintenance of internal security and are largely determinant of whether stability or instability characterizes the routine of government . They are key to maintaining security in the United States .
 'Those who lead, or are destined to lead, must acquire qualifications and attributes beyond the criteria which identify the successful commander in combat. Those who lead must also acquire qualifications, and attributes, beyond those which identify them in combat, to be a leader .
 Officer Corps is a rich source of potential leaders of the national civil service, the professional class, and other nonmilitary sectors . Officer Corps in most less developed countries are a rich resource for potential leaders in the civil service and professional class .
 "Here one finds a high degree of discipline, dedication, and political moderation," he says . "Here is a high level of discipline and dedication," he adds .
 The Officer Corps, as a unit, may accede to the reins of government as the only alternative to domestic chaos and leftist takeover . It's possible that the Officer Corps could accede with the government .
 Both considerations point to selection and preparation of promising officers for eventual occupation of high level managerial posts in the civil sector, public and private .
 In the field of general education, as in the development of national leadership, the military establishments can play a significant role . The military establishments are important in education and national leadership development .
 During the Cold War, the full significance of these statements may not have been clear to many readers, because our concern with the threat of “Communism” and the Soviet Union was all that mattered .
 As these words are read in the nineties, they take on an altogether new significance as the policy statement of the military organizations of the world under a New World Order . However, as these words take on a new significance, they become an entirely new significance .
 This introductory material was woven into the Mutual Security Program report to create a bridge from the more normal nonmilitary and political elements of the work to the revolutionary Cold War military doctrine .
 It served as a palliative for the civilian sector, both at home and abroad . It was a 'palliative' for the civilians, both home and away from the military .
 Report sounds more like Chairman Mao and his political-military army that was deeply involved in the internal affairs of the state . But as the report moved along into a presentation of its military-sector concepts, it began to sound more like Mao .
 This subject was significant in the Eisenhower era, and it grew more controversial and dynamic during the aborted Kennedy period . This subject grew to be more controversial during the Kennedy era .
 Some of the same military officers who developed and promoted these concepts are even today in high-level positions where they are able to promote it and influence top-level policy more than ever before .
 The quotes are a reminder of how something novel in 1959 and 1960 has come to be taken as an accepted philosophy, especially now that the Cold War is over . The quotes involve military subjects that are taken directly from this report .
 MAP-supported military establishments throughout the less developed areas have political and socioeconomic potential which, if properly exploited, may far outweigh their contribution to the deterrence of military aggression . In the past year, a number of informed and thoughtful observers have pointed out that .
 It is not enough to charge armed forces with responsibility for the military aspects of deterrence . It's not enough for the armed forces to be charged with the military aspect of deterrence, it is said .
 They represent too great an investment in manpower and money to be restricted to such a limited mission . The mission is too much of an investment to be limited to the limited scope of the mission .
 The real measure of their worthiness is found in the effectiveness of their contribution to the furtherance of national objectives, short of conflict, says the British Prime Minister .
 The opportunities are greatest in the less-developed societies where the military occupy a pivotal position between government and populace . And the opportunities therefore are . greatest in . less developed societies .
 The army can become an internal motor for economic growth and sociopolitical transformation, says one writer . "If . properly employed, the army can be used to drive economic growth," he says .
 U.S. military policy was concealed behind a Third World policy, concealed in 1959 . It reaches a climax with the following statements of United States military policy, which was hidden in 1959, .
 White House presentation shows how thoroughly the new U.S. military doctrine follows the teachings of Chairman Mao, authors say .
 They are at once the guardians of the government and the guarantors that the government keeps faith with the aspirations of the nation . They are also guardians of government and guarantors of government's faith .
 It is in their power to insure that the conduct of government is responsive to the people, says the minister . It is also in their duty to ensure that the people are responsive to obligations of citizenship .
 The Eisenhower White House Report takes on full color when we recall that Chairman Mao had launched, in 1957, the Great Leap Forward . Mao launched in 1957—only two years before this report was written, the report says . The report was published by President Eisenhower in 1953 .
 The CIA was working with the Diem government of South Vietnam to establish hundreds of similar communes . The communes were called “Agrovilles” and later “Strategic Hamlets” in South Vietnam .
 Mao’s doctrine, even in the Great Leap Forward, found itself flowing from the pens of U.S. military officers in the form of revolutionary ideas . Mao's doctrine was found in the United States in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The new U.S. military doctrine was thrust upon the emerging government of Vietnam . The concept of Cold War operations permeated the highest levels of government at the time Kennedy was inaugurated in 1961 .
 By the mid-1950s, significant elements of the U.S. military establishment had begun to accept the fact that a nuclear war was impossible . The Cold War was the best scenario for those who saw some form of warfare as essential to the existence of the nation-state .
 A top-level study commissioned in August 1963 described an attitude that had begun to surface right after the inauguration of John F Kennedy . It stated that a nation-state could not survive without warfare, and this work was published in 1963 .
 The members of Kennedy’s inner circle were concerned that no serious work had been done to plan for peace in the world, and such discussions were heard in the Pentagon . Such discussions were often heard in Washington, D.C.
 The commissioning of the study in Report From Iron Mountain illustrates this concern . Report from Iron Mountain was commissioned by the government in 2007 .
 He was well aware of the situation in Washington and its progression into the Kennedy era, with Phi Beta Kappas and other men of experience and learning . He is a well-informed man .
 The most interesting part of both “reports” is the many ways in which they overlap and agree with each other, and how they have become part of the modern military doctrine .
 Many good strategists in the United States military foresaw it, so they designed the parameters of the new type of military doctrine and constant warfare . The new kind of constant warfare would, for the most part, take place in the territory of relatively powerless Third World nations .
 In the process of stamping out “Communist-inspired subversive insurgency” or other bogeymen foes, millions of defenseless little people were murdered .
 Classic examples of this was the massive slaughter in Cambodia, the Iran-Iraq war, and subsequently “Desert Storm” and other related hostilities in the Middle East . Classic examples were the . Iran- . Iraq war, the Vietnam War, and the Vietnam-era Vietnam War
 Maxwell Taylor, on the Cuban Study Group after the Bay of Pigs disaster . Maxwell Taylor: The study group was formed in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Taylor had been the chief of staff of the U.S. Army when the Mutual Security Program report was written . Taylor was in charge of the United States Army at the time .
 He believed and endorsed this new doctrine that members of his army staff had developed . The new doctrine was developed by members of the army staff .
 The Cuban Study Group was the source of the report that had been given to the President on June 13, 1961, that in turn became National Security Action Memoranda #55, #56, and #57 on June 28 . The Cuban study group provided the report .
 General Taylor moved into the White House as military adviser to the President . Shortly thereafter, General Taylor joined forces with President Barack Obama .
 President Kennedy had just sent NSAM #55 to the incumbent chairman of the JCS, General Lemnitzer, saying that he wanted his advice on Cold War matters . Then he placed General Taylor in the White House for practically the same purpose .
 President sent General Taylor to Vietnam for a military report on the situation there . That October, the President sent him to Vietnam . General Taylor was sent to Vietnam to give a report .
 In 1962, Taylor was made chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He remained until 1964, when he left to become ambassador to South Vietnam .
 This is the story of a people who endured war for thirty years, who were driven from farm and home, and who had no way to get food, water, and the other necessities of life other than by banditry . The Magic Box, Trigger of the Expanded War in
 As veteran bandits they became good fighters, they credited their success to Ho Chi Minh, to General Giap, to Mao Tse-tung, to the Soviets, and, at times, to our own doves . They were so good they credited success to . Ho Chi
 In their own country they were know as the ‘dangerous brothers’ rather than the enemy . In their home country, they were known as “dangerous . brothers” rather than enemy .
 They were terrorized refugees in their own homeland, the beggars, the people of a ravaged land . The refugees are terrorized by the terror of their homeland . They are now the victims of a war ravaged land.
 If a person were to fly over the hills of Indochina, he might be reminded of the Green Mountain State of Vermont .
 He would see similar lush, rolling hills that pull a blanket of green up one side, over the top, and down the other . He would also see similar rolling hills in the same way .
 The Vermont hills were not always that way, not always peaceful . Read Kenneth Roberts’s great book of our own Revolutionary War, Northwest Passage .
 To the early American war heroes and to the British invaders, Vermont was a nightmare, a green hell . Vermont was Vermont's "green hell" Vermont is now a state of Vermont .
 Vietnam to the American GI and to the CIA’s underground warriors. So, too, was Vietnam . The American GI was a major inspiration in the CIA's underground warriors .
 Vietnam has for centuries been considered one of Earth’s garden spots, a place where man had only to exist to live comfortably . Vietnam has been known for centuries as the home of the carefree, naked, little brown man . Vietnam is one of the world's most beautiful places
 Rhade tribesmen have lived in the forest on the mountains for hundreds of years . The Rhade tribe has lived there for more than 300 years .
 They lived easily with the French for generations and managed to coexist with neighboring tribes, because they were strong . The French lived with them for generations, because of their strong character .
 The French lieutenant of police left the Rhade area after the defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu by the Vietminh army under General Giap . He left with his family and his few belongings .
 Rhade corporal took over the police powers, and things continued about the same, except that European-style law and order ended . In his place a corporal was taken over by the police .
 The village elders, or Huong-ca, resumed their political functions under their own traditional council . Village elders resumed the political function under the traditional council of elders .
 The French overseer at the lumber mill took off, and work there stopped, for with him had gone the European economy . Then the French economy took off .
 With the cessation of the only real income-producing enterprises of the area, contact with the outside world was severed almost entirely . The area was cut off from the rest of the world by the end .
 Now and then a Chinese trader would come with his few coolies, bringing salt, cloth, blades, blades and news . "Now and then, there would be a few traders bringing salt and cloth, and news. Now and now, there are no more coolies to come with
 Rhade farmers had to work all the harder to produce the extra provisions . The elders would have to take to the central village over the mountain to trade for necessities .
 In a country where tall grasses and bushes shoot up as fast as they can be cut down, it is nearly impossible to grow a crop in the fields . The country is known for its high grasses, bushes and grasses .
 A field that has been standing uncultivated abounds with such a thick cover of grasses that the tiny sprouts of seedlings can never grow . A field of grass can be seen in a field that is covered in a thick layer of grass .
 These tribesmen farm by cutting, slashing, and burning the forest to get the cleared earth and luxuriant soil . The tribesmen cut, slash, and burn the forest in order to get to cleared earth .
 They have learned from their forefathers to kill trees at the margin of the forest and then, hurriedly, to plant their scant seeds in this new, bare ground . They have killed the trees, then hurriedly planted them in the new ground .
 If the farmer diligently fights the inroads of the grasses and weeds, he may have a farm for several years . The farmer may be able to have several years of his farm .
 Rhade have worked hard to clear more ground and harvest more crops . The Rhade are working hard to raise more crops and clear more land .
 Produce must be moved to market; there must be a place where one can buy and sell . Produce needs to be taken to market, and there must also be a market place where you can buy, sell .
 When the French and Chinese no longer came to the Rhade regions, the produce rotted, and the basic economy staggered to a halt . The Rhade region was hit hard by the lack of Chinese and French trade in the region .
 When a basic economy deteriorates in a marginal area, the people must move on, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "When a basic economic situation deteriorates, it's time to move on. The people must be prepared for it," he says .
 When war, pestilence, flood, drought, or some other disaster strikes a primitive society, the people must search elsewhere for food and other necessities . The people must look for food in primitive societies .
 Banditry is the last refuge of the desperate and starving, and banditry, that last refuge, is a violent business .
 During the early, amateurish days of the ten-year Diem dynasty, in that newly defined piece of real estate that was called Vietnam, there was considerable misinterpretation .
 Ngo Dinh Diem issued an edict removing French influence he was bringing an end to law and order, such as it was . Little did he realize that by issuing the edict remove French influence, he was .
 He didn't realize that by promulgating a second edict banning the Chinese, he was causing the basic tribal economy—marketplace bartering and produce movement —to vanish . Nor did he realize he was creating a second ban on the Chinese .
 This fragile gentleman had new clothes and new shoes, and he rode into the village in a jeep . He rode in the jeep in a new outfit .
 The Rhade had not seen such a thing since the return of the French after the Japanese had gone . The French lieutenant and his family had arrived in a jeep back in the mid-1940s .
 The other passenger was a Vietnamese from the faraway city of Saigon . Then he introduced the young driver of the jeep, explaining that this young white man was American, not French .
 The padre said that the French no longer governed the country but that a great man named Ngo Dinh Diem was the president of this new bit of land called “South Vietnam” and that his palace was in Saigon .
 He knew it would be useless to try to explain that Ho Chi Minh’s Nationalist government was not the government of all Indochina . He knew he would not be able to explain it would have been useless to .
 It would be too complicated, it would not be believed, and the Rhade would not care much one way or the other anyhow anyhow . It would not matter one way, Rhade said. It was too complicated .
 The Rhade had lived in their ancestral areas for centuries and cared little for the outside . They cared little about the outside, whether it was represented by Japanese, French, American, Vietminh, or Vietnamese officials .
 The padre, the young American, and the Vietnamese official returned many times . "The padre" and the official returned to Vietnam many times, the padre says .
 After a while, the American was welcomed without the priest and often stayed for weeks . After a few weeks, the priest often stayed in the home of the priest .
 He brought with him some poultry and a new breed of hog that he taught them to raise . He also taught them how to raise poultry and new breed hog .
 Rhade carried with him new seeds and tried over and over to encourage the Rhade to plant them as he directed . He carried with new seeds with him and tried to encourage them to grow them as they directed .
 On countless occasions he would persuade villagers to dig holes in the fields and to plant the seeds as he had learned to do at the university .
 He never did understand the Rhade farmers and their primitive ‘slash and burn’ farming . Rhade farmer never understood the primitive “slash & burn” farming .
 The seeds could not grow in the heavy grassland of the open fields, experts say . And they never could explain to this young expert that they could not . The seeds never could grow in that heavy grasslands, they say .
 The American became a familiar figure, and his hard work and gifts of chickens, pigs, candy, and cigarettes were always welcome . In any event, the American became an American .
 The padre, the American, and the Huong-ca sat in earnest discussion all that day . "The padre and the American" were in serious discussion, the padre says .
 They were unaccustomed to the American’s shovel, and work progressed slowly . The American's shovels were used in the work of the workers .
 Meanwhile, the American felled a tree and cut out a section to be used as a post .
 A tall, sturdy, upright pedestal stood in front of the chieftain’s hut . Now a tall and sturdy pedestal was erected in the place of the hut .
 If anyone else did so, the kindly government in Saigon would be most angry, and the village would be punished . The village would have been punished for their actions .
 The padre was ordered to push the button if the village was attacked by the Communist Vietcong from the forest . The patriarch was to push a button to activate the alarm system .
 To the Viet soldier and the American, the men in the forest were not starving and frightened refugees; they were the enemy . To the American and the Vietnamese, the enemy was the enemy, and to the American soldiers, they were .
 The elderly padre knew that these native people had never heard of the Vietcong . He explained that his friends called all bandits from the refugee camps in the forest “Vietcong” and that they were to be greatly feared because they were the puppets of the National Liberation
 The padre explained that when the patriarch pushed that shiny red button on the Magic Box, the powerful gods of Saigon would unleash vengeful armies through the air . The dreaded Vietcong would be blasted by bombs from airplanes and napalmed from helicopters .
 The Rhade would receive these “benefits” whether they wanted them or not, says the mayor . The Rhades would receive the ‘benefits,’ whether they want them, whether they were wanted .
 The villages that had plenty of food and medicine and that were the special elect of Saigon were always the first targets for the starving bandits . For they knew only too well that the villages that were . well known to the bandits were always first targets . The special elect were always targets for
 The village had received special medicine and food relief since the return of the padre . The padre had returned with the American .
 The “Extended Arms for Brotherhood’s program of the new president in Saigon was caring for these tribesmen . The program was part of the “extended Arms For Brotherhood” program .
 The village had been visited by some young men from the camps in the woods . Shortly after the first time this extra food had been delivered, the village was visited by young men .
 They sat with the patriarch all day and quietly but firmly explained that they came from a refugee camp hidden in the hills . The camp was caring for thousands of homeless natives from the south who had been driven from their homes by the Diem-backed police .
 They had been enemies in every new region they came to, and now, terrorized and starving, sick, sick and dying, they had had to turn to that last resort of mankind, banditry and pillage . The last resort to mankind's last resort, banditsry
 These countless refugees, in their own homeland, had fled the careless deprivations and brutal massacres of the benevolent forces of Saigon . Saigon's benevolent forces were responsible for the massacre .
 They wished to be peaceful, but they desperately needed food and medicine . They wished for peace, but needed medicine and food, they said .
 The villagers demanded that the village share some of its plentiful goods with them . They demanded that some of the village's plentiful goods be shared with them.
 This arrangement, although unappealing to the village, was accepted, and for a while it kept a fragile peace between the two worlds . This arrangement was accepted by the village .
 The refugee numbers swelled, and their demands became greater and greater . However, the refugee numbers rose, and the demands for refugees to be met .
 This sharing of their meager goods with the refugees was called “the payment of tribute” by the Vietnamese . The sharing of meager goods by the refugees has been called ‘the payment for tribute’
 The refugees had become the “enemy,” and the Americans’ word for ‘enemy” was Vietcong . The refugees were refugees, and the U.S. word for "enemy" was “Vietcong” The refugees became the enemy,
 The political leader had explained to the patriarch that collaboration with the Vietcong meant death for him and removal of the village people to a Citizens’ Retraining Camp or a “Strategic Hamlet”
 No matter what their benefactors chose to call these displacement centers, they were prisons to the natives . They were prisons for the natives, no matter what they were called .
 The more or less peaceful demands of the refugees became adamant orders as their needs increased . The refugees' demands have become more and more demanding as they need increased .
 What began as a reluctant sharing of food became submission to force and banditry . What had begun as a reluctance sharing food became submissive .
 The ranks of refugees swelled as the exodus from such areas as the no-man's-land of the once-prosperous and fertile Mekong Delta area of the Camau Peninsula turned into a vast and relentless human wave .
 A situation not unlike that of the Native American migrations westward took place . A situation similar to that of Native American migration westward .
 Each tribe displaced from its ancestral homeland by the white man became marauders and attackers in the territory of the next Indian nation . Each tribe was displaced from their ancestral homeland .
 Once-peaceful, docile, and reasonably well-to-do rice farmers became the feared, terrorized bandits called the Vietcong . Tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands of rice farmers turned into the feared bandits .
 The dogs barked, chickens and pigs ran about, the food huts were ransacked and burned, and several young men of the village were kidnapped . Several young men were kidnapped, according to the villagers .
 For the first time since the installation of the radio, the old man crept out of his hut and stood before the Magic Box . He said: "For the first reason, I want to see the magic box again. It's a miracle"
 In the deep darkness of the forest night, the red glow of the buzzer filled the sky with its talismanic power . The red glow was the red light of the night .
 The chieftain had often wondered what would really happen if he pushed that red button . He often wondered if he would push that button .
 Even though the padre had told him of the wonders that would take place when he did push the warning device, he had never been able to fully comprehend it all .
 The political observer had warned the patriarch of the punishment he would suffer if he turned in a false alarm . He had warned him he would be punished for turning in false alarms .
 "If he did not push that button, he and his people would suffer the fate of collaborators," he says . Yet if he did, he would be the same fate as collaborators .
 It was his turn, and that of his village, to become part of this war that was being made in Saigon with the expert advice of the U.S. men of goodwill, he says .
 The destitute turned to banditry as the last stage of community life before surrendering to the relentless death of the ravaged . Whenever starvation, pestilence, and war ravaged the land, the thin veil of civilization had been torn away .
 The blind, ignorant actions of General Hunger are all it takes to create a war, says General Hunger . General Hunger is all that it takes for the U.S. to win a war .
 In lawless, unorganized society, this was the natural and inevitable reaction, he says . "In lawless society, it was the inevitable reaction," he says. "I'm not surprised by the reaction."
 This is especially true in a country where the natives eat by nibbling most of the day . This is particularly true in the country where it is known for its biting habits .
 Tropical peoples eat a bite at a time, and as a result their stomachs are small, and they have very little fat . Tropical people eat only one bite a time and eat very slowly .
 For these people, starvation sets in much faster than it does for the people to the north, who are fatter and who eat at longer and more regular intervals . For the people in the northern part of the world, starvation is more likely to set in faster than for those in the
 The time between deprivation of food and the driving necessity to eat is much shorter, and such people strike out hard for food as soon as their supply is wiped out . Thus, the time . between deprivation . of food . and the drive for food is much less short .
 napalm, bombings, and defoliation tactics created more instead of less war and created it in a short time . This explains why napalm and bombings created more than war .
 The victims were deprived of food and had to fight for it, without delay . The victims had to go from food to food in order to survive .
 The people who had raided the village were of this hungry, refugee populace . The raiders had raided a village of refugees . The refugees had been fleeing a refugee population .
 He rationalized and sympathized with the refugees, even under duress . But the ideological dilemma posed by his new friends, the American and Saigon political activist, made him, the patriarch, their enemy .
 He knew that many other elders had resisted the refugees and had been slain by them out of the necessity for food . He knew many others had resisted him and had resisted them .
 Others who sympathized with refugees had been brutally taken to retraining camps by the political observers and had suffered cruelly there . He knew that others who had sympathized . Others who had been sympathizing with the refugees had suffered badly, he said .
 A sleep-dulled South Vietnamese Special Forces elite trooper saw the flickering warning light on the situation map . The alert came from a South Vietnamese special forces unit in the wake of the attack .
 There was no two-way capability with the village radio equipment, no way to discuss the attack or to evaluate the warning from the village chieftain . The village had no way of discussing the attack and evaluating the warning .
 The system could only say only that there was an attack and automatically identify the location of the attack . The system was unable to say whether or not the attack was carried out .
 It could not say that the “attack’s nothing more than a small raid by a few starving natives intent on stealing food . It could say that it was nothing more . than a raid .
 Viet trooper took one look at the American Green Beret soldier of the Special Forces “A” Team . The soldier was sleeping in a native hammock nearby . He was sleeping with a native American in the hammock .
 He knew that after two minutes the flickering red light would cease automatically . He knew after the two minutes, the flickering light would stop .
 The American had been drinking beer with the other “A” Team members and with the young girls of the “White Dove Resistance Sisters” He had let other warning lights flicker out without sounding the alert, he says .
 He knew some elders, eager to flaunt their powers before the villagers, would push the button to bring out the helicopter patrols . He knew, too, that some elders would push out the button . The helicopter patrols have been called out in the past .
 He understood that the desperate villagers, half-crazed by starvation and by bandit raids, were often “spooked” into pushing that glaring red eye on the Magic Box .
 It simply brought on more retaliation, the dreaded wrath of a war of recounter in which the aggressor creates his own enemy . The aggressor created his own enemies with the help of the Taliban .
 By the time the forces got there, the village would have been burned to the ground . The village would probably have been destroyed by the war .
 The people would have been killed or be hiding in the forest, so that when the “avengers” arrived the chances were better than even that the villagers would be miscast as the enemy anyhow anyhow . People would have died or be killed .
 The general rule was to shoot at anyone who ran, regardless of who that person might be . They appeared to be “enemy’s on both sides .
 From such a “rescue” the villagers had but one alternative, they had to flee with the refugees and become “Vietcong,” or “enemy” in their own homeland . The villagers had only one alternative: to flee, or become �
 Just then the American rolled over in the hammock and his rifle, which had been leaning against it, fell to the floor . The rifle was leaning against the American's rifle when he rolled over and it fell onto the ground .
 Green Beret veteran of Fort Bragg’s stern indoctrination grabbed the single-sideband radio mike and called Division Alert . Division Alert is Division Alert for the first time .
 South Vietnamese Special Forces are the elite civilian, CIA-trained troops of Ngo Dinh Nhu . The elite civilian-civilian Special Forces were trained by the CIA .
 This one was going to be all-out; it was the first attack reported from the Rhade zone . This was the second attack to be reported from Rhade Zone .
 Intelligence had predicted a vast enemy buildup in the area, including heavy preparatory movement on the trails of Laos .
 The enemy must be stopped now with a resolute counterattack . Everything pointed to a massive National Liberation Front/ North Vietnamese masterstroke against a new attack zone .
 Twenty helicopters stirred up a hurricane of dust as they prepared for the convoy flight to Thuc Dho . The semitropical dawn burst in all its pink brilliance over Ahn Lac .
 As the briefing ended, pilots were told that the refueling stop would be at Thien Dho . The loaded helicopters could not fly a greater than one-hundred-mile radius mission without refueling .
 Cruise speed would be fifty-five knots for the cargo craft to assure the ability to autorotate safely to the ground in the event of engine failure at the planned “nap-of-the-earth” flight level .
 In convoy, with formation and linkup, this would mean an average out-and-back ground speed of twenty-five to thirty knots . In convoy it would mean a speed of up to 30 knots .
 Returning choppers would RON at Thien Dho after hitting the target . Therefore, the returning chopper would return to the target.
 The Village Self-Defense Network helicopter force was an incredible organization . The helicopter force is an incredible group of helicopter pilots .
 Each helicopter could carry ten armed men one hundred miles in one day . Helicopters could carry 10 armed men 100 miles in a single day . Each helicopter was able to carry ten men one 100 miles .
 With a one-hundred-mile radius for the helicopter and a convoy speed of twenty-five knots, it would be four hours each way, for a total of eight hours in the air .
 It took no fewer than forty choppers to assure the availability of twenty for the Thuc Dho mission . Army/civilian helicopter maintenance was operating at a commendable 49 percent in-commission rate .
 The forty helicopters were supported by two aviation companies of about two hundred men each . A total of four hundred men were involved in the operation, including two hundred pilots .
 These companies were in turn supported by a supply squadron and a maintenance squadron of two hundred men each .
 All of these squadrons were supported by housekeeping units, transportation units, base-defense units, fuel-storage units, and fuel-delivery units .
 Advance-scout aircraft were dispatched to reconnoiter the area for a landing zone . While the chopper convoy was en route to Thuc Dho, advance-scouts reconfigured the area .
 A helicopter must touch down on level ground . An unequal or nonlevel touchdown creates a destructive situation as a result of the dislocation of the center of force .
 The Huey is built especially strong to resist any uneven landing force, but fully loaded, with the rotors whirling at full power, the strain can be dangerous . Fully loaded, the Huey can also be dangerous to land .
 Spotter aircraft must find an area large enough to accommodate several Hueys at a time, to assure the protection of massed firepower in the event of an ambush and to reduce costly fuel consumption .
 Scout aircraft were able to report a landing site at an abandoned farm a half mile from Thuc Dho . By the time the choppers had refueled at Thien Dho and were back in the air, they had landed at the site .
 It is estimated that three choppers could touch down at one time, in trail .
 Smoke still rising from village, but there had been no enemy action against the spotter aircraft and no enemy sighted . No enemy aircraft was sighted and smoke still rising .
 Two troop choppers and one armed Huey had maintenance troubles and were forced to remain at Thien Dho . Two of the choppers had maintenance problems and remained at the base .
 The remaining twelve troop-carrier choppers skimmed the earth at about fifty-five knots . The five gunships weaved across the course to Thuc Dho at full speed .
 In the direct sunlight of early afternoon, the airborne force arrived at Thuc Dho . In the sun, they arrived at the airport in the early hours of the morning .
 The gunships hovered over the area, ready to suppress any movement below with direct machine-gun fire . The gunship was ready to shoot down any movement from below .
 The convoy began to form a circle around the zone as the first three choppers settled into the field to disembark thirty men . Meanwhile, the convoy formed a circle of circles around the area .
 The choppers leaped upward, whirling dust and straw into the air, just before the next three Hueys landed with the next wave of troopers . Then quickly, quickly, the choppers jumped out of the air and onto the ground .
 Crewmen saw to it that the silent South Vietnamese Special Forces elite troops jumped out immediately . Crewmen also saw to be sure that the secret operation was complete .
 The crewmen, too, were experienced and recalled stories of earlier days when untrained troops had to be ordered out at the point of a gun and a few wellplaced kicks .
 Second and third choppers of the third wave touched blades as they neared touchdown . In the commotion and difficulty of this maneuver, the choppers touched blades . The choppers had touched blades before landing .
 As the last wave settled on the field, two circling gunships opened fire into the high grass near the forest . Two circled gunships fired into the grass near a forest .
 Troopers on the ground flattened out and fired rapidly and blindly . Troopers were hit by a hail of fire from the ground . The troopers were hit in the head by a single bullet .
 When the old H-19s were being used over the rice fields of the Camau Peninsula, the natives had learned that a crude bow held by the feet of a man lying on his back in the grass could be most effective against low-flying choppers .
 The rotor is the most vulnerable part of the helicopter, and this crude weapon brought down many a chopper . The crude weapon was fired to “hang” this hazard in the air .
 First reports indicated engine or rotor failure, since there was no gunfire or other hostile action observed . First reports indicate engine failure, but no gunfire reported .
 The remaining gunships were nearly out of ammunition, and all the choppers were low on fuel, so the convoy sped back to the refueling base . The convoy, now down to thirteen Hueys, left the surveillance to the spotters and sped back .
 The radio man was in contact with the spotter aircraft, which directed them to the village . The plane was directed to a village in the village by a helicopter .
 In the smoldering ruin of grass huts, there was not a sign of life .
 With only a few hours of daylight left, the “A” Team lieutenant placed his troops into defensive positions for the night . With only hours to go, the "A" Team lieutenant places his troops in defensive positions .
 First word about Thuc Dho had been relayed to Division Combat Center . First word also relayed to USMACV ( United States Military Assistance Command—Vietnam) Headquarters .
 Village Self-Defense Forces information collated into a report that was sent directly to the Pentagon . Village Self Defense Forces information was collated together .
 Pentagon and intelligence community compiled data relayed from Southeast Asia into an early-morning briefing for the President and his immediate staff .
 This material from intelligence sources, U-2 and satellite reports, and certain domestic information were put together at the Command Center in the Joint Chiefs of Staff area at the Pentagon .
 The briefing of yesterday's events sets up today's work and tomorrow’s operations . It is the first briefing of the day and sets up the next day of operations .
 New faces at prebrief.com on December 31, 1960 . Some new faces in attendance .
 They were the secretary of defense designate and certain of his transition staff . They were Secretary of Defense designate and some of the transition staff.
 The alarm from Thuc Dho was mentioned routinely by an army officer at the early-morning pre-brief . The alarm was mentioned quite routinely, says an officer .
 The secretary of defense designate, absorbing the first flavor of Vietnam, requested full elaboration on this action at the briefing the following day . Secretary of Defense designate: "Full elaboration of this action requested"
 This special highest level of interest was duly noted by all service chiefs and their attending staff members .
 During the day a flood of messages filled the air to and from Saigon, placing top priority on the action at Thuc Dho . The messages were placed on top priority during the day .
 The air force announced heavy surveillance and bombing of all supply lines to Thuc Dho through Laos and the northern routes . Air force announces heavy bombing of supply lines .
 A few elderly villagers, along with young children, were found cowering in holes and huddled in the forests . The elderly villagers and young children were among those found in the holes and holes .
 When interrogated concerning the attack and the whereabouts of the village patriarch and the able-bodied men, the captives stared in ignorance . The captives stare in ignorance of the attack .
 Lieutenant found a major Vietcong encampment in the area . This confirmed for the eager lieutenant that he had stumbled upon a major encampment .
 The lieutenant radioed along this valuable information, plus the routine body count, enriched to include those killed by bombardment and napalm . The lieutenant reported the death toll .
 At this early stage of the operation, any casualty figures were not required . Confirmation of any casualties was not required for confirmation of any .
 The lieutenant estimated the enemy strength as a reinforced battalion or perhaps a regiment . The lieutenant estimates the enemy's strength as an army reinforced battalion .
 On-the-spot information was used to prepare briefing material for the U.S. mission to Vietnam . It was from such information that the briefing material was prepared by Saigon .
 Sensing the military’s concern with this action as a result of the secretary designate, the intelligence community stepped up its own input . The intelligence community is concerned about the military's concern .
 It was in the interest of the intelligence community to assure that the role of these elite troops be at least the equivalent of the United States Army’s. Since they were, it was . Since they are .
 Saigon’s CIA headquarters outdid itself building up all information available about Thuc Dho . Saigon's CIA headquarters built up all the information available .
 The United States Army Special Forces “A” Team, all Fort Bragg trained, were bona fide army soldiers . Their commander, a rather unorthodox major, was a CIA man on an army cover assignment .
 Major was among the first to reach Thuc Dho in the early wave of more helicopters on the second day . Along with South Vietnamese Special Forces officers and civilians under cover of the South Vietnamese Army, this major was part of the first wave of helicopters .
 The Pentagon prebrief was prepared, as usual, using data gathered from sources all over the world . The Pentagon was prepared to provide a pre-brief of the latest events .
 Information on space, from the Congo, from India —all such data except that on Cuba— was kept to a minimum . Information on the Congo from India was also kept from the United States .
 Extra chairs were placed in a second row around the polished walnut table behind the military chiefs for the CIA and Department of State guests in the Command Center . Extra chairs are placed in the second row behind the polished table .
 All were admitted on a “need to know” basis . Everyone there had a clearance that surpassed “top secret”
 It should be recalled that as of that moment in December 1960, only one month after the election of John F Kennedy, the troubles in Vietnam were much less serious than they would become later .
 For most of those present, part of this great drama was impressing and winning over the new defense secretary . The new administration has captured the eye of the new administration .
 The secretary designate, Robert S McNamara, was particularly interested in the “reported” Vietcong battalion or regiment .
 Discussion of this question was limited by the fact that the army briefing officer had been ordered to stick to his notes . Discussion was limited somewhat by the . fact that he had been told he had to stick .
 The elusive Vietcong battalion slipped through the South Vietnamese cordon and that, according to army spotter-plane forward observers, there was no one in the woods . Then a general, in the second row behind his army chief of staff, rose to report that he had a message,
 CIA representatives in the audience were watching as he completed this report . As he completed it, he glanced at the CIA representatives .
 The secretary designate grasped the significance of what had been said and fired another question at the briefing officer and the room in general .
 One of the CIA men half-raised a hand, slid his feet out from under his chair, and prepared to rise . The CIA men were preparing to rise from their seats, but one of them raised his hand .
 He was the chief of the supersecret Far East branch himself, an old Asia hand . He was not the usual pre-brief attendee; he was not a pre-eventual attendee .
 We have been trying to control a Communist-inspired war of national liberation in South Vietnam that has spread out of control throughout the land . We have tried to control the Communist-influenced war, which has spread across the land, says the government .
 Laos, Thailand, and South Vietnam feel that the advisory role of the United States military forces does not go far enough . And we who have put so much effort into Laos and Thailand, we feel that U.S. military forces should go further .
 The Strategic Hamlets and the Village Self-Defense Forces are not enough. The strategic Hamlets is not enough, says the author of the book .
 The village had been prepared by one of our agents and they had a transmitter that linked them to the Village Self-Defense Network . Fortunately, the village had a . transmitter that links them to a . village self-defense network .
 By January 1961, an “Advanced Counterinsurgency Course’s” designed specifically to train thousands of Green Berets for Vietnam, had been hastily lifted from the Civil Affairs and Military Government School at Fort Gordon, Georgia, and put at Fort Bragg .
 One of the last official acts of the outgoing deputy secretary of defense, James Douglas, was to visit Fort Bragg to bless this new school . Douglas' last official act of defense was to bless the school .
 A special order for thousands of these transmitters had been placed with the manufacturer and given the highest priority . Within weeks, a special order was placed for the transmitters .
 Shortly after the inauguration of President John F Kennedy, transmitters were being bolted to posts in village after village to augment and facilitate the Strategic Hamlet campaign .
 The new secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, made his first visit to South Vietnam . Not too many months later, McNamara made a visit to the country .
 The villagers, the South Vietnamese Special Forces elite troops, and the American Green Berets had worn paths through the area rehearsing and reenacting the famous attack for visiting dignitaries . By the time the secretary saw it, the villagers had reenacted the attack .
 The once-lush hills had been dug up by bombs, seared by napalm, defoliated by chemical genocide . The hills were dug up and seared in by bombs and napalm .
 The story was compiled from the author’s personal trips to Vietnam and liaison with the CIA between 1955 and 1964 .
 JFK made his move to control the CIA as a member of the U.S. House and Senate . John F Kennedy was an experienced politician . JFK was a powerful and influential politician .
 St. James’s during the days just before the start of World War II, he was made privy to the ways of foreign policy and to the world of big business .
 He was the son of one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in America . He was one of America's richest men . He died at the age of 92 .
 President Obama had to start all over again after being elected to the presidency . He had to learn a lot from his mistakes .
 The stakes in the game played at the White House were much higher and more complex than those in any of his previous endeavors . The flow of events during the closing months of the Eisenhower era had not made his task any easier .
 Eisenhower’s repeated illnesses, perhaps his age, and particularly the heartache he suffered as a result of the collapse of his dream of a meaningful “Crusade for Peace” created a “lame duck” period of deeper than usual dimensions . Eisenhower�
 A counterinsurgency plan for Indochina had been set in motion, and the buildup of the army’s Special Warfare program at Fort Bragg had gotten under way .
 The U.S. Air Force’s “Everest’ Tactical Fighter Experimental aircraft development project was rushing plans to have that selection made before the pro-business Eisenhower team left Washington .
 In 1960, the TFX was visualized as the biggest single aircraft procurement order ever placed—running as high as $6 billion . The TFX is now the world's largest single procurement order of all time .
 Life seemed relatively quiet in Vietnam as the principal skirmishes, both military and political, took place in nearby Laos . At the same time, life seemed relatively calm in Vietnam .
 All of these pent-up pressure points exploded after Kennedy’s inauguration and proceeded to overwhelm his new and relatively inexperienced administration . “All of these . pent-ups exploded after . Kennedy”s inauguration, he said .
 Kennedy received a personal report from Col. Col. John McCain, a retired general, on his first day in office . Kennedy received the report from a retired soldier .
 Edward G Lansdale, the CIA’s longtime and most important Southeast Asia agent, visited Saigon recently . Lansdale: Saigon is a key part of the CIA's Southeast Asia strategy . Lansdal: "It was a great trip to Saigon, a great opportunity to
 Lansdale offered a second briefing on the counterinsurgency plan for Indochina . Lansdale also offered a briefing on his plan for the country .
 Later, Kennedy approved the counterinsurgency plan, which expanded South Vietnamese forces at a rather leisurely pace . Later, the plan was approved by the President .
 Ngo Dinh Diem received financial support for a twenty-thousand increase in his army and support for his counterguerrilla force, then known as the Civil Guard . This plan provided the South Vietnamese president with the financial support .
 The anti-Castro project had grown in the hands of CIA opportunists from a cycle of sporadic para-drop raids on Cuba to a fullblown, over-the-beach invasion plan . Between January and May 1961, the new President was kept busy with, among other things
 According to the invasion plan, Castro would have had no combat aircraft remaining by dawn on the morning of the invasion . The plan was approved by President Kennedy, according to President Kennedy .
 A key bomber strike that was supposed to destroy the last three aircraft on the ground was called off . However, the strike called off due to a lack of coordination with the US military .
 President Kennedy had approved the strike only the afternoon before the landing . This strike had been approved by President Kennedy only the day before landing .
 The delay of this mission was found by the Cuban Study Group to be the primary cause of the failure of the invasion . The delay was found to be a primary cause .
 Kennedy set up a unique Cuban Study Group to discover what had happened to cause the failure and to make plans for the future actions of his administration in the Cold War arena .
 Jack and Bobby Kennedy made up their minds that Allen Dulles, along with other top-level CIA staff, must go . Bobby Kennedy, a military neophyte, became enchanted with Gen. Gen. Dulles .
 Bobby Kennedy would discuss the Bay of Pigs investigation with his brother and other close advisers . General Taylor’s masterful control of the investigation of the . operation and his development of paramilitary plans .
 Lansdale became executive director of Gilpatric’s Vietnam task force . He assumed the role of governmentwide coordinator and manager of the concept of counterinsurgency . Lansdale is now the government's national coordinator .
 This development only seemed fitting, since Lansdale, his friend Gen. Gen. Dan, was Lansdale's friend . Lansdale died in 1994, a year after Lansdale and his wife died .
 I arrived in Washington in late January and made the rounds of talks with policy-makers . I have been in Washington since late January to meet with policy makers .
 Such one-track-minded officers ignore the interconnection between politics and military affairs . They must be made to understand the correct relationship between the two, he says .
 All military actions are means to achieve political objectives, while military action itself is a manifested form of politics” I would note that Mao had cribbed his lectures from Sun Tzu, Clausewitz, and Lenin .
 Asian Communist doctrine currently was heeding Mao’s words in its warfare, says Mao . ‘We, on our side, had to learn to be more flexible in meeting it.’ says Mao's words in his warfare .
 Special White House committee report of May 1959 entitled “Training Under the Mutual Security Program” included in chapter 12 of chapter 12 .
 When one teaches such a policy for another country, he is likely to be convinced that it would work and do well in his own country also . In this connection, one must keep in mind that when one . teaches such policy, he must keep a . mind .
 This is the great lesson of our review of this report and of the reminder how important the Communist teaching of Mao Tse-tung has become in U.S. military doctrine and training . This is a reminder of the importance of Mao's Communist teaching .
 In the index of Lansdale’s book there are six references to Mao Tse-tung—and not one single mention of John F Kennedy . The book's objective is to analyze the events that brought about the murder of Kennedy .
 By May 3, 1961, the Kennedy administration had changed horses in midstream . Kennedy administration was flexible enough to change horses mid-stream .
 The Gilpatric-Lansdale draft for Vietnam of late April was shelved . A newer State Department draft of May 3 (presumably written by George Ball) was approved by the President .
 Lansdale’s Defense Department recommendations were eliminated completely, and Fritz Nolting, a man with close CIA ties, had become ambassador to Saigon .
 The Dulles-CabellBissell team was fading fast as Gen. Lansdale’s star had been eclipsed . Lansdale's star was eclipsed, and the Dulles team had been fading fast . General Lansdale had been in charge of the Army's
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson was in Saigon in May 1961 to conduct a fact-finding mission . He delivered a letter from President Kennedy to Ngo Dinh Diem .
 Johnson authorized to raise the matter of stationing U.S. troops in South Vietnam . Johnson had been authorized to discuss the matter .
 Diem did not want them at that time; the Diem government had other things on its mind . Diem's government was not interested in them, he says .
 As described in earlier chapters, Diem had been dependent upon and personally close to Lansdale ever since Diem returned to the Far East from exile . Lansdale had been close to Diem since his return from exile from exile in 1970s .
 He had spent a lot of time working out plans with Lansdale during the latter’s lengthy visit to Saigon after Kennedy’�s election in late 1960s .
 Diem became suspicious of the Kennedy administration and its representatives . Diem was suspicious of Kennedy administration officials .
 He was reluctant to accept new faces, new ideas, and a new strategy, despite the fact that he was repeatedly assured that it was all for his own good . He was also reluctant to take on new faces and new ideas .
 From the middle of 1959, Diem had begun the creation of communelike ‘Agrovilles” that were planned as small communities in which all essential amenities were provided . Diem's "Agroville" was planned for small communities .
 More than one million Tonkinese refugees had been transported south by U.S. sea and air assets . As noted, the greatest single factor underlying the unrest in the new nation of South Vietnam was the infiltration of more than 1 million refugees .
 These people, many of whom came to fill key posts in the Diem government as the years progressed, needed a place to live . These people needed a home to live. These people are now living in a new home .
 In Diem's mind, these Agrovilles, designed and supported with American funds, were to provide a place to live for as many of these invading strangers as possible . Diem’s mind, he said, was to provide as many as possible as possible.
 Fewer than twenty-five Agrovilles had been carved out of a no-man's-land in the destitute countryside . For many reasons, this plan failed miserably .
 The open-commune Agroville was based on a design concept from Chairman Mao Tse-tung . It became the heavily barricaded Strategic Hamlet of 1961 in the Kennedy era . The open commune is based on the design concept of Chairman Mao .
 It was engineered as much to keep the settlers in as to provide security for them against attack from the outside by starving bandits, usually called the Vietcong . It was designed to protect the settlers from attack from outside .
 South Vietnam was overrun with displaced, starving natives and by equally displaced and starving Tonkinese . By 1961, South Vietnam had been overrun by both sides .
 The situation “to engender warfare” in Vietnam could not have been better. Viewed from the eye of the maker of Grand Strategy, with his Malthusian incentives, the situation ‘could not be better”
 Ho Chi Minh arrived in Hanoi accompanied by his associates from the United States Office of Strategic Services and armed with American weapons from Okinawa . The conflict in populous, wealthy (by Asian standards) Indochina had been set in motion back in 1945 .
 These were the weapons used by the Vietminh to control much of the region from 1945 to 1954 . The weapons were used during the Vietnam War .
 These weapons made it possible for them to defeat the French at Dien Bien Phu . These weapons, especially the heavy artillery, had made them possible to defeat them .
 What remained of the $3 billion arms aid the United States had provided to the French was added to Ho Chi Minh’s U.S.-supplied arsenal . At that time, what remained of that $3billion arms aid had been added .
 Michael Forrestal, a close friend of Jack Kennedy’s, visited Vietnam with Roger Hilsman from the Department of State . Forrestal was a senior member of the National Security Council staff .
 Vietminh’s weapons were American-made. That was their bureaucratic euphemism for saying that they were American made . That was a bureaucratic phrase used by the U.S. government .
 All weapons taken from the Vietcong by the U.S. were either homemade or previously acquired from the Diem government or the United States . The weapons were either made from homemade or acquired from Diem's government or United States.
 It is little wonder that the Diem brothers found the Kennedy administration difficult to accept . It was little wonder why the brothers found it hard to accept in Vietnam .
 The actions of supplying weapons to both sides, on top of the forced movement of more than one million Tonkinese from the north to the south via U.S.-supplied navy vessels and aircraft, constituted "make war" tactics, in the Diems' eyes .
 Kennedy administration welcomed Bay of Pigs report from Gen. Gen. John S. Eisenhower . Kennedy administration responded to the report with a positive response to the CIA's efforts .
 Maxwell Taylor served as military adviser to the President in the Kennedy White House . Taylor's assignment was to be the President's military adviser in the 1960s . Taylor was also the President of the United States in 1961 .
 On October 11, 1961, President Eisenhower directed General Taylor and Walt Rostow, a foreign policy adviser, to travel to Saigon . General Taylor visited Saigon in 1961 . General Rostow and General Taylor traveled to Vietnam .
 Rostow had stated, in the fall of 1961, that it was “now or never” for the U.S. in Vietnam . Rostow: It was ‘now or now’ for the United States in Vietnam. Rostow said it was now or never
 Taylor recommended a small number of U.S. servicemen be introduced into Vietnam under the guise of a "flood relief" project . Taylor was a little more patient .
 Robert S McNamara and his former Ford Motor Company ‘Whiz Kids’ were gearing up to get into the act . Meanwhile, Robert S. McNamara was preparing to launch a new series of movies .
 McNamara did not have any experience with warfare; he knew little, if anything, about Indochina . McNamara knew little of what he was trying to do when he was in charge .
 He liked things to be orderly and to be explained in ‘case study’ detail . He liked to be organized and explained in "case study" detail .
 One of his first decisions, based upon a preinaugural briefing in the Pentagon, was to order the use of defoliant spray in Vietnam .
 Bill Godel turned the idea over to the Advanced Research Projects Agency . He turned this idea, his own, into the high-powered organization of technicians that had sprung up in the Pentagon .
 Godel jumped from Office of Special Operations in the Office of the Secretary of Defense . Godel had worked under Gen. Gen. George W. Bush . He had worked for the Department of Defense since 1993 .
 During its first days, this defoliant project was known as Operation Hades . Shortly thereafter, it was given the name Ranchhand .
 No one gave the project much consideration, and the ordinary defoliant used by the railroads was given a try . The project was abandoned .
 In the normal course of business, it never occurred to anyone that this defoliant would prove to be dangerous . The company has been forced to use it in the wake of the discovery .
 The Ranchhand project was approved by McNamara, Roswell Gilpatric, Robert Kennedy, U Alexis Johnson, Mike Forrestal, Dick Helms and Maxwell Taylor . As was customary with many projects at this time, the Ranchhand was approved .
 The aircraft assigned to this project had been left over from other projects . Their modification for spraying purposes did not prove difficult .
 No one had any concern for the consequences of the decision to defoliate . No one was concerned about the consequences for the defoliation .
 The use of harmful defoliants served little, if any, practical purpose in Vietnam . As events showed later, the use of such a defoliant did not serve any practical purpose .
 As a matter of fact, the “enemy” found it useful to burn the dead leaves and flee in the clouds of smoke, so it had more use from their point of view than for regular Vietnamese forces .
 This process was characteristic of McNamara and his concept of operation . McNamara: "This process of operation is characteristic of the McNamara concept" McNamara says .
 The objective of the CDTC was to place one office "at the front" in Saigon and the other close to the seat of power, and money, in the Pentagon . The objective was to put one office “at the . front’s front” in Sa
 As each problem arose and was identified in Saigon, it was numbered and wired immediately to the Pentagon . The Pentagon was wired to identify the problems and send them to the White House .
 If there was a problem with “the action of the M-16 carbine” in combat, it was given a number in serial order and sent to the Pentagon . #1156 would be given priority treatment .
 Many people, myself included, used to read the lists of CDTC priority projects every day . Many people used to use the CDTC lists of priorities every day.
 One unusual thing about CDTC projects was that their size, complexity, cost, or combat utility made no difference in their serial listing and treatment . The CDTC project was one of the most successful in the world .
 The ‘elite troops’ were CIA and Filipino trained . They were assigned to the palace to guard President Diem and his family .
 As part of their training they were getting “field combat’ experience on the troubled Cambodian border . The soldiers were getting "field combat" experience .
 Without delay, ARPA, the Pentagon manager of the CDTC project, set up a conference in the Pentagon for nutrition specialists from three leading universities . ARPA set up the conference in order to meet nutrition specialists .
 These specialists were next flown to Hawaii for Indochina briefings, then to Saigon, and then to the Cambodian border . They were flown to the Cambodiaian border, then flown to Vietnam for briefings .
 The Tonkinese could not eat the food prepared for them in Saigon and flown to them on the border . There they learned that the ‘elite troops” for the most part Tonkines could not . eat .
 ARPA team arranged to have the sauce prepared in enormous quantities and, for lack of a better alternative, run through a nearby soft-drink plant .
 The bottles were packed in wooden crates, airlifted to the border, and paradropped to the starving troops . They were packed into wooden crates and sent to the troops .
 Some months later, I observed a new CDTC project much farther down the numbered list . Some months after I observed the project, I noticed a new project much further down the list .
 It called a conference of nutrition experts and flew them to Saigon, Vietnam, to meet with experts . It was the first time the country had flown experts to Vietnam .
 In Saigon, they were told about the earlier project and shown the large-scale production facility and bottling plant . They were shown in Saigon .
 When cases of special sauce had been paradropped, the glass bottles were smashed . The glass bottles smashed . Special sauce is a popular recipe for pasta .
 The special Tonkinese sauce was made in the same vats and then canned at the new facility . The special sauce was then made at the same facility in China .
 This time the sauce was air-dropped to the troops, it survived the impact . This time, the sauce survived the hit . The sauce was dropped from the ground and survived the explosion .
 The team of nutritionists declared the project a success and returned to their separate campuses .
 ARPA closed the project without ever looking back and turned to the next case . ARPA has never looked back at the project .
 This was how the modern war was being fought in the halls of the Pentagon—“Whiz Kid” style . This is how the . modern war . style. This was the ‘Whiz . Kid’ style.
 A Washington lawyer with ready and frequent access to the White House had made a trip to Florida . He saw some massive machines clearing land in great swaths of Florida .
 As rows of monster machines move forward in teams, one beside the other, they chewed up everything in their way . The ground was left bare ground about as smooth as a tennis court .
 Such machines chewed their way through the rain forests, producing pulp for paper manufacture and leaving behind nothing but bare, dead ground . This lawyer was told that such machines were used in Latin America in the upper Amazon Basin .
 When he returned from Florida, this quick-thinking lawyer went to see McNamara, after having paid a tactical call on the President, and suggested that an array of . enormous machines, set loose at the noman’s-land of the 17th parallel in Vietnam, could
 He suggested that the bare earth be networked with electronic devices that would permit the instant detection of anything that moved .
 In a similar but more costly deal, another astute planner learned that one of the major problems in Indochina was its lack of ports adequate for seagoing cargo vessels . The deal was similar but costly .
 Through all the early years of the war, almost all supplies delivered by ship had to be off-loaded in the inadequate river port of Saigon, far from the sea .
 A huge replica of the Cam Ranh Bay area on the coast of Vietnam was constructed on a set of large tables . A man rented a large office on Connecticut Avenue in Washington and had a huge replica .
 It was his idea that the natural, shallow bay could be dredged and that huge plastic bags could be submerged, with weights, and used for storage of large quantities of gasoline and jet fuel .
 The weight of the seawater on these plastic bags would pump the lighter petroleum through pipes to a seaside storage site . The lighter petroleum would then be pumped through pipes into the sea to storage sites .
 A huge consortium of general contractors worked together on the project . Before it was done, that original $2 billion project had multiplied in cost many times over .
 This was the part of the Vietnam War that was rarely seen and is still seldom realized . The Vietnam War is still rarely realized. This is still a war that is rarely seen .
 The $220 billion direct cost of the war had to have been spent somewhere . After all, the $500 billion had to be spent somewhere. .
 "They had learned from the failure of the Bay of Pigs operation that they could not trust the CIA," says President Obama . They learned from Gen. Gen. George W. Bush that the CIA could not be trusted .
 Maxwell Taylor said the only way to fight the kind of war they inherited from the CIA in Indochina would be to do it with paramilitary tactics as waged by the U.S. Army Special Warfare units . Taylor: The only way of fighting the war would be paramilitary tactics .
 All earlier U.S. Special Forces troops had been serving in South Vietnam under the operational control of the CIA . Gen. Gen. John H. Eisenhower ordered the CIA to take over control of South Vietnam .
 Maxwell Taylor proposed in his letter to President Kennedy on June 13, 1961, that National Security Action Memoranda #55, #56, and #57 become the basis of a new order of things . Taylor had proposed that the new order would be based on a new set of national security
 Kennedy had agreed without delay, and by late 1961 he had installed General Taylor in the White House as his special military adviser . Kennedy had installed Taylor in late 1961 as his Special Military Adviser .
 Taylor and Rostow proposed to introduce U.S. “support troops” into Vietnam under the cover of a “flood relief” action . Not long after that, they made their trip to Saigon and returned with their proposal .
 Kennedy approved of this modest recommendation, and a new era of change was begun . Kennedy: "A new era was begun ... one based upon greater change in Washington"
 Ed Lansdale’s star was in eclipse, and a new internal battle was under way in the murky halls of the Joint Chiefs of Staff area of the Pentagon . Lansdale: "Ed Lansdale's star is in eclipse"
 The fight began with the establishment of the Office of the Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities and the arrival of its boss, Maj. Maj. Gen. Omar Hassan .
 David M Shoup of the United States Marine Corps were traditional soldiers . Shoup was a member of the U.S. Marine Corps . He was the son of David Shoup .
 Kennedy had created the office of “military adviser to the President” and placed Taylor in that office . It bothered Lemnitzer not at all to observe that Kennedy had placed Taylor there .
 By the end of 1962, General Lemnitzer was on his way to the NATO command in Europe . Kennedy, Taylor, and all the others had become mired in the quicksands of Southeast Asia .
 The United States military establishment was neither designed nor prepared to engage in peacetime covert operations, nor did it wish to be. The U.S. military establishment did not want to engage into covert operations .
 The CIA is always able to incite an incident sufficient to require U.S. action and involvement . The CIA always incites an incident that requires the United States to take action and involve .
 The CIA can do this because it has, or is able to create, intelligence assets . The CIA has a lot of intelligence assets, the agency says . The agency says it can create, or create, those assets .
 The CIA is the first agency of the government to make contact with “rebel’s or “insurgent” parties . CIA is first agency to contact "rebel" parties . The CIA says it is working with rebels in the United States .
 CIA spooks prowl the bars and meeting places of other countries in search of just such information . The CIA is known for its clandestine operations in the U.S.
 One may overhear, or participate in, a conversation with some natives who are making derogatory remarks about the government in power, as Contra leaders did in the case of Daniel Ortega .
 The agent races to his “back-channel” communication system, reports directly to his boss in CIA headquarters . He then is urged to obtain more information and to broaden his sources . This is why the agent was sent there in the first place .
 He gets more information, even if he has to encourage or generate it, he says . So he gets more info, even though he must be encouraged or generated .
 Maxwell Taylor in his post-Bay of Pigs investigation letter to President Kennedy on June 13, 1961 . Taylor wrote that the Bay of Pigs probe should have taken place in 1961 .
 CIA doctrine has always been the doctrine of the CIA and its close allies in the Army Special Warfare program . The CIA and close allies have always been involved in the program .
 With few if any changes, they were also the basis of the doctrine being promulgated by Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams . Abrams is key policy official for plans regarding paramilitary operations in Nicaragua .
 In the same memorandum, there is an important but little-noticed definition that plays directly into the hands of the CIA, even though Kennedy was attempting to refocus this type of activity onto the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 No operation can remain “small” once the CIA begins to pour in tens of millions of dollars and the tremendous military assets of the U.S. The operation is small, but it can't remain ‘small’ after the CIA pours into the fray .
 The CIA has developed an efficient system of obtaining military equipment, manpower, overseas base facilities, and all the rest, ostensibly on a reimbursable basis, in order to carry out covert activities . Over the years, the CIA has obtained military equipment and manpower, but also overseas facilities .
 The reimbursement is made by transferring hidden CIA funds in the Department of Defense accounts to DOD, thereby repaying all “out-of-pocket” expenses of the military . CIA funds are transferred to DOD accounts in order to repay all ‘out of pocket’ expenses
 CIA was able, quite easily, to support a rebel force of more than forty thousand troops in Indonesia in 1958 . For example, in 1958, in Indonesia, the CIA used U.S. military assets to support rebels .
 The activities in Nicaragua were ‘small’ when they began after the ouster of Anastasio Somoza in 1979 . The activities were “small” when they were "small," according to the report .
 Before long, it had spent another $27 million and eventually went on to spend more than $100 million . Before long it had already spent $27million and $100million .
 Inevitably, American blood would be shed, and inevitably regular military forces would be called in to bail the Contras out . Just as they were called into Vietnam in 1965 after the CIA and the OSS had worked there for two decades to escalate that conflict .
 The action initiated by the CIA is a reaction to some minor and, perhaps, misleading event, and 2. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 4 . 5. 5 . 6. 5: 5. 4: 5: 4: 6: 7: 8: 9
 This was the single greatest strategic failure of the Vietnam conflict, says John McCain . Vietnam was the Vietnam War, he says .
 The United States had no reasonable military objective; it simply reacted to the situation it found there . The U.S. had no objective to pursue a military objective, the U.K. simply reacted .
 A false definition of the problem is the greatest failing of U.S. administrations, says President Obama . Such adventures are rarely, if ever, successful and productive, he says .
 Any military activity instigated as no more than a reaction to some minor event lacks the element of strategic planning that is needed to attain an objective . The U.S. should not engage in any military activity that is more than reaction to minor events .
 Despite decades of propaganda that would have had us believe they lived in either the “Communist” or “pro-West” sphere, they were not dedicated members of the bipolar “Us or Them” political scheme .
 The distinguishing feature of these smaller countries is that they are not broadrange manufacturers or producers, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 They do not make typewriters, radios or televisions, coffeets, fabric, fabric or automobiles . They do also make television, radio, televisions and automobiles .
 Much of their national revenue is derived from customs fees, and much of their private wealth is from individual franchises for Coca-Cola, Ford automobiles, Singer sewing machines, and so forth .
 In such an economy, the ins, regardless of politics, control these lucrative franchises, and the outs do not . The ins and outs control the lucrative franchises in the U.S.
 It is based on pure economics and greed and has nothing to do with communism or capitalism . It is not a communist or capitalism, it's based on economic and greed, it says .
 The ins solicit franchises from businesses in the United States, they are called friendly and pro-Western . Therefore, if the ins solicit franchise franchises from business in the U.S., they are pro-western .
 The leaders of the Contras, who used to serve Somoza in Nicaragua, wanted their valuable U.S. franchises back . They used to be part of the United States.
 Money lies at the root of the Contras war in Nicaragua . The Contras and the followon U.S. troops provided more than adequate incentive for those who wanted war .
 This is why an in-depth recapitulation of the Vietnam era is important in shedding light on the events of today . This is especially important for the future of Vietnam, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 58,000 Americans who never returned from that tragic conflict never returned . And we have had to pay for it all before, not only with dollars, but with the lives of those who didn't .
 Lewin has told me his book is a novel and that he had a serious message to deliver to the public . Lewin told me he had told me that his book was a novel. Lewin's message is to be delivered by the public.
 Robert McNamara was secretary of defense at the time Thomas Gates left the office in 1961 . He says he was assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense in 1961.
 Along with McNamara came a group of dedicated and intelligent men who, for the most part, were not highly experienced in the military and such things as Grand Strategy and the utilization of modern military forces and weaponry .
 As I got to know them better, I would take part in luncheon discussions that sounded much like Lewin’s writing . Despite this, as I . got to . know them, I got . better—men like Ed Katzenbach, who had been dean at Princeton
 What Lewin wrote is true to life, and we all would do well to heed his words . Lewin's words: "What Lewin said is true life. What we need to heed is that we should heed him"
 The causes of the escalation of warfare in Indochina in the 1960s and 1970s were serious words that weighed heavily on the causes .
 They represent the classic views of a cabal of leaders in our society who fail to see any reason other than war for the existence of man . The views of these leaders are classic views, they say, and they represent a cabal .
 The very fact that certain individuals of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations were said, by Lewin, to be thinking such thoughts in the face of the reality of the hydrogen bomb shows that this temporal world of ours has been changing faster than its leaders and the public can accommodate .
 Knowledgeable grand strategists of the power elite realize today that there cannot be a true, all-out war in a world society equipped with thousands of hydrogen bombs . World society is equipped with . thousands of . hydrogen bombs.
 Grand Strategy requires that warfare be waged for the purpose of attaining the highest national objective—Victory . But Grand Strategy must be waged to achieve the nation's highest objective, Grand Strategy .
 No nation can go to war knowing full well that the prosecution of that war with hydrogen bombs will inevitably lead to the elimination of all mankind and to the destruction of Earth as a living system . No nation . can go . knowing full . well well that a war with . hydrogen bombs would
 Those in positions of genuine power face the chilling reality of this truth . As this realization has permeated the various levels of world leadership, those in power face it .
 Their game of nations, their house of cards, is already showing signs of falling apart . "Their house of nations" is starting to fall apart, says President Barack Obama .
 Principal among these fading truths is the very evident decay of national sovereignty . National sovereignty is being eroded by the decay of the nation's sovereignty .
 Leaders of both parties have been forced to wonder how the U.S. could have lost its lead in the trade markets of the world .
 Reston observed that officials in Washington were finding their pet theories being murdered by the brutal facts . Reston: Officials in Washington are beginning to wonder what went wrong with the facts .
 Reston has not been the only one showing concern over this important subject . Reston is not the only person in the U.S. to express concern over the issue of immigration .
 "The fate of our own nation and of the family of nations hangs in the balance," says President Obama .
 Richard Perle was an assistant secretary of state under Reagan and a frequent voice of the Reagan administration on such matters . A reporter asked Perle whether he thought the administration had been willfully disregarding national sovereignty . Perle: "I don't think it's a violation of our sovereignty"
 Perle evaded and left unanswered during the meeting . It was the only question he left unanswered .
 He could scarcely have honestly claimed that the administration did recognize and did honor the principle of national sovereignty . President Obama's administration has been criticized for its actions .
 We now have a less visible but perhaps equally profound challenge to the unlimited sovereign power of nation-states in the technical reality of global communications . The challenge is less visible, perhaps equally equally profound, but equally profound .
 "What we are witnessing and participating in is a true revolution, and like all revolutions it is creating political unease," says President Obama . "What is happening is creating a real revolution," says Obama .
 Wriston cites “communications” as a “challenge ... to sovereign power” perhaps equal to that of ICBMs . He cites "communications" as a "challenge" perhaps as a challenge .
 Obviously, both serve to severely limit the undivided power of nation-states . The U.S. has a long history of anti-state terrorism .
 "Once that power has been divided, it is, by definition, no longer sovereign," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The jurisdiction of the state cannot be divided, and the state is supreme within its own boundaries . These have been reliable and respected definitions and ideas until rather recently .
 The international obligation to honor the concept of sovereignty “no matter the size and power of the state” may have led to the utilization of deep secrecy to cover those small, secret operations carried out by one state within the borders of another .
 The operative state believes in sovereignty as a foundation of the intangible structure of the family of nations . It carries out covert operation for reasons of presumed necessity, hoping that it will not be discovered and exposed .
 If exposed, the operative state hopes that it may be able to disclaim, quite plausibly, its sinister and unwelcome role in the affair . The operative state is hoping to disclaim its sinister, unwelcome role .
 It may be said, with few exceptions of any significance, that this was the policy of the Eisenhower administration and its predecessors .
 Eisenhower administration directed the CIA, rather than the uniformed military establishment, to plan for and carry out such operations . The military possessed the experience and assets required for such activities and the CIA did not .
 "The requirement for secrecy outweighed other considerations. Within the terms of such a policy, the need for secrecy outweighs other considerations," says CNN.com.com .
 By the last years of the Eisenhower era, the CIA had overleaped its bounds . The CIA had already over-exercised its bounds.
 Its vast operations in Indochina, Tibet, and Indonesia and its U-2 spy-plane flights over the Soviet Union had seriously compromised this policy . The operations could not be kept secret because of their size and duration .
 The Kennedy administration inherited this situation, and the early exposure of this practice caused by the disaster on the beach at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba brought things to a head . The early exposure to this practice was brought to an end by the tragedy of the Cuban uprising .
 Kennedy's new policy signaled a direct turnabout of the assignment of responsibility for covert operations from the CIA to the military . Kennedy’s new policy . signaled a turnabout .
 These men all believed that warfare and the utilization of military forces was a formal affair . Military services were not to be used in any other country large or small, in violation of that state’s sovereignty .
 The U.S. should not use military forces within the borders of the United States, save for accepted emergency situations, in emergency situations . They also believed that the utilization of military forces was also a violation of the state’s sovereignty, that is, its power .
 In this climate, General Lemnitzer and the service chiefs studied each of the NS AMs from the White House with considerable care .
 NS AM #55, “Relations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the President in Cold War Operations,” had been signed by President Kennedy . It was delivered to the secretary of the joint chiefs of staff .
 Discussion of NS AM #55, #56 and #57 was scheduled on the “Joint Chiefs’ agenda” for an early meeting . Discussion was scheduled for the early meeting of the Joint Chiefs' Joint Chiefs . Discussion of the NSAM #55 and #56 was
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff meet regularly in the Gold Room in the heart of the windowless JCS area of the Pentagon . The Gold Room is a windowless, windowless part of the vast Pentagon .
 The agenda for each meeting is selected with care, running from routine unclassified items to those of the very highest classification .
 The military service and the Joint Staff briefing officers are notified well in advance that they are on the agenda for that date . The briefings are usually conducted by the military service .
 In the Gold Room, the chairman and the service chiefs sit at a large table with ranking staff associates from each service . Chairman and service chiefs are joined by ranking staff members from each of the three services .
 Extra staff officials leave after briefing on their special subject has been given and before the next-higher level of classification begins . As a result of the security classification pecking order, these extra staff officials are often left behind .
 As the morning proceeds, both tables thin out with the departure of these officials, both officials .
 Although such operations had been carried out by the U.S. government, in one way or another, since 1948 . It was surprising to see how little the Joint Chiefs actually knew about them .
 Sen. John McCain says he's informed of CIA operations before they take place . McCain: "Keep it short. Keep it short"
 JCS felt much the same way and had limited their participation in both the planning and operation of such activities as much as possible . The JCS said they felt that such activities should be limited .
 General Lemnitzer and General Shoup admitted that they had not realized that that was what had been done with the planeloads of weapons and other war materiel they had furnished to a “classified” request made by a CIA agent in United States military uniform .
 It did not take long to see that these military men, all chiefs of their services, were not Cold Warriors . They did not intend to be. It did take time to see them as Cold Warriors and they were not .
 Allen Dulles had perfected the special policy channel, which ran from the National Security Council to the CIA for all clandestine operations . They had rarely been included in special policy channels .
 CIA operators approached the individual services for support, such as weapons from the army, airlift from the air force, or sealift from the navy . Their services, of course, inevitably got involved .
 Despite logistical support they rarely, if ever, participated in the overall operational planning with the CIA . Even for such complex ‘secret” activities as the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba .
 Copies of the key elements of the directives were given to each of the chiefs personally for safekeeping .
 NS AM #56, “Evaluation of Paramilitary Requirements,” had been delivered to the secretary of defense by the White House . The White House also delivered the report to Secretary of Defense by the president .
 This task had been assigned by Secretary McNamara to that longtime CIA operator Gen. Gen. David Gergen . Gen. Gergen was a CIA operator for decades .
 The third presidential directive, NS AM #57, “Responsibility for Paramilitary Operations,” was a document of great potential . The document is a document that could be used in the future .
 As written, the primary thrust was contained in an enclosure that proposed the establishment of a Strategic Resources Group for initial consideration of all paramilitary operations and for approval, as necessary, by President .
 For an important paper from the White House, the language of the covering letter came as quite a surprise . The language was a surprise for the language used in the letter . The White House has been criticized for its language .
 The letter that reversed the Taylor procedure was written and signed by McGeorge Bundy . Bundy signed the letter to reverse the procedure . Bundy's letter was signed by Bundy himself .
 In this connection, it was McGeorge Bundy who had made the telephone call to Gen. Bundy . Bundy was the man who made the call .
 Charles Cabell canceled the essential air strikes against the last of Castro’s combat aircraft, even though President Kennedy had approved those same air strikes that very afternoon . Cabell, the deputy director of the CIA, canceled the strikes on the night before the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 NS AM #57 left the former Cold War operations system in place with one stroke of the McGeorge Bundy pen . The Special Group would “perform the functions” of the new Strategic Resources Group .
 This circumscribed the role of the Strategic Resources Group designed by General Taylor . General Taylor created the group in order to protect the nation's interests .
 With its toe firmly in the door as a result of the loophole in NS AM #57, the CIA began an argument that effectively neutralized that directive .
 NSAM #57 made clear that a small and covert operation would still be assigned to the CIA . This seemed to make it clear that the CIA would continue to be involved in the operation .
 "It seemed to me, and many others, that this language made it indisputably clear what the President wanted," he said . "I'm not sure what I'm doing here," he added .
 Their arguments progressed to the subject of the eventual transfer of such operations from an embattled CIA to the larger and more experienced military .
 Presidential directives doomed this series of presidential directives to the files . These arguments, plus the natural desire of the JCS to remain .
 This had important results, especially with reference to the future of the war in Vietnam—and later in the situations in Central America and the Middle East, where almost identical progressions were taking place . The results had important implications, especially in the Vietnam War, the author says .
 Maxwell Taylor became chairman of the JCS in October 1962 and ambassador to the South Vietnamese government in July 1963 . Taylor was ambassador to South Vietnam from July 1963 to August 1963 .
 Special Resources Group is the brainchild of President Obama . The group was created by President George W. Bush .
 First U.S. troops under direct military command landed at Da Nang in March 1965 . Policy outlined in NS AM #57 was a direct result of the policy outlined in the book . The first United States troops under command landed in Vietnam in 1965 .
 With the landing of the U.S. Marine battalions, under the command of a marine general, the nature of the warfare that had been carried out under the aegis of the CIA changed .
 It took twenty years for the clandestine work of the CIA to achieve that level—and it was not accomplished during JFK’s lifetime . The CIA's clandestine work was not achieved during JFK's lifetime .
 The Joint Chiefs wondered how these new policy ideas had reached the President . NSAM #57 was the first document to be released in July 1961 .
 Some thought Ted Sorensen, the President’s counsel, and, perhaps, Bobby Kennedy were responsible for them . Some thought that Ted Sorennsen was responsible for the deaths of Bobby Kennedy .
 Some suspected that Walt Rostow and Bill Bundy may have come up with the concept . Some believed Rostow, Bundy and others came up with it .
 If they had been able to discover the source of these documents, they would have been better able to evaluate their true significance . If they'd found the source, they could have evaluated the true significance of the documents .
 Sorensen and Bobby Kennedy may have put them together, he says . Bobby attended all of the meetings of the Cuban Study Group, Bobby having attended all the meetings .
 As we discovered later, these directives had been written by General Taylor, and a small, select staff . General Taylor's directives were later revealed to be those of a select group .
 Many years later, I invited Admiral Burke to lunch, along with a lawyer friend, to meet him . "I invited him to lunch," he said .
 I asked the admiral directly if the Cuban Study Group had ever issued a “report” to the President after the conclusion of its lengthy deliberations . The admiral said the group had never issued a "report" to the Obama administration .
 Bobby Kennedy had attended all of the meetings, he said . Furthermore, he noted that Bobby Kennedy attended the meetings .
 His inference was that with Bobby in the room, there was no need to report the findings to his brother, whom Bobby saw and spoke to every day . Bobby was Bobby's brother, and Bobby saw him every day, according to CNN.com .
 General Taylor, with the consent of the other members of the Cuban Study Group, may have written his lengthy “Fetter to the President” on his own in order to present his personal views about the way this nation should carry out Cold War operations . General Taylor’s
 "He was the military expert among that group and the others were not. After all, he was an expert among them," he says .
 In view of the situation at that time, this may be the correct interpretation of these important events . The situation at the time was at the center of the crisis in Iraq .
 The admiral and the others on the group hid under the fine point that General Taylor delivered a “letter” to the President, not a formal report . General Taylor and the other members of the group say he delivered a "letter" to the president .
 The President signaled his acceptance of the “Report on the Defense Intelligence Organizations” that had been written by a group headed by Gen. Gen. George W. Bush .
 Graves B Erskine was the longtime head of the Office of Special Operations . He was the head of special operations operations for the U.S. Marine Corps . Graves was a member of the Marine Corps.
 This was followed, between August 16 and August 25, 1961, by a large recall of Army Reserve and National Guard troops . The recall was ostensibly in support of pressures in Europe .
 On September 6, 1961, 148,000 more men were recalled to active duty, with 40,000 of them sent to Europe . The majority of the men were sent to the Middle East .
 Dulles, who had been the director since February 1953, left the CIA on November 29, 1961 . Dulles had been in charge of the CIA since 1953 .
 When the going gets rough, agency professionals circle the wagons and get tough . Agency professionals circle wagons, get tough when it comes to dealing with the tough times .
 Kennedy announced his selection of McCone to replace Allen Dulles . They began their next moves as soon as the president announced his choice .
 He had been deputy to the secretary of defense for several months in 1948 and under secretary of the air force during 1950 and 1951 . He had no military or OSS experience .
 McCone could be made into an executive figurehead, while the straight-arrow army general, Maxwell Taylor, could be maneuvered into a paramilitary role .
 McCone's orientation trip around the world was scheduled for McCone . To get these plans started, McCone was scheduled to go on a long orientation trip .
 The new DCI would be isolated from all other contacts and kept in the company of no one but the agency’s best for an extended period . The great significance of such a trip is that such a visit would be kept from all contacts and isolation .
 The CIA’s number-one spokesman and craftsman at that time was Desmond Fitzgerald, head of the agency's Far East Division . Fitzgerald is now the CIA's number one spokesman . Fitzgerald was head of agency's far East Division at the time .
 He was selected by the “Gold Key Club,” the inner circle of the hardline CIA professionals, to accompany McCone on this trip . McCone is a former CIA director .
 Fitzgerald came over to the Pentagon for a meeting with key officials in clandestine business . Fitzgerald also met with officials at the Pentagon to discuss clandestine operations . Fitzgerald was in the middle of the meeting .
 He revealed plans for this trip that would include stops at major CIA stations and a special tour of South Vietnam .
 Certain villages were to be prepared, like movie sets, so that McCone would believe he was seeing Vietnamese combat action in “real time” and up close . Villages were prepared to be set up as movie sets for McCone's visit .
 The object of his visit to Vietnam was to have him exposed to as much CIA action as possible . He met Ngo Dinh Diem and other selected leaders who had been working with the CIA for decades .
 CIA’s Desmond Fitzgerald said that the trip had been timed to provide for lengthy briefings sessions . Fitzgerald said the CIA would have weeks to totally indoctrinate (or brainwash) the new director of the CIA .
 McCone would get a good rundown on the key people in the new CIA headquarters at Langley, Virginia . He would also hear about worldwide political activities, including the CIA's political activities .
 Not long after McCone’s return from the trip, he was sworn in as the new director of central intelligence . Richard Helms, a longtime careerist, was appointed as deputy director of intelligence .
 At the close of 1961 there were 2,067 American servicemen in Vietnam . By the end of the decade there would be more than half a million in the country's war effort .
 As we look back on that decade, we see the record of revolutionary changes . We look back at the first 10 years of the American presidency .
 Many of the same men have played similar roles for later administrations in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East . Many of these same men also played key roles in Latin American, African and Middle Eastern administrations .
 "We cannot but be alarmed at the bewildering innocence of American citizens," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Actions of these administrations reflect a policy that began to take shape during the Eisenhower era . The Kennedy National Security Action Memoranda was clearly documented in those Kennedy national security action Memoranda .
 As presidential administrations come and go, the bureaucracy lingers on to perfect its ways . This is nowhere more sinister than in the domain of the CIA and its allies throughout the government .
 The essence of covert operations directed and carried out by the government of the United States, from the top down, is the denial of the international concept of nationstate sovereignty, the principle upon which the family of nations exists .
 This situation has been brought about by the existence of the Earth-destroying hydrogen bombs, by the uncontrolled and uncontrollable growth of worldaround communications, and by the runaway power of transnational corporations, it has been said .
 All of these factors threaten and destroy sovereignty, as is evidenced by the events that have occurred in the Soviet Union since 1990 . The events have occurred since 1990, according to the former Soviet Union .
 To most Europeans, I guess, America now looks like the most dangerous country in the world . America now appears to be more dangerous than any other country, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The transformation of America’s image within the last thirty years is very frightening for Europeans . Since America is unquestionably the most powerful country, the transformation of its image has been frightening .
 It is probably still more frightening for the great majority of the human race who are neither Europeans nor North Americans, but are Latin Americans, Asians, and Africans . It is still more terrifying for Europeans and North Americans who are not North Americans .
 They feel that, at any moment, America may intervene in their internal affairs, with the same appalling consequences as have followed from the American intervention in Southeast Asia . They feel they may have to live with the consequences of U.S. intervention .
 For the world as a whole, the CIA has now become the bogey that communism has been for America . The CIA is now a bogey for the world, with the CIA becoming a symbol of communism for the U.S. for America.
 Wherever there is trouble, violence, suffering, tragedy, the rest of us are now quick to suspect the CIA had a hand in it . The CIA is responsible for some of the world's biggest tragedies, including the deaths of Americans .
 Our phobia about the CIA is, no doubt, as fantastically excessive as America’s phobia . But in this case, too, there is just enough convincing guidance to make the phobia genuine .
 In fact, the roles of America and Russia have been reversed in the world’s eyes . The roles of Russia and the United States are reversed in world's eyes . Russia and U.S. have been seen as the world's most powerful nations .
 This is what the destruction of sovereignty and disregard for the rule of law means, and it will not stop there. This is not only what it means, but what it will mean for the future of the country .
 With it will go property rights, property rights and the rights of man . With it, we have witnessed in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, we say .
 John F Kennedy had been shot dead months before by bursts of “automatic gunfire” in Dallas by “mechanics” that is, skilled gunmen, hired by a power cabal .
 JFK’s successor was only a few feet under the bullets fired at Kennedy as he rode two cars back in that fatal procession . JFK was becoming mired in the swamp .
 Kennedy, who had vowed to “break the CIA into a thousand pieces,” was dead . Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head of the CIA . Kennedy had vowed "to break the CIA"
 LBJ, who heard those fatal bullets zing past his ears, had learned the ultimate lesson . Richard Nixon was in Dallas on that fatal day, so that he, too, had the fact of this ever-present danger imprinted on his memory .
 Within a year of President Kennedy’s death, the CIA was on the move again . The CIA was in control of the CIA in the early 1960s .
 Victor Paz Estenssoro fled from La Paz to Lima, Peru, after an abrupt coup d’etat engineered by the CIA . The president of Bolivia fled to Peru after the CIA engineered a coup .
 The man Barrientos replaced is the same Paz Estenssoro who again served as president of Bolivia in 1986 and who was much disturbed when U.S. troops showed up in his country with armed helicopter gunships .
 From long experience, Paz knew what it meant to have weapons in the hands of outsiders who might at any moment permit them to be used by his enemies to threaten the government . Paz: "From long experience" Paz said he was prepared to be a soldier in the field
 Before the outbreak of WWII, the German Nazi machine had built a vast underground spy network in Latin America . Lufthansa and its affiliated companies had a network of spies throughout the region . The network was built around the German airline Lufrdansa .
 It was operated in much the same manner as the CIA’s huge proprietary corporation, Air America, was decades later . Air America acted in support of a Nazi spy network .
 In 1941, Paz was arrested for promising to deliver the oil fields of his country into the hands of the Germans . Paz already had a political record as the Bolivian minister of finance . In 1941 he sided with the Nazis .
 He had been the leader of the pro-Nazi National Revolutionary Movement . He was connected with four Bolivian newspapers that operated under the domination of Hitler's propaganda chief, Joseph Goebbels .
 Paz fled Bolivia to seek refuge in the elite San Antonio district of Lima in 1964 . Three men met in the dimly lit barroom of the old regal Hotel Bolivar .
 I had just walked across the sunlit plaza and entered the same barroom through its street-level doorway . The barroom is located in the same plaza as the barroom where it sits .
 I heard those men speaking English and immediately recognized them, even though my eyes had not adjusted enough to see them . The men were speaking English, and I recognized them immediately .
 In our silent profession we learn never to approach anyone in strange surroundings until we are certain the coast is clear . We learn to never approach anyone with strange surroundings . We are not allowed to approach strangers in strange situations .
 The Peruvian national drink, a Pisco Sour, is the national drink of the country's national drink .
 One of the three men came to the bar beside me, ordered drinks, took out a cigarette, and prepared to light it . The three men ordered drinks and took out the cigarette, then took it out again .
 The three had just finished an assignment in Bolivia and were on their way back to Washington . The three were returning from a mission in Bolivia .
 They engineered the coup d’etat against Paz and installed General Barrientos as president . They had engineered the overthrow of Paz . Paz had been overthrown by the military and taken control of the country .
 The U.S. National Security Council decided in 1964 that Paz must go and a new man was placed in his shoes . The Bolivian president was elected in 1964 .
 Barrientos Ortuno was a popular young air force general . He was chosen for this role by the president of Argentina .
 He was to be given the “Robin Hood” treatment by the CIA to increase his popularity . The CIA had done for Ramon Magsaysay in the Philippines, for Ngo Dinh Diem in South Vietnam, and for a host of others around the world .
 He must maintain absolute control over all weapons, particularly ammunition, in his country, says President Obama .
 In Bolivia at that time, Paz had put control of all weapons in the hands of relatives and reliable friends who commanded the civilian militia as an elite palace guard . The Bolivian president died at the age of 65 in 1953 .
 They maintained edge over the armed forces by controlling all ammunition —absolutely. They maintained an edge over . The armed forces . They maintained . an edge .
 Soldiers of the Bolivian army and air force had weapons and were trained with live ammunition . Unit leaders had to turn in a shell case for every round fired . Soldiers were trained to fire live ammunition after a day on the firing range .
 There was strict accountability not only for every weapon but for every single bullet . "There is strict accountability," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The task for the CIA was to overthrow Paz and replace him with Barrientos . The task was clear, and it was simple, and the CIA had a simple solution .
 All that had to be done was to put more ammunition into the hands of Barrientos’s regular troops than Paz could get into his own civilian militia, and to do it quickly and by surprise . All that needed to happen was to do so quickly and surprise .
 This was done under the cover of an openly declared joint exercise involving U.S. and Bolivian army and air force units . The exercise was scheduled to take place in outlying regions of Bolivia .
 This exercise, in 1964, was designed much as the antidrug campaign in Bolivia would be in 1986 . The Bolivian anti-drug campaign in 1964 was designed to be similar to the campaign in 1986, when it took place .
 The military maneuvers served to raise the political stature of Barrientos and to cover the secret delivery of tons of ammunition to his troops .
 All of the U.S. Air Force aircraft employed in support of this exercise were “clean”—they had taken no part in the delivery of ammunition . The exercise took place in the United States .
 The CIA used a contract Super Constellation aircraft from Air America to fly ammunition to a remote landing ground in Peru . The ammunition was transported by a contract aircraft from the Air America .
 CIA-controlled light aircraft flew it across the border in CIA controlled light aircraft to Bolivia . From there, it was flown into several smaller magazines scattered throughout Bolivia . The CIA controlled the operation .
 The day before the coup, CIA agents moved a sizable military force to the outskirts of La Paz . The coup took place in the country's capital, the capital of Mexico's capital .
 During the night its members were issued live ammunition, and at daybreak they infiltrated the city . The group was given live ammunition during the night and was given access to live ammunition .
 The troops of the civilian militia were caught by surprise, with their weapons in hand but with no ammunition . They were caught with weapons in their hand but without ammunition . The troops were caught in the ambush by the soldiers .
 Paz, yielding to good sense, quickly accepted the offer of a flight to Peru .
 During the night, my friends, the three CIA operatives, had been hosts, that is, captors, of General Barrientos at a secret safe house . The night before, the CIA operatives had been hosting him at a safe house, he says .
 When it was time to take the general to La Paz, they loaded him onto an old Bolivian Air Force C-47 for the final leg of his journey to power .
 When the plane landed in a leaderless city, these CIA agents realized that El Presidente was far from being sober enough to assume his new duties . The CIA agents say he was drunk enough to take over as president .
 Barrientos was driven down the main street to the cheers of his subjects . The CIA men explained to him what had happened, his new duties and responsibilities, and some of the hazards of his new job .
 "Paz" is now a permanent resident of Los Angeles, California . The city has been home to Paz since 2001 .
 Less than an hour later they were at the Lima airport and on their way to Panama . Less than a half an hour after they arrived in Lima, Peru, they were in Panama .
 The CIA headquarters in Panama was, at that time, responsible for all clandestine activities in Latin America . The CIA was responsible for the CIA's activities in Panama .
 The three CIA agents were ready for other assignments . It had been a success, and they were ready to take on new assignments .
 This formula for the transition of leadership in less developed countries has been used over and over again . This formula is used to transition leadership in countries such as Brazil, Argentina, Mexico .
 The people of those countries have little, if anything, to say about it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The people of that country have little ... to say," he says .
 The record of this type of activity goes back to World War II, and off the record it goes back much farther than that . It's not the first time this kind of activity has occurred in the U.S. since WWII .
 Vietnam's tactics have become the method of dealing with the problems of less developed countries in the bipolar world . As the progression of events in Central America has demonstrated, the tactics of Vietnam have become an effective way of dealing .
 Lose Vietnam and the rest of Southeast Asia would fall to communism . Lose Nicaragua and there would be Communists right on the other side of the Rio Grande .
 Despite the changes in what was the Soviet Union, this kind of warfare isn’t over yet yet . The Soviet Union still has a long history of Soviet-era warfare . The U.S. has never won a single victory in a war of its own .
 In Vietnam the U.S. won precisely nothing, but that costly war served the primary purposes of the world’s power elite . In Vietnam, the United States won nothing, and that war served its purposes .
 "They benefited splendidly from the hundreds of billions of dollars that came their way. For one thing, they benefited from the billions that came in their way," says President Obama .
 More than ten million men were flown from the United States to Saigon by contract commercial airline flights . The flights represented more than $800 million in windfall business for those airlines .
 With each takeover, the victors gain access to the natural resources and human, low-cost, assets of the country . The winner of each takeover is the owner of the assets and the majority of the population .
 Once operatives are out of town, a new band of intelligence experts takes their place . Once that “dirty work” has been achieved, intelligence experts take their place.
 One of the least-known divisions of the CIA is that headed by the deputy director of economics . The CIA's economic division is one of the most secretive parts of the agency .
 This division moves into a country to work with a new regime and to begin the task of selecting and setting up new franchise holders for as many goods as possible .
 These new franchise holders are usually closely associated with the new President .
 The CIA screens and selects these new “millionaires’s” and arranges for them to meet with the various companies they will front for under the new regime . The CIA screen and arrange to meet the new millionaires .
 It might be said that this cleansing of the economic system is the real reason for most coups d’etat, and that political ideology has very little to do with it . Political ideology is not the only reason for coups, it is to clean up the economy .
 The ins are called “friends of the West” and “anticommunist,” but that’s just for public consumption . “Antiquommunists” are called friends of the west and anti-communist .
 The outs are well aware of the system, having been the ins and beneficiaries of the same, or similar, largess under the prior administration . On the other side of the coin, the outs are aware of system .
 An administration begins to believe that it is truly in power and that it actually runs the government . But it happens that over a period of time an administration believes it is in power . The White House has been accused of corruption in the past .
 This leads its officials to make franchise arrangements with an ever-increasing number of sources . This leads to an increase in franchise deals with an increasing number of people, officials say .
 Some of the more daring, in an attempt to escape the severe financial and profit-making controls placed upon them and their government by U.S. manufacturers and by the canopy of international banks that is spread over all imports .
 They believe they may be able to buy essential goods cheaper that way and to sell their resources and labor at better rates . They believe that they may have been able to afford to buy goods cheaper .
 To oversimplify, this is what Ferdinand Marcos was doing in the Philippines before he was ousted . Marcos was ousted from the Philippines in 1986 .
 As such actions increase, the national leadership will be increasingly attacked by the U.S. The United States will increasingly attack the leadership on the grounds that it is turning toward communism . The country is becoming a base for the infiltration of the Communist ideology and military system into the hemisphere .
 In other cases there are more or less ‘legitimate’ coups d’etat as internal opposition rises against an oppressive dictatorship . In some cases, the coups are legitimate but not legitimate .
 Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina ruled the Dominican Republic from 1930 to 1961 . Fulgencio Batista in Cuba and Anastasio Somoza of Nicaragua were also “anti-Communist” dictators .
 All of these men, to cite a few, had been in power so long that they believed they could throw their weight around and extend their franchise selections to other countries .
 In such cases the U.S. does not so much aid the insurgents as it just sits on its hands and lets the aged dictator be eliminated by others who want his job .
 It remained for President Corazon Aquino to heed the hints that poured out from the Office of the Deputy Director of Economics and other “friends” as she faced the task of rebuilding the franchise networks .
 This means big money to the country involved and to the U.S. and the bankers who manage the finances in both directions . This is big money for the United States and for the world, both sides .
 That amount is more than 50 percent of the net cost of the Vietnam War—even though it was the total for only one year . That amount amounts to more than half of the total war's net cost .
 "This type of activity continues with or without the specter of communism," says the author . "It's important to remember that this is not about communism," he says .
 "This business of military and foreign aid is much more complex and much more important to the economic future of this nation than most people understand," says President Obama .
 The total cost of U.S. foreign aid from 1952 through 1979 amounted to $100 billion, in 1950 dollars . Buckminster Fuller served as a consultant to the governments of many countries, including Brazil and the Soviet Union .
 Foreign aid paid for all the new factories and machinery of all the American corporations moving out of America . Foreign aid funded all the factories, machinery and factories that were built in the United States .
 This allowed corporations to acquire gold equities while U.S. citizens and small domestic businesses could not do so . This allowed the corporations to buy gold stocks while United States citizens could not . Small domestic businesses were not allowed to do so.
 Anyone who wishes to learn more about the exploitation of the lessdeveloped countries and the control of United States corporations should read Walter Wriston’s book Risk and Other Four-Letter Words .
 Retired CEO of Citicorp, Wriston knows the subject better than almost anyone else . As a retired CEO, he knows more than anyone else than almost everyone else .
 The only problem is that the reader must understand Wriston’s point of view . The reader must also understand the point of mind .
 Almost none of that money will ever return to the U.S. It is our savings and our pension plans—or rather, was . The money will never be returned to the United States .
 The U.S. has no idea of what our personal objective and that of our country ought to be with respect to the rest of the world . We often misunderstand the nations of the Third World, most of which, like Vietnam, have been created by design . The design of other
 Many of these Third World social groups, such as those in Indochina, have histories that go back fifteen thousand years or more . As a people, they have survived for thousands of years on the same ground as that of their ancestors .
 Most of the national boundaries of Vietnam, Saudi Arabia, Ghana, South Korea, and Iraq are latter-day devices, creations that divide these ancient and homogeneous people . Yet most of those ancient lands, such as Vietnam, are quite homogeneous .
 When we speak of the failure to have and to understand our national objective, we must be able to define its meaning, especially in time of war . We must also define our national objectives, especially during war, writes David Cameron .
 Creighton W Abrams, who asked the crucial question of President Johnson, was asked by Creighton Abrams . Abrams: 'What do you think of Johnson? What do you do?'
 He needed to know what this country’s strategic objective was in Indochina, he said . He said .
 With that, he and his staff would have been able to draw up a proper and effective military plan to win that war . With that plan, he would have be able to come up with an effective plan .
 Without such a statement from the President, the best that men like Abrams and Westmoreland could do was wallow in the quagmire of indecision while counting bodies on both sides .
 General Abrams knew, as did most of the senior U.S. military officers, that if he had been turned loose with the forces at his disposal he could have captured Hanoi, and all of Ho Chi Minh’s forces .
 The former Commander in Chief, Pacific, Adm. in Chief said the U.S. should not be allowed to leave the Philippines . The U.N. has been in the Philippines since 2001 .
 Such a tactical achievement would not have brought with it victory, it would simply have caused the immediate escalation of warfare on an international scale . But these men knew also that such a victory would not bring victory, they said .
 Any success they might have achieved on the border of China would have unleashed hordes of Chinese armed and equipped with modern weaponry of the Soviet Union . There could have been no victory in a land war against hordes of well-armed Chinese .
 Such an eventuality would have led inevitably to a so-called conventional war of such fury that the leaders of both sides would have been forced to weight the tactical necessity of the utilization of the hydrogen bomb . Such a conventional war would have resulted in the use of such a weapon .
 At that point, there could be no such thing as “graduated” or “limited” warfare . The U.S. could no longer rely on ‘graduated warfare’ or ‘limited’ warfare .
 "The very heart of the meaning of warfare is that it is, and forever must be, all-out and unrestricted in its fury," says President Obama .
 The progress, or direction, of the course of wide-open warfare is always unpredictable . Furthermore, the progress or direction of the . course of the war is unpredictable, he says .
 If General Abrams had really been turned loose by his commander in chief in the White House, it would not have been long before the President would have been forced to make the decision to use the hydrogen bomb .
 The United States would have been made the target of Soviet retaliation . The U.S. would not have been targeted by the Soviet Union .
 In that series of decisions, which appear to be all but inevitable, lies the power to bring about the destruction of Earth . The decision to destroy Earth is all but certain, but it could be catastrophic .
 The real significance underlying General Abram’s question to the President is that the President should answer it . That is the real significance of the question, he says .
 Faced with these facts, no President will ever again be able to order Americans to take part in an all-out, classic war . Facing the dilemma they create, President Obama will never be able again to order a war .
 No President or his counterparts in nuclear-armed nations will be able to commit troops to battle in which the certain outcome will be global destruction . No President of any nation would be willing to engage in such a war that would end with global destruction.
 A little-known secret about the war in Indochina illustrates how dangerous the H-bomb threat actually was . H-bombs were used in Vietnam .
 Three U.S. Air Force F-84 fighter-bombers were put on tactical alert at the Udon Thani air base in Thailand . The base is just across the river from Laos, and is just over the border with Laos .
 At that time the Vietminh were believed to be mounting an all-out massed campaign, in conjunction with opposition Pathet Lao forces, westerly across the Plaines des Jarres from Samneua toward capital of Laos .
 It was suspected that the Vietminh were planning a flanking attack into Cambodia on the way to a final strike at Saigon . It was also suspected that they were planning to attack Cambodia .
 Although the Vietminh rarely massed their forces, it was believed they had a sizable army on the move . It was believed to be believed they were on a large scale .
 This was the first time since the atomic bomb attacks on Japan in 1945 that these massive weapons had been readied for actual combat . The year was 1960; this was the year when the atomic bombs were readied .
 The F-84s and their nuclear weapons were returned to their bases . Cooler heads prevailed, some shocked to the core by the very thought of such a possibility .
 A lower-level form of inconclusive warfare continued in Indochina for the next fifteen years . As a result, a lower level form of peacekeeping continued in Vietnam .
 $137. billion was spent by the U.S. for “military operations” alone in the Third World during 1985 . It has become the objective of “low-intensity conflict” to continue the wasting of money, the pointless killing of defenseless people .
 National sovereignty no longer exists as a fact in LDCs, and exists only partially in all other nations today . The rules of the ‘Game of States’ require that the game be played as though sovereignty did exist .
 The LDCs are considered to be sovereign equals, as at the United Nations, that is, one state, one vote . As a result, they are considered as sovereign equals at the U.N. that is one state with one vote in each .
 The true definition of “less-developed country” has nothing to do with politics, ideology, or military power, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Sutter: "Less developed country’s true definition is that of a less developed country"
 An LDC is a country that differs from others because it does not have the ability to produce or manufacture all of the things it needs or wants to survive, even at a relatively low level of subsistence . LDCs are countries that have not been able to produce all the things they
 As some scholars have put it, the LDCs do not have the “carrying capacity” for bare existence and real growth in modern times . The LDC’s are not ‘carrying . capacity’ to survive and grow, some scholars say .
 The biggest business in a less-developed country, and the sole reason for its government power structure, is import and export . As a result, the biggest business is importing and export, the government is dependent on exports .
 LDCs hope to export enough, in dollar values, to provide the money required to make payments on the interest on their national debt . The money is needed to pay for all the things they must import, including food, clothing and medicine .
 The government of such a country is a business monopoly over its people and its territory . The government is motivated less by some political ideology than by the very pragmatic aim of controlling the import-export business .
 In most LDCs the customs activity and border patrol are the most important elements of the governmental structure . Customs activity enables the political leadership to maintain its monopoly on everything exported and imported by the country, as well as its value .
 Franchise holders, the ins, are usually assured of becoming millionaires . These franchise holders are often assured of being millionaires .
 Their franchises are obtained through contacts with select sources in the U.S. and other Western powers . The franchises are often obtained from select sources .
 There is no other way to obtain nonlocally produced goods, including foodstuffs, which must be imported . They cover all the essentials required by the populace; there are no other ways to get them .
 The outs include those who have been stripped of their franchises, usually as a result of a coup d’etat, in favor of the ruling group . The outs, on the other hand, are those who were stripped of franchises, and those who are not .
 The term “political party” and the words “communism,” “socialism” rarely apply in any of these LDCs . The term "political party" rarely applies in these countries, but it does in the United States .
 The outs represent an ever-present danger to the ins through the possibility of a coup d’etat . The outs are definitely on the outside looking in and represent an outside threat .
 In most cases, the votes, if elections are held, are counted by the armed forces . The armed forces are the instrument of the in power group . The vote is the most important instrument of a power group in power .
 Such controls leave little alternative to the outs other than the coup d’etat method of power transition . Such controls left little choice for the outs, such as coup d'etat .
 In all less-developed countries, the difference between the ins and outs has little, if anything, to do with political ideology . "In all less developed countries," the difference in the ins vs. outs is little political ideology, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The scenario exploited by the major powers divided the world into “Communist and the West” or some other structure . The scenario was exploited by major powers, the author says .
 The supremely powerful international bankers keep the books and balances for each side . They balance each other's accounts in order to keep the world's most powerful institutions safe .
 They make these transactions possible by offering the loans, issuing letters of credit, collecting huge fees for their role in each transaction, and collecting interest on the entire package .
 In many LDCs the total amount of interest paid to the banks and their international financing structure amounts to more than half of the total value of dollars earned by their exports . The interest paid by the banks amounts to over half the value of the exports .
 Annual payments are seldom more than the interest involved and none of the principal . For this reason, annual payments are rarely more than interest .
 This is one reason why the principal never comes back to the United States. "This is one of the reasons why I'm not allowed to return to the U.S. This is the reason why I don't want to come back to America," says the principal .
 When Continental Illinois Bank failed, a major share of its $47 billion holdings had come from 2,200 other U.S. financial institutions . Continental Illinois was one of the largest banks in the country, with $47 million in assets .
 The failure of that single “money center” bank would have taken down with it the majority of those other 2,200 financial institutions . Had the U.S. government not moved to take over these massive losses, the failure would have led to the collapse of most of the
 France vies to sell the Mystere fighter plane to each LDC at the same time the U.S. pushes its own aircraft . The plane will be sold to each of the LDCs at the time .
 Deals are made, for example, with Brazil to purchase iron ore and, in the process, to construct a much-needed 1,100-mile railway line .
 In most LDCs vast amounts of raw materials and labor at low cost are traded for manufactured items . In most countries, raw materials are traded in for manufactured goods .
 The struggle for less-developed countries is not a political contest such as Communists versus the West . All that is important is to know that the struggle is not to be political .
 It is a struggle for an import-export lock on each country, with the aim of creating markets and consumers, along with a maximized flow of dollars in both directions that includes a heavy overhead burden of interest for bankers, who benefit likewise .
 This understanding takes us back to the origins of the thirty-year war in Indochina and events of that era . It takes us to understand the origin of the 30-year conflict and events in that period .
 Elements of the U.S.-British coalition began the "anti-Communist" battle cry before surrender of Germany . Despite the fact that the Soviet Union had been our ally during World War II, elements of the coalition started the battle cry .
 $6 trillion has been legally transferred from the United States people’s national capital account over to the capital ownership account of the one thousand largest transnational, exclusively American-flag-flying corporations . Since that time, approximately $100 billion per year has been spent on foreign military aid
 This question points to a need for a reliable American source in the LDCs who has information, that is, "intelligence,” on all key families in the country .
 CIA station chief in each less-developed country will create a list of key families who are close to the ruling power . The list includes key families close to ruling power members of the ruling party .
 In many instances, a son will be enrolled in the military of that country and will then be put on a quota of officers who have been selected to attend a “radar school” or other military course in the U.S. The United States Military Aid Program .
 The long-term benefit is the opportunity for us to influence other countries, it says . It goes on to say, “This center is a vital link in American foreign policy.”
 Upon return, these students and their families will be looked upon as future franchise holders for the import of U.S.-made products .
 This effort is cloaked in the military uniform, but it has been arranged by the CIA for business purposes . The CIA has been involved in the effort to recruit Americans to join the military .
 Despite all precautions, there comes a time when the in government is overthrown by the outs . Despite all the precautions, it is still possible that the government will not be overthrown .
 In spite of all the propaganda, the new ins are rarely, if ever, “Communists,” “socialists” or other ideologues . The new ins, however, are rarely "Communists" or "socialists," or other Ideologues
 They just want to cancel all existing franchises, turn out the former franchise holders, and begin the whole process again . The team wants to cancel existing franchises and turn them out .
 In such a system, it becomes necessary for the U.S. to side with one group or the other . The United States must side with either side of the fence, the president says .
 Both sides are well aware of the game played by the CIA and its friends in the U.S. business community . Both sides know the game being played by both sides .
 Paz was displaced by the CIA and Barrientos was put in his place . Paz knew exactly what had happened and who had done it, the CIA said .
 The Bolivian president of Bolivia was elected in 1972 . He was elected president in 1978, but was forced to step down in 1982 . He has since returned to the presidency of Bolivia, Bolivia .
 CIA Director Casey’s suggestion to Marcos that he run an election worked like a charm . After all, the CIA director Casey's suggestion worked like an electoral candidate .
 The franchises for products imported into the Philippines under the Aquino regime were all written anew . Marcos was out, and the franchises for imports into the country were written anew. Marcos was also out .
 Obama administration failed to understand the use of military power, says CNN's John Sutter . Obama administration has been criticized for not understanding military power .
 U.S. failure to properly assess the fighting capabilities of the T-33 jet trainer has serious implications . The discussion whether United States air cover was planned for the Bay of Pigs invasion is academic, in our opinion .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy acknowledged last week that underestimating the T-bird was a major mistake . Attorney General Kennedy acknowledged underestimating T-birds was a mistake .
 This article is evidence that by January 1963, the Kennedys had realized that the cancellation of that crucial air strike was the major miscalculation behind the defeat of the exile brigade, just as Gen. Gen. Eisenhower did .
 The Kennedy brothers agreed that they would not lay themselves open to that problem of underestimating enemy capability again . They would not underestimate enemy capability .
 Indochina was looming over Camelot at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue . But far away, on the other side of the world, it was still a threat .
 By mid-1961, the Kennedys realized that the H-bomb was as much a factor, in the theater of operations in Indochina, as the T-33 jets had been in the Bay of Pigs operation . The H-bombs were a factor in the
 Any participation in a military action in a friendly Third World country was necessarily limited to the use of conventional weaponry . In other words, any participation in an attack in such a country would necessarily be limited to conventional weapons .
 At the same time, military strategists know that war must always be an all-out, go-for-broke activity . The U.S. military says it's not always an easy way to get around the world .
 If limited warfare is attempted, it inevitably becomes a war without an objective . Furthermore, if limited warfare tries to be limited warfare, it will become a war with no objective .
 Such a war cannot be won, as we learned in Korea and would learn in Vietnam, says President Obama . Such a conflict can't be won in such a war, he says .
 The war in Vietnam, fought as it was without a military objective, had to lead nowhere . Thus, as Clark Clifford so clearly predicted, the war had to be stopped .
 Kennedy knew that the introduction of U.S. military forces into Vietnam would create that insoluble problem . Kennedy knew it would create an insoluble conflict .
 Kennedy inherited the low-level action Kennedy inherited in Indochina from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations . The CIA continued in operational control there as it had since 1945, although now in a somewhat more diversified role .
 By the end of 1961 President Kennedy’s military adviser in the White House, Gen. Gen. Eisenhower was President Kennedy's military adviser . Eisenhower was the president of the United States in 1961 .
 Maxwell Taylor, had visited Vietnam and had rendered an important report on conditions there . Taylor's report was based on a report by Maxwell Taylor . Taylor had visited the country and rendered important report into conditions .
 By the end of 1961, John McCone had been to Indochina and around the world on a most specialized orientation trip orchestrated by Desmond Fitzgerald . McCone was appointed to replace Allen Dulles as the director of central intelligence .
 President Kennedy was not going to accept proposals to introduce U.S. armed forces into Vietnam for military purposes . But he might approve their use as advisers in a limited partnership with Diem’s government .
 Most of Kennedy’s advisers came from academic backgrounds . They were interested in learning more about the Vietnamese, their lives, and their traditional government .
 Its basic economic way of life was simple and efficient, sustained as it was by agriculture and fishing . It was sustained as well as agriculture and . fishing .
 One of its most remarkable characteristics was that its peasant communities were cohesive social units that easily managed the behavior of their inhabitants . One of the most important characteristics of the peasant communities was that they could easily manage their behavior .
 This social structure was based upon the clan, or “Toe,” which consisted of all persons, male and female, of a common ancestry through the male line going back to the fifth ascending generation and forward to the third descending generation .
 This represented a total of nine generations and a time span of two hundred years or more . This represented nine generations of nine people . This represents nine generations .
 A clan was headed by the senior male of the principal lineage, and his home served as its headquarters . The home of such a clan was the home of its senior male, and its home was the headquarters .
 The clan sustained by the ‘cult of ancestors,’ and rites took place in an ancestral hall . The clan was sustained by a cult of ancestors and rites were held in ancestral halls .
 As can be imagined, these clans were closely knit and generally remained in the same area century after century .
 Other than the payment of a head tax and a requirement of limited military service, they had very little contact with any central government . They were quite isolated, and other than the . payment of the head tax, they were . only required to . be a requirement for limited . military service
 These rice-growing peasants rarely traveled far from their own village, and most personal contact was with members of their own clan .
 Few places in Vietnam could have been considered to be urban . Saigon in the south, Hanoi in the north and Hue, the old Imperial capital, near the middle .
 These clusters of families and clans constituted self-contained units of social conservatism that were strongly resistant to external influences . Families and clans were self-contradicts to the outside world .
 At this time, the total population of Vietnam was approximately 30 million, with 14 million in the south . At the time, Vietnam was about 30 million people, with the majority in Vietnam .
 Of those in the south, about a million and a half were Chinese, and more than a million were recent “refugees,” or invaders from the north . Of those who live in the southern part of China, a million of them are recent ‘refuge
 These northern Vietnamese were neither welcomed by nor well assimilated among southern clans . Northern Vietnamese were not welcomed by southern Vietnamese clans .
 The southern Vietnamese recognized these invaders, who were mostly of the Catholic faith, by their more Mongoloid or Chinese features . They were mostly Catholic faith .
 U.S. transported enormous tide of northern refugees into the south after establishing the South Vietnamese government under the leadership of Ngo Dinh Diem .
 He was a staunch Catholic who had been an exile in the U.S. and Europe under the sponsorship of the Catholic church for many years . He had been living in exile in Europe and the United States for years .
 A brother, Monseigneur Ngo Dinh Thuc, was the archbishop of Hue and the head of a Catholic clergy of two thousand . A brother was the Archbishop of Hue . He was also the leader of the Catholic clergy, including four bishops .
 President Diem and his government were much closer to the northern “invaders” than to the southern villagers and landowners . This meant that Diem’s government was closer to northern ‘invaders than to southern villagers .
 The influx of over one million northern Catholics was, without question, one of the most inflammatory causes of hostility throughout South Vietnam, as the CIA and its allies intended it to be . Over one million Catholics was one of South Vietnam's most inflammatory issues .
 The stable, nonmobile natives of the south were overwhelmed by these new arrivals, whom the Diem government favored and had settled on their land, into their established way of life and inflexible economic system . The stable and nonmobile native of the southern part of the country was overwhelmed
 Almost from the start of his regime, in 1955, Diem initiated land-reform measures by issuing new land ordinances . In 1955, he issued a land ordinance to reform land laws .
 Traditional landowners were required to declare their uncultivated land; if they failed to bring any unused holdings into production, the government would seize the land and use it for the settlement of refugees from the north .
 Such actions made no friends for Diem in the south . It became the basis for much of the violent rioting, called “insurgency,” that developed in later years . Diem's actions led to riots in the South .
 He set up ‘Agrovilles,’ which were intended to be semirural communities in which all families could enjoy the amenities of the town and still have their basic garden property . The Agrovilles are intended to provide all families with amenities .
 One of the underlying, unstated objectives of the thirty-year war in Indochina was to bring about the breakup of this ancient and traditional communal style of living . This is an old idea; in fact, one of the reasons for the war is to break up the traditional communal
 The Agroville concept was a failure, primarily because of the continuing friction caused by the burden of the million-plus refugees . The concept was largely due to continuing friction between the refugees and their families .
 A plan for the “pacification” of the southernmost region of Vietnam, the Mekong Delta, was proposed to Diem in November 1961 . General Taylor had left Saigon and returned to Washington when the plan was proposed .
 Thompson was a British civil servant who had come to Saigon from the position of permanent secretary of defense in Malaya . Thompson was killed in Vietnam in March 1968 .
 Diem had issued a request for experienced third-party officials to assist him with counterinsurgency problems . Diem has asked for experienced officials to help him deal with the problem .
 He began by laying out a plan for the ‘pacification’ of the Mekong Delta region . He also laid out a proposal for the "pacification" of the region .
 "pacifism" is not what it meant in Indochina . Although it may be confused with ‘pacify’ or “pacifistism” (that is, opposition to war), this is not the same thing .
 Thompson may not have had that in mind when he sold the idea to Diem . Thompson had plenty of experience with pacification in the years of rebellion in Malaya . Thompson's program could go either way .
 British methods of putting down the rebellion in Malaya and his plan for the pacification of the Mekong Delta by the creation of Strategic Hamlets . Plans to pacify the region by creating strategic hamlets .
 The Vietnamese are concerned about basic issues and matters of fundamental concern to the nation . They are concerned with basic issues, such as the economy and the environment .
 There has been a Malthusian movement, concealed at all times from the public, to uproot and destroy the existing and traditional system of communal society .
 The activists of this movement fear the strength of the peasant and the ways of peasant life . Activists fear the power of the peasants and the way of peasant living .
 Indochina and Korea were their prime targets during the post-World War II decades . Ind Vietnam was their prime target during the 1950s .
 Around the world and from ages past, “the peasantry consists of small agricultural producers who with the help of simple equipment and the labor of their families produce mainly for their own consumption and for the fulfillment of political and economic power .”
 To others, they were places where the hundreds of thousands of refugees from the north could be settled, or where the residents of certain embattled southern areas could be protected from their local enemies .
 At the same time, there was another movement in Asia, little noticed in the West, that supported the concept of the “commune,” or independent village . At the time, the movement was little noticed .
 Mao Tse-tung had adapted Marxism to Chinese conditions by placing the peasantry, rather than the urban proletariat, in the revolutionary vanguard . Mao had come to power in China in 1949 and had adapted Marxist principles to the Chinese .
 This revolutionary concept, actually a step backward in time, was an unsuccessful attempt to decentralize the economy . It was an attempt to establish a nationwide system of people’s communes . This is a step back in time .
 This move flew in the face of Soviet communism, which —despite its Orwellian name — was actually an anticommune system, or a commune-annihilator system . This move was a move in defiance of the Communist Party .
 The play of this strange mix of ideas was not lost on the various members of the Kennedy administration . Kennedy administration was not particularly fond of the idea .
 From the start, it was made clear that Thompson’s charter would be limited to matters of “civic action” (another new term, developed from the World War II program of ‘Civil Affairs and Military Government”), became a buzzword in Vietnam .
 Orwellian play on words had much to do with the way war-making policy developed in Vietnam . This Orwellian phrase was used to refer to the Vietnam War .
 In Thompson’s basic plan, the main governmental aim of the Strategic Hamlet program would be to offer an attractive and constructive alternative to Communist appeals . Thompson's basic plan is to offer the Communist Party an attractive alternative to Communism .
 As noted above, the very choice of words assured that his concept would be received quite differently by various groups and interests .
 Thompson’s strategy, taken from his successful campaign in Malaya, was what he called “clear and hold” operations . Thompson's strategy was ‘clear, hold’ operations .
 An area would be cleared of opposition and then, as the Strategic Hamlet, held safely, held . The natives would be allowed to return to their normal ways .
 The object of the Strategic Hamlet, as he proposed it, was to protect the villagers . He proposed it to protect villagers, and it was a good idea .
 President Diem bought this British proposal, and it was, on the whole, enthusiastically received in Washington . President Dieman bought this proposal, but it was not widely accepted in Vietnam .
 A plan entitled “A Strategic Hamlet Concept for South Vietnam,” drawn up in the State Department, was well received by General Taylor . President Kennedy presented the plan to General Taylor and President Kennedy .
 It was at this time that the term ‘oil spot’ entered the military vocabulary . The term “Oil spot” was coined in the early 1950s .
 Stragic Hamlet concept proposed that once an area had been cleared and held, the pacified area would expand, like an oil spot on calm water . This new concept espoused ‘clear and hold’ operations .
 By that time, early 1962, Diem saw Strategic Hamlets as a national program in which he could install his ambitious brother Ngo Dinh Nhu as the central figure in the program .
 The distinction between this approach and Thompson concept, which had been approved by the President, became an important factor as the years marched on .
 Many within the Kennedy administration began to doubt the advisability of continuing blind support of the Diem regime . Meanwhile, there were many within the administration who began to question the support .
 Diem made little effort to make his government more popular, and unrest among the people . The burden of the 1,100,000 northern refugees kept the pot boiling .
 "Diem will not reform either administratively or politically in any effective way. Diem is not reformable either politically or administratively," he says .
 McGarr test program, “Operation Sunrise,” was launched in Binh Duong Province on March 22, 1962 . Despite the fact that such thoughts were common among officials, the program was launched .
 The “clear and hold” aspects of the tactical situation were understood, but when it was learned that a new Strategic Hamlet was to be constructed, the whole project came to a halt . The whole project was halted after the announcement of the construction of the new strategic Hamlet
 Diem saw Strategic Hamlets as a means to institute basic democracy in Vietnam, where nothing like that had ever existed before . Diem: "Nothing like that [Vietnam's] democracy was ever before before"
 To underscore how different Diem’s concept was from that of the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Gen. Dan Callan said .
 Nothing could underscore more clearly the conflict that existed on the two sides of the ocean . The conflict between the U.S. and South Korea was clearly evident .
 Everyone on the other side of the Pacific was talking about warfare of one kind or another . The U.S. has been engaged in a war in the Pacific since 2001 .
 Only seventy families could be persuaded to volunteer for resettlement, a sign that those families were most likely northern Catholic refugees . Those families are most likely to be northern Catholics .
 Other people were herded forcibly into the hamlet, but they were supposed to have been paid for their former land and for their labor in building this new Strategic Hamlet .
 In this first hamlet alone, $300,000 provided through the United States mission in Saigon never reached the families . The families of the families never received the money . The U.S. mission in Vietnam never reached their families .
 By the time the hamlet was settled, it was discovered that most of the militaryage males had disappeared . Most of the men had disappeared from the village .
 Startling figures reveal what the Strategic Hamlet program really was . Startling figure reveals what it really was for the U.S. government .
 First, there was a massive forced movement of more than one million northern Catholics to the south . The Catholic Church was forced to relocate more than 1 million north Catholics to south .
 First, the Strategic Hamlet program further disrupted millions of southerners . Second, the program further destabilized millions of people in the South .
 These planned, insidious programs, so characteristic of the Cold War itself, did as much to destabilize Indochina as the warfare that they caused . These planned and insidious programs were so characteristic that they destabilized the region, the author says .
 The real “subversion” and “rioting” were directly related to mass movements of a once-stable and immobile population from the north . The real "subversion" and "rioting" was directly linked to these mass movements, the author says .
 In February 1963, a report was given to the President that was drawn to appear cautiously optimistic . In 1963, the President was given a report that appeared cautiously optimistic.
 It was based upon the expectation that all of the materials needed to complete the Strategic Hamlet program would be delivered during the year and that it was nothing more than the slow delivery of materials that had been delayed .
 There is no way that such a revolutionary program could have been forced upon these ancient, land-oriented people . The land-orientated people had been uprooted from their ancestral plots and thrust, forcibly, into these new hamlets .
 Many considered these new hamlets to be the equivalent of concentration camps . Many considered them to be to be a concentration camp. Many considered it to be an example of the concentration camp .
 The hamlets were planned as safe havens for the residents to protect themselves from raiding parties of starving hordes . But they actually became prisons for the inhabitants, who dared not leave these hamlets because of pressure from the government .
 Saigon Military Mission’s make-war mission from the CIA, it is staggering to realize that by September 2, 1963, Gen. Gen. Saigon was in full control of the CIA . The U.S. was in the midst of the Vietnam War .
 The government provided food in vast quantities, medicine, and small-arms ammunition for the inhabitants of these Strategic Hamlets .
 Because of the enormous number of starving, homeless people wandering around the country, it was inevitable that they would direct their attacks at these well-supplied hamlets . It is inevitable that it would be inevitable that the attacks would be directed at these hamlets, writes CNN.
 It got so bad that the new hamlet residents would have to leave the hamlet at night as swarms of bandits pillaged these government stockpiles . The bandits would pillage these stockpiles of food and water from the government .
 "They were afraid to live there because they were unable to withstand the ever-present threats from the outside," says the author of the book .
 Diem’s idea of “pacification,” with its “new democracy” and other benefits, never had a chance . Diem's idea of "pacification" with its "new democracy" and other . benefits, he says, never got a
 Brother Nhu began emphasizing government control of the peasantry, at the expense of ‘pacification” as it was understood in Washington . Meanwhile, his brother Nhu emphasized government control over the peasants .
 By this stage, the Kennedy administration had begun to experience serious doubts as to whether the Diem government was “winning the war,” or even capable of doing so . On these terms and against that form of “close-in’s opposition. . . .
 It is difficult to think back to the Vietnam situation of 1961 and 1962 in terms of what we saw in Vietnam between 1965 and 1975 . Keep in mind that it was difficult to remember Vietnam's Vietnam situation in 1962 and 1962 .
 In 1962, what we now call the Vietnam War was a relatively low level paramilitary activity . The Vietnam War in 1962 was a low level of paramilitary activity. In 1962 the war was still low level .
 All of the combat that in any way involved United States armed forces and U.S. personnel was a result of the “advisory” role approved by the President . The President approved the "advisory" role .
 To certain military observers, it may have been safe to say that the war was going well, and even safe to predict a time when Diem’s forces—with strong United States support—would be victorious . The war may have gone well, but the U.S.
 There was so much poor planning, corruption, and alienation of the native, indigenous peasants that it appeared there was no way Diem could win . But a Diem-controlled government would be a serious handicap .
 By the end of 1962, this latter position prevailed in the White House and even in some areas of the Pentagon and State Department .
 Helicopter helicopters were introduced by the CIA into Vietnam in December 1960 . The CIA introduced them into Vietnam by introducing them to the country in December 1961 .
 Between December 1960 and March 1963, more than $2 billion in U.S. assistance had been sent in support of the Diem government .
 By March 1963 the number of U.S. “advisers” in Vietnam had been increased to 12,000 . There had been sixtytwo American deaths .
 Up to March 1963, twenty of the helicopters in action in Vietnam had been destroyed by enemy fire, and sixty helicopters were destroyed as a result of mechanical trouble . Twenty of the sixty-two Americans who died there had been killed in helicopter action .
 The rules of engagement were officially modified to allow Americans to fire at the enemy if they felt themselves “endangered,” without having to wait to receive enemy fire . The rules were officially changed in May .
 He had dispatched “advisers” to Vietnam, but he fully recognized the reality of the situation and the position they were in, he said .
 Faced with the ambiguities of this situation and the misunderstandings of each other on both sides of the Pacific, by 1963 there arose a feeling within the Kennedy administration that the war should be turned over to Ngo Dinh Diem .
 By midsummer 1963, Diem had become more intractable, and the latter view dominated . By mid-summer 1963, the view of Diem was that of the President of South Korea .
 Kennedy was saying, as John Foster Dulles had said in 1953, that Americans have been actively involved in Vietnam since 1945 . Kennedy said, as Kennedy had said, that U.S. has been actively engaged in Vietnam in 1945 .
 In 1945, Vietnam had just been freed from Japanese wartime control; in 1945, Ho Chi Minh had declared the independence of a new Democratic Republic of Vietnam . In 1945 there was no government and no country of South Vietnam .
 The thought that the people of South Vietnam in 1963 had the capability to win a war of independence by themselves was preposterous then as it was when President Eisenhower first proposed the idea in January 1954 .
 It was in this uncertain atmosphere that the next summer of crises erupted in Vietnam, Vietnam . The next summer, the next year, was in an uncertain atmosphere .
 On May 8, 1963, a mass meeting was held in Hue, the ancient imperial capital of Vietnam, to commemorate Buddha’s birthday . The meeting took place in Hue to commemorate the Buddha's birthday .
 The government saw this demonstration as a challenge, and the Catholic deputy province chief ordered his troops to fire on the mob . The government said the demonstration was a challenge .
 The following day, in Hue, more than ten thousand people demonstrated in protest of the killings . More than 10,000 people protested the killings in Hue .
 Madame Nhu, by now ‘the Dragon Lady” in the press of the world, exacerbated the problem by announcing that the Buddhists were infiltrated by Communists . Then, as feelings rose to a fever pitch, she announced that Buddhists had been infiltrated by the Communists .
 Three days later, the press was alerted to be at a main downtown intersection at noon . The press was told to be there at noon at a downtown intersection .
 On June 11, they were horrified to witness the first immolation suicide of a Buddhist monk in protest of Diem’s treatment of his people . The monk's suicide was the first of its kind in Vietnam .
 Thich Quang Due’s shocking death alarmed the world and electrified Vietnam . The death shocked the world, but it has since shocked the nation .
 Ngo Dinh Nhu’s U.S.-trained Special Forces shock troops, along with combat police, invaded Buddhist pagodas in Saigon, Hue, and other coastal cities . Hundreds of Buddhist monks were arrested .
 More than 14 hundred Buddhists, primarily monks, were arrested, and many were injured . Many of them were injured, many of them being injured .
 President Kennedy dispatched a new ambassador, the veteran Henry Cabot Lodge, to Saigon . At the same time, President Kennedy had dispatched a veteran ambassador to the country .
 Lodge arrived in Saigon at 9:30 P.M. on August 22, 1963 . After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge made his way to Saigon .
 This date marks the beginning of the most explosive and ominous ninety days in modern U.S. history . This date marked the beginning .
 On November 22, 1963, the U.S. government of the United States was taken over by a superpower group . The group wanted an escalation of the warfare in Indochina and a continuing military buildup .
 The trends and policies of the Kennedy administration had started to be changed by the new Johnson administration to assure the achievement of these goals . Within a few days after the assassination, the policies and trends of Kennedy administration were changed .
 They were opposed to Ngo Dinh Diem’s brother, Nhu, who was the head of the Strategic Hamlet program, and his wife . In particular, they were opposing the brother of Diem's wife, who led the country's strategic program .
 Nhu had developed and controlled the CIA-trained Vietnamese Special Forces . Nhu handpicked the generals who commanded the military units around Saigon .
 Ambassador Lodge sent a message to Washington noting the disaffection with the Diem regime . Ambassador Lodge said the Saigon generals were still strongly with Diems . The Nhus and the Nhus were particularly unpopular with the regime .
 Harry Felt, the commander in chief of the Pacific Command, called Washington in support of a strong stand against the Nhus . The Nhus are both Diem’s brother and his outspoken wife . Felt called Washington to support a strong stance .
 Admiral Felt, the senior military commander in the Pacific, was not directly responsible for activities in Vietnam because of the dominant CIA role there . Felt was responsible for the CIA's dominant role in Vietnam .
 He followed all developments closely and had his own eyes and ears on the scene . Nevertheless, he followed closely and followed closely . He said: "I'm not sure what's going on, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 Shortly after the admiral’s call to Washington, this author was called to Hawaii . The author was in Hawaii shortly after .
 Admiral Felt was asked to sit at a table in his office as members of his staff brought stacks of intelligence messages in for analysis . After a long introductory discussion, he sat down with him as he analyzed messages .
 I worked in his office for the entire week, reviewed hundreds of messages and letters, and had many talks with the admiral and his staff . The admiral's office is located in his home state of Guam .
 He believed that intelligence gathering in Vietnam was very bad and that commanders, both Vietnamese and American, were being forced to make decisions without sufficient military information .
 There was much controversy over the status of the actual military situation throughout the country . The situation in the country has been described as a major concern .
 There was dissatisfaction over Nhu’s deplorable attacks on the Buddhists . Nhu has been accused of attacking Buddhists in the past . There was also dissatisfaction over the attacks on Buddhists.
 There were rumors of the possibility of the overthrow of Diem and his government, or at least of the Nhus. The Nhus were overthrown by Diem's government .
 At the same time, as the U.S. government debated the pros and cons of getting rid of Diem and his brother, there was another unusual development . At the time, the United States government was debating getting Diem out of Vietnam .
 "It became necessary to meet with leaders of the various factions who would support a coup," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We need to talk to the leaders of various factions"
 Such meetings had to be held secretly for the protection of all parties . Such meetings were held secretly to protect all parties involved in the conflict .
 Conein was serving in Vietnam in 1963 as a United States Army lieutenant colonel . He was a U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel in Vietnam .
 He was not actually in the United States Army, but was a CIA agent assigned to Indochina under the notional cover of a military officer . He was assigned to the country under the cover of an Army officer .
 During World War II his duties with the OSS took him to China, where he worked with U.S. Army major general Gallagher . He operated with Ho Chi Minh, who operated with the nationalist leader of Indochina .
 At the time of the Japanese surrender, it became necessary to fill the vacuum of leadership in Indochina, particularly in Hanoi, for the purpose of rounding up the Japanese troops still there and providing a rallying point for the people of the country .
 General Gallagher was sent to Hanoi for this purpose . General Gallagher took with him Ho Chi Minh, Col. Col. Hui-Chi Minh and Col. Ho Chi-Minh .
 Allen Dulles created the Saigon Military Mission for the purpose of infiltrating CIA agents into Indochina under the cover of the U.S. military . Edward G Lansdale was in charge of that unit . Lansdale is the CIA's most experienced Far East agent, Edward G
 Conein was in Hanoi at the same time working against his old associates, Ho Chi Minh and General Giap . Lansdale spent most of his time in Saigon with the Diem administration .
 The scope of the SMM's activities had been enlarged to include mounting of ‘dirty tricks’ against the Vietminh, who were led by Ho Chi Minh, and at times against the French .
 It has always seemed rather strange that the same man who had arrived in Indochina with Ho Chi Minh should have been the one sent back to Hanoi to employ his clandestine skills against the same H.Chi.
 The SMM was actively instigating the movement of the more than one million Tonkinese to the south . At the same time, of course, the SMM actively instigated the movement .
 Lucien Conein had been designated as the go-between for the anti-Diem plotters . He was the same Gen. Gen. Diem, who had been tasked with liaising with the plotters, as well as the dictator .
 Lodge was one of the most important agents of the OSS and later the CIA in the Far East . Lodge had been an agent for the CIA since 1945 . Duong Van Minh and newly installed U.S. ambassador Lodge were the two most important Americans in Vietnam .
 In 1963, nearly twenty years after arriving in Hanoi, he was being employed to encourage the apparatus being formed to eliminate Diem . Diem was the man whom the CIA had installed as leader of the new government of the south . The CIA had placed him in the government of
 The answers to these and related questions remain buried in closed files, along with so much other information of that time period . The answers are still buried in the closed files of the time .
 Negotiations leading to the overthrow of Diem continued through August 1963 but were not conclusive . Diem's overthrow of the Nhus was not conclusive, and negotiations continued through 1963 .
 Ambassador Lodge's August 31 message from Ambassador Lodge came close to outlining the series of events that became the approved plan . Ambassador Lodge says the plan was approved by the White House .
 It had become clear that the war could not be won with the Diem regime in power in Saigon, that the Vietnamese people were not with him . The war had not been won with Diem in power, says the president of Vietnam .
 Diem failed to consider the impact of the one-million-plus Tonkinese Catholic ‘refugees’ on the people of South Vietnam . Diem’s callous disregard for the welfare of the indigenous population .
 United States officials never seemed able to understand why the situation, political and military was much worse in the far south, the Mekong Delta region, than it was in the north and central regions . U.S. officials were baffled by the situation .
 Most of the one-million-plus refugees had been dumped into the southern districts south of Saigon . Most of them were dumped into southern districts of the city .
 They had become the ‘insurgents’ and fodder for the insatiable war machine . They had been the “insurgent’s” and the fodder for war machine. “They’ve become the . “Insurgents,
 President Kennedy set up a train of events that became vitally important and that revealed his own views and his future plans for Vietnam . President Kennedy: "Under the burden of these and other questions, he set up an important moment"
 In the aftermath of the showing of Oliver Stone’s movie JFK, there were many top columnists who attempted to have the American public believe that the Kennedy administration had not produced any substantive body of historical fact concerning his plans for Vietnam .
 Columnists all “circled wagons” with their untenable stories even before JFK had been shown in the theaters . It is very interesting to speculate on why these columnists all "circling wagons" with their stories before JFK was shown .
 I shall present selected information from the public record and from personal experience . In response to their contrived questions, I shall bring to light the facts of the matter,’s truth . In the past, I have been accused of sexual misconduct .
 This book contains the record of frequent meetings, studies, and travels to and from Saigon by top U.S. officials at the White House, Department of State, and Defense Department during that period .
 These meetings often included Kennedy, McNamara, Rusk, General Taylor, and other high-level administration officials .
 He was assigned to the Joint Staff and worked closely with General Taylor and President Kennedy . He worked with President Kennedy and General Taylor on Joint Staff .
 A review of the above source book will reveal that he was involved in as many as thirty such meetings, messages, and trips on the subject of the future course of the U.S. government in Vietnam .
 Krulak and I worked closely, and I was involved in much of the preparation of this developing policy . I was also involved in preparation of the policy, and was part of the development of this policy .
 Kennedy was the driving force of these meetings and the “idea man” behind the policy. A fact that I recall clearly was that Kennedy was . Kennedy was a driving force for these meetings. He was the ‘idea” man behind policy.
 Kennedy was deeply involved in Vietnam planning from 1961 until his death . The climax of this work came between August and late November 1963 .
 President dispatched General Krulak to Vietnam so that he would be completely up-to-date on matters there . The purpose of the trip was to write a ‘Trip Report’ that would contain the new Kennedy policy and any last-minute items .
 Accompanyanying Krulak was a senior Foreign Service officer, Joseph Mendenhall . Accompanied was senior foreign Service officer Joseph Mendeenall .
 Of all the senior officers in the Pentagon at that time, Krulak had become the one closest to Bobby Kennedy, and through him, to the President . What most people in Washington had not noticed was that of all the . senior . officers in Washington, D.C. had
 Krulak was asked to work for the President in the White House . The White House has not revealed what he actually had been asked to do .
 Kennedy announced he was sending McNamara and Taylor on another fact-finding mission to Vietnam . Shortly thereafter, Kennedy announced that he would send them on another mission .
 The two men left on September 23 and were back in Washington on October 2, with a massive report for the President . The report was published on October 3 .
 Paul Harkins, Lodge, and Admiral Felt met with President Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam . President Diem was assassinated in 1968 .
 The next day, most of them had met privately with the Vietnamese vice president, Nguyen Ngoc Tho . They met privately to discuss their country's future .
 Tho was able to inform them about the failure of the Strategic Hamlet program and of the broad-based peasant disaffection with the Diem government . Tho told them of the widespread discontent with the government .
 These were the last top-level meetings with President Diem, and from that day forward his days in Saigon were numbered . Diem's days in Vietnam were numbered.
 It had been planned to take effect quite differently than has generally been reported . But it had to be planned for a very different way than it was reported .
 This was an interesting ingredient of such an official, top-level trip . This was the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a major political crisis .
 They had spent a lot of time traveling; they had met people on an unbroken schedule all day long and into the night . They had been on a constant schedule for days .
 When they returned to Washington, they stepped off the helicopter onto the White House lawn, carrying a huge, leather-bound, fully illustrated official report to the President . The report was written in one day, during their spare time, during the trip .
 It seems impossible; yet it happened then, and it has happened again, and again . It happened then and again, but it seems impossible, yet it seems to have happened again .
 When Krulak was sent to Saigon, President knew that he would come home with all the current data essential for final decision making . President knew he would return home with data essential to final decision .
 While McNamara and Taylor were touring Vietnam, the President, Bobby Kennedy, and General Krulak were setting down the outline of their report . It would contain precisely the major items desired by the President in the manner he wanted them .
 This report was written and produced in the Pentagon by Krulak and members of his SACSA staff .
 It was bound together and bound in leather and had gold-leaf lettering for President Kennedy . The lettering was put together in leather . It had gold leaf lettering .
 As soon as it was completed, it was flown to Hawaii to McNamara and Taylor so that they might study it during their eight-hour flight to Washington and present it to the President .
 August-December 1963 includes a brief note about this “Trip Report’s” 10.10. 1963 .
 That report to Kennedy of October 2, 1963, was, in fact, Kennedy’s own production . That McNamaraTaylor report was, of course, Kennedy's own production.
 It contained what he believed and what he planned to do to end the Vietnam problem . The book was published by President Nixon in 1964 .
 Kennedy statement on Vietnam was the first and major plank in his platform for reelection in 1964 . More important, this statement was Kennedy's statement on the Vietnam war . Kennedy's Vietnam statement was the most important plank of his 1964 campaign platform .
 This was one of the rising pressure points that led to the decision to assassinate him, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . This was a rising pressure point, he says .
 Report of McNamara-Taylor Mission to South Vietnam played a most important part in the lives of Diem and his brother, President Kennedy and President Kennedy . Report: “The decisions that it produced played a very important part”
 The Defense Department should announce plans to withdraw 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963 . It should be possible to withdraw the bulk of United States personnel by that time .
 MAP and CIA support for designated units, now under Colonel Tung’s control, will be . transferred to the field .
 President Obama had to get reelected to finish programs set in motion during his first term . He had to finish projects set to start during his presidency . He also had to end the Vietnam War .
 He had to make a positive and comprehensive move early in order to accomplish both of these goals . And he had to do it early, he said, to achieve both goals .
 Krulak and Taylor visited Saigon first and then followed this with the ‘official” McNamara and Taylor visit .
 Plans continued for the removal of Diem and his brother, but not the death, of the two men . Plans continued to remove Diem from the country .
 Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu had left Saigon on September 9 to attend the Interparliamentary Union meeting in Belgrade, Yugoslavia . She had plans to extend the trip to Europe and the United States .
 With the intercession of the Vatican and the papal delegate in Saigon, Diem’s brother, Archbishop Ngo Dinh Thuc, traveled to Rome . Diem was assassinated in 1968 . He was killed by the death of his brother, the Archbishop of Ngo
 President Diem and his brother left Saigon by commercial airliner from Saigon for Europe . Plans carefully included arrangements for the departure of the president and brother by commercial airline .
 The two men were driven to the Tan Son Nhut airport, in Saigon, and boarded a plane waiting for them . The plane was waiting for the two men to board it .
 President Diem and his brother turned and left the plane while the few witting Americans on the scene looked on, stunned by their action . Then, for some totally unexplained and unaccountable reason, they turned and walked away .
 The brothers hurried back to their limousine, which had not yet pulled away from the airport ramp, entered it, and drove back into Saigon and to the Presidential Palace at high speed .
 The longtime household and palace guards had fled as soon as they realized that Diem and his brother Nhu had gone . Their longtime household . palace guards fled as well as their longtime household guards .
 There was no fighting, as would have been normal if the plotters had made a move against Diem . The plotters did not make a move, and there were no fighting .
 This is how their removal was planned, and this is how close it came to success . This was how they planned to remove them from their homes .
 A tunnel had been dug, for just such purposes, from the palace and under the river to Cholon . A tunnel was dug, and it was used to transport people to the palace, from Cholon to the city .
 They ran through the tunnel to what they thought would be safety and ended up in the hands of their enemies . They thought they would be safe, but ended up being taken by the enemy .
 They were thrown into a small military van, en route to some unknown destination, they were murdered . The victims were thrown in the van and thrown into an unknown destination .
 I discussed this subject with Stone and he became most interested in that side of the assassination scenario . Stone: "I discussed this matter with Stone. He became most interesting in that aspect of that . Stone became interested in this side of that scenario."
 I had already written letters to Jim Garrison, judge of the Court of Appeal in New Orleans, as I worked with him on his manuscript of his book, On the Trail of the Assassins . He had already been writing letters to Garrison, Judge Garrison, for his book .
 Garrison had become interested in the subject of my letters and had shown them to his editor, Zachary Sklar, at Sheridan Square Press . Garrison had shown the letters to him and showed them to the editor of Sheridan Square . Garrison was interested in my letters .
 Sklar became the screenwriter for Stone’s movie JFK, and he had discussed my letters with Stone also . Sklar wrote JFK's screenplay for Stone's movie JFK .
 The significance of all this was that I had introduced President Kennedy’s Vietnam policy statement NS AM #263, into these discussions . The significance was that he had introduced . President Kennedy's Vietnam policy statements .
 It is my belief that the policy announced so forcefully by Kennedy in his earlier NS AM #55 and #263 had been the major factor in the decision by certain elements of the power elite to do away with Kennedy before his reelection .
 Kennedy’s NS AM #263 policy would have assured that Americans by the hundreds of thousands would not have been sent to the war in Vietnam .
 This policy was anathema to elements of the military-industrial complex, their bankers, and their allies in the government . This policy is anatheema to elements in the military, bankers and the government, he says .
 This policy and the almost certain fact that Kennedy would be reelected President in 1964 set the stage for the plot to assassinate him . This policy set up for the assassination plot .
 Strong evidence in support of this belief lies in the statements in the previous chapter that are transcribed directly from NS AM #263 and from a description of the deaths of South Vietnam’s President Ngo Dinh Diem and his brother Nhu .
 NSAM #263, October 11, 1963, was a crucial White House document . The document was released by the White House in 1963 .
 Much of it, guided by White House policy, was actually written by my boss in the Pentagon, General Krulak, myself, and others of his staff . Much of this article was written by Krulk, himself, and himself .
 McGeorge Bundy prepared and signed the cover letter and dispatched it directly to the secretary of state, secretary of defense, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Bundy's cover letter was sent directly to Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and chairman of Joint Chiefs . Bundy prepared
 Official copies were made available to the director of central intelligence and the administrator of the Agency for Internal Development .
 Report of McNamara-Taylor Mission to South Vietnam,” dated October 2, 1963, is published in Vietnam . Report: “McNamara and Taylor Mission to Vietnam’s Vietnam War.”
 The President approved the military recommendations contained in Section I B of the report, but directed that no formal announcement be made of the implementation of plans to withdraw 1,000 U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963 .
 McGeorge Bundy's cover letter does not carry or cite an enclosure . It makes reference to the McNamara-Taylor report, but it does not cite it .
 Without the report itself in the record this cover letter of NSAM #263 is all but worthless . The report itself is the basis for the cover letter .
 In other words, on that date, that was an official statement of the President’s Vietnam policy . In other . words, that . was the President's Vietnam policy, and that .
 IB A program be established to train Vietnamese so that essential functions now performed by U.S. military personnel can be carried out by Vietnamese by the end of 1965 .
 It should be possible to withdraw the bulk of U.S. military personnel by the end of the decade .
 In accordance with the program to train progressively Vietnamese to take over military functions, the Defense Department should announce in the very near future plans to withdraw 1,000 U S. military personnel by the end of 1963 .
 In brief, those sections above are the essence of the Kennedy policy that would take men out of Vietnam in 1963 and the bulk of military personnel out by 1965 .
 At that time, after nearly a generation of involvement in Vietnam, this was a clear signal that Kennedy meant to disengage American military men from Vietnam . Kennedy's decision to pull troops out of Vietnam was a signal that he wanted to end U.S. involvement .
 This was about one month after the movie had opened in theaters across the country . The movie had been released in theaters one month earlier . This is one month since the movie opened .
 For his movie, and for having said things such as the above quote, Oliver Stone was attacked by leading journalists across the country . Stone has been attacked for his movie and for his comments .
 Our history books and the basic sources of history lie buried in the archives of government documents that have been concealed from the public . Government documents have been tampered with and forged .
 One section is no more than the simple cover letter, and the other section, pages away in the record, is presented by its simple title as a “report” with no cross-reference whatsoever to the fact that it is the basic substance of President Kennedy’s Vietnam
 The record of the Kennedy administration has been savagely distorted in basic government documents and by so-called historians who have accepted the myths to be found on the record .
 As we have seen repeatedly, the cover-story aspect of the plot to kill the President is much the more serious and elaborate task of the whole plan . The cover story of the President's assassination is much more serious than the assassination attempt is the main cover story .
 The cover-story activity lives on today, as we have seen as a result of Oliver Stone’s movie JFK . Furthermore, as well as the cover story activity, the cover-stories still exist today .
 There are no military secrets to be found here, only an appalling litany of faulty premises and questionable objectives . The military secrets are built one upon the other over the course of four administrations, and perpetuated today by a fifth administration .
 Even in this new publication, the presentation of NSAM #263 is unclear . The presentation of this publication is unclear.
 State Department publication omits crucial elements of the trip report entirely . Then to further obfuscate the record, this State Dept. publication omitted crucial parts of the report entirely, the report says .
 Instead of improving the historical record with the passage of time, the authors are further distorting it . The authors are distorting history, rather than improving the record .
 Almost three decades later, the cover story lives on, and records of the Kennedy era are the hardest hit .
 The deaths of President Ngo Dinh Diem and his brother Nhu in Saigon on November 1, 1963, were considered a Vietnamese internal affair during most of the decade that followed . Nixon made a statement in 1971 that revived those events and put them in different light .
 Harry “Scoop” Jackson suggested that the U.S. might be in a position to exert discreet pressure upon President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam to move toward a more democratic form of government . Jackson was a strong possibility as the Democratic candidate against Nixon in 1972
 Nixon put a match to the fuse, and the bomb was certain to explode . Nixon had put a . match to . the . fuse, Nixon said . "I'm sure it's going to explode," he said .
 Until this Nixon comment, no public official had openly suggested the Kennedy administration was guilty of complicity in Diem’s murder .
 Hunt suggested to Colson that it might be possible to alter messages, in White House files, so that anyone using them for research in later years would ‘discover’ that President Kennedy had, beyond doubt, ordered the murder of President Diem .
 Colson, the man who had said that he would walk over his own grandmother if it would help the reelection of Nixon, took no action to stop his crafty consultant from trying to see what he could do .
 President Diem in Saigon and President Kennedy in Washington during those fateful months of October and November 1963 . These events, among so many others at the time, underscored the nature of the pressures that had been brought to bear on them .
 Nixon and the Kennedys still have deep animosity between them . Nixon and Kennedy still have a history of animosity .
 As this example shows, there were in the Nixon camp those who would not stop at forgery to achieve their goal of destroying the Kennedy historical record .
 Howard Hunt was as bitter about the Kennedys as was Nixon . Hunt played a role willingly by Howard Hunt, who was bitter about them . Hunt's role was played quite willingly by Hunt .
 As mentioned earlier, Diem had made it quite clear what his goals with the Strategic Hamlet program were . Diem has made it clear what he wanted to do with the program .
 His position did not jibe with those who wanted to escalate the war in Indochina . He was not at all interested in the introduction of an ancient form of self-government .
 Kennedy’s desire to get the U.S. out of Indochina by the end of 1965 is evidenced by his orchestration of a series of events such as the Krulak-Mendenhall visit to Vietnam in September 1963 .
 By late summer, and certainly by the time of the McNamara-Taylor trip, closely held plans had progressed for the removal of the Diems from Saigon .
 President Kennedy had reached the decision that the U.S. should do all it could to train, equip, and finance the government of South Vietnam to fight its own war . This would be done for someone other than Ngo Dinh Diem .
 On the same day that the President received this McNamara-Taylor report, Gen. Gen. Michael McNamara received this report . Gen. McNamara said the report was "a matter of concern"
 This was a meeting of great significance, and one that to this day has never been properly explained . This was the first meeting of its kind, and it was never properly explained.
 CIA designated Conein as one of its most valuable agents in the Far East in 1963 . Gen. Gen. Eisenhower met with his old friend of eighteen years, Gen. Coneins . The two men were reunited in 1963 at the White House .
 Lansdale and Conein had worked hard to get Ngo Dinh Diem started as the newly assigned president of South Vietnam . Diem was the first South Vietnamese president to be elected .
 Conein’s task was to stay close enough to key Vietnamese to assure them that the U.S. would not interfere with their plan to move in as soon as President Diem had left Saigon .
 The plan prepared by the United States had been carefully drawn to leave Diem no alternative except to leave on this scheduled trip . The plan was carefully drawn by the U.S. to leave him no choice but to leave the country .
 There was much discussion and argument among members of the Kennedy administration, who knew of the President’s intention to oust Diem once he had left the country .
 Diem and his brother were to follow to attend a meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Belgrade, Yugoslavia . With Madame Nhu and Archbishop Thuc already in Europe, Diem was to follow .
 The evacuation plan, carefully orchestrated under Kennedy’s direction, broke down, and Ngo Dinh Diem and his brother were murdered . The evacuations plan broke down and the Diem brothers were killed .
 Many were created to cover the real plan and to protect those Vietnamese who had worked closely with the administration . They do not tell the role that Kennedy played in the story, and many were created .
 I was on duty in the Joint Chiefs of Staff section of the Pentagon on the day of the coup d’etat . I was a member of the Joint chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon .
 My immediate boss, General Krulak, knew the full details of the plan to remove Diem from the scene by flying him and his brother out of Saigon, says . "My immediate boss knew the plan," he says .
 Krulak remained in contact with the White House as developments in Saigon were relayed . He remained in touch with President Nixon's administration .
 I can remember clearly the absolute shock in our offices when it was learned that Diem had not left on the proffered aircraft for Europe . I can recall clearly the . absolute shock that he had not . left on his aircraft for . Europe, he said .
 One of the most important narratives of this event was written by Edward G Lansdale in his autobiography In the Midst of Wars . Lansdale's account of the events was published in his book In The Midst Of Wars .
 Few Americans knew Ngo Dinh Diem and the situation in Vietnam from 1954-68 better than Ed Lansdale . Lansdale: "Few Americans, if any, knew the situation better than Lansdale"
 As the prisons filled up with political opponents, as the older nationalist parties went underground, with the body politics fractured, Communist political cadre became active throughout South Vietnam . Communist cadre recruited followers for action against a government held together mainly by the Can Lao elite rather than by popular support
 The reaped whirlwind finally arrived in November 1963, when the nationalist opposition erupted violently, imprisoning many of the Can Loa and killing Diem, Nhu, and others . Diem was the prime minister of the Vietnam War .
 It was some time before the news became known that Diem had fled to Cholon and been captured and killed there .
 This news was flashed around the world; this was the story that everyone heard . This is the story everyone heard, and it was the first time the story was made public . This was the case that the world was watching .
 The public never heard of the planned flight to Europe that the Kennedy administration had arranged for him . The Kennedy administration did not know about his plans to fly to Europe .
 Howard Hunt was able to locate certain top-level messages to and from the White House and Ambassador Lodge in Saigon that contained information referring to “highest authority” The cable traffic code for President Kennedy was used to find the messages . Hunt found the messages referring to the ‘
 None of these messages contained any reference to a plot to kill President Diem and his brother or came even close to it . The messages contained no reference to an assassination plot or any attempt to kill the president or brother .
 Ambassador Lodge was able to direct all participants into action and to begin the careful removal of the two brothers to Europe by commercial aircraft . The messages were carefully worded phrases .
 The files that had been forged to smear President Kennedy were put in Hunt’s White House safe, where they remained until discovered by investigators later . According to information that came out during the Watergate hearings, those files were put there in Hunt's White House .
 There is much about this episode that has become important upon review . Review of this episode is critical of the episode . The episode is one of the most important episodes of the season .
 Those opposed to Jack Kennedy have stooped to all kinds of sordid activities to smear him while he was alive, to attack his brother Bobby . Jack Kennedy's brother Bobby was still alive, and to hound Sen. Ted Kennedy, Sen. Bobby Kennedy .
 Nixon's gratuitous reference to Kennedy’s “complicity in the murder of Diem” after a decade of silence on that subject speaks for itself . Nixon made the remark after years of silence about Diem .
 The efforts of Howard Hunt and Chuck Colson (both employees of the White House at the time) to dig up old files in order to besmirch the memory of President Kennedy provide another example . Hunt and Colson are both former White House staffers .
 Most of the events that brought about this terrible form of modern genocide in the name of “anticommunism” or “containment” were buried in deep secrecy or not even available in written records . The development of the war in Indochina had been spread
 It created an artificial client state in South Vietnam, lamented its unpopularity among its own people . The U.S. supported a series of military dictators who served their own ends, and at times our government’s ends .
 The true strength of rulers and empires lies not in armies or emotions, but in the belief of men that they are inflexibly open and truthful and legal . The strength of empires lies in belief that men must be open and honest and legal, says the author .
 As soon as a government departs from that standard, it ceases to be anything more than ‘the gang in possession” and its days are numbered . The U.S. government is no longer the "gang in possession"
 Ellsberg did not participate in the broadcasts, because his lawyer advised him not to leave the country at that time . He did travel to London and did take part in a daily series on the subject, but not in the broadcast .
 Documentaries are dangerous in the hands of those who do not have the experience or the other sources required to validate and balance their content . They are useful and accurate as far as individual documents go .
 This is because their true source was only marginally the Pentagon and because of the clever selection of those documents by the compilers removed many important papers . The true source of the documents is the Pentagon .
 This neglect of key documents served to reduce the value of those that remained to tell the story of the Vietnam War . This neglect led to the loss of many of the key documents that were left intact .
 Most of them were found in classified files in the Pentagon, but they were functionally limited files . Most of the files were in highly classified files, but were only found in limited files, the Pentagon says .
 Nearly four thousand documents contain only a few signatures of military officers . Despite their volume, there are remarkably few that actually bear the signature of officers . The documents include nearly four thousand military documents .
 Many of those that carry the signature of a military officer, or refer to military officers, make reference to such men as Edward G Lansdale . Lansdale actually worked for the CIA while serving in a cover assignment with the military .
 When such papers are removed from the “military” or “Pentagon” categorization, what remains is a nonmilitary and non-pentagon collection . The collection includes papers from the U.S. military, not the Pentagon .
 For the serious and honest historian, this becomes an important distinction . The serious historian, however, is not a historian, he says .
 The files from which most of these papers were obtained were in that section of the Office of the Secretary of Defense called International Security Affairs .
 Although this office was in the Pentagon, it was lightly staffed with military officers . Most of its activities concerned other government departments and agencies, such as the CIA and the White House .
 John Foster Dulles, formerly secretary of state, once declared that one of the most complicated periods in this nation’s history began in Indochina on September 2, 1945 .
 There is no way that this group, averaging “four months per man” in its studies in 1967, and 1968, was going to be qualified to present a true and accurate account of that war . The compilation of a scattering of papers that contained bits and pieces of the story
 This reveals one of my greatest misgivings concerning the accuracy of the study . The study was commissioned by the University of Cambridge in 2007 .
 There are altogether too many important papers that did not get included in this study, too many that were absolutely crucial to an understanding of the origins of, and reasons for, this war . The study was published in the UK last week .
 This has been a complaint of historians who have attempted to teach the facts of this war . This has not been the case of historians, historians have said .
 History book accounts have been written by writers who were not there, who had little or nothing to do with it . Or, conversely, those who were there for a one-year tour of duty, usually in the post-1965 period .
 Few of these writers have had the comprehensive experience that is a prerequisite to understanding that type of contemporary history . Few of the writers have been able to understand contemporary history better .
 Neither we nor the South Vietnamese have been masters of our Southeast Asian policy . We have been its victims, as the leaders of America sought to preserve their reputation for toughness and determination, he says .
 The United States recognized the new government on November 8 . After having delayed an appropriate period, the U.S. recognized it .
 As the euphoria wears off, the real gravity of the economic situation and the lack of expertise in the new government became apparent to both Vietnamese and American officials . Vietnam's new government has been criticized for being too inexperienced in foreign policy .
 The deterioration of the military situation and the Strategic Hamlet program also came more and more clearly into perspective . The deterioration in the situation was also clearly into view, the author says .
 Lodge and the country team met with Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, Ball, Ball and Bundy at the Honolulu conference on November 20 . The topics dominated the discussions at the conference .
 Lodge had conferred with the President a few days later in Washington . The White House tried to pull together some conclusions and offer some guidance for our continuing and now deeper involvement in Vietnam .
 The instructions contained in NS AM 273, however, did not reflect the truly dire situation as it was to come to light in succeeding weeks . The instructions in AM 273 came to light later that day .
 The reappraisals forced by the new information would swiftly make it irrelevant as it was overtaken by events . It would also make the reappraisal process irrelevant as events occurred .
 President Ngo Dinh Diem and his brother had been murdered, and the administration of South Vietnam had been placed in the hands of Gen. Gen. Diem . The government of Vietnam was overthrown in the early 1980s, and Vietnam was ruled out of power .
 Most of the members of the Kennedy cabinet had flown to Honolulu, together, for that November 20 series of conferences . Then, in one of the strangest scenarios of recent history, most of the cabinet members had flown there together .
 The full cabinet meeting in Hawaii was to be followed by a flight to Tokyo on November 22 . Even the secretary of agriculture was there .
 Almost all the Kennedy cabinet members were on that flight to Tokyo . Almost all of them were on the flight .
 They were on that aircraft bound for Tokyo when they learned that President Kennedy had been shot dead in Dallas . They learned that he was killed in Dallas, Texas, when they were on board .
 President Obama ordered the plane to return directly to Hawaii and, almost immediately, on to Washington .
 On September 29, 1963, Secretary McNamara and General Taylor met with President Ngo Dinh Diem in Saigon . The two met for three hours with President Diem .
 It should be possible to withdraw the bulk of U.S. personnel by the end of the year .
 We believe the United States part of the task can be completed by the end of 1965 . The U.S. portion of the project will be completed in 1965, the U.N. says .
 President Kennedy and President Diem took optimistic view of the war in Vietnam . These are quotes taken from official documents of that time . They include statements by Kennedy and Diem .
 General Krulak was as close to the President and his policy as he had ever been, he says . He says he worked directly with Gen. Krulaks on the Joint Staff . President George W. Bush was assassinated in 1992 .
 Just four days after Kennedy’s death, Lyndon Johnson and most of the JFK cabinet viewed the situation in an entirely different light . Kennedy published NSAM #263, which visualized the Vietnamization of the war and return of all American personnel by the end of 1965 .
 In Johnson’s NSAM #273 they saw the military situation deteriorating (“the deterioration of the. . . the Strategic Hamlet program” and all of a sudden saw the program as a failure .
 On that date, John Kennedy was still alive and President of the U.S. On that day, he was still living and still alive . Today is the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination .
 This report says that his cabinet had been assembled in Honolulu to discuss “these topics” — the very same topics of NSAM #273, dated November 26, and a vital step on the way to a total reversal of Kennedy’s own policy . Yet this report says
 The total reversal was completed with the publication of NSAM #288, March 26, 1964 . The total reverse was completed in 1964 . NSAM#288 was published in March 1964 .
 President Kennedy would not have sent his cabinet to Hawaii to discuss that agenda . President Kennedy wouldn't have sent Cabinet members to discuss agenda of Hawaii .
 He had issued his own agenda for Vietnam on October 11, 1963, and he had no reason to change it . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country since 1968 .
 He had no reason to send them all to Hawaii for such a conference, he says . More than that, he said, there was no reason for such an event .
 It is never good practice for a President to have key members of his cabinet out of town while he is on an extended trip . President's Cabinet members will be out of the country for extended time .
 "We are piling circumstance upon circumstance. Keep in mind, through this series of vitally important questions, that we are piling circumstances upon circumstance."
 It is the body of circumstantial evidence that proves the existence of conspiracy, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As soon as the Honolulu conference broke up, these same cabinet members departed from Hawaii on an unprecedented trip to Japan .
 No one has explained why the Kennedy cabinet was ordered to Japan at that time . Kennedy cabinet members were ordered to visit Japan at the time .
 A reading of newspapers from late November 1963 reveals that extracts of speeches supposedly given by some of these cabinet officers in Japan were made available and then printed, for example, even in the Washington, D.C., Star . The extracts of these speeches were then made available in newspapers around the
 Cabinet officers did not reach Japan and that their VIP aircraft returned to Hawaii . We all know now that these cabinet officers didn't reach Japan . Their VIP aircraft went back to Hawaii.
 Lodge meets with the President the day after the conference . He presumably continues the kind of report given in Honolulu .
 These are astounding statements, considering that they were written sometime in 1968, when everyone knew that the most important fact of that two days was the assassination of President Kennedy .
 This massive compilation of official documents produced by McNamara’s “task force. . to study the history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam from World War II to the present” totally ignored the assassination. Secretary McNamara's task force .
 This official history skips all mention of the death of the President of the United States and tells the story of Diem's death as though it had occurred in a vacuum . The official history simply skips .
 This “Letter of Transmittal” of January 15, 1969, was addressed to Clark M Clifford, secretary of defense . Clifford is a man we have quoted frequently during this work .
 These questions and subjects are the things of which assassinations and coups d’etat are made . These questions are the subjects of which assassination and coup d'etat is made .
 The plotters worked out their plans in detail as they moved to take over the government that Kennedy had taken from them . Kennedy's government had been overthrown by the White House .
 As a result, every other public official became a pawn on that master chess board . "As a result of this, every public official becomes a pawn," says President Obama .
 Assassinations and coups d’etat permeate and threaten all levels of society . Assassinations are often a problem for governments and individuals, says President Obama .
 These may be entirely speculative questions, but they are based upon a close reading of the subject and firsthand knowledge of the times . These may not answer any of these questions .
 It is unfortunate that most historians have not looked more carefully at Kennedy’s NSAMs from 1961 through 1963 . NSAM #55 in July 1961 through October 1963, and its draft of November 21, 1963, was .
 Vietnam went from a placid recreation area to a hotbed of turmoil after the defeat of the French forces at Dien Bien Phu . The division of the country into two parts, the forced movement of more than one million Catholic northern Tonkinese to the south, and the
 During this period I had frequent contact with the members of the CIA’s Saigon Military Mission . The mission was part of the Saigon military mission .
 Special Operations Office for the Joint Chiefs of Staff was created to bring military support work under the guidance of a single “focal point” office . I was assigned to the Office of Special Operations for the next two years .
 I headed that office until 1964, when I retired after the death of President Kennedy . President Kennedy died in 1963 at age of 65 .
 By the fall of 1963, I knew perhaps as much as anyone else about the inner workings of this world of special operations . By that time, I had learned a lot about special operations in the U.S. Army .
 I had written the formal directives on the subject that were used officially by the U.S. Air Force and by the Joint Chiefs of Staff for all military services . "I had written a formal directive on the matter that was used officially," he said .
 I was approached after I had come back from a week spent reading intelligence papers in Admiral Felt’s headquarters in Hawaii, during September 1963 . I was selected to be the military escort officer for a group of VIP civilian guests that had been invited to visit the naval station in Antarctica
 This group was scheduled to leave on November 10, 1963, and to return by the end of the month . This group of people was due to return to the U.S. in November 1963 .
 A member of the VIP party, a congressman, asked me to go with him on a two-day side trip to the New Zealand Alps and to the Hermitage Chalet at the foot of Mount Cook, the highest mountain in the country .
 The dining room offers a stunning view of Mount Cook and the nearby range . It is a dining room of rare beauty, offering as it did a dazzling view .
 President Barack Obama was assassinated in 2012 . Obama's assassination was the start of the strange events surrounding that murder and the takeover of our government .
 "I have always wondered, deep in my own heart, whether that strange invitation that removed me so far from Washington and from the center of all things clandestine that I knew so well might have been connected to the events that followed . The invitation to the White House may have been linked to
 I do not know the answer to that question, although many of the things that I have observed and learned from that time have led me to surmise that such a question might be well founded . I do know the answers, but many things that have led to that .
 I had worked on presidential protection and knew the great extent of which one goes to ensure the safety of the chief executive . I knew the extent to which one went to ensure a chief executive's safety, he said .
 Established procedures were ignored on the President’s trip to Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Despite all this, established procedures were not ignored .
 It seems that those who planned the murder of the President knew the inner workings of the government very well . Those who planned to kill the President were very well aware of his government .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . The cover-up program has continued since then, and continues since 1963, since Kennedy's assassination . This fact is made evident not so much by the skill with which the murder of the President was undertaken .
 By November 1963, the Kennedy administration had begun to weave subtle changes into the fabric of U.S. life and politics .
 John F Kennedy, the first Roman Catholic U.S. President, was elected to office in November 1960 over the incumbent vice president, Richard M Nixon by the narrowest margin in history .
 As his third year in office drew to a close, Kennedy sensed that his popularity had increased and that his chances for reelection in 1964 were good . Kennedy felt that his reelection chances were good in 1964 .
 From the beginning of his presidency, he had poured billions of Defense Department contract dollars into a savvy plan that benefited the voting districts of the country that were most important to him . The plan was a savvy move that would benefit the districts that he was most interested in .
 He was skillfully changing the method of assigning military contracts, much to the alarm of the powerful arms industry . He changed the way he assigned military contracts to the military .
 By 1963, Kennedy was telling confidants what some of his actions would be following his reelection . Kennedy told confidants that some of the actions would follow his reelection bid .
 President Obama said he planned to splinter the CIA into a thousand pieces and scatter it to the winds . One of his most memorable statements was that he planned for the CIA to be splintered into pieces .
 Another was that he would end American military participation in the conflict in Indochina . Another would end U.S. involvement in the war .
 He was pragmatic enough to know that once he was reelected, he could do things more effectively than he could with the uncertainties of the election process ahead of him . He said: "I'm not going to be scared. I'm not scared. He's not scared."
 He sensed the nation’s growing discontent with the undercover warfare in Indochina . He sensed that the nation was growing discontent .
 He saw this discontent as part of a pattern of rebellion against the Cold War . He saw the discontent as an expression of rebellion .
 As the son of the former American ambassador to the Court of St. Edward VII, he is also a son of a former ambassador to St. James' Court .
 President Kennedy’s interests and instincts were always slanted more toward Europe than to the lands of the Pacific Basin . Kennedy was born in Fondon, England, and died in 1963 .
 This, too, created friction among the strong and growing ‘Pacific Rim’ interests of the financial and industrial world . This has also created friction between the financial, industrial world and the Pacific Rim .
 Not since the days of Franklin D Roosevelt had a President so moved a nation—and the world . His popularity didn’t end at the shores of the Atlantic and the Pacific, for his popularity didn't end at all .
 As his popularity increased and as his reforms began to take root, other forces came into play . However, as he gained popularity, other factors came to play .
 Powerful interest groups began to join in a cabal against the young American President . President Barack Obama was elected to office in 2008 .
 On November 22, 1963, less than a year before his probable reelection to four more years as President, John F Kennedy was struck down . Kennedy's death was the result of the assassination .
 The Kennedy murder was the result of a coup d’etat brought about by a professional team equally skilled in the field of ‘cover story’ and deception activities as it was in murder .
 Kennedy’s plans for reelection were based in large measure on the allocation of billions of Defense Department dollars available in the Tactical Fighter Experimental construction program . Defense Department funds were allocated to the program .
 Money was going to states and counties that had had had the closest balloting during the 1960 election . Money went to those who had won the closest election in the 1960s .
 The $6.6 billion TFX budget made it the largest government contract ever put together in peacetime . The government contract is the largest ever made of peacetime contracts .
 In the process of divvying up the funds, Kennedy had made it clear to the gnomes of the military-industrial complex that he was in control and that they were not .
 This raised the pressure for the ultimate confrontation between the President and a cabal of powerful financial and industrial groups .
 During the Kennedy years, people within the government and their close associates in academia and industry discussed frequently and quite seriously many of the major questions phrased by Leonard Lewin in Report From Iron Mountain .
 I had been assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense before the Kennedy election . I was there when the McNamara team of “Whiz Kids” arrived. I had worked for McNamara .
 Never before had so many brilliant young civilians with so many Ph.D.s worked in that office . The office was filled with brilliant young people, including Ph.I.Ds, who were both brilliant .
 Lasting peace, while not theoretically impossible, is probably unattainable . Even if it could be achieved it would most certainly not be in the best interests of a stable society to achieve it .
 War fills certain functions essential to the stability of our society . Until other ways of filling them are developed, the war system must be maintained . The war system is maintained and improved in effectiveness .
 The elimination of war implies the inevitable elimination of national sovereignty and the traditional nation-state, says the author of the book .
 The basic authority of a modern state over its people resides in its war powers, says President Obama . "The basic authority" of a state is its war power, says Obama .
 There is no hard evidence that this political philosophy was that of President Kennedy or of senior members of his administration . President Kennedy's political philosophy may have been that of Kennedy .
 The Kennedy administration had already undertaken several courses of action that showed a clear intention to slow the forward thrust of the Cold War . Indeed, the Kennedy administration .
 NS AM #263 announced plans for the Vietnamization of the war in Indochina and the scheduled, early withdrawal of all American personnel . One of these, of course, was spelled out in NS AM .
 It appeared to many that the process of accommodation that Khrushchev had initiated with Eisenhower, which had failed because of the U-2 affair, had begun to take root with President Kennedy .
 Kennedy's administration changed direction as his administration matured in office . Kennedy's first major shift in direction was in the direction of the White House .
 He declared that one of the objectives of Project Apollo was to beat the Russians . He had declared that the objective of the project was to defeat the Russians.
 A 1958 study by the Rand Corporation had forecast that the United States would land a man on the moon . A 1958 Rand Corporation study had predicted that the U.S. would land on moon . The study was published in 1958 .
 In 1958, NASA employed nine thousand people; in 1963 that number reached thirty thousand . NASA employed 30,000 people in the United States .
 President Kennedy offered to call off the moon race in favor of cooperation in space exploration with the Soviets . Kennedy appeared before the U.N. on September 20, 1963, in a surprising turnabout . Kennedy: "The moon race is over now"
 News of this offer was received with horror in certain powerful circles . News of the offer was met with horror by some powerful circles, including the Pope .
 Clare Booth Luce called this “a major New Lrontierpolitical blunder and economic Lrankenstein’s economic blunder” Clare Luce, wife of Henry Luce and herself highly influential in the Republican party, called it a “major New Lron
 Pressure from several fronts began to build against the young President . As a result of this, pressure has begun to build on him .
 The pressure came from those most affected by cuts in the military budget, in the NASA space program, and in the enormous potential cost—and profit—of the Vietnam War .
 Kennedy’s plans would mean an end to the warfare in Indochina, which the U.S. had been supporting for nearly two decades . Kennedy's plans would end the war, which began in Vietnam in 1968 .
 This would mean the end to some very big business plans, as the following anecdote will illustrate . This would be the end of some very large business plans . The story will be told in the following article .
 It was reported in an earlier chapter that the First National Bank of Boston had sent William F Thompson, a vice president, to my office in the Pentagon in 1959, to explore “the future of the utilization of the helicopter in military operations” that had been taking place in Ind
 The bank had suggested to Textron officials that the acquisition of the near-bankrupt Bell Aircraft Company might be a good move . The bank said it had suggested that Textron .
 The bank and Textron needed to determine the extent of use of helicopters by the military and by the CIA then and the potential for their future in Indochina, the company says .
 Both parties were satisfied with information they acquired from the Pentagon and from other sources in Washington . Both parties are satisfied with the information they obtained from other Washington sources .
 In due time, news media in Vietnam reported that an elite paramilitary force had made its first helicopter strike against the Vietcong from “Huey’s Bell-Textron helicopters .
 It was also reported in an earlier chapter that more than five thousand helicopters were ultimately destroyed in Indochina .
 Continuing the warfare in Vietnam, in other words, was of vital importance to these particular powerful financial and manufacturing groups . Continuing the war in Vietnam was vital importance .
 $220 billion cost of U.S. involvement in Iraq War included helicopters, helicopters . Helicopter cost was part of $220 million in total, including helicopters .
 Only $2—$3 billion had been spent on direct U.S. military activities in Vietnam in all of the years since World War II up to and including 1963 . Most of the $220 billion, in fact, was spent after 1963 .
 It is often difficult to retrace episodes in history and to locate an incident that became crucial to subsequent events . It was difficult to find an incident in history that later became crucial for subsequent events, says historian .
 The success of the deal between the First National Bank of Boston, Textron, and Textron hinged on the escalation of the war in Indochina . Bell's success in the deal was the result of the escalation in the war .
 A key man in this plan was Walter Dornberger, chief of the German Rocket Center at Peenemiinde, Germany, during World War II . He was later an official with the Bell Aircraft Company .
 Dornberger’s associate and protege from Peenemiinde, Wernher von Braun, had been instrumental in the development of the army's Pershing and Jupiter rocket systems . von Braun became a central figure in NASA's plans for the race to the moon .
 Such connections among skilled technicians can be of great importance within the military-industrial complex, as they generally lead to bigger budgets for all related programs . Such connections can lead to more funding for other related programs, such as air defense .
 Kennedy had announced a reduced military budget, the end of U.S. participation in Indochina, and a major change in the race to the moon . Kennedy had also announced a reduction in the military budget and the end to the Vietnam War .
 It takes no special wisdom or inside knowledge to understand that certain vested interests considered the Kennedy proposal to defuse Vietnam and these other major budget items to be extremely dangerous to their own plans .
 The pressure brought to bear upon Kennedy was intense, but some sort of major event was needed that would stir emotions and trigger action . The pressure was so intense that Kennedy needed a major event to stir emotions, trigger action.
 President Ngo Dinh Diem of Vietnam and his brother died in November 1, 1963, in Saigon . It is very likely that the death of President Diem and brother was one of those events . Diem's death was likely to have been one of the events in which
 There were at least eight or nine more that, in retrospect, indicate that a plot against Kennedy had begun to unfold . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Almost the entire Kennedy cabinet traveled to Honolulu for that conference on November 20, 1963, with Henry Cabot Lodge, then ambassador to Saigon .
 President Kennedy and Vice President Lyndon Johnson had left Washington for a goodwill visit to Texas .
 The President and his party spent the night in Fort Worth, Texas, on November 21 . Fort Worth was a major recipient of TFX aircraft contract funds . It was scheduled to get the multi-billion-dollar Bell helicopter business .
 The trip removed most of the Kennedy inner circle, a cabinet quorum, from Washington . The Honolulu trip removes most of Kennedy's inner circle .
 To extend such an absence with a trip to Tokyo by virtually the entire group would have been hard to justify on any grounds, at any time . To then extend such a . trip to . Tokyo, Japan, would have a difficult time to justify such a trip .
 The swing through Texas by the President and vice president directly violated a long-standing Secret Service taboo on events that brought both men together in public appearances . At the same time, the swing through . Texas .
 The master scenario of the planned coup d’etat had been set in motion, at the highest levels, well before the President set out for Texas . Whatever the answers to these apparent mysteries, it is an unavoidable conclusion that the master scenario had been .
 On November 22, the presidential party made the short flight from Fort Worth to Love Field, Dallas, and debarked from Air Force One . The parade was a rousing parade through the city .
 As the presidential motorcade began its procession through the streets of Dallas, we note that many things which ought to have been done, as matters of standard security procedure, were not done .
 These omissions show the hand of the plotters and the undeniable fact that they were operating among the highest levels of government in order to have access to the channels necessary to arrange such things covertly . The omissions of these omissions are proof that they are working among the top levels
 Some of these omissions were simple things that were done normally without fail . Some of the omissions are simple things, such as simple things .
 All windows in buildings overlooking a presidential motorcade route must be closed . Observers must be positioned to see that they remain closed .
 Those placed on roofs will be armed in case gunmen appear in the windows . They will have radios, and those placed on roof roofs will also be armed .
 All sewer covers along the streets are supposed to be welded to preclude the use of a gunman’s lair . The city is supposed to have sewer covers designed to prevent gun-laborage .
 People with umbrellas, coats over their arms, and other items that could conceal a weapon are watched .
 By 1963, the Secret Service had many decades of experience in the task of protecting presidents . The Secret Service was in charge of protecting the president .
 The Secret Service was given protection of the President and his family as its main responsibility by Congress following the assassination of President William McKinley in 1901 .
 The Secret Service customarily calls upon local police, state police, National Guard, and the regular military establishment for assistance as necessary .
 There is even a special course, called “Protection,” for personnel of selected military units to familiarize them with responsibility .
 In this day of high technology, high technology has become a profession of great precision and expertise . The job of high-tech has become an important part of the profession .
 In a bureaucracy, it is more difficult to arrange for some office not to perform its duties than to let it do them . It's more difficult for some offices to perform their duties than for others to perform them .
 When a unit does not perform its duties in accordance with custom and regulations, it is a signal that something highly unusual has occurred . Therefore, when a unit . does not . perform its . duties in . accordance with . custom and . regulations . It is a sign that something . highly
 In the case of the killing of President Kennedy, certain key people had been told they would not be needed in Dallas . President Kennedy was killed in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 Some were told not to do certain things, while others were left out altogether . Some were simply left out of the action altogether .
 It is not always easy to obtain positive proof of a conspiracy, even when many facts point to its existence . It is often difficult to obtain proof of the existence of conspiracy .
 The power of the conspirators may be such that they can squelch usual legal procedures . It is not known if they will be able to quell any legal procedures against the government .
 The public must discover what happened from details and circumstantial material supporting the case . Thus, if it is to know the truth, the public must know what happened .
 The public can eventually determine the nature of the conspiracy and the identity of those behind it . Then, from whatever valid evidence becomes available, the public can determine the identity and the truth .
 Unless one of the original conspirators betrays his companions and gives evidence against them, their guilt can be proved only by circumstantial evidence . The guilt of the conspirators can only be proven only by evidence of their involvement .
 It is said by some writers on evidence that such circumstances are stronger than positive proof .
 A witness swearing positively may misrepresent the facts or swear falsely, but the circumstances cannot lie . The presence of variations in the routine can reveal the existence and the skill of the plotters, the author says .
 Let us review certain facts concerning the events surrounding President Kennedy’s death . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Warren Report contains testimony by Forest Sorrels of the Secret Service . The Warren Report includes testimony from Secret Service agents .
 Dallas police chose a ninety-degree turn from Main Street to Houston Street and an even sharper turn from Houston to Elm Street . The route chosen by Sorrels and the Dallas police involved a turn between Main Street and Elm Street in Dallas .
 The President’s car was brought to a very slow speed in a part of town where high buildings dominated the route, making it an extremely dangerous area . The President's car had to be brought to slow speed to avoid being hit by high buildings .
 Sorrels did not say that sharp turns and high buildings made the route unsafe . He said it was unsafe to take such turns and buildings .
 President Kennedy was shot on Elm Street just after his car made a slow turn from Houston . President Kennedy's car was shot just after he made that turn .
 Many considered this to be a crucial piece of evidence that there was a plot to murder the President . Many have considered this evidence to be crucial evidence that the President was murdered .
 The route was selected by the Secret Service, contrary to policy . It was ignored by the Warren Report and all other investigations since then . It is considered crucial because the route was chosen by Secret Service .
 The conclusion that has been made is that it was part of the plot devised by the murderers . They had to create an ideal ambush site, and the Elm Street comer was it . The conclusion is that the murderers had planned an ambush site .
 No matter what route was selected for the presidential motorcade, the Secret Service and its trained military augmentation should have provided airtight protection all the way .
 'This serious omission tends to provide strong evidence of the work of the conspirators. This they did not even attempt to do, and this serious omission provides strong evidence that they were involved in the assassination. This omission is a serious omission, and it tends to give evidence of their work
 According to the Secret Service’s own guidelines, when a presidential motorcade can be kept moving at forty miles an hour or faster, it is not necessary to provide additional protection along the way . The Secret Service's own guidelines say when a motorcade is moving at 40 miles an
 Protection personnel on the ground, in buildings, and on top of buildings in order to provide surveillance . However, when the motorcade must travel at slower speeds, it is essential that there be protection personnel .
 Before the shooting many windows in the Texas Schoolbook Depository Building were open, as on-the-spot photos revealed . These personnel would have discovered, for instance, that many windows were open .
 The commander offered the services of his unit for protection duties for the entire trip through Texas . He was “point-blank and categorically refused by the Secret Service,” he was told .
 There were no Secret Service men on the roofs of any buildings in the area . No Secret Service agents were on the roof of any of the buildings .
 All windows overlooking the parade route in this slowdown zone had been closed . There had been no precautions taken to see that all windows .
 The man alleged to have killed the President is said to have fired three shots from an open window on the sixth floor of the building directly above the sharp turn at Houston and Elm streets .
 The availability of that “gunman’s lair,” if it was occupied at all, violated basic rules of protection . It was a "gunman's lair" that violated the rules of protecting the U.S. Constitution .
 No Secret Service men were covering that big building, and no Secret Service officers were on the roofs of adjacent buildings to observe it or other such lairs .
 The official scenario of the President’s murder is patently absurd, for many reasons, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The official case of the president's murder is absurd, but it is not the only one .
 The Warren Commission was required to base its entire story on a script that said there was only one gunman, that this gunman fired three shots from a single-shot Italian rifle from a comer, sixth-floor window .
 Both reports three shots fired by a single gunman, from the same rifle . Gunman fired three shots, fired by single gunman .
 If there was more than one gunman, if any shots were fired from any other location, or if there were more than three single shots, the entire house of cards fabricated by the Warren Commission collapses . The Warren Commission and its allies, such as the FBI, the Secret Service, the
 If the report is proven wrong on any of these key points, there must clearly be a conspiracy involving perpetrators of a master plan to do away with the President and to take control of the government .
 Let’s examine some key elements of the Warren Commission scenario . Since all of this information is on the record, let's examine some of the details .
 The alleged lair of the gunman was six floors above the turn that the President’s car made onto Elm Street . The President's car was driven by the gunman .
 A Dallas resident named Abraham Zapruder stationed himself on a low stone structure to take color movies of the President’s motorcade . Unforeseeably, the President's motorcade was captured on film .
 Because of Zapruder’s eyewitness film, it is possible to mark precisely the location of the car at the time of the first shot and to time the intervals between the shots . The President's car was shot in the first place at the President's residence .
 Even at a slow speed and a moderate distance, a rifleman must follow the target and lead it to compensate for movement . A rifleman needs to follow and lead the target to compensate .
 From the distance and height of the sixth-floor window, it would not have been an impossible shot—had it not been for the foliage of a large tree that stood between the gunman's lair and the President’s car, as shown in the spot news photos .
 The film captured the rotation of the tires and the movement past the spaced white lines in Elm Street . The film was shot on Elm Street in New York .
 These items make it possible to ascertain with precision where the President was and to determine that he was concealed by that big tree at the time of the first shot . These items are made available to the public for the first time .
 No marksman could have followed that moving target through the foliage and fired three shots in quick succession and have two of them hit his target with precision . The marksman was able to follow the moving target and fire three shots at a time .
 An experienced gunman would not have selected a place where he had to peer through a tree if he was planning to shoot the President of the United States. Moreover, an experienced gunman—a former marine, we’ll say—would not have chosen a tree for the shooting .
 The FBI had a camera mounted in the sixth-floor window and aimed it through a telescopic sight . In an attempt to prove that the gunman had been able to shoot the President through the tree .
 The bureau arranged for an automobile with four passengers to move slowly down Elm Street while the camera took pictures, ostensibly to show what the gunman saw . The car was moved slowly down the street while the photographer took pictures .
 In these photographs, it is possible to see the cross hairs of the telescopic sight zeroed in on the back of the target victim from that window and through the tree .
 A telescopic lens may be focused on a distant target and will appear to see ‘through’ intervening obstructions, such as leaves . A telescope can also be used to focus on distant targets and see “through” obstructions such as trees .
 In the same way, the eye can focus on a distant target through a screen door; it sees the distant target and doesn’t notice the screen . The eye can also focus on the screen door, but the eye sees the screen and doesn't notice it .
 This can be done by the human eye and by means of a cameraman’s trick shot . But it cannot be done with a rifleman peering through branches and leaves, as any hunter can tell you .
 It’s the bullet, not the lens, that has to crash through the branches and leaves . Such obstructions knock it off its course. It's the bullet not lens, but it crashes through the trees .
 This is a classic example of how a real crime can be hidden by a skillful cover-up . This simple bit of FBI skullduggery with the tree, the telescopic lens, and the camera is the classic example .
 As this becomes obvious, we wonder who, at what high level of the administration, had the power to engage the FBI in such a plot and its cover-up . The White House has been accused of engaging in a cover up by the FBI .
 This is the heart of the matter as we dig further into the Kennedy assassination . This is why we need to find out more about the Kennedy case .
 A memorandum by FBI director J Edgar Hoover on November 29, 1963, cites a discussion he had on that date with President Johnson . Hoover was FBI director of the CIA in the late 1960s and early '60s .
 In summary, the President and the director of the FBI had concluded that Kennedy was hit once and Connally twice . In addition to Kennedy, Connally was hit three times, the FBI concluded .
 The Warren Commission Report states that one bullet that went through the President’s body also hit Connally . Another bullet hit the President's head and killed him, the report says .
 Report recognizes that one bullet missed both men and hit a bystander . The report also recognizes that a bullet missed the two men in the shooting .
 This also requires all the trickery of the “magic” bullet scheme . This also is a total of three bullets and requires all of the tricks . This is also the total number of bullets .
 If we think about this for a moment, we realize the importance of the JohnsonHoover conversation . "If you think about it, it's important to think about how important it is to have a conversation with the community," says Johnson .
 President Johnson was stating his conclusion only one week after the murder . President Johnson's conclusion was made only a week after his assassination .
 He heard those shots, and his account that day completely contradicted what would later become the official scenario . He said he heard that day, and that day's account completely contradicted that .
 Hoover and Johnson discussed the selection of the men to be asked to serve on the Warren Commission . This important memorandum begins with a recapitulation of a conversation between Hoover and . Johnson in which they discuss the selection .
 Johnson disproved the Warren Report’s ‘three-bullet’ finding, Hoover said . Johnson himself disproved that finding, according to Hoover . Hoover: “The Warren Report disproves the three-bullets”
 That simple statement, by itself, throws out the validity of the Warren Report . The Warren Report was published in 1998, but it has since been discredited .
 The bullet hit a curb and injured a bystander named James Tague . It does not account for the "near-miss" bullet that struck a curb, as will be described below . The bullet did not hit Tague, but it hit the curb .
 Neither the Warren Report nor even this Hoover memorandum was correct, the author says . "Exhaustive evidence proves beyond the slightest doubt that neither of these reports was correct"
 Warren Commission murder scenario states that three shots were fired . Warren Commission: Three shots fired; Warren Commission says three shots fired .
 The most cursory of analyses of this “three-bullet’s contrivance does not min the case. Yet the most cursor of analyses does not seem to be the case, it does .
 Without going into the autopsy details, we will simply accept that as bullet number one . Without going to go into the specifics of the death, it is simply that the death toll is high .
 One bullet missed and has been acknowledged by the Warren Commission as a clear miss . The Warren Commission acknowledged that the bullet missed . Warren Commission acknowledges that this is one of the most significant missed shots .
 At least one bullet hit Gov. Connally . Governor Connally was hit by a bullet in the head .
 The commission members bulldozed their way through this dilemma by ramming bullet number one through the President, out a small aperture in his throat area, through the air (in a circuitous path), and into the air . A few small fragments remain in the governor's thigh, where to
 The bullet was found on a stretcher in Parkland Memorial Hospital, where Kennedy and Connally had been taken . The Warren Commission asserted that someone found the much-traveled projectile lying in a hospital bed .
 The Warren Commission published photographs of that bullet, and the bullet itself may be seen ‘live” in the National Archives .
 The magic bullet is unscathed, except for a slight mark where someone cut away a tiny bit for identification purposes . Miraculously, the magic bullet was unscathed .
 Connally shows no evidence of missing those bits that John Connally still carries with him in his injured thigh . This historic specimen, moreover, shows no signs of missing . Connally's injured thigh.
 The perpetrators of this crime were of sufficient power to arrange for the murder of the President, it is claimed . But it is valuable for illustrating how certain the perpetrators of the crime were . The chief justice was reduced to a puppet for purposes of issuing the cover-up report .
 Even more unnerving has been their ability to foist such a story on the American public for nearly thirty years and to make it stick by having every President since Kennedy vouch for it . The story has been made public by the U.S. since Kennedy, and by every President
 This alone is a definition of the location of and the magnitude of that anonymous power center . "Anonymous power center" is located in the U.S. state of origin .
 The magic-bullet scenario has survived more than a generation of attacks, investigations, and doubt . It has been a success story for many of the world's most famous people .
 It remains the official story, a story that very few, if any, officials and major news media representatives contest . It remains a story .
 Examples such as these prove that this crime was committed not only to kill the President but to take over the powers of the government . Examples such a crime were committed to kill President Obama and take over government .
 The cabal knew that whatever it contrived as the explanation for the crime could never be contested . The cabal knows that whatever its contrived was never contested, it would never win .
 The Secret Service, the FBI, and the Warren Commission had to admit that one of the three bullets fired by their “lone gunman” missed . The Warren Commission said one of three bullets missed .
 James Tague, a bystander, was struck on the cheek by a fragment of the bullet or by a bit of the granite curbstone struck by that errant round . Tague was struck by a piece of a granite curb stone struck by the bullet .
 Tague was photographed with blood running down his cheek by an alert news cameramen .
 He also photographed the curbstone where Tague stood that day, and those photographs show the bullet strike on the stone .
 Someone had “found” only three shell cases at the scene of the alleged gunman’s lair . They were further constrained by the “fact” that someone had ‘found’ only 3 shell cases . The suspect is believed to have been the suspect in
 The commission had to weave its story accordingly, the commission said . The commission was tasked with weaving its story in the wake of the revelation .
 Most readers of the Warren Report assume that Tague was standing close to where the President’s car passed on Elm Street . Tague says he was standing near where the car passed .
 The path of the bullet could not have been far from the others that were fired, police say . They think it was an actual near miss and that the path was not far from other bullets .
 The readers assume that if the commission was going to credit this gunman with the uncanny ability to shoot through the foliage of a tree and hit a moving target with two out of three shots, then he must have been good enough to have a very “near” miss with the wasted
 The plot to kill the President was hatched in the hope that the President would not be assassinated . That was not the case, however, and therein lies another key factor in the plot .
 If we project that line back to some firing point, we have placed that gunman in a window on the second floor of the Dal-Tex building, behind the President’s car . The gunman is believed to be in a second-floor window, behind President's car .
 The path of the Tague bullet reveals that the true location of at least one gunman at Dealey Plaza was in a second-floor window of the Dal-Tex building . The bullet path shows that the gunman was in the second floor window .
 In this location he would have had a logical field of fire from the rear of the car, with no intervening tree . In this area, the car would have been hit by fire from a tree .
 The caliber of a professional “mechanic” or hit man is such that he would select only the best position . "Mechanic" or “hit man’s” would select the best positions, such as ‘mechanics’ or
 On Saturday, November 23, 1963, the curbstone with the mark of the bullet strike on it was removed and replaced . It is noteworthy that on Saturday, Nov 23, 2013, the curbingstone was removed .
 Zapruder film shows the final, fatal, and shattering shot of Kennedy's head . The final shot came from ground level and from a position in the direction of the grassy knoll that gave the gunman a close-in, clear shot .
 The fact that brain matter was splattered backward, over the trunk of the car, onto the motorcycle policeman riding to the left and rear of the vehicle, fortifies the conclusion that the shot came from the right, from the left, from in front and from ground level . The fact
 What happened to the Zapruder film provides further insight into how the wily plotters arranged their cover-up . The film was shot in June 1945, but was never released .
 Life magazine official negotiated with Zapruder for the rights to the film in his camera . Life magazine had already secured a copy of the film . Life's "Life" cover story was published in New York City on November 22, 1963 .
 A series of still photographs was printed to show the impact of that bullet on the President’s head . Later, someone cleverly reversed their sequence to make it appear that the head had been thrust forward, not backward .
 A researcher, Harold Weisberg, noted that these crucial moving picture photos had been reversed and did not match the sequence of the actual movie strip film . Not long after publication of that series of pictures, a researcher noted .
 President's head was struck from the rear, not from the front, where the actual killer had been . This meant that, somehow, someone had either caused the FBI to change the sequence or had caused Life magazine to arrange the pictures in an order to make it appear that the President�
 The case was carefully monitored by skilled agents who could control certain key activities of the Warren Commission and the news media, which have remained under this control since that date . This crafty reversal of the photographic sequence reveals that the case was closely monitored . The Warren Commission has remained in control since
 The plot to murder the President, to take over control of the administration, and to cover up any related actions for as long as necessary, is the most incredible aspect in this plot . The conspirators reach as far as the chief justice of the United States in order to lend credence
 The Warren Commission was created in 1964 to control the White House . President Richard Nixon was appointed to lead the Warren Commission in 1964 . The commission was created to create a White House-style government .
 The members were discussing the problems they foresaw in having to deal with the Secret Service, the FBI, and the state of Texas, where the murder trial should have taken place . The members of the Texas House of Representatives discussed the potential problems they faced .
 Hoover memorandum of November 29, 1963, said the murderer was Oswald . New President Lyndon Johnson said the new President, Lyndon Johnson, said Oswald was responsible .
 The Warren Commission did not investigate what had happened . It merely took prepackaged, precooked data and published its prescribed report, as it had been ordered to do .
 Warren Commission members' statements illustrate troubled climate under which they operated . Those statements illustrate the troubled atmosphere under which the Warren Commission operated .
 The commission was created by executive order on November 29, 1963, the same day Hoover and Johnson met to discuss how the investigation would be handled . Hoover, Johnson and Hoover met that day to discuss the investigation .
 The commission received a fivevolume report from the FBI on December 9, 1963, and another from the Secret Service on December 20, 1963 . The report was compiled by the FBI and Secret Service .
 An important result of the formation of the Warren Commission was the derailing of a planned independent congressional investigation of the assassination . The Warren Commission formed as a result of its formation, the first independent congressional probe of the JFK assassination .
 Waggoner Carr, the Texas attorney general, and Preston Smith, the lieutenant governor of Texas, were two of Johnson's first visitors after he became President .
 It would be interesting to know whether they decided then not to hold a trial for the murder of Kennedy, even though it was committed in Texas . The murder of JFK in Texas was not a murder case, but a murder trial was held in Texas.
 Only essential police and the TV crews were permitted at headquarters . Jack Ruby gained entrance to headquarters, but only essential police were allowed in .
 Neither officer on either side made any effort to grab Rubenstein—not until after the pistol fired . Rubenstein got right up to Oswald’s stomach; he got right . up to his stomach . Neither officer made any attempt to grab him, not until after he fired the pistol
 Lee Harvey Oswald was made the “patsy” for the murder of the President, we must consider again the atmosphere under which the men on the Warren Commission operated . If we have come to the conclusion that Lee Harvey . Oswald was . made the . ‘pats
 They were selected and appointed by the President, after a discussion with FBI director J Edgar Hoover . They had been selected by the . President .
 The commission members were appointed immediately following this Johnson-Hoover conversation . The very same day, as a matter of fact, they were appointed . The commission was appointed immediately after this .
 It was said that they had a clear charter to investigate and to solve this terrible crime . The police were said to have a clear Charter to investigate .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren, former Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles; Congressman Gerald R Ford; Congressman Hale Boggs . Former Director of CIA, Sen. Earl Warren and Sen. Gerald Ford also featured .
 John Sherman Cooper, John J McCloy, former president of the World Bank, speak to CNN.com Live on Sunday at 9 p.m. ET. ET . CNN's Mr. Cooper talks to John McCloy about his new book, The World Bank .
 Allen Dulles was in charge of the CIA’s U-2 spy plane operations and of the flight that crash-landed in the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960, causing the disruption of the Paris Summit Conference . Dulles: "I'm not afraid to fly.
 Eisenhower ordered all overflights of Communist territory to be grounded before and during that period . Eisenhower had specifically ordered that overflights were grounded .
 If any men, in or out of public life, could have solved this murder, these seven men should have been able to do so, they should have done so .
 In blunt language, as we have said throughout this work, they didn’t even try. They didn't even try, they’re not even trying,’s said. ‘In blunt language’, as well as the government, they have said .
 A presidential commission is not a court of law, and its processes are not a reasonable substitute for a court . The commission is a presidential commission, but it's not a law-making panel . The process is not reasonable substitute to a court, the president says .
 The Warren Commission was given subpoena power, but didn't use the time-honored process of cross-examination . Warren Commission did not use the adversarial process of . cross-examining .
 The fact that Walter E Craig, president of the American Bar Association, had been asked to attend the hearings had little, if any, bearing on the course and outcome of the commission’s work .
 Craig never took advantage of this opportunity to crossexamine witnesses . Craig was never taken advantage of the opportunity to testify against him .
 The commission never really considered the possibility that anyone other than Oswald, by himself, had committed the crime . Oswald was the only person to commit the crime, according to the commission .
 By law, the crime of murder must be tried in the state where it was committed . The crime must be committed in the country where it is committed .
 He is as innocent of that crime as anyone else until a court of law has found him guilty . He is innocent of any crime as well . He's not guilty of anything he's found guilty .
 Chief Justice of the U.S. had to have known that . Chief justice of the United States had to know that .
 The least they could have done was to order that a trial be held in Texas . The trial should have been held in the U.S.
 The answers to these questions, and to so many others like them, are, unfortunately, quite obvious . The answers are unfortunately obvious, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Anyone who came in touch with this case became shrouded under the cloak of secrecy that has covered it for decades . The case has been shrouded in secrecy since it was discovered in the 1980s .
 To these questions, there are at least two responses, each on a different yet complementary level . The answers to these questions include: 'Yes' and 'yes'
 Throughout history, there is adequate evidence to accept the existence of an almost mythical and certainly anonymous power elite . Throughout history there has been a mythical power elite in the United States .
 Winston Churchill used the term ‘High Cabal’; Dr. Buckminster Fuller does his best to describe it . Winston Churchill called it ‘The High Cabal' Winston Churchill also used it as a reference to the ‘Cabal’
 In the case of the Kennedy murder, there has been no way to pierce its cloak of anonymity . Neither the government of the state of Texas nor the federal government will take positive legal action .
 It has been a masterpiece, all the way from the Fee Harvey Oswald role to statements made by high officials today . It was a masterpiece of the story, all from the role of Oswald to the assassination .
 One thing we must understand is that the cover story has its band of actors . One thing must be understood: "One thing is that this is not just a cover story"
 Many of these actors came from the Cuban exile groups in Miami and New Orleans . Operation Mongoose infrastructure was established ostensibly to eliminate Fidel Castro .
 They created the plot, the scenario, the time, the characters, and the script . The plot was created by the actors and crew of the film .
 In this case they would have been a band of skilled men who do such things regularly on a worldwide basis for money and protection . They would have done such things on the worldwide basis .
 There are colonies of such experts that are maintained by certain governments, or by select instrumentalities of governments, and by other powers . The colonies of experts are kept in colonies by governments or by instrumentalities .
 The following items will serve to illustrate the extent of the power these people wield . They include the following items .
 The murder of President Kennedy and its accompanying pageantry was witnessed, on film, TV, radio, and in print, by hundreds of millions around the world . Hundreds of millions of people watched the Kennedy assassination .
 For those in Christchurch, the Kennedy assassination took place at seven-thirty on Saturday, November 23, 1963 . For those who just happened to be in New Zealand, the assassination was the morning of November 23 .
 Christchurch Star hit the streets with an “Extra’ edition. As soon as possible, the Christchurch star hit the street with an extra edition.
 One-quarter of the front page was devoted to a picture of President Kennedy . The photo was taken on the day of Kennedy's assassination .
 The remainder of the page was, for the most part, dedicated to the assassination story, from various sources .
 It had to have been prepared before the crime, and like everything else, prepackaged by the secret cabal, it had to be pre-planned .
 This ‘instant’ news, available so quickly and completely in far-off New Zealand, is a most important detail of the murder plan . This “instant-news” is available “available so quickly, completely in New Zealand’s New Zealand
 This newspaper ran an “Extra” edition that was on the streets before noon in Christchurch . This newspaper runs an ‘Extra’ edition of the Christchurch edition . It was published before noon on Sunday .
 A few lines below, it said, “Three bursts of gunfire, apparently from automatic weapons,” were heard . The report was published in the New York Times .
 ‘Right rear” of Senator Yarborough’s position could not have been the alleged lone gunman’�s lair six floors above . As confirmed by photographs made at that time, the ‘right rear’ of Senator . Yarborough's position was confirmed by
 NBC-TV reported that the police took possession of “a British .303-inch rifle . . with a telescopic sight . Police said the rifle was a British rifle with a .303 inch rifle .
 This type of sudden, quite random reporting is most important, because one can usually find the truth of what occurred in these early news reports . The truth can be found in this type of reporting, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Later, the “news” will be doctored and coordinated and will bear little resemblance to the original, more factual accounts . The “News’s” coverage of the events in the U.S. will be edited and coordinated,” says Dr.
 They know gunfire when they hear it, and they reported “bursts of gunfire’s of gunfire,’ they said . They reported ‘bursts’ of gunfire . They know when they’re shooting, and when they report gunfire, they say .
 This reference to “three bursts of gunfire” and “apparently from automatic weapons” provides a most important clue . The Christchurch Star published the headline of the Christchurch newspaper .
 It shows how on-the-spot news coverage creates real facts that are much different from the preprepared cover story, and the Warren Report of the Warren Commission .
 These same lines were repeated in subsequent CBS bulletins of that date . The same lines of the CBS news bulletins were repeated .
 The gunmen may have used automatic weapons, but it is more likely that they fired at least three times each . It's likely that what the reporters heard that day was the well-coordinated fire from at least 3 gunmen .
 It serves to remove the certain responsibility from each gunner as a psychological cleanser . It's a psychological cleaner for the gunner .
 If three men are to fire, they all know that two guns are loaded and one gun is firing blanks . Three men know that if they fire, two guns will be loaded, one gun will fire .
 Each man can choose to believe that he did not kill the victim; and each man can swear an oath that he was not the killer . Each man has a right to believe he was responsible for the murder .
 It is relevant to note that these on-the-spot bulletins did not contain the previously written “Lee Harvey Oswald” data that had been fed to the world press .
 Nowhere does the Warren Report mention the precision control of several guns, yet it is hard to discount the first, eyewitness reports from experienced men .
 Almost one-quarter of the front page in Christchurch was taken up with detailed news items about Lee Harvey Oswald . On the other hand, almost a quarter of that front page was devoted to detailed news about Oswald .
 Oswald in a business suit and tie was run on page 3 of this week's edition . An excellent photograph of Oswald in business suit was run in the pages of this article .
 Oswald was charged with the murder of the President but not accused of that crime until early the next morning . Oswald had not been accused of the murder and was not charged with that crime .
 Long article put on the wires by the British United Press and America’s Associated Press had been assembled out of nowhere, even before Oswald had been charged with the crime . Yet a long article was assembled by the press even before he was charged .
 Oswald was a nondescript twenty-four-year-old in Dallas at 12:30 P.M. on November 22, 1963 . Nowadays, Oswald is a household name throughout the world, but in 1963 he was unknown .
 There is no way one can believe that these press agencies had in their files, ready and on call, all of the detailed information that was so quickly poured out in those first hours after the assassination . There was no way to believe that this information was available in the first hours .
 The Christchurch Star published a long account of Lee Harvey Oswald's assassination in Christchurch, England . Oswald's studio portrait included that fine studio portrait in business suit, white shirt and tie .
 David Lawrence: "instantaneous communications throughout the world has been made possible" David Lawrence of the Herald Tribune says that’s true .
 Those in charge of the murder had prepared the patsy and all of that intimate information beforehand . Those in control of the . murder had . all of the intimate information . beforehand .
 The FBI, the Secret Service, the Warren Commission, and the Dallas police force instantly declared Oswald to be the killer . Oswald was the only person to be found guilty of the Dallas murder .
 In newspapers around the world, even as far away as Christchurch, New Zealand, the headlines blared that Oswald was the President’s murderer . Oswald was Oswald's killer, according to reports .
 The question is such a powerful question that one wonders why it hasn’t been asked more often by those who have recourse to excellent sources .
 We must also wonder at the chilling effect this assassination has had on succeeding presidents . We also wonder if it has had a chilling effect on subsequent presidents .
 Lyndon Johnson was riding in a car behind President Kennedy in the Dealey Plaza motorcade . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 We may be sure that he thought during his years as President about those shots that went right over his head . We may have thought about that shots .
 As any soldier can tell you, such an experience provides an excellent education, says the author of the book .
 Richard Nixon was in Dallas during those fateful moments, attending a meeting with executives of the Pepsi-Cola Company . We have noted in an earlier chapter that, despite frequent denials, Nixon was attending the meeting .
 Nixon and the others in the room knelt in a brief prayer when they heard of Kennedy’s death, a company lawyer says . The general counsel of that company says Nixon and others in a meeting knelt as they heard the news .
 There were many news stories in which Nixon denied that he was in Dallas at the time of the assassination . Despite this, there were many reports in which he denied it .
 Nixon may not have heard those guns of Dallas, but there can't be no question that they were never far from his mind . Nixon may have heard the gun battle in Dallas, Texas, in the 1960s and '70s .
 Gerald Ford, who became President after Nixon left office, was a member of the Warren Commission . Gerald Ford became President of the U.S. in 1973 .
 Add to that his own experience when an assassin fired at him while he was President . Add to the fact that he was shot by an assassin while President Obama was in office .
 President Reagan was not in Dallas and was not a member of the Warren Commission . He was a Rockefeller Commission that studied CIA activities in the U.S. He was not the president in Dallas .
 He learned about allegations concerning the assassination of President Kennedy and of the CIA’s role in foreign assassination attempts as a member of that commission . The former CIA director says he learned about the allegations about the CIA's role .
 President Reagan was assassinated on the steps of the Washington Hilton in 1981 . He was assassinated by an assassin’s gun on the Hilton steps .
 Only four days after the assassination in Dallas, LBJ listened to a briefing on warfare in Indochina, which had been the subject on the agenda of the November 20 conference in Hawaii . LBJ attended the briefing on the subject four days later .
 President Kennedy’s death marked a major turning point in the Vietnam War . This briefing and agenda was formulated at the November 20 conference in Honolulu, Hawaii, before President Kennedy's death .
 The November 20 agenda and the November 26 briefing moved in direct opposition to Kennedy’s intentions and paved the way for the enormous escalation .
 President Johnson’s NS AM #288 of March 1964 completed the full turnabout . President Johnson was president of the Army in 1964 .
 On March 8, 1965, United States Marines landed on the shores of Vietnam at Da Nang . The U.S. Marines landed in Vietnam in 1965 . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 Before that ‘no-win’ conflict would end, more than $220 billion would be poured into the coffers of the war makers . Before that "No-win" conflict would be ended, over $220 million would be spent on the war .
 It had been evident that great pressures were building against President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 The Kennedy administration, especially with the near certainty that the President would be reelected, was diametrically opposed to many of the great power centers of our society, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy administration would have been diametratically opposed to some of the power centers
 A nation with the strength and determination to rise and demand an investigation into the death of President Kennedy will have the strength to survive and prosper . A nation should demand a probe into the deaths of Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King .
 More than any other country, America represents the cause of freedom, for all of mankind, says President Obama . America represents freedom, Obama says, "for all of humanity"
 It's vitally important that the truth of the events in Dallas on November 22, 1963, be told . For that reason, for ourselves and for others, it's important to know the truth . The truth is important to be told, and the truth should be known .
 On November 22, 1963, President John F Kennedy flew to Dallas, Texas, to deliver a major speech at the Trade Mart . LBJ takes the Helm as the Course Is Reversed .
 For this Nation’s strength and security are not easily or cheaply obtained, nor are quickly and simply explained,’ says President Obama . ‘For this Nation's strength and . security is not easily . cheaply obtained. nor are they quickly and . simply explained. For this
 Display of material wealth cannot stop the disillusionment of diplomats subjected to discrimination, diplomats say . Display of Material wealth will not stop diplomats suffering discrimination, they say .
 U.S. military might should not and need not stand alone against the ambitions of international communism, says President Obama . But American might must not be alone against communist ambitions, he says .
 Our security and strength, in the last analysis, directly depend on the security of others . That is why our military and economic assistance plays a key role in enabling those who live on the periphery of the Communist world to maintain their independence of choice .
 Our assistance to these nations can be painful, risky and costly, as is true in Southeast Asia today . The assistance to nations in the region is often painful and risky, as well as costly .
 For our assistance makes possible the stationing of 3-5 million allied troops along the Communist frontier at one-tenth the cost of maintaining a comparable number of American soldiers . For example, it would be a tenth of the cost to maintain a similar number of U.S. soldiers
 A successful Communist breakthrough in these areas would cost the U.S. several times as much as our entire foreign aid program . It might cost us heavily in American lives as well as American lives .
 Kennedy planned to say much about the reasons for his policy in Southeast Asia in a nutshell . In a nutshell, he planned to talk about his policy . Kennedy was expected to speak about his role in Southeast Asian affairs .
 This was Kennedy’s considered opinion on October 11, 1963, when he approved NSAM #263, and this remained his opinion until the day he died . Kennedy: "This was Kennedy's considered opinion."
 There is no sign of any plan by Kennedy for the series of policy alterations that began with draft of NSAM #273 on November 21, 1963 .
 You will recall those words from the draft NSAM #273 that was written on November 21, 1963 . You will remember those words .
 Kennedy planned to make the speech in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . Kennedy planned the speech .
 Kennedy’s prepared message for delivery at the Dallas Trade Mart had been planned to be the theme of a most important series of speeches to follow . Kennedy's prepared message was intended to be a series of important speeches to followed .
 One thousand American military advisers would be home from Indochina by Christmas . American personnel would be out of Vietnam by the end of 1965 . One thousand U.S. military advisers to be home by Christmas, he announced .
 This subject, and the enormous pressures it evoked, were paramount in his mind on that memorable day in Dallas . This subject was the subject of many of his most memorable moments .
 Had he lived, and had he been reelected, this was to be the course he had charted for his administration and for his country .
 Kennedy had learned much from experiences in Indochina since the beginning of our military/OSS involvement there in September 1945 . Kennedy learned much of the lessons he learned from his experiences .
 He had seen that billions of dollars of military aid provided to the French had been ineffectual in preventing their humiliating defeat by the Vietminh at Dien Bien Phu .
 Three U.S. Air Force fighter aircraft armed with tactical-size nuclear weapons had been deployed to an air base in Thailand, just across the river from Laos, for potential use . North Vietnamese forces had been observed marching into eastern Laos .
 Eisenhower persuaded Eisenhower that the use of such massive weapons against guerrilla forces could not have altered the course of that insurrection and might have ignited superpower retaliation . He knew that these aircraft had been recalled because wiser heads had prevailed .
 Kennedy learned much from his experiences in October 1962, when aerial reconnaissance revealed the possibility that the Soviets had begun to place tactical, short-range nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 President Obama faced the stark dilemma of whether to deploy conventional military force for invasion of Cuba . If he ordered such an invasion, the Soviets who were based in Cuba may have had the option of firing missiles at targets in the U.S.
 No actual missiles had been observed or photographed in Cuba, despite the fact that certain ‘crates’ covered by tarpaulin could have been missiles . This led to the possibility that there might be missiles there . No missiles were actually observed in Cuba .
 If the U.S. did attack Cuba in full force, Cuban missiles or not, this attack itself could have led to a superpower nuclear exchange .
 By 1963 Kennedy saw that prosecution of the CIA-directed covert warfare in Indochina would lead to a similar hard dilemma . By 1963, Kennedy was in a similar dilemma .
 By the summer of 1963, he and his closest associates had reached the conclusion that the future of South Vietnam must be placed in the hands of the South Vietnamese . The future of Vietnam in South Vietnam was in Vietnam's hands of South Vietnamese forces .
 He had made up his mind to Vietnamize that conflict, with American financial and material assistance, and withdraw U.S. personnel as quickly as possible .
 Kennedy knew all too well that he would have to go before the American people to gain their approval . This was the basis for NSAM #263 of October 11, 1963, which was the day Kennedy made the decision .
 Eisenhower knew he faced opposition from the all-powerful military-industry combine that Eisenhower had warned him about in December 1960 . He knew equally well that with that decision to get out of Indochina, he faced strenuous opposition from military-Industry combine .
 They had urged Ho Chi Minh to create an independent Vietnam . They had provided Ho and his military chieftain, Col. Col. Gen. Ho, and his brother-in-law, to Vietnam .
 Vo Nguyen Giap, with an enormous supply of arms so they could round up remaining Japanese military elements . Giap was in charge of Vietnamese forces in the region .
 At the same time, this stockpile of arms provided the basis for their own national sovereignty . The arms were obtained from United States Army sources on Okinawa, Okinawa .
 In this context, this OSS/CIA power structure had been at the forefront in directing the Cold War since that time . OSS and CIA power structure, fortified by its worldwide allies, had been in the forefront .
 The CIA knew all too well that Kennedy’s new Vietnamization policy was but the first step of his pledge to break the agency into a thousand pieces and limit its role to intelligence functions, a profession it didn’t practice seriously . The CIA was in danger of losing its
 Kennedy had begun a series of trips around the country, during which time he planned to deliver several major speeches, all orchestrated to underscore his new direction . Kennedy planned to plant seeds for his reelection in 1964 .
 At the same time he opened this carefully planned course of action, his powerful opposition fully realized that the popular young President would be able to convince the American public that he was right and that he would be reelected to another four years in office .
 A knowledgeable go-between was notified, and he arranged for the President’s murder by skilled “mechanics” on the streets of Dallas . The President was almost killed almost on the front steps of the sheriff's office . A skilled ‘mechanic�
 “mechanics” are members of a select group of specialists, referred to by Lyndon Johnson as “a damned Murder Inc.” and trained by the CIA for use at U.S. government order . These ‘mechanic’s”
 Their deeply anonymous system gets them to the target area and into safe positions . It assures them of a guaranteed quick exit . The system is anonymous .
 Since the ‘mechanics’ are certain to be on the side of the power elite, they never have been and never will be identified and prosecuted . The “mechanic’s” will be on his side, he says .
 An assassination, especially of the chief of state, can always be made easier and much more predictable if his routine security forces and their standard policies are removed and canceled . An assassination of a top official is always easier and more predictable .
 The route chosen was along busy streets with many overlooking high buildings on each side . It was chosen along busy roads with many of the tallest buildings in the city .
 Windows in these buildings had not been closed, sealed, and put under surveillance, officials say . Windows in the buildings were not closed and sealed, they said . Windows were not sealed, sealed and under surveillance .
 Secret Service units and trained military units that were required by regulations to be there were not in place . Secret service units and military units were not included .
 The route was particularly hazardous, with sharp turns requiring slow speeds, in violation of protection regulations . The route is particularly dangerous, with . sharp turns require slow . speeds, according to the report .
 Such a lack of protection is almost a guarantee of assassination in any country, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 It is difficult, if not more difficult, to convince trained and ready units not to be there than to let them go ahead and do their job . Yet someone on the inner cabal staff was able to make official sounding calls that nullified all of these ordinary acts of presidential protection on November
 At the same time the killers were contacted, another element of the plot was put in motion . "The greatest and most important element" was put into motion, the author says .
 Even before the murder took place, “cover story” experts had already created an entire scenario with a “patsy” gunman and a whole cast of lesser luminaries, such as those concealed within the Mongoose anti-Castro project, who can be exposed
 The strongest element of the cover-story side of the operation is the power that its perpetrators possess to prohibit normal pursuit and investigation by the media . Perhaps the strongest part of the . operation is that it can prohibit normal . pursuit of and investigation .
 There is but one way all of this could have been managed, both before and after this elaborate coup d’etat . The coup d'etat is the only way to get around the world's most recent crisis .
 "That is with absolute control from the highest echelons of the superpower structure of this country and the world," he said . That is with . absolute control of the . highest echelon of the world, he said.
 When there is a complete and carefully planned assassination plot that is designed and put into operation to cover, at least all of the items touched upon above, then it becomes evident that there was a conspiracy . The plot was designed to cover up the events surrounding the assassination .
 In most cases of this type the cabal is not concerned with this discovery, because with the death of the leader they have taken over the power position they sought, and none of them or their inner circle will be captured, identified, and prosecuted .
 It was 2:05 P.M. of the twenty-third in New Zealand, where I heard the awful news. It was a 2.05 p.m. of New Zealand where I was told the news .
 Not until after 11:26 P.M. on November 23, Oswald was formally charged with the murder of the President . Justice of the Peace David Johnston told Oswald he had been formally charged . Oswald was held without bond .
 Oswald faced more than one hundred newsmen from throughout the nation, from international publications, and from radio and television stations . Oswald was returned to his cell that evening .
 Dallas police did not know until later that Lee Harvey Oswald had been designated as the killer of President Kennedy . By that time New Zealanders had known, for hours, what the Dallas police didn't know .
 These New Zealanders had read preprepared news that had been disseminated by the cover-story apparatus . These New Zealander had read the news .
 This shows clearly how the scenario of President Kennedy’s death had been prepared well before the actual event . This strongly suggests that Lee Harvey Oswald had been chosen to be the “murderer” of the President before Dallas police made it official and despite evidence to the contrary
 There can be no question whatsoever that the cabal that arranged to have President Kennedy murdered had arranged and staged all the other terrible events of that day . President Kennedy was murdered by a cabal, the president's widow says .
 The White House was able to control the dissemination of news that day, and the cover-up, since that date . They had also been able to . control the . dissemination of the news, the . report of the Warren Commission, since then, they have been able .
 The evidence of that part of the plot and of the continuing cover-up becomes quite clear when one goes back through the record . The evidence is quite clear in the record, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It becomes easier to see why the commission permitted the publication of twenty-six volumes to conceal the bits of information it did discover .
 The findings that do exist make it clear that there had to be important reasons for the murder of the President . But the findings do not yet show that there must have been important reasons to kill the president .
 Duong Van Minh, in charge as of November 4, 1963, was in charge of the program to Vietnamize the war . The program included an agreement to provide the general with necessary funds and military materiel .
 Reports suggest a reversal of the situation in Vietnam . Then a trickle of reports suggested a reversal in the situation .
 Lodge and the country team met with Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, Bell, and Bundy at the Honolulu conference in November 20 . The topics dominated the discussions at the conference .
 Kennedy Trade Mart speech was planned for November 22 in Dallas, Texas . Kennedy was planning to give a speech at the trade mart on November 22 .
 Kennedy concluded that things were getting better in Vietnam and that the U.S. would be able to turn the countersubversion activity over to the Vietnamese and get out of Indochina . Kennedy, his military advisers, and his . military advisers .
 Kennedy had not changed his course on Vietnam and never intended to change it . Kennedy's Vietnam policy was never changed and he was never expected to .
 Even the secretaries of agriculture and commerce had been involved in that excursion . Keep in mind that even the secretary of agriculture .
 Study task force makes transition from Kennedy administration to Johnson era . What a strange way five years later .
 Lodge flew to Washington to meet with the President, according to the White House . Lodge says he flew to D.C. to meet President Obama .
 When Lodge left Saigon, Kennedy was President and when he arrived in Washington, Johnson was President—and Kennedy was dead . It does not even make the point that when Lodge left .
 The “Study of the History of U.S. Involvement in Vietnam From World War II to the Present” had been initiated on June 17, 1967, by Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara . The study of the history of the Vietnam War was initiated by Secretary
 It is inconceivable that McNamara, Leslie M Gelb, and all the others involved intended to scrub that sordid event out of the pages of history . But on the other hand, what they did produce is hard to explain . McNamara and Gelb are unlikely to have
 McNamara-Gelb study will not find anything about the death of President Kennedy . At the very least, this means that as students and historians plunge into the record of this thirty-year period, much of it covered in elaborate detail, will not be found .
 As that tragic event drops further into history, it may be all but forgotten, thanks to this type of omission . The omission may be a mistake or a mistake, but it's not a mistake .
 Most of the cabinet members who attended the conference with Ambassador Lodge met with President Johnson in Washington .
 The group discussed the agenda of the Honolulu conference . During that meeting, they discussed the meeting .
 The agenda gave lip service to the Kennedy plan but laid the groundwork for the change in course that followed as soon as Kennedy was dead . That agenda was given lip-service to Kennedy's plan, but also laid groundwork for change .
 Following that meeting of November 26, 1963, the President issued NS AM #273 . The President of the U.S. held a press conference in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy’s NASM #263 of October 11, 1963, underscored renewed efforts to improve the counterinsurgency campaign in the Mekong Delta . For the most part, its content paralleled Kennedy's NASM .
 NSAM #273 was, at best, short-lived. Alas, the restraint of the policy set forth in this article was, of course, short . The restraint of this restraint was, for example, was, a little bit, but it was not long enough .
 It was then, and had been for years, the scene of much of the “insurgency” and “Vietcong activity” found in Vietnam . Yet it was then and had . years, it was . scene of many of the . "insurg
 This is like saying that the Canadians were an enemy of the United States and were causing violent insurgency in this country and that this outbreak was most prevalent in Florida . This is not the case of the Canadians being enemies of the U.S. It's the case that they are causing violent
 "We would recognize immediately that something was wrong with such a scenario. Because we know the geography here, we would recognize something wrong," he says .
 Most of the one-million-plus North Vietnamese settlers had been moved by the United States Navy and the CIA’s CAT Airline . The port of Saigon in the Mekong Delta was the only available port in those days . It was because that is where most of the
 This refugee movement, as we have seen, had a profound impact on the southernmost part of South Vietnam . The refugee movement was a major factor in the country's history .
 These northern refugees were simply landless, homeless, and foodless . The Diem government was not prepared to improve conditions in the region .
 President Johnson was informed by the drafters of NS AM #273 that the counterinsurgency campaign in the Mekong Delta needed to be increased .
 One-millionplus refugees had been abandoned there . That is where the trouble was, and where it had always been . The trouble was where it was .
 Plans were requested by the White House for a series of clandestine operations against the North Vietnamese by government forces under the direction of the U.S. military . At the same time, plans were requested to be made for clandestine operations .
 Haiphong Harbor, the main port for Hanoi, should be mined, says White House staff . Pentagon, White House officials had suggested that the port be mined . Some leaders in the Pentagon, some from the White House, had recommended it .
 Others had suggested “hit and run’s attacks, to be operated covertly and with a cover story . U.S. could plausibly disclaim responsibility in the event of exposure or capture during a mission .
 This seemed to be the right time to bring these proposals up again, Johnson said . Johnson agreed to consider them, provided they had the approval of the commander in chief of the Pacific and of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Planning for covert action against North Vietnam had begun in May 1963 . JCS directed CINCPAC to prepare for operations that would be under the direction of the South Vietnamese .
 Walt Rostow, head of the Policy Planning Staff in the Department of State, had been plugging away at this idea ever since he had made a speech at the Special Forces Center in Fort Bragg in April 1961 . Rostow's speech was a speech that he made at Fort Br
 The plan was drawn up by CINCPAC staff and known as OPLAN 34A . It was approved by the JCS on September 9, 1963 .
 This was made a part of the agenda for the Honolulu conference of November 20 . It was discussed with President Johnson on November 26 .
 He was quick to agree with anything that would put direct pressure on the North Vietnamese . He agreed with anything he could do to pressure the regime .
 On December 21, 1963, the President directed an interdepartmental committee to study OPLAN 34A further . The committee was appointed Maj. Maj. Gen. Robert E. Johnson .
 General Krulak had been one of those actively engaged in this planning from the start, and it did not take him long to come up with a proposal . He said: "It did take him just a few days to come forward with the proposal"
 His plan was to be applied in three phases, each one raising the level of pressure on North Vietnam . The plan was intended to raise the pressure on the North Vietnam in three stages .
 Phase I, planned for February-May 1964, called for U-2 intelligence flights, COMINT missions, psychological missions, leaflet drops, propaganda kit deliveries, and radio broadcasts . Phase I was called for intelligence flights and psychological missions .
 It also provided for “twenty destructive undertakings designed to result in destruction, economic loss and general harassment” against North Vietnam . The document also included “destructive undertakings” and “destruction’
 A total exchange of top leadership in Saigon was taking place in the 1970s . While this planning had been secretly under way, the planning was under way . The planning was being carried out in secret .
 Ambassador Lodge arrived in late August 1963, at the peak of the Diem ‘coup’ discussions . Ambassador Lodge had arrived at the time of the 'coup' discussions in the country .
 Early in December, the CIA assigned a new station chief to Saigon, an experienced old pro . John Richardson, who had been there since the winter of 1961-62, was replaced in December .
 In December 1963, the CIA still retained “operational control” over all U.S. forces in Indochina . This was a most significant personnel change, because in December 1963 the CIA was still in charge .
 At that time both the CIA station chief and the senior U.S. military commander, Gen. Gen. Eisenhower, was in charge of the CIA . He was the senior United States military commander in Afghanistan .
 At that time, the director of central intelligence was John McCone, who had been appointed to that office by President Kennedy after Allen Dulles and his deputy, Gen. Gen. Jan. Allen .
 Charles P Cabell, were sacked following the disastrous Bay of Pigs operation . Charles Cabell was sacked after the disastrous operation in Cuba .
 In other words, McCone was not a Johnson man, and he held the new President in awe . McCone held President Johnson in awe, and held him in awe.
 McCone took de Silva under his wing in order to introduce him to the President in the White House . This was made quite apparent by McCone’s words .
 In this brief extract, we have another clue to the fact that the Kennedy concept of ‘things going well in Vietnam” was being eroded almost daily by the change of course being instigated by those who came into power .
 John McCone arrived in Saigon to preside at de Silva’s introduction to Ambassador Lodge . Secretary McNamara and a large party, flying in an Air Force One White House jet from a meeting in Paris, arrived at almost the same time .
 De Silva’s first full military briefing in Saigon was held, about thirty minutes after his arrival, in an atmosphere dominated not by McCone but by the secretary of defense . De Silva's first full briefing was therefore held, .
 As each of these carefully orchestrated events unfolded, it was not too difficult to see that the ‘Vietnam phasedown’ of Kennedy’s plan was in the process of being completely turned around .
 During that same month, December 1963, the Vietnamese Civilian Irregular Defense Groups were transferred from CIA control to the United States Army Special Forces, the Green Berets . During that month, the Vietnam Civilian IGs were transferred .
 This was the initial move of the U.S. military glacier into combat action in Southeast Asia under the operational control of its own military commanders . The United States military is now in full control of the operations in the region . This is the first time the United States has taken part in
 Peer de Silva arrived at the end of the Vietnam War . The U.S. had acquired a fleet of small high-speed boats for use with OPLAN 34A operations against the North Vietnamese .
 CIA, with the cooperation of the United States Navy, had arranged to procure a fleet of fast boats from a Norwegian manufacturer . The CIA, the U.S. Navy, and the CIA had arranged for the fleet to be built .
 These boats were as close as anyone could come, in the sixties, to the famous PT boats of the forties . The boats were close to anyone who could come to them in the 1960s .
 Under OPLAN 34A tactics, the CIA made use of an unusual cargo aircraft called the C-123 . To augment this capability, under OPLANN 34A . The CIA used the aircraft to augment its capabilities .
 The C-123 was an outgrowth of the original C-122 that had been designed and built by the Chase Aircraft Company . The Chase aircraft was the first of its kind to be built .
 The success of that earlier model led to a merger of Chase and Fairchild Aircraft Company . The success led to the production of the C-123 and the merger of the two companies .
 Some of these aircraft were later modified for spraying Agent Orange over much of Vietnam . Some of the aircraft were used to spray Agent Orange in Vietnam .
 The use of C-123s reveals another characteristic of clandestine operations . The C-122s are used to carry out clandestine operations in the United States .
 Many of the same people who have been involved in the Iranian “arms for hostages” swap and in Central American covert activities got their start in the “Fun and Games” business of covert activities . These aircraft had belonged to the United States Air Force “Air Commando
 Richard Secord, among others, were familiar with the venerable C-123, they selected it for use in these latter-day activities . The C.123 was selected for use by the Air Force in the 1980s .
 PT-style boats and C-123s were used in late 1963 and 1964 . Behind the scenes, the PT boats were used behind the scenes .
 PT boats landed over-the-beach invasion parties on sabotaged missions . C-123s were used in clandestine flights over North Vietnam to drop smaller groups of agents .
 This brief statement reveals a bit more about how covert operations are mounted . This is the first time the U.S. government has mounted a covert operation operation .
 In general, these teams were believed to have been made up of South Vietnamese natives .
 These “hired personnel,” as a category of clandestine operators, still exist . “Hired personnel’s” still exist, as well as clandestine operators . These ‘hired persons’ still exist.
 Stateless people are stateless people who are highly trained and equipped for special operations . They are highly-trained and equipped with special operations. They are also highly trained .
 "They are far too valuable to expend on minor missions, and they must be kept available for such duties all over the world," says President Obama . "They must be able to be used to carry out such duties," says Obama .
 Their talents are called upon for covert operations of the greatest importance . They and their families are maintained in special safe areas, and their talents are used in covert operations .
 The very fact that such key people were used in OPLAN 34A operations underscores how important the highest authorities considered these activities . The use of key people in the operation underscores the importance of these activities, officials say .
 They were seen as the leverage essential to the gradual but certain escalation of military activities in Indochina after the death of President Kennedy and during the early, and more pliable, days of the Johnson era .
 These covert operations against North Vietnam were called, in the words of presidential adviser Walt Rostow, “tit for tat” activities . But with a difference, the operations were covert, but with a different .
 Usually in a ‘tit for tat’ game, one party hits the other and the second responds . Usually in this case, the second party responds to the first hit .
 In the Rostow context, the first party would strike covertly, the U.S. or South Vietnam would do so . The first party, the United States or Vietnam, would have struck covertly .
 The United States would announce that it had been hit first and that it was legitimate to strike back . Then, when the second party hit back, the U.S. would announce it had struck first .
 “Gulf of Tonkin Resolution” gave the President the authority to “strike back” and to utilize U.S. forces against North Vietnamese . Such an action took place in the Gulf of Tonkins and led to the famous ‘Gulf . of Ton
 This was all part of the very clever sequence of events that had been planned as far back as May 1963 . It was then implemented in after the death of Kennedy . This was then followed by the assassination of JFK .
 On July 30, 1964, “South Vietnamese” PT boats made a midnight attack on the Hon Me and Hon Nieu islands off the coast of North Vietnam above the 19th parallel, north .
 The North Vietnamese responded by sending their high-speed KOMAR boats after the raiders . The raiders were attacked by the high speed boats . North Vietnam responded to the raid by sending its own high speed KOMar boats .
 Commando raids were made on the coast of North Vietnam, August 3, 1964 . The Vinh Sonh radar installation was hit by commando raids .
 Because of its importance, this raid was most certainly made by CIA mercenaries . The raid was made by the CIA mercenaries, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Claim was made of intercepted radio transmission saying, “North Vietnamese naval forces had been ordered to attack the patrol” consisting of the Maddox and Turner Joy .
 Incident triggered action that led to passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution of August 1964 . Incident triggered passage of passage of Gulf War Resolution of 1964 . Gulf War resolution was passed in 1964 .
 Plans laid in May 1963 and other related actions had been leading up to this event since November 22, 1963, and the guns of Dallas, Dallas . The preparations had been under way since March 1964 .
 In March 1964 the familiar team of McNamara and Taylor made another factfinding trip to South Vietnam .
 They returned and made their report to the President and the NSC on March 16 . They returned to the U.S. to make their report .
 As a result of this report the President approved and signed NS AM #288 on March 17, 1964 . President approved the President's signing of the bill .
 By this time, of course, the Kennedy plan for Vietnam had been altered considerably .
 McNamara and Taylor said “the situation in Vietnam was considerably worse than had been realized at the time of the adoption of NSAM #273” on November 26, 1963 . In their report, they said the situation was “considerable worse” than it had been
 The level of activity was raised as OPLAN 34A strikes were leveraged in severity and with the response of the KOMARS against attacks by the PT boats and their mercenary crewmen .
 Ambassador Lodge resigned in mid-1964 to run for the presidency that fall . He was replaced in Saigon by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Gen. John Lodge .
 Taylor’s staff was augmented by an old-line State Department veteran, U Alexis Johnson, and William Sullivan, who was made executive officer for the diplomatic mission .
 Gen. Paul Harkins left his command in Saigon and was replaced by his deputy, Gen. Gen. John Hoarins . Gen. Huarins was replaced with his deputy Gen. Hoarin .
 In Peer de Silva’s words, “These three were to be perfectly aligned to dominate the U.S. policy and strategy in Vietnam in the crucial decision-making years of 1964-1965, a power alignment which I believe proved most unfortunate,” he writes .
 Westmoreland had been given his orders by Taylor, then Chairman, JCS: “Westy, you get out there and take charge.”
 "Get the military command and the ARVN organized and then fight the war right, the way we did in France," says President Obama . "We will fight right, like we did," he says .
 The principle of fighting the big war, the big action in Vietnam, had thus been established, De Silva said . De Silva added, “The principle of the fighting in Vietnam was thus established.”
 This doctrine, and the decisions later issuing from it, led inescapably to April 1975 and American defeat . This doctrine led to the defeat of the U.S. in Vietnam .
 The others were helicopter maintenance crewmen, supply personnel, and the like. They were helicopter crewmen .
 Taylor’s orders to Westmoreland came at a time when not one single American soldier was serving in Southeast Asia under the operational command and control of a U.S. military officer .
 These are questions that trail behind the train of events that led to the death of Pres. Barack Obama .
 John F Kennedy and the subsequent escalation of the U.S. military intervention in Indochina led to the death of the President .
 Millions of noncombatants were killed in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Cambodia between 1945 and 1980 . Vietnam and Laos were among the three countries involved in the war .
 In addition to genocidal murders, there have been numerous examples of the forced movement and relocation of additional millions of natives from their traditional homelands and communities .
 Such movements inevitably lead to the destruction of their ancient way of life and its irreplaceable social values . Such movements will lead to destruction of ancient way-of-life, says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.S.
 The result of these actions has often been the devastation of ancient homelands that had never been touched by warfare . “The West” and “the Communists” have often carried out this century both by ‘the West’
 The 1968 massacre of more than three hundred women and children at Song My in Vietnam serves as no more than a minor example of the type of warfare that has overwhelmed such rural communities . The terrible 1968 massacre in Vietnam is no more .
 Edward G Lansdale regaled his associates in the Pentagon with stories of “enemy agents” who had been placed in helicopters to be flown to headquarters for interrogation . Lansdale often regaled associates with tales of "enemy agents" who were flown in helicopters for interrogation.
 Such murders were of little consequence to those warriors, as My Lai and the movie Platoon confirm . Such murders are of little importance to those who fought in Vietnam .
 These Vietnamese were “neutralized” without benefit of trial or of the rules of warfare governing the treatment of prisoners . The Vietnamese were "neutralized" without benefits of trial . The rules of war governing how prisoners are treated should be applied to prisoners .
 There are many people in this world who believe it is essential to reduce the total human population, and to reduce it by any means . For example, there are people who think it is not only “all right” but essential .
 This conviction stems from the work of the British East India Company’s chief economist at the turn of the nineteenth century, Thomas Malthus . This conviction, which stems from his work, pervades certain elements of our global society .
 Malthusianism is a deeper motivational factor than the more popularly recognized ideological confrontations, says Dr. John Defterios . He says it's a deeper motivator than ideological confrontation .
 When it is ‘their turn,” the Soviets have performed these common genocidal functions as well as ‘the West” has, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . When it's “their turn’s ‘they’ve performed
 Millions of noncombatants have been slaughtered in Afghanistan . 6 million Afghan natives have been forced to leave their homeland over the great passes to Pakistan .
 There is a single theme behind our work: We must reduce population levels . There is one theme behind the work: Reduce population levels. We need to reduce our population levels, the government says .
 Either the governments will do it our way, through nice, clean methods, or they will get the kind of mess that we have in El Salvador, or Iran, or in Beirut, or Beirut . The governments will have to do it their way, or the mess will be worse .
 We look at resources and environmental constraints, we look at our strategic needs, and we say that this country must lower its population, or else we will have trouble . We say we must lower our population or face trouble .
 The government of El Salvador failed to use our programs to lower population, says Salvadoran president . Salvadoran President Salvador Salvador Salvadorian President Salvador Sanchez Sanchez Sanchez Aguero says . Sanchez: El Salvador's government has failed to reduce population .
 The above conditions merge together into a demand for war—any kind of war, anywhere, anywhere . The above and above are the reasons for war, including the possibility of war .
 This is the root concept, and the overall excuse, for an entire series of wars in Third World countries since 1945, says David Cameron . The root concept is the idea of war in the Third World, he says .
 Because of the Malthusian belief in the need for population control, the murder, by warfare, of countless millions of noncombatants is “lawfully” justified . The murder is justified by the belief that population control is necessary .
 Africa and Latin America have been at risk of civil war in recent years . This is why such wars are certain to break out before long in the heavily populated continents . This has been true quite recently, and it is why it is likely to be true .
 Of course, national leaders wish to justify their actions and cloak them in legality . But they also want to cloak their actions in legality, they say . This is not the first time they have done so far .
 President Lyndon B Johnson felt the need to escalate the long, warlike action in Indochina from its emergent underground stages to an all-out overt military confrontation .
 The President can use the armed forces without a declaration of war . However, congressional authorization is necessary for the President to use the military .
 The U.S. is prepared to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom . Congress approves and supports the determination of the President, as Commander-in-Chief, to
 This resolution was passed in August 1964, nineteen years after the U.S. became actively involved in the affairs in Indochina .
 At times it seemed as though things were at a standstill, and at other times the tip of a covert-action iceberg would reveal another step along the way . At times, things seemed to be at a halt, and sometimes the tip-of-a-taken iceberg would
 After the passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, a series of air strikes, called “Flaming Dart,” was carried out against North Vietnam . North Vietnam was attacked by North Korea in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 On February 22, 1965, General Westmoreland recommended that American troops be landed on the east coast of Vietnam, at Da Nang . The U.S. troops arrived in Vietnam on February 25, 1965 . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 Two U.S. Marine Corps Battalion Landing Teams were selected . After considerable internecine hassling, it was decided that the marines would make the first landing .
 This was the first time in almost twenty years of U.S. involvement that members of the armed forces of the United States had entered combat zones under the command control of their own officers .
 For the first time, the CIA’s role as the operational command in Vietnam was being shared with the military . The CIA was being given the lead role in Vietnam in Vietnam for first time . It was the CIA's role as an operational command .
 Despite this development, the ‘War in Vietnam’ was still a strange and unprecedented creation . It was still an example of the CIA’s master role as Cold War catalyst .
 Carl von Clausewitz: When diplomacy and all else fails, the army takes over . The science of war, as defined by Clausewitz, is that when diplomacy and the army fails, it takes control .
 Despite nearly a century and a half of this doctrine, the management of the “War in Vietnam” broke all of the rules, says historian John Avlon .
 The ambassador in Saigon was the senior, and highest-ranking, American official in Vietnam . The military and CIA officials ranked below him .
 This was a novel way to wage war, that is with an ambassador over and senior to the general in command . The ambassador is a senior member of the General in command in the Middle East .
 While testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during the latter part of the sixties, Sen. Richard Nixon spoke of the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in Vietnam .
 Stuart Symington revealed that the U.S. ambassador in Vientiane, Laos, had the authority to order bombings and to specify where the bombs would be dropped .
 The ambassador in Saigon had been given ‘military proconsul’ powers for more than a decade . In these terms, the ambassador in . Saigon was given “military . consul” powers .
 "Any consideration of leadership in time of war must inevitably lead to the question of the objective," says President Obama . "The objective of leadership must be clear," says Obama .
 President Johnson built up the strength of the U.S. Army in Vietnam to 550,000 men, brought the air force to enormous strength . The Navy Seventh Fleet was the most powerful force afloat .
 Despite all this, the United States lost the war; it failed to achieve its goal . The United States was defeated in the U.S. war, President Obama said .
 In Asia, that is not a good indicator of success, and it played right into the hands of General Giap . In the past, it has been seen as a failure in Asia, especially in South Korea .
 Guerrilla style, he spread the action out as much as he could, all over the landmass of Indochina . The action was spread out as well as the entire landmass, including the land of Vietnam .
 This made the tremendous U.S. military force impotent, diluted as it now was over wide areas . The United States military force was impotent . This made it appear to be over-reaching .
 About 12,000 men of the United States Army First Cavalry Division, Vietnamese airborne units, and South Korean marines took part . Operation Masher and White Wing was part of Operations Masher & White Wing .
 They succeeded in capturing the valley and heralded it in Saigon as “a breakthrough in winning the Vietcongcontrolled people to our side.” They heralded the capture of the valley as ‘a breakthrough’
 George S Patton, the hero of the Third Army’s march across France in the face of an experienced German military machine, must have spun in his grave over those instructions for that type of guerrilla war . George S. Patton, who fought in the Second World War, would have
 It does little good to review the history of a war by basing it on the one time strategic objectives of the victor and the vanquished, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "It does not do little good" to review history by looking at one time .
 Before WWII, Stalin purged the Ukraine and wiped out millions of his own people . Stalin had purged millions of people and wiped them out of existence .
 During WWII Stalin diverted his armies, with Hitler’s in hot pursuit, away from Moscow and across this same “heartland of Mother Russia,” the Ukraine . During WWII, Stalin diverted armies, including those of Hitler, across this ‘heartland’ of
 By the time the war was over, more than 20 million Russians had been killed, and the once vital Ukraine had been reduced to rubble . Although the Soviets have claimed victory over Hitler, it would be hard to say that the Russian people won, on any count .
 Clearly it had been someone’s strategic objective to wipe out the natives of the Ukraine and to destroy their homeland . In the process, in the process completing Stalin's work and ending Hitler's dream, the Ukraine was destroyed .
 It is clear that the United States did not achieve its limited objective of helping the South Vietnamese establish a free democratic nation . The U.S. failed to achieve its mission to help the South Vietnam establish a democratic nation, it says .
 Millions of people in Indochina were killed and removed from the overhang of the Malthusian equation of world population density . On that score, millions of people died and removed .
 No ideological, “Communist vs. anti-Communist” issues had been settled, and the domino theory and “bloodbath’s” projections have not occurred . The United States initiated that with its massive B-29 bombardment .
 This leaves one more enormous accomplishment of the warfare in Indochina to be considered . This is one of the most significant achievements of the war .
 The American share of this enormous sum expended on the Cold War was spent under the leadership of the CIA . No less than $220 billion went to the CIA’s war in Indochina . The CIA, “Capitalism”
 It is not too difficult to be persuaded that a similar and more costly excursion lies not too far in the future . Because of the success of that type of ‘money-making’ war, it's not too easy to persuade .
 The ASSASSINATION of President John F Kennedy was one of the truly cataclysmic events of this century . The assassination of President Kennedy was a truly Cataclysmic event .
 The murder of a President was traumatic enough; but the course of events that followed and that have affected the welfare of this country and the world since that time has, in many ways, been tragic . The murder has affected many of the world's lives since it took place .
 Most of the major events of world significance are masterfully planned and orchestrated by an elite coterie of powerful people, not of one nation, one ethnic grouping, or one overridingly important business group . That assassination has demonstrated that most of the world's major events were masterfully orchestrated
 Kennedy's assassination has been used as an example of their methodology . Kennedy’s assassination was used as a model for the methodology of assassination .
 Most thinking people of this country, and of the world, believe that he was not killed by a lone gunman . Most of the thinking people believe that . He was not shot by a single gunman. He was shot by police officers .
 The cover story created and thrust upon us by the spokesmen of this High Cabal has existed for three decades . Despite that view, the cover story has existed, the truth is still alive, the author says .
 It has come from the lips of every subsequent President and from the top media representatives and their spokesmen, it has been said . It has also been said by the media and its representatives .
 Consider the pressure it must take to require all of them, without exception, to quote the words of that contrived cover story over and over again for nearly three decades . Consider how much pressure it takes to require them to say the words without exception .
 This is the evidence we have of the significance of the Kennedy assassination, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is the proof that the assassination was significant to the nation"
 Other major events, such as the development and escalation of the Vietnam War, have been manipulated in a similar manner . The development of Vietnam War and the rise of the Cold War have also been manipulated .
 In bringing this work to a close, I shall provide, briefly, a look at a few of the other events during the Cold War that have taken place because the power elite planned things that way .
 "I am aware I may be attacked in the same fashion as Oliver Stone even before his movie JFK appeared in the theaters. As a result, I am aware of the same . I'm aware that I may . be attacked, even before . Oliver Stone's movie JFK . appeared in
 The attack consists of words like conspiracy and paranoia similar to the verbal accusations during the Inquisition . The attack is similar to those used to accuse the Inquisition of conspiracy or paranoia .
 To attack someone as conspiracy prone because he doesn't believe the cover story that one lone gunman killed the President is ridiculous, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 By now it has become clear that there was a plan to murder Kennedy in order to escalate the Vietnam war and decimate most of the less-developed countries through a form of banker-managed economic warfare .
 This is planning at its best or worst, depending on your point of view, depending upon what you think it is . This is the best of planning, or the worst of planning . It is planning for the future, or not, at any of the world's most important points of
 paranoia cannot properly be used to define someone who studies economics and history and reveals certain facts . Furthermore, paranoia cannot be used as a guide to understanding certain facts, he says .
 Winston Churchill’s phrase for the power elite, the High Cabal, operates . The game plan of the Cabal has been revealed in the past few weeks .
 JFK was killed by one man, who fired three shots from a mailorder Italian-made rifle . JFK was shot three times in the head by a mail order Italian made rifle .
 Most Americans have wanted, at first, to believe the word of their government, especially when it involved such an important matter . Quite naturally most Americans wanted to believe their government's word .
 In that business, the ‘mechanics’ are faceless and have chameleon identities that are skillfully shielded by the system . “Mechanics,” the “mechanic’s” identities are shielded from the system, the
 President Kennedy was murdered in a burst of gunfire, as reported by able and on-the-spot newsmen, that hit him at least twice, struck Governor Connally at least once and more likely two times . A fragment created by a stray shot hit a man named Tague who
 The Warren Commission is looking at the role of President Obama in the White House . The commission is expected to present its case to the public this week .
 A recent episode from the pages of the Journal of the American Medical Association should alert the public to the seriousness of the cause underlying the decision to assassinate JFK almost thirty years ago .
 President George W. Bush was shot in the back of the neck of the president . President John Reagan was killed by a bullet that struck his throat and injured Gov. John Connally . President Bush was killed in the attack .
 The U.S. Supreme Court is under duress from a higher power, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Here is this prestigious organization being forced to play a distasteful role before the American public by repeating a story that is untenable"
 Their spokesmen have said, using contrived diagrams, that one bullet entered Kennedy’s neck from the back and exited the throat . Kennedy was killed by a single bullet in the back of the neck .
 The bullet that entered Kennedy's body from the back made a hole in the coat and a matching one in the shirt at a point well below the neck . Kennedy's suit coat and shirt were worn at the time he was shot .
 A bullet would have had to have changed course immediately, inside Kennedy’s body, to have advanced upward and emerge from his throat . Such a bullet would’ve had to change course immediately to have emerged from his body .
 The bullet was allegedly fired on a downward trajectory form six floors above the President’s car .
 The contrived story of this AMA presentation went beyond medical facts . The AMA presentation was contrived to tell the story of the AMA presentation .
 Some authors have written that a “general” was in the autopsy room at the time and that the general gave orders to the autopsy doctors, it has been made to appear that the doctors had been ordered not to perform an adequate examination .
 Godfrey McHugh was an air force general in 1963 . He was a general general in the air force . He has been a friend of McHugh since the fifties . He says he is proud of his achievements .
 AMA spokesmen say the President’s military aides were at Bethesda, as the AMA spokesman says . The AMA says the President's military aides are also at Bethesda .
 He was also a friend of Jackie Kennedy and had known her since before she met Kennedy . He also had known Jackie Kennedy for decades .
 The course of events in our time is planned carefully by agents of the power elite, says Julian Zelizer . The reason I mention these things now is to underscore that the course of the time is carefully planned .
 This American Medical Association episode in the spring of 1992 is a classic example proving that the power behind the Kennedy assassination plot lives on . The episode is an example of a classic episode proving the power of the assassination plot is alive .
 It is clear to anyone close to the scene, and to those who have studied them with care, that this massive set of documents, “37 studies and 15 collections of documents in 43 volumes” is not the true and complete story .
 Ambassador Lodge met with the President the next day . This was followed by a statement from the President . Ambassador Lodge is a former ambassador to the UK .
 Not a word was said of the fact that President Kennedy had died on November 22 . The man Lodge met with on the twenty-third was Johnson .
 Let’s tie the assassination of Kennedy and the role of the power elite to some other notable events . Let's tie Kennedy's assassination to some of the most notable events in history .
 It was actually ‘about 1990” when the Soviet Union did weaken and the Cold War came to an end . That was an astounding forecast before such an eminent group considering that it was made in 1972 .
 The predictions of this conference proved to be another long step on the way to a New World Order . The predictions were a long step to the way toward a new world order .
 That was another long-range forecast that is being proved quite accurate .
 In that sense, this becomes an accurate definition of the existence and activity of the power elite . The power elite is the most powerful and most powerful in the world, the author says .
 Stans resigned to become chairman of the Committee to Reelect the President in 1972 .
 The Dartmouth Conference was formed by the Rockefellers under President Nixon . The organization was formed under Nixon's presidency .
 US-TEC was the United States-USSR Trade and Economic Council . It was the U.S. and Russia's trade and economic council .
 Meetings of the membership were scheduled every six months alternately in each location . Meetings were held at each of the locations .
 Usually these meetings are augmented by major trade fair exhibitions from each country . Usually the meetings are accompanied by major international trade exhibitions .
 US-TEC has done much to make Roy Ash’s forecast at the ‘Look at Business in 1990’ conference come true, says Ash . Ash: "Look at business in 1990" conference .
 Business, in 1972, took aim at the Evil Empire, as President Reagan called the Soviet Union a decade later . Business took aim in 1972 at the 'Evil Empire'
 Not much has been published openly about either of these organizations, the U.S. membership and the Soviet membership, as they have worked busily to create the New World Order . The United States membership of the United States and Soviet membership has been very secretive .
 Their work has included the promotion of the military-industrial complex and of the massive international agricultural combines in their search for new business in new fields .
 CIA is one of the primary activists and promoters for these combines, especially since its more recent emphasis upon the business of economic intelligence . In this connection, the CIA is .
 In March 1973, the White House arranged for a meeting of representatives of the largest petroleum-consuming organizations in the country . The meeting took place in March 1973 .
 These companies included airlines, railroads, trucking firms, utilities, and government agencies such as the Government Services Agency and the Department of Defense .
 At that time, gasoline was selling at the service station pumps for under forty cents per gallon, and railroads were buying fuel on long-term contracts for about eleven cents a gallon . Gasoline was being bought at the railroads for about 11 cents a year .
 A recent study has warned that petroleum use was far ahead of new discovery, a White House spokesman said . Reserves of the world’s oil supply might be depleted in the not too distant future, perhaps even before 2000 .
 The meeting was called to alert all major consumers that before the end of the year it would be all but impossible to make a long-term contract for petroleum . Prices would be up by a factor of two or three, he said .
 I was sitting between representatives of the airlines and the General Services Administration . I was in the middle of a meeting with representatives of airlines and GSA representatives .
 By the end of the year those predictions concerning price had proved to have been conservative .
 Arab-Israeli war broke out in late 1973 . Arab-Arab conflict broke out on the day of the war . Israel and Israel was the only Arab nation to join the Arab Spring in 1973 .
 Arabs instituted an oil embargo and that available supplies of gasoline would drop around the world . Before long it was announced that the Arabs had instituted the oil embargo .
 Soon thereafter we were all parked in long lines leading to the gas pumps waiting for the little gasoline available and at any price . Soon thereafter, all of us were parked in line for gas .
 In early 1974 the prestigious Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C. invited several hundred mid-level officials from all parts of the government, from congressional offices to local offices of major corporations .
 These were more or less monthly meetings where invitees could listen to world leaders in the field of energy, particularly petroleum . The invitees were invited to meet with world leaders .
 "I was pleasantly surprised at the high caliber of the subjects and the speakers, such as Henry Kissinger and James Schlesinger," says John Defterios .
 "It is clear that an objective of those meetings was to have all of us marching to the same drum. It was clear that those meetings were aimed at having all of them marching to same drum," he said .
 We all began to believe that the fast-rising price of petroleum was fully justified, that a “world price” was inevitable . The “last barrel” would be drawn from some well not too long after the year 2000, says author .
 As we now know, much of this ‘energy crisis’ was a massive production designed and orchestrated to raise the price of petroleum from its long-time base of approximately $1.70 per barrel to a high, at times, of $40.00 .
 No other production in the fields of economic warfare had ever made so much money . Except for the international drug trade, no other production has ever made more money than did .
 It takes little imagination to discover that this is another product of the High Cabal elite . While the energy and drug projects are operating most profitably the international food business cannot be far behind .
 As conventional battlefield warfare diminishes in value to the world planners, economic warfare is moving boldly to the front of the stage . Economic warfare is becoming a key part of the future .
 William J Casey had served as a member of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, former under secretary of state, and later the director of central intelligence under President Reagan .
 I think that we are being swamped and we have an ample supply of economic information . I think we have a lot of information to share with the world, says President Obama . We are being 'swamped' with information, says Obama .
 What we are deficient in is sufficient analysis, understanding of the long-term implications where the economic facts that scream out at us from the financial pages every day are carrying us and the problems that they are creating for us in the future, and what we can do about them. What we
 "We have close to a complete absence of any real machinery or any place in the U.S. government to systematically look at the economic opportunities and threats in long-term perspective," he says .
 A little more than one year after that speech Bill Casey became the director of central intelligence, and economic intelligence became the biggest game in town for the CIA and the National Security Agency .
 The meanings behind these events reveal themselves to us once we see our way through the maze of the Warren Commission Report and the continuing obfuscation of the facts concerning John F Kennedy’s death .
 This CIA connection in the business of making war, and more recently of making big-business bigger, has introduced another pattern of events that this country has experienced, though not as frequently as some other nations . The CIA connection to the CIA connection has been in the past, but not as
 This may be seen as the agency’s ability to “rekindle the fire” whenever some new occurrence is needed to raise the level of concern throughout the nation, particularly whenever another big military budget is prepared for a vote .
 By the end of direct U.S. participation in the warfare in Indochina, it had become clear to the long-range war planners in the government that further attempts to support an ever-increasing military budget for the type of conventional warfare practiced in Korea and Vietnam would no longer
 With the advent of the Reagan administration and its pro-business leaning toward a strong and ever-increasing Defense Department budget, something had to be done to raise the level of public anxiety and anger toward the only superpower available, the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the country's only superpower
 Clear evidence indicates that the old Hegelian doctrine that nations require conflict still prevails . Clear evidence suggests that this is not the case for nations to avoid conflict .
 "The scenario of the conflict itself must change. But you may be sure that the scenario ... must change," he says .
 An important example of the Reagan era that is being used repeatedly to demonstrate how the power elite and warmakers utilize all manner of plots to achieve their ambitious goal of establishing the highest level of costly military preparedness under all kinds of political conditions .
 U.S. official phoned family of Georgia representative Larry P McDonald, a passenger on that flight, late in the evening of August 31, 1983 . McDonald was a Georgia representative .
 The plane, its passengers, and crew were safe on the ground at Sakhalin Island, Russia . The purpose of that call was to inform them that the plane was safe . The plane's passengers and crew are safe at the moment .
 The CIA message had been fabricated for other purposes, among them to cause the Japanese to recall the Air-Sea Rescue Fleet . The CIA had fabricated the message to cause Japan to recall its rescue fleet .
 State officials say they believe in the validity of the CIA message . It is difficult to believe that officials of the State would have made that humanitarian call if they did not believe in it .
 The airliner never landed on Sakhalin Island, the passengers and crew have never been found and the aircraft had disappeared . The plane never landed and the passengers were never found on the island . The aircraft disappeared and the plane disappeared .
 At ten A.M., September 1, 1983, in Washington, Secretary of State George Shultz appeared on TV to announce the Soviet Union had shot down that Korean airliner in cold blood .
 The largest Defense Department budget ever passed in peacetime whizzed through Congress and was eagerly signed by President Reagan . Within days, the largest defense budget ever was signed by Reagan .
 Thus began the most costly peacetime decade in the history of civilization . The cost of the decade was the most expensive peacetime period in history .
 The CIA message was sent, what it said, and that the news media around the world knew about it . During the evening of August 31, only the Times knew about the message .
 The plane had been on Japanese radar for six minutes before it disappeared, the Times reported .
 A positive radar trail led to a crash site southeast of Hokkaido, far from Sakhalin . The crash site was found by a Japanese coast guard in Japan .
 The Japanese had sent twelve air-sea rescue vessels toward that location . The rescue operation was called off by the Japanese .
 The CIA message arrived in Seoul and Tokyo and at the Department of State . While they were at sea, the CIA message was sent to South Korea and Japan .
 As soon as the Japanese received that message, they recalled their rescue boats, and the chance to locate the wreckage, save survivors, and confirm its identity was lost .
 With that essential diversion safely accomplished, the government could announce any scenario it wanted for the loss of the Korean airliner and get away with it . With that diverted safely accomplished the government would be able to get away from it .
 No one was ever going to be able to locate the wreckage of the plane deep in the Kurile Trench of the Pacific Ocean . The plane was found deep in a deep, deep hole deep into the Pacific .
 In the midst of this international uproar we discover the steady hand of the unruffled High Cabal . In the middle of an international uproar, we discover a steady hand in the hands of the Cabal.
 As we look back at this trade show, at the Evil Empire days and at the existence of this most important US-TEC organization, we discover more elements of that power elite structure that we have been describing .
 Roy Ash said during the 1971 conference that “East and West would meet some place toward the middle about 1990” was not a prediction but a master plan . Furthermore, this record confirms that what he said in 1971 conference was not prediction .
 These are examples of how these higher echelons are above warfare, both hot and cold, as they continue their own games on a more exalted level on both sides at the same time . Both sides are at the top of the world's highest ranking football teams .
 David Rockefeller was chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank in 1977 . Rockefeller wrote an item in the US-TEC journal of 1977 .
 He has been one of the world’s most important international bankers as head of one of its most important banks . He was head of the Bank of Europe at the time .
 Think back fifty years, from 1977 to 1927, and recall all of the enormous ideological, military, economic, and political problems that existed between the East and the West . Think back 50 years from 1977-2727 .
 Rockefeller and Chase Manhattan took pride in the fact that they had been in Moscow during that time doing business in the center of the maelstrom . Rockefeller took pride that he had been there doing business .
 He expected, as only natural, that bankers would arrange the policy for what took place in Vietnam, and they have done just that . He said: "It was only natural to expect bankers to arrange for what happened in Vietnam"
 The U.S. President's good friends were packing their briefcases for another big meeting for business as usual in Moscow . While the President of the United States harangued the world about the Evil Empire, his good friends, our senior businessmen, were packing .
 The plot to assassinate President John F Kennedy was a plot to kill him . The atmosphere in which such planning took place was the atmosphere of the assassination plot .
 A group of senior members gathered after lunch for a third martini . Senior members gathered for a drink at the end of the meal .
 Kennedy’s denial of the TFX procurement contract to the Boeing Company had hit his company, a major subcontractor, very hard . One of them mentions that a director of his company had called that morning to say that Kennedy had called .
 McNamara had been telling the bankers things were going to change, one member said . This struck a nerve of one of the other members, who reported that Roz Gilpatric, who works with that “goddamn” McNamara, had been told the bankers .
 They could no longer count on the practices that had feathered their nests for so many years . They could not count on their own practices . They were forced to abandon the practices they had been practicing for so long .
 Another member took a quick sip of his martini and said, “I had a call from one of our bankers in the City early this morning.” Another member said he had been called by a banker in the city . The call was made by one of the members of
 He wanted to know how we were doing and was it true that Kennedy was going to take all Americans out of Vietnam? "He wanted to ask if it was true," he said. "That was true"
 An elderly member of the Dulles family used to visit the family in their summer home on Henderson Bay . He said his boys had just completed a study of how many helicopters would be needed for a ten-year war in Vietnam .
 The total was in the thousands, and the cost ran into the billions of dollars . The cost of the project was estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands .
 He snarled that Kennedy was working with some of the Irish Mafia and his favorite generals to get us out of Vietnam . Then he looked around the group of old cronies and snared, "That goddamn Kennedy bastard has been working all summer"
 President Obama is a sure thing for reelection, but then there is Bobby and after him Teddy . "Right now, right now, he’s a . sure thing . for reelection," he said .
 On the perimeter of that intense group sat a younger man quietly attentive to every word and watching every move . The younger man was quietly attentive and watching the group .
 Just then, as the speaker finished his words, he saw a wink in the eye of a senior member . The wink was the wink of the eye, the speaker said .
 "In the fall, somewhere in the south," he says . "I'm going to be in the fall," he adds . "In a fall, there's always something to do," he asks .
 It had been the result of a consensus of not that one meeting, but of many, it was said . It was a consensus that many had agreed to accept the decision to take action .
 "He knew then that his biggest job would be to put a small cadre of the best men in the world at work right away on the cover story and on the deception plan," he says .
 He would handle the call to the agent for the ‘mechanics’ who operated from a foreign country . He would begin the moves that would result in the evernormal selection of the site .
 He would have to speak to no more than three others, and they would not know him except by an exquisite code . He would speak to only a few people, but they would only know each other by code .
 It was his job to handle the Secret Service, the FBI, and the Pentagon, he said .
 "The game plan of the High Cabal never fails, because they are at the top," says Julian Zelizer . "They never fail," says Zelizer, "because they are the top"
 Even if it should fail, no one would ever be able to prosecute them or their allies . Even if they fail, they would never be prosecuted for their actions .
 I said in the beginning that this was not intended to be simply a history. I said, "This is not meant to be a history," he said .
 "I believe that God does not throw the dice. More importantly, I emphasized that I . believe that I believe that . God does the dice," he said .
 "The affairs of man and nature are not determined at random or by mere chance," says President Obama . The world is not a series of random events, says Obama .
 1963 marked a major turning point in this century because the power elite moved that year to remove John F Kennedy from the White House and to take the course of the Ship of State into their own hands . You have had the opportunity to travel back through those years with me .
 1972 stands out as another one of those signal turning points. Furthermore, the year 1972 is a signal turning point. 1972 was a turning point in the history of American politics .
 Roy Ash, president of Litton Industries made his closing statement that described events that would occur twenty and thirty years later . That was February 1972, and as those sessions came to a close, Ash made his momentous closing statement .
 When a Vietnam War, the assassination of John F Kennedy, or the destruction of a Korean airliner are necessary, they will be caused to happen . There are major plans, as David Rockerfeller notes, and when a Vietnam war is necessary, it will happen .
 A lone gunman in a sixth-floor window in Dallas will not be left to chance or the bad aim of a lone gunman . Dallas police say they will not let the gunman take aim at the scene .
 The fact of the existence of a conspiracy to kill the President of the United States is shocking . Yet many Americans try to brush it aside. Many Americans still try to ignore it .
 Americans do not believe the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald by himself killed Kennedy . But they find it all but impossible to believe the alternative . The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald killed Kennedy by himself .
 'From the time they saw that film they have been unable to accept the creative falseness of the cover story,' says the film's creator . 'They have been able to accept that film was a cover story'
 Of particular note was the film’s effect upon the professional community of assassination buffs . The film's effect on assassination buffs was particularly notable .
 There are some who support the government line, with its Warren Commission, magic bullet, Lee Harvey Oswald, Jack Ruby, and all the rest of that massive, highly contrived fiction . Some support the Warren Commission .
 Stone’s masterful film, as well as renewed strength in its message, was met with renewed strength . It was this latter group of buffs who found encouragement in Stone's film .
 New and rapidly growing hordes of assassination investigators have encountered reality and encouragement in the film . To these more or less . well organized groupings, we must add to these new . new and rapidly . growing hordes .
 Stone’s film presented a comprehensive coverage of the assassination and all of its ramifications, public and private, that provided everyone with material they may not have heard before . Stone's film was presented by CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Many of the more prominent of this group viciously attacked Oliver Stone and his movie . Oliver Stone's new film, "The Assassination of the Columbine Columbine" is released on Friday .
 Hard-liners comprise the most ardent sector of the assassination buff melange . Professional writers and journalists who work for some of the most important media outlets in the country .
 NSAM #263 is the official and complete documentation of Kennedy’s intentions . NSAM#263 is a complete document of Kennedy's intentions .
 Wicker’s December 22, 1991, Times article was a lengthy and unnecessarily demeaning diatribe against Stone and his movie . Wicker wrote that Stone's movie was a masterpiece, but Stone's film was a classic .
 He presents the full JFK debate by publishing the demeaning articles of his detractors and the responses of his supporters side by side in the text .
 David Ansen, ; Robert Sam Anson, ; David W Belin, ; Jimmy Breslin, ; Joseph A Califano, Jr., Jr., ; Alexander Cockburn, ; Alan M Dershowitz, ; Roger Ebert, ; Gerald R Ford, ; Leslie
 This is a rare form of movie review and was almost universally adversarial, even though, in most cases, they, the writers, were in error and not the film itself . This is an extremely difficult form of a movie review .
 Most of the writers, most of whom work for major media bosses, wrote negatively about the film . They all wrote in support of the anticonspiracy, lone-gunman, Warren Commission theory .
 It strengthens the arguments of those who believe there was a massive conspiracy, and it does battle, as did David versus Goliath, against the power of the throne .
 The film, for both sides, enlivened the game and created new flocks of believers . To all of this, the film—for both sides --enlivenes the game .
 The answers to the source of the decision to murder John F Kennedy are not in government files . The answers have not been found in government records .
 This action alone aroused the profession of the assassination buff to its highest level, as evidenced by the activities of the Coalition On Political Assassinations and others like it .
 "This was not the end. These achievements serve to make the film exceptional," says the film's creator . "This is not the beginning of the film," says director Tom Charity .
 It was the goal of Oliver Stone and of those of us who worked with him that the truth about the murder of John F Kennedy be brought to as many viewers as possible, not only in the United States of America .
 The impact upon the ordinary layman who has not made a special study of this subject has, in many instances, been far greater, proportionately, than upon the professionals . This has been done, and the impact upon ordinary laymen who have not studied it has far greater than the
 As the reader will have noted, this has been a primary objective of this autobiographical book of mine. This has been an objective of the book of my .
 I have tried to put the Kennedy assassination in proper prospective with a chronological time-line as a guiding star . I have been trying to put Kennedy assassination into proper prospective . The Kennedy assassination is a chronicle of the assassination .
 The beginning of the warfare in Indochina actually began on the same day as the surrender of the Japanese on September 2, 1945 . The “Big Four” at the Teheran Conference so amply provided for in November 1943 .
 This directive ordered that 1,000 U.S. military personnel be brought home by the end of 1963 . The bulk of United States personnel would be withdrawn by end of 1965 .
 President Kennedy’s assured reelection in 1964 led directly to the consensual decision at the highest levels that the President must be killed and that control of the U.S. government must be put in other hands . That carefully crafted and determined policy in the impending climate of Kennedy's assured reelection
 In other words, Kennedy’s Vietnam policy announcements made a coup d’etat necessary . In other . words, the Vietnam policy announcement made a . coup d'etat was necessary .
 The inclusion of this little-known NS AM #263 in the film became the principal point of attack of the big guns that were leveled at Stone, Garrison, and myself .
 It really is amazing that the most vitriolic attacks were those that attempted to inform the public that there was no such directive. It really was amazing that those who tried to tell the public there were no such directives. That's amazing .
 The furor over that one item, NS AM #263, was evidence that Stone had hit his target .
 In the film’s closing scenes between “Garrison” and “Man X,” who was a representation of this author, one could feel the tension build in every audience in every theater .
 Stone had those last scenes filmed on the mall in Washington, D.C., between the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument . The rising dome of the Capitol building looming over Costner and Sutherland in the distance . Stone's film was "purely masterful"
 The Kennedy Center is overlooked by the old faded yellow brick building that was CIA headquarters and the long-time office of Director of Central Intelligence Allen W Dulles .
 It is the place where so much of that fatal decision, for the U.S. government and for all of us, was made by the cabal . It is also where the cabal made the decision to kill the president .
 November 22, 1963, marks the 50th anniversary of the assassination of President Kennedy . The film was released in 1963 and has been widely viewed worldwide since then .
 January 1961 was the last month of the Eisenhower administration and the month during which Kennedy was inaugurated . During that month, the Pentagon was more hectic, more confused and more explosive than January 1961 .
 There was something about that period that bore some special message of its own—for the future . "There is something about something special about the future. There is a special message for the future," the author says .
 What was happening, especially there in the Pentagon, was not simply a routine changing of the guard . It was not just a routine change of guard, it was a change of the policy .
 That month carried its own message, a premonition of sinister things to follow . The month of the month was a warning that things were going to happen .
 The Eisenhower team was so confident that Nixon would be elected that they had arranged long-range objectives for the Nixon administration to carry out . The Vietnam War, the antiCastro activities, and the space program, were among the objectives .
 Plans included big-ticket items such as the Air Force’s scheduled procurement of the new TFX swingwing fighter aircraft at $6. billion .
 Kennedy election assuring a drastic change in key positions up and down the line, put all of those plans in jeopardy . Kennedy election, assuring change of key positions, put many plans in doubt .
 No one stood more to lose than our friends in the highly dedicated industrial sector of the nation, particularly in the military-industrial group . The UK has been in a state of war with the US since 2001 .
 On January 17, 1961, President Eisenhower delivered his Farewell Address to the American public . Eisenhower's Farewell address was the first to be delivered in the United States .
 The conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the U.S. experience . The American military establishment is new to the American experience .
 Two days after Eisenhower’s address, I walked into the office of Secretary of Defense Thomas Gates to give him a few brief words on what was taking place in the business of “providing the military support of the clandestine operations of the CIA” The Bay of Pigs operation
 From the Pentagon we could barely see the buildings of Washington across the Potomac . The Pentagon is located in Washington, Virginia, and the Pentagon in Virginia .
 Mr Gates’s office, hallway, anteroom, and his office were jammed with well-wishers . And, on that late hour, as I approached Mr Gates's office, I saw that he was jammed .
 "I have always believed that he was the best and most qualified man ever to hold that office. As I look back at those nine years, I have always . believed that . He was the ... most qualified person ever in that office," says former president .
 Mr Gates was in no position for a briefing at that curtain-lowering time, his secretary ushered him into the office of Deputy Secretary of Defense James Douglas . Mr Douglas was another able gentleman .
 He greeted me with his characteristic smile, strolled across his office, and leaned against the window sill . He greeted him with a characteristic smile and strolled into his office .
 I said, “Mr Douglas, I have briefed you from time to time over the past six years.” Mr Douglas said. “I said, "Mr Douglas’s been briefed you’ve briefed you," he said .
 I went on to give him a report on the status of the Cuban Exile program that the Eisenhower administration had started, as a formal C.I.A. activity, back in March 1960 . Then I gave him a further update on the Cuban exile program .
 When I finished the brief report, I asked, “Each time I have come in here, or into Mr Gates’s office, I have known that you gentlemen were well aware of the subject of these briefings over the years, and of their background; but tomorrow, when
 Mr Douglas turned away and looked out at the snow and the dim outline of the city .
 Prouty said, “Prouty, I’ll be damned if I know what to say.” Finally he turned back, and said: “I’m not sure what I do what I know. I”
 I haven't met the bastards and I haven’t the slightest idea what they know and what they do not know. I’m not sure if they know or what they don't know,’s not sure. ‘I’ve never met the
 This was the best characterization, that I can recall, of the climate that existed in Washington between the two administrations since that unexpected election of John R Kennedy . This is the best description of the political climate in Washington since Kennedy .
 Few people have realized the true atmosphere of the Eisenhower-Kennedy transition, and nowhere else in the government was that transition more acrimonious than in the Pentagon . The Pentagon was the scene of the Kennedy-Eisenhower transition .
 As a military officer I worked with the Gates team and without a break continued along with the McNamara team . I worked for the Gates, McNamara and McNamara teams .
 The Kennedy victory at the polls, in 1960, was perhaps as much a cause of his eventual assassination, in 1963, as anything else . I cite this fact, at the close of my book, because as I look back over those years it has become clear to me that the Kennedy
 There was no way he could win against the inplace power centers, including that of the military-industrial complex, as Eisenhower had warned . President Eisenhower himself had warned that the military industrial complex was in place .
 As you can see, such things have nothing to do with a ‘lone gunman’ , with Fidel Castro and the Cubans, with the Mafia, and all the rest of the lore that has blossomed since November 22, 1963 .
 They are a part of the true story, and the others are parts of the essential ‘cover story’ that has lived and been made to flourish since mid-November 1963 . The truth is that the cover story is that of the real story, the others .
 Stone asked me to become a technical advisor as he developed the script for his film back in July 1990 . Stone's film is set to be released in October 2015 . Stone is best known for his role in the 1990s film, "American Sniper"
 He came to my home a few days after I had triple bypass coronary surgery in October 1990 . He gave me a copy of the initial version of the script, which he says was given to him .
 He wanted those who knew little about the details of the assassination and its aftermath to get a good comprehensive view of the situation . He said he wanted those with little to know about the assassination to get the details .
 Jim Garrison and Jim Marrs, along with the experienced photography expert, Bob Groden. Jim Garrison. Bob Marrs . Bob Garrison . Jim Garrison . Marrs: "Jim Marrs and Jim Garrison are the team behind the camera"
 Garrison was the first official member of any court jurisdiction in the country to do what ought to have been done in Texas, i.e. take it into a court for trial . Garrison was an excellent selection because he was the only official member in any jurisdiction in Texas .
 With this endeavor Jim had put many of the actual facts of the assassination into the record . Jim had advanced public knowledge of the crime and of its raging cover story, including the Warren Commission ruse .
 With Jim Marrs, Stone had one of the finest and most honest technicians in the investigation business . Marrs was one of Stone's most honest and honest technicians .
 It has been my endeavor, since 1985 when I first sat down at my computer, to write the story of the Cold War as few have seen it . To explain what took place at the close of World War II that led to the Korean and Vietnamese wars, and to describe the events
 In this endeavor I had the invaluable assistance of Oliver Stone, Jim Garrison, and so many others dating from the eventful days of my own military career . Oliver Stone and Jim Garrison helped with the film .
 Victor H Krulak, lieutenant general, USMC, was my boss and friend in the Pentagon during the Kennedy years . He was a friend of President Kennedy's .
 "To Oliver Stone, for discovering in my ideas and experience, that made the theme of his great movie a challenge to America," she says .
 To my son, David, his wife, Bonnie, and his daughters, Jane and Lauren, all computer experts, I could never have accomplished the burden of this work . Without his encouragement and assistance I could not have accomplished this work, he says .
 To Lauren Michele Prouty, again because she did all the computer chores essential to the technical quality of the final product .
 To my editor, Hillel Black, for his understanding of a complex manuscript and an intricate subject and for his inspiration . To this author, I would like to thank him for understanding the manuscript and the subject .
 To Thomas Whittle, editor of Freedom magazine, for recognizing the value of this work and publishing some of these earlier articles .
 To Michael Baybak, my literary agent, for steering me through the intricate pathways of publishing with good sense and good humor . To Michael, my book editor, for his advice: "Publish your book in a great way"
 This work is based on a nineteen-part magazine series first developed by the author with and published by Freedom magazine, the investigative journal of the Church of Scientology . Freedom magazine is an investigative journal for the church of Scientology.
 Gehlen was head of Hitler’s Eastern European Intelligence Division . He surrendered to American army officers before the fall of Nazi power . Gehlen later was made a general in the United States Army for intelligence purposes by an act of Congress .
 CIA in the world of the H-Bomb: The CIA in a world of H-Bombers . The CIA was involved in World War II . The U.S. government was in control of the CIA .
 Director of central intelligence, then William Casey, made a modest suggestion that President Marcos ought to hold an election . Casey made the suggestion during a visit to Manila in the 1980s .
 At the same time we noted the rise of a new Communist-inspired insurgency there . At the . same time, we noted that the . rise of the . insurgency there was also a rise in the Communist .
 At that point, the director of central intelligence knew and held the winning hand . At that time, the CIA director had a winning hand, he says .
 Graves B Erskine was serving as the special assistant to the secretary of defense for special operations . He was in charge of special operations for the U.S.
 As such he was responsible for all military contacts with the CIA, for the National Security Agency and for the Department of State and the White House . He was also responsible for contacts with CIA, NSA and other agencies .
 Allen Dulles had with him at this meeting both Edward G Lansdale, whom he was sending to Saigon from Manila to head the Saigon Military Mission, and George Aurell, the station chief for the CIA .
 The author was assigned to the Erskine office, 1960-62, during a nine-year period in the Pentagon . He says the Pentagon has a history of missteps .
 He served as the senior air force officer for the duties of the Office of Special Operations . He served in the U.S. Air Force's Special Forces .
 For the United States this marked the actual beginning of what we call the Vietnam War . For the U.S. this was the actual start of what is now known as Vietnam War.
 The CIA had operational control over all forces of that war from 1954 to 1965 . The U.S. Marines, under United States military command, hit the beaches of Vietnam in 1965 .
 The CIA’s role was dominant during those years in this phase of WW III, which cost $220 billion, millions of noncombatant lives, and the lives of 55,000 American servicemen .
 Churchill was defeated in British parliamentary elections during the conference . He was replaced by the newly chosen prime minister, Clement Attlee, in 1945 .
 Adm. Walter Bedell Smith, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the deputy secretary of defense and former vice president of the General Motors Corp., Roger M Kyes . The panel includes the deputy .
 Lecture, ’’Southeast Asia, Army War College, by Edward G Lansdale, December 1958 . Lecture by Lansdale .
 The Selection and Preparation of the Battlefield 1 1. 1 has heard firsthand accounts that the CIA agents tossed these natives out of the helicopter, alive, “just for the fun of it” and as a lesson .
 The National Security Act of 1947 used the word “direction” to mean that the idea for the plan originates with the NSC . The NSC directs its accomplishment by whatever department or agency it may choose .
 Allen Dulles, the director of central intelligence, arrived at a meeting with some scheme . It was not uncommon for the Dulles brothers to arrive at meetings with schemes . Dulles was the CIA Director of Central Intelligence in Eisenhower days .
 This practice generally worked and was deemed permissible in that environment, but that was not how the NSC was intended to work. This practice was not meant to work, and that's not how it should have worked. The NSC has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 President Kennedy found it difficult to reverse this practice in later years, because the CIA had been able to have its way in these covert matters over the Department or State and the Department of Defense .
 "The existence of this letter has been denied for years by various administrations and by the board members," the letter says . The existence of the letter was denied by administrations, board members .
 I have had a copy of this rare and most important “letter” for years, and it now appears verbatim in a book called Zapata . The book is now being published by Zapata.
 After that meeting, these Cubans traveled to the Pentagon from Capitol Hill, in a military vehicle with me, to meetings that were held in the Office of Special Operations . The Cubans were also taken to meetings with the Pentagon's Special Operations team .
 The Battlefield and the Tactics, Courtesy CIA 1 “Pre-Brief” is the name given to the everyday, worldwide news summary that is prepared by the CIA and presented to the President early each morning .
 It is given to a select, small group of Pentagon officials just prior to the White House session . It is a highly select group of officials .
 Diem and his administration applied the term loosely within South Vietnam to mean “the enemy” Most of whom had no idea what communism was, and most of whom were Cochin Chinese, or southern, natives . Diem's administration used it loosely to mean "the enemy"
 The intelligence “count” of the enemy included many natives who certainly were not Communist . Thus, the intelligence ‘count’ of Vietcong enemy included .
 Countries were likened to a row of dominos set on end; the row would fall if the first domino was knocked down . Countries were likens to dominos; the first dominino would be knocked down if the row was set to fall .
 General Wheeler went on to become chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He held a position for some six years . General Wheeler was a member of the U.S. Armed Services Secretary .
 Shortly after World War II, Nixon answered a want ad from a Los Angeles newspaper which sought a man who would run for political office . The CIA in the Days of Camelot 1.
 Nixon ran for Congress with the help of these anonymous backers and was elected . Nixon was elected to Congress in 1964 .
 These people continued to support him through the ups and downs of his political career . These people supported him throughout his career, he says .
 Nixon has acknowledged that he had these backers; exactly who they were is another question . Nixon has admitted that he has these backers, but it's not clear who they are .
 Russell has confirmed the accuracy of his son’s account of Nixon's presence in Dallas at the time of the assassination . Russell has also confirmed that Nixon was in Dallas when he was assassinated .
 Later, sometime after the shooting, Nixon was driven to the Dallas airport by a Mr DeLuca, also an official of the Pepsi-Cola Company . Nixon was taken to the airport by the official, who was also a Pepsi official .
 The son of another Pepsi-Cola executive was in Dallas at that time and had dinner with Jack Ruby, Oswald’s killer, the night before JFK was murdered . In addition, the son of an executive was also in Dallas when Ruby killed JFK .
 Maxwell Taylor’s “Letter to the President” of June 13, 1961, plus my own personal files . Maxwell Taylor wrote to the president of Washington, D.C. in 1961 .
 The plan was a plan for the recmitment of Cubans into a militarytype organization for training purposes . It was intended to encourage Cubans to take part in a military type organization .
 At that point, the CIA had plans for very little, if any, operational activities in Cuba . At that time, the agency had plans to engage in any of its Cuba operations .
 The agency began to formulate plans for airdrops and over-the-beach landings of small groups of Cuban exiles . The agency was spurred on by certain former senior Cuban officials .
 It or a similar guide was used for the training and indoctrination of the cadre of Cuban exile leaders . It was used to train and indoctrinate the Cuban exile leader .
 It is important to note what the U.S. Army teaches on this subject and consider its applicability in this and other countries . The United States Army teaches about this subject .
 The document was used widely to train and indoctrinate the United States Special Forces Green Berets in Vietnam . This same document was also used to train the U.S. Special Forces Special Forces .
 I had been directed, in 1955, to establish that office under the provisions of NSC 5412 . I was its chief from 1955 to 1960, when I was transferred to the Office of the Secretary of Defense .
 In this capacity as head of the Military Support Office, in 1960,1 went to Fort Gulick with CIA agents . In 1960, in this capacity, 1 went to fort Gulick, with CIA .
 At that time Air America was one of the largest airlines in the world, and a great airline . Air America is now one of America's largest airlines .
 Each block is under the absolute control of a leader, who knows where everyone is on that block . Each block has a leader who knows who is on each other .
 He uses children and schoolteachers, wives, shop foremen, and all other sources to gain total, twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week surveillance . He also uses children, school teachers, wives and wives to gain surveillance .
 No one could penetrate the Cuban system either from airdrop entry or by beach landing . No one would evade it from the inside, and no one would be able to do so .
 The effectiveness of this system neutralized the exile group’s ability to penetrate into, or to support, political guerrillas . The effectiveness was neutralized by this system, says author .
 Winston Churchill used the term High Cabal in recognition of this group’s existence and supremacy . Winston Churchill said the group was 'High Cabal' and 'Cabal' in reference to its supremacy .
 Being rockets, they have no recoil, make little or no noise, have a high terminal velocity, and are hard to detect by autopsy after they have entered a person’s body . The rockets are difficult to detect after they enter a person's body . They are hard-to
 When the CIA-directed rebellion against Sukarno in Indonesia in 1958 failed so miserably, it was Nixon who demanded, and got, the immediate dismissal of that World War II-era OSS hero Frank Wisner .
 I knew the ships had been at sea and that forces would hit the beach at dawn on Monday, April 17 . I knew I knew that the ships were at sea, and the forces would be at sea .
 I had heard that three T-33s had not been destroyed in the April 15 air strike, when all of the other combat aircraft had been hit . I had been told that three of the aircraft were not destroyed in that strike, but all the others had been .
 The President did not want a public inquiry and a formal report . The President, however, did want a formal inquiry, and he did not . He did not. want a . formal report, however .
 Adm. Burke asked to lunch with a friend, and asked him to meet with him . "I called Admiral Burke, whom I had worked with over the years, to ask him to lunch"
 The admiral was the finest chief of naval operations the U.S. Navy ever had, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he asked the admiral about that report .
 Bundy said no air strikes could be launched until after the brigade had secured the Giron airstrip . Bundy said strikes would ostensibly be launched from there .
 Wyden and Bundy added that “order from the President,” after the deaths of JFK and RFK, to cover Bundy’s actions . Bundy and Wyden said that order from the president would cover Bundy's actions . Wyden: Order from President, after the
 William Bundy is daughter of Dean Acheson, wife of William Bundy, and sister-inlaw of McGeorge Bundy . Bundy was wanted by Kennedy to be secretary of state . Bundy is sister of former Secretary of State John Kennedy's son .
 Kennedy had chosen William Yandell Elliott, rather than Dean Rusk, to be his national security assistant . He had chosen Rusk in place of Acheson, who had been chosen to be national security adviser .
 U.S. representative Mike Synar visited the top-secret Northrup Stealth aircraft .
 One must keep in mind, however, that this apparent ‘breakdown’ may well have been intentional . One must also remember that this may be intentional .
 Our so-called national policy on “anticommunism” has gotten a lot of mileage out of Castro and his “Communist threat,” just as it has continued to do in Central America, South America, Africa, and the Middle East . Our so
 I had worked with the CIA on anti-Castro activities since January 1, 1959 . knew almost all of the men who had been called to meet with the study group . The study group was a study group of men who worked for CIA .
 Many would wait in my office until they were called; many came back following their testimony and interrogation . Many of them would come back after their testimony or interrogation .
 Nothing on the record gives any indication that he ever broke the stranglehold the CIA had on that investigation . It was well known that he returned to the White House each day to discuss developments .
 De Varona was one of the four Cuban exiles who, after flying from the American Legion convention in Detroit, where Nixon had spoken in August 1960, to Washington, had gone directly to the offices of then senator John F Kennedy in the Senate Office Building .
 From Kennedy’s office they all went to the Office of the Secretary of Defense in the Pentagon . They all went from Kennedy's office to the office of the secretary of defense .
 Kennedy had been in personal touch with de Varona and the others all through this period . Kennedy was in touch with them all through the period . He said: "I'm sure you can't wait to find out what happened next."
 This adds another element to the value of de Varona’s testimony before the Taylor group . De Varona's testimony is important to the Taylor Group .
 Had the strike been flown as approved by the President, the jets would have been destroyed and the invasion would have succeeded . Had that strike had been flown, the strike would have destroyed the jets .
 The Brigade on the beach could have countered Castro’s attacks along the narrow approach causeways . Its own substantial air force of hard-hitting B-26 aircraft operated from the airstrip the Brigade had already captured . The Brigade could have counter-attacked Castro's attacks on the
 Dulles revealed this information in sworn testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on May 31, 1960, the same month the crash landing occurred . His testimony was not released until 1982 and generally has been ignored by the American press .
 No one has ever fully investigated the possibility that this flight, launched in direct violation of President Eisenhower’s order that there be no overflights before the summit conference, might have been ordered covertly by a small but powerful cabal that intended for it to fail .
 Based upon a number of other strange events related to this particular flight, there is a strong possibility that this could be the case . The plane was carrying passengers and crew members when it crashed .
 Those in the Office of Special Operations and the Secretary of Defense were certain, from what they had heard firsthand, that Lansdale would be named the next ambassador to Saigon .
 The director of the Joint Staff was the senior permanently assigned officer in the then four-hundred-man office that supported the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He was the most senior permanent assigned officer to the Joint Joint Staff .
 Gen. II I was the first chief of the Office of Special Operations and continued in that office until 1964 . Gen. I I continued to lead the Office until 1964, when Gen. III I was in charge of the Special Operations Division .
 Each of these was signed and distributed in the normal manner by McGeorge Bundy for the President . Each of the photos was taken in the same manner .
 At the time of which I am writing there were some four hundred people in this unit . At the . time of . which time, there was some . four hundred . people in the unit .
 Chiang Kai-shek and May Ling, who had been in Cairo, went to Tehran, and I believe they traveled on Roosevelt’s plane . May Ling was in Cairo and traveled to Tehran .
 Richard G Stilwell was a friend and close associate of Vinegar Joe’s son, Gen. Gen. Richard G. Joe . He was also a close friend and associate of Gen. Joe's son .
 Edward G Lansdale and I flew to Fort Gordon, Ga., to pick up elements of the Civil Affairs and Military Government curriculum . The curriculum was then used as the basis for drafting the new curriculum for the Army Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg .
 At that time, we were both assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense . We were assigned to each other at the time .
 By late 1960, this Mutual Security Program report had filtered down from the Eisenhower White House, without comment but with the weight of apparent approval . The report was published without comment from the White House .
 As a top-level document of great potential, it then became fundamental to the development of the new Special Warfare curriculum as it was rewritten and merged with material from Fort Gordon .
 The Fort Bragg curriculum had the blessing of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, contained elements of a White House report, and was supported by the CIA . This whole layer of apparent authority became the Special Warfare and Special Air Warfare doctrine for dealing with Third World nations .
 The author has no evidence or recollection that any of this was ever discussed with the Congress or with the Department of State . The author says he has no recollection of this being discussed with Congress or State .
 The United States Army had more or less defined a new Cold War role for military forces . Yet, on the basis of these policy statements, evolved from the writings of Mao, among others, the U.S. Army had a new role for the military .
 With this presentation the reader is getting a rare and unusual view of the inner workings of our government as it pertains to the development and utilization of the military in Cold War operations .
 This is exactly what is being done today in Central America, the Middle East, and Africa . This is the same thing that is happening today in Latin America, Middle East and Africa.
 I have been able to acquire a copy of this report, “Training Under the Mutual Security Program,” May 15, 1959 .
 It appears, complete, as Appendix 3 of my earlier book, The Secret Team . It appears to have been complete, and is now available in paperback .
 This was run by the CIA-sponsored Saigon Military Mission, described in detail in earlier chapters . The Magic Box, Trigger of the Expanded War in Vietnam 1, is the first chapter of this book .
 It was part of ‘Operation Brotherhood,’ an organization managed by CIA-run Filipino leaders under the aegis of the International Junior Chamber of Commerce . The organization was managed by a group of Filipino leaders . The group is now known as Operation Brotherhood .
 These native sources in intelligence never saw starvationcrazed refugees; they always saw what they were being paid to see . Intelligence sources never saw starving refugees; instead they saw starving people .
 "General Hunger was General Giap, and Communists were abroad in the land," says Giap . General Hunger was Gen. Giap. "General Giap was General . Giap's .
 He was a creation of the American CIA, and the CIA was running the war, with a checkbook, in 1960-61, as it had been since 1945 . The CIA was in charge of the war with the U.S. in 1960s-61 .
 Ike's hopes for detente were crushed by the CIA’s U-2 spy-plane incident of May 1, 1960, as described earlier . JFK Makes His Move to Control the CIA, JFK Makes his Move to control the CIA .
 Chief agent in a country would have a direct line to CIA headquarters, bypassing every other channel of the U.S. government . The chief agent would be the chief agent of the country .
 It is a novel; but its content is so close to the reality of those years that many readers insist that the “report” must be true . The novel is so realistic that readers insist it is true, but it is so accurate that many insist that it must have been
 He assures me that the book is a novel and that he intended it to read that way in order to emphasize its serious content . The book is intended to emphasize serious content, he says .
 This first news report by a seasoned combat journalist shows that those in and around Dealey Plaza heard numerous shots . This is more than the three bullets reported by the Secret Service, the FBI, and the Warren Commission .
 "Star Wars" project might have included the Strategic Defense Initiative “Star Wars’s” project as another boondoggle .
 The life of type of most items normally averages between ten and twenty years . Most items normally live between 10 and 20 years .
 This small plane could land, STOL (short takeoff and landing) fashion, on unprepared airstrips and even on mountainsides .
 With entry into Peru limited, for the most part, it was possible for the government to control all import and export business . The Belaunde government team included certain old and rich families with traditional and banking power .
 The reader cannot help but note that they are equally timely and applicable to the more recent Iranian “hostages for arms” controversy and even to Desert Storm . The reader can't help but . note that . they were equally timely .
 Visions of a Kennedy Dynasty 1 ‘New Frontier’ was the domestic and foreign policy program of President Kennedy’s administration . ‘The New Frontier” was the "New Frontier" program of the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy used the slogan in his acceptance speech in 1960 . It is taken from a slogan used by Kennedy in his speech at the Kennedy Awards .
 This is a good source of “inside the family’s” information about certain aspects of the intervention in Vietnam and of the role played by the various participants, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For my work with the Joint Staff, I was awarded, by General Taylor, one of the first Joint Chiefs of Staff Commendation Medals ever issued . For his work, General Taylor gave me a Medal of Honor for my work .
 The once-fertile Ukraine had been laid bare, says CNN's Peter Bergen . He saw firsthand the indescribable destruction of such cities as Rostov, Rostov .
 Creighton W Acheson, Dean Advanced Research Projects Agency Afghanistan Africa, outlook for Agent Orange Agnelli, Giovanni Agriculture Agrovilles Ahn Lac Air Base Air America Air Re-supply and Communications Allen, George V Ambrose, Dr. George V. Ambrose and Dr.
 Assassination, CIA policy oncommon techniques Kennedy assassination . Assassination manuals . Atomic bomb, development of the atomic bomb .
 Auchincloss, Ken Aurell, George Baldwin, Hansen W Ball, George Bao Dai Bankers Bannister, Guy Barber and Guy Barber .
 Charles Cabell, Earle Cairo conference California Standard Oil Company Cambodia Camelot Cameron, Allan W Camp Peary Cam Ranh Bay Can Loa Caravelle Group Carr .
 Defense Departmentand CIA Defense Intelligence Agency Defoliation, impact of initial use of Democracy in America . Democratic Republic of Vietnam . George Declaration of Independence .
 See Gulf War de Silvo, Peer de Tocqueville, Alexis de Varona, Manuel Antonio Diem, Ngo Dinh. See more Gulf War stories here .
 Felt, Adm. Frank Extended Arms for Brotherhood Fair Play for Cuba Committee, Cuba Committee Family Story, The FBI, and Kennedy assassination .
 Geneva Accords Geneva Agreements and French-Indochina War Genocide were signed by the U.S. State Department of International Security in Geneva .
 Greene, Gen. Mike Great Britain, and Vietnam Green Berets, are the most famous members of the Special Forces in the United States .
 Haileybury College Haiphong Halberstam, David Hamilton, Lee Harkins, Gen. Wallace M Groden, Bob Gromyko, Andrei Grumman Aircraft Company Guatemala Gulf of Tonkin Resolution Gulf War . Vietnam War ended in a victory in Vietnam in
 Humes, James Hunger, Howard Huongca Hydrogen bomband Vietnam war . Roscoe Hiroshima H-19 helicopter . Ho Chi Minh and Tonkinese refugees .
 See also France; Vietnam war Indonesia . See also CIA, KGB International Security Affairs Office International Monetary Fund .
 CIA power Dallas speech of long-range plans of managerial style of 1960 campaign . Dallas speech was part of 1960 Dallas speech . CIA power of Dallas speech.
 Korean airlines incident occurred during Korean war . Kissinger, Henry Kissinger and Krulak were involved in winning of the Korean Airlines incident .
 Victor H Kubrick, Stanley Lansdale, Edward G and enemy-agent murders and special forces Laosearly fighting in Lardner .
 Nixon, Richard, x, and Bay of Pigs and Castro, Castro and Kennedy assassination vs. Kennedy assassination . Caravelle Group coup .
 North Vietnam, covert action against Vietnam . Vietnam war nuclear weapons, Eisenhower deployment of nuclear weapons . Military role of O’Daniel, Gen. Lauris .
 OSS O’Keefe, Bernard ‘One Hand’ system On the Trail of the Assassins Operation Mongoose Operation Sunrise Operation Trinidad OPLAN 34A Organization of American States OSStermination of
 Reston, James Rhade tribesmen Rhee, Syngman Richardson, John Rice Riots, in South Vietnam Risk and Other Four-Letter Words . Rostov, Russia Rostow, Walter Ruby, Jack Rusk, Dean Russell, Sen. Rockefeller .
 Richard Saigon Saigon Military Mission civic action program of . and Diemand Geneva accords . Initial actions of and native relocation objectives of . the . objectives of the . mission .
 Senate, U.S., and CIA oversight of Shah of Iran oversight of Iran . Richard Secret Service, and Kennedy assassination Senate, reviewed . Richard Kennedy assassination .
 Sorenson, Theodore Sorrels, the Forest Source Selection Board Southeast Asia. S.Sorenson: "Forest Source Selection board Southeast Asia"
 See individual names, countries and subjects Southeast Asia Resolution South Vietnam, creation ofelections inhistory of social breakdown in topography of Vietnam .
 Truman, Trujillo, Rafael Truman, Harry S., and atomic bomb on CIA and iron curtain Tuyen .