 Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov said U.S. plans to deploy missile systems near the Russian border risks a nuclear standoff on a par with the height of the Cold War .
 The Cuban missile crisis erupted in 1962 when the Soviet Union responded to a U.S. missile deployment in Turkey by sending ballistic missiles to Cuba just miles from the United States .
 It sparked a tense two-week standoff that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . The standoff was the first time the North Korea-South Korea nuclear talks began .
 Soviet ships headed for Cuba turned back in the face of a U.S. naval blockade . The crisis was defused when Soviet ships turned back .
 Eventually, the Soviet Union agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba in return for the U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union eventually removed its missiles in exchange for the United States not invading Cuba . Eventually the Soviet Russia agreed to pull the missiles out .
 Washington secretly said it would remove the U.S. missiles from Turkey to avoid a repeat of the near-catastrophe . Washington secretly removed the United States missiles .
 Russia has also been fiercely critical of President Trump's recent withdrawal from the INF arms control treaty . We could find ourselves in a situation where we have a rocket crisis close to the crisis of the 1980s but close to Caribbean crisis, says Deputy Foreign Minister .
 Earlier that month, the United States said it would withdraw from the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty with Russia in six months . The U.S. also announced it would pull out of the treaty .
 Warning came as one of the Russian navy's most advanced warships entered Havana's harbour on Monday . It would do so unless Moscow ended violations of the landmark 1987 arms control pact, although Russia denies any violations . Havana has threatened to sue Russia if it doesn't end the pact .
 It docked at the port used until this month by United States cruise lines with tourists seen taking photos of the imposing vessel .
 The Admiral Gorshkov which entered service last year is armed with cruise missiles, air defence systems and other weapons . It is the first of its kind to enter service in Russia .
 The frigate is based at the Arctic port of Severomorsk and is part of Russia's Northern Fleet . It is based in the Arctic and is the largest Russian naval ship in the world .
 In 1962, leaders of the U.S. and Soviet Union engaged in a 13-day standoff over the installation of nuclear-armed Soviet missiles on Cuba . President Kennedy notified Americans about the presence of the nukes and explained his decision to set up a naval blockade around the island .
 He made it clear the United States was ready to use force to neutralise the threat to its national security . He made clear the U.S. was prepared to take action against the Taliban .
 Following the news, many feared the world was on the brink of nuclear armageddon . Many feared the news of a nuclear war .
 The U.S. accepted Khrushchev’s offer to remove the missiles in exchange for the United States promising not to invade Cuba . However, disaster was avoided when the U.K. accepted the Soviet leader's offer .
 First ship in new class of frigates intended to replace Soviet-era destroyers to project power far away from Russian shores . Ship is the first ship in a new class intended for replacing aging Soviet-style destroyers .
 Kremlin has moved to bolster Russia's military capability amid tensions with the West . The annexation of Crimea in 2014 led to tensions between Russia and the West following Crimea's annexation .
 CNN.com will feature a full transcript of this week's top 10 news stories . Please email us at the end of the article to tell us what you think about our favourite stories .