 The Soviet Union has few nuclear missiles; many cannot reach the United States . Many of the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles can't reach the U.S. Many of its nuclear missiles are located in Russia .
 The Soviet Union does have a massive number of nuclear bombers that can hit the United States . The United States can shoot down many of these planes, yet the U.S. can shoot them down .
 The United States has a huge number of nuclear missiles and nuclear bombers, many of which can hit the Soviet Union . The U.S. has many of the world's most powerful nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union has conventional military superiority in Europe and Cuba . The U.S. has a sizable presence in Cuba, but nothing near the military might the United States can bring to bear .
 The Soviet Union has been trying to push the Western powers out of West Berlin . West Berlin has been a source of tension between Russia and the West .
 A major foreign victory in placing nukes in Cuba would be very helpful to Soviet prestige . The most recent crisis in summer 1961 has not been resolved, and the most recent .
 The United States has tried to invade Cuba by supporting the “Bay of Pigs” invasion in 1961 . The U.S. supported the ‘Bay of Pigeas’ invasion of Cuba .
 KGB agents in Cuba report that the Americans have repeatedly tried to kill Castro . Castro Castro was killed by the Americans in 1959, according to the KGB agents .
 There is a reasonable risk that any missile sites could be discovered before their construction is completed . There is also a risk of discovery before construction is complete .
 Khrushchev’s advisor would have known before the Soviets put missiles in Cuba . Consider only this information and what you would have been able to know .
 Explain in an essay how nuclear war might have occurred if the US, USSR, and/or Cuba had acted differently at that step . Explain how the U.S., USSR, Cuba and Cuba acted differently .
 U.S. responds affirmatively to Khrushchev’s first letter but says that first missiles now in Cuba must be rendered inoperable . United States says it wants quick agreement and urges quick agreement . U.N. says first missiles must be inoperably rendered in
 President Kennedy is debating what to do about the missiles in Cuba, and he needs advice . President Kennedy was debating what he would like to do with Cuba .
 There are nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba; our best estimate is that these missiles are capable of hitting almost any city in America . Our best estimate: These missiles could be able to hit almost any American city .
 We have imposed a “quarantine’s around Cuba to prevent the future installation of any missiles or placement of military forces in that country .
 In practice, this means that we have dispatched the United States Navy to blockade the island . The U.S. Navy has been dispatched to the island to blockade .
 Khrushchev publically announced he would only remove missiles from Cuba if the U.S. pledged never to invade Cuba and to withdraw its missiles from Turkey . But earlier today, he said he only removed the missiles if the United States pledged to never invade Cuba or withdraw its missile missiles
 Spy overflights indicate construction is nearing completion on missile sites . Meanwhile, our spy overflights show that construction is underway on the missile sites in Russia .
 The United States Air Force hopes to strike the Soviet missiles before they are operational . This means that if the U.S. Air Force wants to strike them soon, it will need to do it very soon .
 U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down by Soviet missile over Banes, Cuba, killing pilot . Major Rudolph Anderson was killed by Soviet surface-to-air missile in Cuba .
 Give into Soviet demands to withdraw missiles from Turkey and pledge never to attack Cuba . Adm. give in to Soviet demands that Turkey withdraws missiles and withdraws them .
 Give into Soviet demands to never invade Cuba, but secretly agree to withdraw missiles from Turkey . Also agree to pull missiles out of Turkey, but give in to Soviet demands .
 Since that time, the nuclear disarmament movement has ebbed and flowed . Nuclear disarmament movements have ebbed in and out .
 Today, statesmen including George Shultz, Henry Kissinger, Sam Nunn, and Bill Perry advocate for the elimination of all nuclear weapons in order to avoid nuclear war . Groups like Global Zero advocate for eliminating nuclear weapons .
 Some argue that nuclear weapons are a stabilizing force for world politics . Others argue that this goal is ultimately a fantasy .