 1961 was a common year starting on Sunday of the Gregorian calendar . 1961 was the 1961st year of the Common Era and Anno Domini designations . 1961 is the 61st year in the 20th century, the 2nd year of 1960s decade and the 961st
 MAD Magazine pointed out on its cover for the March 1961 issue, this was the first ""upside-up"" year since 1881 . MAD Magazine said it was first year in which numerals that form the year look the same as when the numerals are rotated upside down, a
 Chinese calendar 4657 or 4597 were both exhausted for lack of sleep, and had taken excessive alcohol at the time of the crash . The crash was the first time the two men had crashed together .
 Italian sculptor Alfredo Fioravanti was part of the team that forged the Etruscan terracotta warriors in the U.S. Consulate in Rome . He confesses to being part of a team forged the sculptures in the Metropolitan Museum of Art .
 Five African chiefs of state announce plans for NATO-type African organization to ensure common defense . January 7 following a four-day conference in Casablanca, five African heads of state announced plans for the organization .
 In France, a referendum supports Charles de Gaulle's policies on independence for Algeria . January 8 in France, France votes to approve a referendum on Algeria's independence . The vote will be held in France on January 8 .
 British authorities announce they have uncovered a large Soviet spy ring, the Portland Spy Ring, in London . January 9 British authorities say they have found a large Russian spy ring in the city .
 President Dwight Eisenhower gives his final State of the Unio n Address to Congress . January 17 at 9 p.m. ET . President Eisenhower delivers his final address to Congress in Washington .
 January 20 John F Kennedy is sworn in as the 35th President of the United States . Kennedy was sworn in in Washington, DC .
 In Washington, D.C., President John F Kennedy delivers the first live presidential news conference . January 25: President Kennedy gives the first televised news conference in Washington, DC .
 The United States tests its first Minuteman I intercontinental ballistic missile on February 1 . February 1 The U.S. testbeds the first missile to be tested in the United States. February 1
 March-April Drilling for Project Mohole is undertaken off the coast of Guadalupe Island, Mexico . John F Kennedy inaugurated as the 35th President of the United States March 22, 1963 .
 These events result in the beginning of the colonial war with Portugal . These events lead to the end of the Portuguese colonial war .
 Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin becomes the first human in space, orbiting the Earth once before parachuting to the ground . The first time a human has been in space was in 1961, when he was the first person in space .
 Four French generals who oppose de Gaulle's policies in Algeria fail in a coup attempt . The coup attempt was a failed coup attempt by four French generals in Algeria .
 As of 2020, this is the last time Tottenham have won the English League . Tottenham will be playing in the Premier League for the first time in their history . Tottenham have been in the top three of the last 16 teams to win the league .
 A Freedom Riders bus is fire-bombed near Anniston, Alabama, and the protestors are beaten by an angry mob of Ku Klux Klan members . The bus was firebombed by the KKK, who attacked it .
 Alabama Governor John Patterson declares martial law in an attempt to restore order, after race riots break out . Governor declares emergency order in response to race riots .
 Freedom Riders are arrested in Jackson, Mississippi, for ""disturbing the peace" after disembarking from their bus . Freedom Riders were arrested for "disrupting the peace", but were not charged .
 President Kennedy announces, before a special joint session of Congress, his goal to put a man on the Moon before the end of the decade . Kennedy: "I want to go to the moon. It's a dream. I want to be there."
 This is later considered the founding of the human rights organization Amnesty International . This was later considered a founding of Amnesty International.
 Ethiopia experiences its most devastating earthquake of the 20th century, with a magnitude of 6.7.7 . The quake was the most devastating in the history of Ethiopia . The earthquake occurred on June 1 .
 The town of Majete is destroyed, 45% of the houses in Karakore collapse and 45% collapse . 17 kilometers of the main road is damaged by landslides and fissures, and 5,000 inhabitants in the area are left homeless .
 Soviet submarine K-19 suffers a reactor leak in the North Atlantic . July 4 Soviet submarine suffered reactor leak . July 1 Soviet submarine suffers reactor leak. July 4 .
 Kennedy urges Americans to build fallout shelters, setting off a four-month debate on civil defense . Kennedy's comments set off a long-awaited civil defense debate in Washington, D.C.
 Soviet cosmonaut Gherman Titov becomes the second human to orbit the Earth . Titov is the first to be in outer space for more than one day . He is the second person to orbit Earth, and the first person to do so in space .
 The Eritrean War of Independence officially begins with the shooting of the Ethiopian police by Hamid Idris Awate . September ■ September 1 ■ The war of independence officially begins in Eritreans' first year .
 The Soviet Union resumes nuclear testing, escalating fears over the ongoing Berlin crisis . The tests are the latest in a series of nuclear tests conducted by the Soviet Union .
 Gene Deitch makes 12 more Tom and Jerry episodes until 1962 . The new creator, Deitch, made 12 more episodes of the series until 1962.
 The still-on-the-air program will be renamed The Wonderful World of Disney . Years later, after Disney's death, after his death, the stillon the air program will name it after the death .
 French police in Paris attack about 30,000 protesting a curfew applied solely to Algerians . French police say the curfew applies only to Algerian citizens . The curfew was imposed on Algerians in Paris .
 A standoff between Soviet and American tanks in Berlin, Germany heightens Cold War tensions . The standoff in Berlin heightens tensions .
 The Soviet Union issues a diplomatic note to Finland, proposing military co-operation . Soviet Union: Finland should join forces with Finland in the Cold War . Finland was the last member of the Soviet Union to join Finland .
 The Hungry generation Movement is launched in Calcutta, India . November ■ November 1 ■ The Hungry Generation Movement was launched . November 2 ■ November 3 ■ November 4 .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro announces he is MarxistLeninist . Cuba will adopt socialism, Castro says . Castro says he is a Marxist Leninist . Castro: Cuba will become socialism .
 One of the closest election results in Australian history, such a result will not be replicated again until 2016 . The closest election result in Australia history will be replicated in 2016 . It will be the first time since 2004 that a result has been replicated in Australia's history .
 Former Prime Minister Earle Page loses his seat, although he dies a few days later, never knowing the result . Page was never elected to a seat, but he died days later .
 Sheila Burnford's The Incredible Journey, a story of three pets travelling through the Canadian wilderness, is published in the United Kingdom . Sheila Burnford’s story of the three pets travelled through the wilderness .
 Hans-Jorg Rheinberger, ""Experimentalsysteme Eine Geschichte der Proteinsynthese im Reagenzglas"" Wallstein; ISBN 3-89244-454j4 10. 10.