 President Kennedy decided on a that Kennedy would behave with the ""same timidity LlU,ockade of Cuba by the United States Navy by the U.S. Navy to preverrt and irrdecision which doomed the Bay of Pigs."" further shipments of military supplies to th
 Many Americans simply held their br:eath and The president deciclec-l to use the word ""quarantine"" iroped that the world would not be consumed in a . insteacl of rhe word ""blockacie"" because itr internanuclear hol
 This option allowed the prc'sident to steer a "" "" Can y ou imagine n ot seeing another Cltris tma s, middle course between ExComm's varied options .
 The Sorriets were installing nuclear rrrissiles in -A Cuba. We're just too young to die."" nounced in a televised speech to the American public Ma ss nchuse tt s s s chool girl that the Sorriet were installing . Sorri
 He told the nation of his clecision to enforce a quarantine of Cuba . What was the Soviet Union's reaction to removed missiles .
 For several hours, there was no rryarnarned that ""many months of sacrifice and self-disresponse" was no one's fault .
 President Kenrredy learned of the Soviet missile build-up in Cuba through his speech . "Like most Americans, they first and our will will be tested.""
 Khrushchev maintained that the U.S. public into supporting the quarantine demissiles in Cuba, regardless of their type, were meant cision of their prersident .
 Stevenson called for a UN vote to condenrn the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba, but the Soviet ambassador to the UN vetoed Stevenson's proposal . Stevenson called on the UN to vote on whether or not to approve the installation .
 The missiles were placed in Cuba infuriated effects of the crisis influenced the lives of many and found expresLatin American governments . Although reactions variecl, the reactions were positive, the missile's impact on Cuba were infuriated .
 One reaction can be found in the words of Latin American leaders also feared Bob Dylan . One reaction to the death of Bob Dylan can be traced to Latin America's leaders .
 Dylan wrote the song ""A Hard Ban support of commullist guerrilla Rain's A-Gonna Fall"" during the missile crisis . Dylan's song was written in support of the commullists in their own countries .
 Rain is a desperatekind of song. What military sfeps did the United States do? "HArd Rain"
 Americans feared that r,var, possiblv -Bob Dylan nuclear . Americans feared the possibility of a nuclear war .
 On October Heard the sound of a clown who cried in the alley, 25, at least a dozen Soviet ships en route en route . And it's a hard rain's a-gonna fall.""
 The DEFCON scale rutrs from five, for peacc'-time conditions, to zero, for a nuclear attack . The scale ruts from five to zero for the threat of a nuclear strike .
 One hundred and eighty-three bombers were clispatched to thirty-three airfields . One hundred-and-a-half of the bombers were used in World War II .
 Ninety United States rruclear missiles were placed at a heightened state of readiness . Ninety U.S. rru clear missiles have been placed at heightened state-of-prepared status .
 ExComm received reports that missiles in Cuba were about to becorne operaletters . Kennedy and his advisers decided to respond only to the first letter and to igrrore the second .
 If the the president offered to Soviets refused to back do\4'n, the U.S. would give assurances against the invasion of Cuba . in return, the United States would launch an air strike, or to invade the island .
 To make nratters more difficult, there was no rnissiles to be rernoved from Cuba unde.r . International assurance that the Soviets exercised complete control observation and supervision .
 No one manded safeguards to ensure that such weapons in Washington knew for sure'if nuclear warheads had would not be placed in Cuba again . That same evening, President Kemredy sent his . assumc'that they werc'on the island .
 Attorney Gerreral Robert F Kennedy to meet sures bearing down on ExContm . Ex-Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Possible possibility of u'ith Soviet ambassador .
 Itobert Kennedy warned change for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Ambassador Dobrynin that events spiraling out Cuba was recorrsidered . During renroving United States Jupiter rnissiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy: Unless the Soviets agreed to remove the a plarr recognized that it slrould not be seen as a pubmissiles, Kennedy stated, the president would order lic trade . Kennedy stated that unless the Soviets agree to remove it, Kennedy would order it removed .
 The first letter, reshould understand that if they ditl not remoae ceived October 26, ‘as an emotional appeal those bases, we would remoai them’
 President apparently composed by Khrushchev himself, calling Kennedy had great respect for the Amhassador's on Kennedy to avoid the catastrophe of nuclear war . The President of the U.S. called Kennedy a man who would not be allowed to go to war .
 We had Khrushchev f'l' letter took a much more hardline on the issue . The U.S. needed an ansroer position, insisting that the United States remove its immediately from the Soaiet Union .
 I saicl zoe nuclear missiles from Turkey in return for a withmust lmae it the next day."" drarwal of Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy found General Robert F Kennedy -Attorney the demancls contained in the second letter unacceptable for two reasons . Kennedy found the demans were unacceptable for the two reasons. Kennedy found his actions unacceptable .
 Kennedy also revearled to Dobrynin that ha'u'e the Jupiter missiles removed . First, Turkey rvas not rvilling t<t llobert Kennedy .
 Turkev and clther the United States missiles in'Iurkey were outmoded and that U.S. allies on the Mediterranean counted on United States methe United States had already made plans before the dium-range nuclear missiles were removed .
 The next day, Premier Khrushchev chose to deagainst thc'missile sites and an invasion of Cuba infuse the confrontation . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at odds over whether to strike .
 Khrushchev massed in Florida to await the president's orders . C)ver 100,000 battle-ready troops had quickly as possible to President Kennedy . ordered that message be broadcast by radio .
 In addition, he narral base at Guantanamo to Cuba, and end the onreceived a cable from Castro from Castro .
 Castro pressed his belief that the U.S. would itrvade his island in the comin6; days and called on Khrushworld . Castro kept chev to launch nuclear missiles at the United States in Cuba on a rar footing .
 A United States destroyer inspects a Soviet ship transporting a missile from Cuba to the Soviet Union in anticipation of a United States invasion . E{Ttlflt *f :$*[{lrff $l|lF. ry$[fr*|.[$ 1
 States continued its naval quarantine and daily reconvinced that thc. Castro was convinced by the quarantine . Castro was convinced that the U.S. would not allow him to leave the country . Castro believed the quarantine was necessary .
 Uniteid States lt'ould not honor its naissance flights during the negotiations . pledge not to invade Culra. pledge to not be invaded .
 Castro saw the arrangement that rethat the Sorriet missiles were neecled to deter United States insolved the missile crisis as a threat tcl Cuba's security . F{er had believec{ all along all along .
 Khrushchev had not only agreed to withdraw the mismissiles, but also to remove a squadron of Soviet sile crisis bombers . Soviet diplomats pressed Castro to accept bombers from the island .
 Castro would not permit U.S. specialists to conre to verify removal of missiles . Castro, however, would not allow the United States to verify the removal of the missiles . "We belieae that besides hazting salaaged zt,  Cuba n peace Jor Cub
 Verification had to take place in inthnt inclttdetl a halt to the econonic blockade, ternational waters . Verification was necessary to stop the blockade of the waters .
 The Sovic't-Cuban talks dragged turning oaer the naa{il hase at Gunntanarno, And on until Novenrber .19 before Castro reluctantly gave an end to nII attacks on Cuba."" his assent to other aspects of the agreement
 President Mikh ail Gorba cheu ln order to avoid a nuclear exchauge', Khrushcllev turned his back on his Cuban ally and came to terms with his Cold War rival . President Ketrnedy said he believed that used in Vietnam and in other cases.""
 Kennedv risked both his ties with Cuba and his country's Soviet relations with the United States . By doing so, the Soviet KennedV focused on building on the opening in leader risked relations with Cuba .
 After the rlissile crisis, a hotlirre was establislated . Khrushchev and Kennedy worked to diminish the to ease communication between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The arratrgenrent featured teletype machines installed in both the Kretnlin and ""If zue cnnnot nou) end our differences" The White House .
 The hotline was reportedly used TDe can help make tlrc world safe for diuersity dozens of times .
 In the final analysis, our ntost basic conrsulting indeadly conflict was reduced. nnn link is the fact that ztte aII inhabit this planet. The risk of a rnisunderstanding reFor, in the final . analysis, was reduced to
 T'he missile crisis also impressed on the minds . We t'tll hreathe the same nir. We ttllhreathe nir . We hope to see more of the same in the future .
 We all cherish our clf Kennedy arrd Khrushchev the dangers of malcing children's future . Kennedy arrrd Khrisschev warned children's futures were at risk of being maligned .
 A close to the unthirrkable horror of a nuclear war, strntegy of anniltilntion, but tozuard n strategy leader:s on both sides recognized the treed to emof peace."" bark on a new path to prevent nuclear c
 By the time of Union, Union, key participants in the 1962 crisis from the the missile crisis, Soviet nuclear capabilify was still far far away . United States, the former Soviet Union, and Cuba met behind United States capabiliry .
 U.S. intelligence in 1962 estion several times to reviertr the events . United States intelligence tried to revivate the events in 1962 .
 The Soviets had no submanuclear missiles in Cuba as well as Castro's rine-launched missiles . They were at a seven-to-one for accepting them in long-range bombers .
 Following the Bay of Pigs invasion, tl're Soviets deal. It naturnlly "" tonrtented our leatlership a great . It was a great success .
 Castro's conviction that the United States sible attack of American missile forces, and aaiawould use force to snuff out communism in Cuba . They believed that nuclear weapons would be a por.trespond'"" erful deterrcnt to a United States in'r'
 Klrrushchev also hclped to address the P r emie r N iki t n Kh r u shchea imbalance .
 The misnuclear warheads (which contains the explosive desiles) would be within strikirrg distance of many major r,'icc' and in the number of missiles .
 Long-range bombers could be used as bargaining chips to with nuclear weapons, and submarine-launchecl misnegotiate a withdrawal of U.S. nuclear forces from siles .
 Concern about a ""missile gap"" created anxiety for placing missiles in Cuba . United States in nuclear missile technology was Khrushchev's primary motive . Concerned about the gap created anxiety about placing missiles .
 Khrushchev felt Soviet missiles in Cuba ening the country's nuclear capability . Under Presiclents Dwight Eisenhower and John Eisenhower, additional funding went towat:d strengthfirmed .
 U.S. policymakers need to realize that many of the missiles in T'urkey. missiles in the United States. United States policymakers carne carne to realize .
 Evidence suggests that their fears were jusAlekseyea, Soztiet Amhassador to -Aleksandr tified. Newly eign missiles at our doorsttp."" discovered evidence suggests that they feared missiles would be launched .
 The head of operational planning Cuba during the crisis for the Soviet General Staff rn1962, General Anatoly Gribkov, said nuclear warheads had indee.d reached Cuba . Aleksandr Alekseyev, Soviet Arnbassador to in the weeks before the r
 The Soviet warheads (as many as 1,62) were designed to be delivered by short . range, tactical nuclear missiles . The United States had not considered the possibility that the U.S. would react as strongly as it did .
 Gribkov said that Castro unhesitatirrgly welcomed the missiles, not only could have been launched by the Soviet cornmander . He thought they would deter a United States attack of in Cuba without authorization from Moscow .
 No one should belieae that a United States force noting, first of all, that this assured an improaecould haae heen attscked hy tactical nuclenr ment in the socialist cAntp's defense capabilities .
 Khrushchev's offer to tnake Cluba was the first a nuclear response . Castro feared an invasion could prclvoke flatterrec{ by Khrushvic's offer .
 Gribkov's revelation proved his communist country, other than the Sclrrit't LJtriotr, in tvorries \t/ere rvcII-founded. which Soviet nuclear missile.s r,r'ould be deplclyed .
 The Cuban leader expressed his belief that the would invade his island in the coming days . In it, he called on Khrushchev to launch at the United States in response to the expected 10.2 million U.S. nuclear weapons attacks .
 Since the end of the Cold War, participants and scholars have met several times to discuss the Cuban missile crisis .