 It was against the background of the arms race that Cuba became a major flashpoint of the Cold War . The Cuban Islands were a major Cold War flashpoint .
 President of the USA between 1961-1963 . He was the first Catholic and the youngest President ever of the U.S. John F Kennedy .
 This did not occur due to a military coup by General Fulgencio Batista . General Batista was overthrown by the Batista government in the 1930s .
 For two years Cuba and the USA maintained a frosty relationship but without any direct confrontation . Attempts at Containment 1959 – 1961 were attempts to contain Cuba .
 Cuban troops met by 20,000 Cuban troops armed with tanks and modern weapons . They were met with tanks, modern weapons and modern-style tanks .
 Results of Bay of Pigs Invasion: Loss of prestige within the U.S. and the rest of the world for Kennedy . Kennedy's loss of prestige in the United States .
 The CIA carried out numerous assassination attempts against Castro . Castro was assassinated by the CIA in the 1960s .
 Stories about plots against Castro include exploding cigars, poison in milkshakes, training his ex-girlfriend to shoot him . CIA documents confirmed in recently published CIA documents, hiring the Mafia to kill Castro .
 Fidel Castro has gone on to survive ten U.S. Presidents . Fidel Castro survived the Bay of Pigs and has survived ten Presidents .
 He thought anyone so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten . Anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through, had not guts. He thought that anyone who got in that mess was able to be beaten, he said .
 Cuba suffered as a result of U.S. policy during the Batista regime . Cuba's economic colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, he says .
 Castro: "I believe that, without being aware of it, we conceived and created the Castro movement, starting from scratch" The Castro movement is "starting from scratch," Castro says .
 The USSR did not make any attempt to camouflage the sites, and even allowed the missiles to travel on open deck . What is more interesting is that the USSR made no attempt at camouflaging .
 To test the USA, missiles were designed to see how strong the Americans really were – whether they would back off or face up . In the strained atmosphere of Cold War politics the missiles were intended to test the U.S.
 Khrushchev wanted the Americans to find them and be drawn into a nuclear war . The Americans would have been drawn into nuclear war if they found the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was so concerned about the missile gap between the USSR and the USA that he would seize any opportunity he could to close it . He seized any opportunity to close the gap in the arms race .
 On October 14, 1962, a U.S. spy plane flew over Cuba .
 On Tuesday 16th October 1962, President Kennedy was informed for the discovery . October 1962 Aerial photograph of missiles in Cuba issued by the United States Embassy in London on 23 October 1962 .
 The USA could still destroy the Soviet Union so – – – the argument went – the USSR would never use these missiles . The argument was that the U.S. could still use the missiles to destroy the USSR . The USSR never used these missiles so the USA could destroy them, the
 The biggest danger to world peace would be to overreact to this discovery, he says . The discovery could be a disaster for world peace, he warns .
 An immediate selected air attack to destroy the nuclear bases themselves . An immediate selection of air attack would destroy the bases themselves. An immediate air attack was planned .
 All-out invasion of Cuba by air and sea would get rid of the missiles and Castro as well . An invasion would get the missiles out of Cuba .
 A ban of the Soviet Union bringing in any further military supplies to Cuba was enforced by the U.S. Navy . The United States navy would stop and search Soviet ships . The ban was imposed by the United States Navy .
 Kennedy receives letter from Khrushchev saying that Soviet ships will not observe the blockade . Kennedy receives a letter of support for the blockade of Soviet ships . Crisis Timeline: Kennedy received a letter from the Soviet leader .
 At 10:32am, 20 Soviet ships which are closest to the zone stop or turn around . Then suddenly, at 10:30am, at . 32am, Russia's 20 closest ships stopped or turned around in the zone . The 20 ships were in the area at the time
 He also decides to ignore the second Khrushchev letter, but accepts the terms suggested by the former leader on 26th October .
 He says that if the Soviet Union does not withdraw, an attack will follow . He says Russia will withdraw if it is not withdrawn .
 Kennedy’s personal prestige increased after the crisis . Results of the crisis: For the U.S. and for the country .
 It shocked the United States into realising the fragility of its own personal security . The U.S. has increased the focus on building up military strength .
 The Caribbean Crisis was a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career . The Caribbean crisis was the 'victory' of the Soviet Union's foreign policy . The crisis was a 'personal triumph' of his own career.
 President Kennedy will be remembered as the President who helped to bring the thaw in the Cold War . Khrushchev’s Memoirs in 1971 .
 He recognised how frightening were the consequences of misunderstandings between East and West . That crisis left its mark on him, he said . He said: 'I recognise how frightening it was to see the consequences'
 Even after it was all over made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for his administration for what had occurred . President Kennedy’s obituary in the British Newspaper, The Guardian .
 He instructed all that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory . No statement should be made, he instructed all . He instructed everyone to stay away from the press .
 He respected Khrushchev for properly determining what was in his own country’s interests and in the interests of mankind, he said .