 This study launches the Naval Historical The 1958 Taiwan Strait crisis . Atlantic Fleet Center's new series entitled The United States Navy in diplomatic ship visits to European ports .
 The purpose of the series is 1991 disaster relief operations i n Bangladesh, to inform today's naval personnel and other the maritime embargo of Iraq i n Desert . The series is a look at the contributions made by the naval Storm and the Inchon landing in Koservice .
 The United States Navy and the Cuban Missile ashore, strengthened regional alliances, and Crisis, by Curtis A Utz of our Contemporary fostered the growth of democratic and free History Branch, lead off our new series .
 Dennison was responsible for readying Army, Air Force, Marine, and Navy assault forces for a possible invasion global nuclear war . The fall of 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union came as close as they ever would to military power in such a way that the
 He also served as the correct what he saw as a that his missile and bomber Commander in Chief, United States Atstrategic imbalance with the forces were no match for the forces .
 Khrushchev began tic missile-firing submarines and Marine forces of the subsecretly deploying medium and the Air Force's land-based ordinate Second Fleet, under range ballistic missiles nuclear delivery systems . The aircraft car .
 U.S. naval gunfire, and amto Fidel Castro's under the United States Atlantic strikes from the sea Cuba . Comphibious strikes from Cuba Cuba .
 Once operational, these mand, headed by Admiral against Soviet and Cuban nuclear-armed weapons could be used by Robert L Dennison forces ashore . Once operational they could be deployed against Soviet or Cuban nuclear weapons .
 With speed and have been fired against cities ,steamed out to efficiency, other fleet units reand military targets in most sea . Intercepted not only merinforced the Marine garrison of the continental United States, but intercepted shipping en route to Guantanamo on Cuba's States .
 U.S. intelligence disoperating in the area as well. ated American civilians. covered Khrushchev's brash United States destroyers and frigates, Dennison .
 Undermaritime support operations known as the Cuban Missile way replenishment by oilers carried out by Canadian, Crisis, President John F and stores ships .
 Khrushchev faced with the ment, armed forces, and Radar picket ships supported armed might of the United public compelled the Soviets by Navy fighters and Navy fighters . The United States and its allies, had little to remove from Cuba not only early warning planes, but also the U.
 The United States Navy played a ing to defend American and his country . Defense Command in preparwhich he had placed himself himself . The U.S. Defense Command was in charge of the Navy .
 President played a pivotal role in the Cuban crisis . Airspace from Soviet and Kennedy did not press the addemonstrating the critical imCuban forces .
 Navy aerial vantage that the strength of U.S. naval forces to naphotographic and patrol United States and allied naval and . allied naval forces . U.N. aerial vantage vantage .
 Soviet leader was with its strategic doctrine, deployment of Soviet offensive able to peacefully disengage which is as valid today as it weapons into Cuba . The Navy's aircraft played a vital part military forces gave him .
 The Navy, in monitoring their withdrawal serious of Cold War confrontacooperation with the other by sea, tions. tions . The Navy was in the midst of a Cold War confrontation with the each other .
 As the unified commander America's allies, employed for the Caribbean, Admiral U.S.-Soviet Conflict in the . Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev emphasizes a point by striking a table during a Paris press conference in May 1960 .
 The Soviet Union of dictator Joseph Stalin and his successors sidering the likeihood that the U.S. would discover the ploy and respond by threatening war . The Soviets hoped that the United States would respond to the threat with war .
 Seated next to Khrushchev is Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet Defense Minister . Seated with Khrushchev, Malinovski was the Soviet defense minister . Seating next to him is the Soviet leader's wife .
 Communists and anti-Communists in what came to be forced the nations of eastern and in Asia known as the Cold War . The Cold War is now known as 'The Cold War' in the region .
 U.S. responded to allies against Axis powers in the eastern Mediterranean . ComCommand fielded range, surface-launched ballistions with economic assisarray of medium and longtic missiles .
 In tance, like that embodied in range bombers capable of addition, the Marshall Plan for western devastating the major Soviet missile to lift the SputEurope .
 In addition, military and urbadindustrial nik satellite into orbit around Washington sponsored centers in the Soviet Union in October 1957 military assistance to and al. the globe in October .
 The Navy also strategic systems, some in the the spread of Soviet power commissioned several subAmerican national security esand communist ideology . Marines that carried the surtablishment worried that the Serious clashes of interest face-launched, nuclear-armed United States no longer held between the United States
 The issue took on national curred over Berlin in 1948, China in 1949, Korea in Korea in the nuclear-armed intercontinenpresidential election of 1960 early 1950s . Laos in the late 1950s, Laos in late tal ballistic missiles when many Americans be1950s, and
 The Soviets and submarine launched balgap"" between the United supported Chinese, Korean, listic missiles taken States and the USSR. and Vietnamese Communist to sea in the Navy's new . Even though this issue guerrillas and conventional George Washington-class helped Senator John F. Kennedy . Senator
 The Soviets killed few allies, the United States themselves, but beStates deployed IRBMs to learned from intelligence sourcause Moscow was the power Great Britain, Italy, and ces that the U.S. behind international com. Turkey .
 The power of the United States had far more nuclear weapon munism . The patron of nuclear arsenal was tremendelivery systems and waranti-American action .
 The U.S. regarded the USSR as their recounting a SAC briefing on earlier surveillance missions prime antagonist . This the globe, United States leaders tack, to quote a Navy officer .
 Roswell L Gilpatric made a Thomas Edison underway in the Atlantic in 1962 . In the 1950s, the Navy also developed several submarines to carry short .
 The Ethan Allemclass carried 16 Polaris ballistic missiles and isted was in favor of the and political afront . This submarine and speech proclaiming that the in a threatening public state . were a key component of the United States strategic deterrent force .
 Khrushchev country a t odds with the U.S. These improved ties eventuallyknew the true balance of the United States. Khrushvic country was at odds with Soviet Union .
 By the spring ly resulted in the Cuban Mispower, but to have it revealed of 1962, the Soviet premier sile Crisis . The Cuban Crisis was the spring of the Cuban mispower .
 The United States ousted Spain from Spain from the years later this group landed them, Cuba and the Caribbean and took possesnear Santiago, Cuba . The group hoped United States shared much sion of Cuba and Puerto Rico to inspire a rebellion against history .
 Christopher Columbus of Cuba opened the Western Hemi during the next half-cento flee into the Sierra Maestra sphere to Europe in 1492 . Spain colonized by Spain soon after, and forced Castro of Cuba to flee .
 The United States came to Cuba in the late nineteenth century, to dominate Cuban foreign policy . Cuba had become the world's and domestic policy .
 Act of Castro sparked the revolution largest sugar producer and a Congress . Many Cubans then key economic asset of Spain. ment, until repealed in 1934, longed for. ment .
 He dispatched That European kingdom, then provided for U.S. military . units that provided for United States military insmall guerrilla units . Cuba .
 The United States had developed imporeconomy, especially the sugar recruited more rebels, and tant economic interests in industry . At addition, United States companies ly, revolutionaries in the cities the same time, the U.S. controlled the Cuban distributed propaganda .
 Cubans increasingly blew up government build . Central America and the resented this strong American ings. Cubans .
 The government of the reduced to a few pockets of power in the Western HemiRepublic of Cuba was a resistance, Batista fled into sphere . On New Year's Day Caribbean, and staked its presence in their country .
 In 1895, long-simmering cut repeated attempts at his supporters entered Cuban opposition to rule reform . Corrupt politicians exile in the Dominican States and a decrepit Spain and military strongmen Republic. headed for a clash. stifled democracy .
 General Fulgencio Havana to the cheers of the of the Spanish monarchy Batista, who seized power in capital's jubilant populace .
 Many 1952, proved to be one of the tially, the new leader did not Americans were sympathetic most ruthless of Cuban publicly embrace any social or to the Cuban insurgents .
 He held onto power political ideology, but stressed When the battleship Maine, through graft and the suppreshis credentials as a Cuban on a port visit to Havana in 1961 .
 Fidel Castro promised the 1898, exploded and sank, the One of Batista's early opCuban people prosperity, U.S. Congress blamed the ponents was Fidel Castro .
 26 July 1953, the former liberty through the efforts of declared war . On equality, justice, and personal Spanish authorities and 26 . July 1953 .
 Years later, exlawyer and political extremist his revolutionary movement. amination of the wreck sugled a small band of supporters . Castro and his gested that the American in an attack on the Moncada revolutionaries had suffered an interarmy barracks .
 Castro estabsunk by a Spanish torpedo or lowers were captured and lished an increasingly mine, as first suspected, thrown into prison . Castro was believed to have been killed by a mine or a torpedo .
 Photo Interpreters first discovered mlssile sites west of Havana, Cuba, near the towns of San Cristobal and Guanajay .
 U-2 photography also revealed MRBM and IRBM sites on the northern coast of central Cuba, close to the towns of Sagua La Grande and Remedios .
 Castro began a n agrarian reform program that involved the expropriation of over $1 billion worth of American holdings . Castro expropriated $1billion worth of U.S. holdings .
 The trend of events in Cuba appalled U.S. President Dwight D Eisenhower and the leaders of his administration . Eisenhower and his administration were appalled by the situation in Cuba .
 The American government first pressed Castro to moderate his behavior and Cuban leader Fidel Castro meets with when this brought no genuine Soviet Premier Khrushchev at the United States . The U.S. government strongly criticized the Cuban leader's government .
 The president directed the the the United States prompted increased for the deposed Batista Central Intelligence Agency . Soviet and Cuban cooperation in the poregime and America's long to plan, support, and litical, economic, and military spheres .
 Castro railed against the ministration, the United States nation . Castro's ground forces sealed United States government for al security establishment off the beachhead . He publicly and incoming Kennedy adments and ammunition .
 The U.S. responded by placing an embargo on nearly Second Fleet steaming just to prison . Washington responded by 1961, with ships of the United States . over the horizon .
 In 1959, he signed a treaty break out of the beachhead. the Soviet Union . They were hampered by the Leninist ideology. In Septemanti-Castro .
 In May importation of Cuban sugar, lack of adequate training, Day 1961 address . Castro anformerly a valued U.S. imweapons, and equipment .
 The next year, President Kennedy thousands of his compatriots quested and received Soviet refused to provide them with military equipment . Thousands of compatriots sought and received military equipment from the Soviet Union .
 On 3 air support for fear of making Cuban revolution was a January 1961, 1961, President United States involvement in the ""socialist"" revolution . President U.S. involved in the revolution .
 Cuba air force sank two of the U.S. ships . Soviet military buildup in Cuba soon followed .
 Egypt provided a stable platform for specially designed cameras . As with other third world nations like Egypt, it provided a platform for special cameras .
 The Soviet downing of Francis Gary Powers' U-2 over the planes photographed Soviet and bloc ships as they neared Cuba . The planes were photographed as they approached Cuba .
 Photographic interpreters often could tell the and Indonesia, Soviet arms Ural Mountains in 1960 with type and amount of military shipments to Cuba came in SA-2 surface-to-air missiles material . material being transported by stages, starting with small restricted the planes' noting if the merchant
 The CIA obtained much of the merchant vessels from merchant vessels . The U.S. had been observing the Soviet Union throughout the spring .
 Soviet and EastSoviet ""technicians" who developed in the mid-1950s to ern Bloc vessels in the traveled under common RusI gather intelligence on the Bosporus Strait and in the sian names to deceive United States in Soviet Union and the ComMediterranean .
 The U-2 flew a t Naval Station , Bermuda, where Soviet and Naval Air Station as ""the engineer Petrov."" fighters could not operate efJacksonville, Florida, over .
 I NHC 5-446-B photographed the Soviet freighter Krasnogradas she steamed for Cuba in September 1962, probably carrying S S 4 missiles .
 President Kennedy's Bavy and Marine aviators Byina the Vought s u ~ e s s f umanagement l of the Cuban Misails FSU-IP Cmsader camied out many of the vital aircraft . Later that doubled the number of 0-2 1 U
 The aircrafk was a good plakforrn for positions onto each role af f lm, producing a medium s r high-altitude aerial photogaphie stereo image .
 The resolutrtion of w o ~kbstrt , its carn~$~ras groved less thsn satiafw . The resolvertion was made for low-levellwork . The p h o t o o ~ t o ~ a p h
 RF-101s could be equipped missile crisis Bights, g5-2 pilot Major Rudolf with some of the best cameras then a~ailable, Anderson, USAF, paid the dkimate price for his Air Farce tactical remnnaissance squadrons over Cuba .
 This aircraft, while ungainly in appearance, was able to fly long distances at great speed .
 The wings were so delicate that they needed wheeled supports, called "pogos," when the aircraft was on the ground . The wings of the U.S. Air Force One were limited to two missions per month .
 Soviet-built Komar-class 41 to NAS Key West, any missiles. guided missile boat off Florida .
 VF-41 refugees began reporting that firmed the presence of 13 was one of the best intercepSoviet SA-2 antiaircraft misSoviet-built patrol vessels . U-2 photography taken 29 equipped with state-of-the-art untoward .
 SA-2s stantially improved the coastrouble spots of the world would soon be deployed on the tal defense capabilities of the heightened SovietUnited States tenisland, and on 22 August so small Cuban Navy .
 In late August, a U-2 put to sea only a few aircraft unintentionally . Kennedy ordered another U.2 old World War I1 frigates and entered Soviet airspace over mission .
 Even these older vessels, USSR's Pacific coast . information from this flight however, were not toothless . When the information was passed on to the Soviet Union, it was difficult to read .
 The Kenadded to the growing internaHavana that would soon acnedy administration lodged a tional anxiety . The Ken added to the . growing internanxiety .
 Senator Kenneth Keating the beginnings of an overall, United States armed forces would . employ all means necessary ficial access to intelligence, work for Cuba, not just for their own protection . Analysts diplomatic protest with Cuba, a midterm Congressional elecdecided that these sites were .
 Castro personally denied there were Soviet SAMs in Cuba . McCone concluded that the Cuban involvement in the troops in Cuba was Cuban involvement .
 Keating principal target for the SAMs episode but also used the ocaccused the Kennedy adminiwould be his U-2s .
 August images also revealed a that Cuba's airspace had been information . The 29 casion to remind the world stration of covering up this August images .
 Missile site that overlooked violated numerous times by of Congress called for a U.S. several possible amphibious foreign military aircraft . This blockade of Cuba to compel landing areas near the city of was an obvious reference to Soviet withdrawal .
 Some Democratic leadmission flown on 5 September ber mission, flown over easters demanded even more . additional sites near ern and central Cuba, also aggressive action by Kennedy . likely landing areas . Some Democratic leaders demanded more locations of landing sites .
 Intelrevealed the presence of first MiG-21 . Intel revealed the existence of the Soviet-made MiG21 . The domestic and internationdeduced that these were installafighters .
 These planes had the al political arenas, and in postions contained SS-2-C coaspotential to shoot down a U-2 . The planes were the most recent . session of the . most recent tal defense missiles . These planes were . the most . recent session of
 In response to this new inaerial intelligence, Kennedy responded . Kennedy responded with a map of military and naval lnstallatlons .
 LC Geography and Map Divisim responded to the Cuban probground missiles . The map was published by LC Geology and Map Division .
 In statements to the reminded Dobrynin that the Security Advisor McGeorge press on 4 and 13 September, United States monitored Bundy argued . Bundy argued that the . president revealed that Soviet activity in Cuba closemation obtained from the misthe United States knew ly .
 Major General plied that the U.S. Adlai Stevenson, the United States AmMarshall ""Pat"" Carter and could tolerate their presence . Robert Kennedy disagreed .
 The weapons would be placed in over Cuba be stopped and president added sternly, Cuba. that henceforth the U-2s fly . During the first week of deception orchestrated from coastline from coastline .
 Anatoly Dobrynin met suspicions in September, Soviet AmbasMoscow to reduce U.S. periphery brought back litsador Anatoly Dzhrynin .
 Khrushchev kept tle useful information and with several members of the Dobrynin in the dark about revealed nothing about operaKennedy administration .
 Acthe action long after approvtions in the interior of the isting on directions from ing deployment of the offenland . Actheaction long after . approvations in the . interior of . the interior on directions on directions of the . isting . The action was not
 Despite Robert Kennedy's Soviet merchantmen, howKennedy, the president's statement regarding the conever, continued to pay younger brother, that the president continued to . that the tinued close surveillance of dividends .
 An aerial Soviet buildup in Cuba was of Cuba, the presence there of photograph of the Soviet no significance . The presence of a Soviet presence in Cuba is of no significance to Cuba .
 Kasimov showed ten Kennedy that no offensive the danger to the U-2s . Kasimov assured SAMs and fighters increased freighter freighter increased freighters .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff in the fall of 1962, IeR to rlght. T mt .-4,d United States ~ i l i t a t a Preparations r~ 'm president was not Cuba but never exam. 'm he was not president
 Cuds E Leready was asked to sound the ined his military's various military's alarm over Soviet acplanning documents . He asked Maxwell D Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Of -ft; GeorgeWAnder, Chief of Staff; Army Gen. Gen. Cuds
 Adma son, Chief of Naval Operations; and tainly, he was not planning to combat operations would unenen . Cerprobing questions about how he planned to conduct combat operations .
 Given Soviet activity in the Atlantic, the president activated there, however, prudence dicsingle ship stood watch in the any of the CINCLANT .
 Anti-Submarine Warfare of Staff instructed Admiral In 1961, after the Bay of Forces, Atlantic, led by Vice Dennison to deploy naval Pigs disaster, Admiral Edmund B Taylor, forces off eastern Florida .
 The of Staff had directed Admiral conducted regular antisubmaaircraft carrier . Independence Dennison's Atlantic Command rine hunter-killer op .
 One for attacks on all long-range P2V, P3V, and sites of one type (e.g., all SAM P5M patrol aircraft based a t sites); and one for a broad, naval stations and facilities large-scale air assault .
 The U.S. Navy is situated in the Atlantic Marine, Air Force, and Air Force units and the Caribbean . It is situated around the Atlantic and Caribbean .
 They inwould be involved in these opcluded Argentia, Newfounderations, as appropriate, they said . They would be involved with Argentia as appropriate .
 Norfolk on the 11th accompanied by destroyers English and Air Force components and its Tactical Air Command , Hank , also enhanced their readiness .
 Aircraft Wing 2 deployed their alert status and preposielements of Marine Aircraft tioned supplies i n the south .
 The Air Squadron 11, Det., lands on board West and NS Roosevelt Roads Force moved selected squad squad .
 Essex, whose crew is unaware of the crisis brewing in Washington, heads for Guantanamo, Cuba, and a training evolution in mid-October 1962 . Essex's crew was unaware that the crisis was brewing .
 This ship was a key component of the fleet's antisubmarine warfare force . The ship was also a key part of the CVSG-60 fleet's anti-submarine force .
 A Gallant Old Lady T h e t h e antisubmarine warfare support carembarked CVSG-60 off Quonset Point, Rhode Isrier Essex . Essex was the oldest carrier in the land, and headed for Guantanamo Bay, Cuba .
 In 1940, she was the lead ship of a carrier equipment aboard . She was scheduled for six weeks class of 24 vessels .
 She saw extensive action in the Pacific, suffering a steamed into Guantanamo on Friday, 19 Ockamikaze attack .
 Captain Gerard S Bogart set aside Sunday service during the Korean War and received four the 21st as a liberty day .
 At 0330 on the 21st, the order ""reveille, 1955 with an angled flight deck and other imreveille" echoed throughout the carprovements, she served as an attack carrier rier . Modernized in at 0330, she was ordered to have an angled
 In mid-1962, Essex was overhauled in the New . The ship was sent to an ASW support carrier .
 New electrical and dent would make an important address . The next sonar equipment made her one of the most night. New electrical . and dent .
 New sonar, Iconorama, and electronic counterEssex operated a t sea for the next 26 days .
 Carrier's aircraft and sonar and her escorting by Commander Robert L Severns tracked a submarine contact-Soviet included two antisubmarine squadrons, an Foxtrot-class submarine F945 .
 VS-34 and VS-39 flew Grumman S2F complex new equipment, while HS-9 operated Sikorsky HSS-2 great effectiveness . VS-33 and VS39 flew with Trackers, while VS-9 flew Sikorski HSSs-2
 Detachment 9 of VAW-12 flew Grumtrained officers and bluejackets of the United States Navy man WF-2 Tracers . The planes could now be able to adapt to changing situations .
 For their outoperated from Essex because of new data link standing performance during the Cuban Missile gear installed during the 1962 refit . For their . performance, standing performance has improved .
 The ""Milk Run" U-2 Mission of E vents in the Caribbean were removed . Ground crews removed the and the people in them .
 Art took a dramatic turn film from his aerial camera Lundahl, who put it on a plane bound passed the information to his American aircraft resumed for Washington . Lundahl's film was taken from his camera on 14 October .
 Navy specialsuperiors a t CIA headquarflights over Cuba rather than ists processed the film and ters, who i n turn alerted Naaround the island's periphery the following day . For the first time, United States Air the CIA's National PhotoMcGeorge Bundy was
 U-2 flew over western ery that immediately turned and his chief national security Cuba, and landed a t McCoy the routine ""milk run"" misadvisors .
 The photo interpreters discovMRBM site located on the SAM activity over the Comered a new missile site meant 14th. Havsion into an intelligence coup. to identify and describe the ing encountered no MiGs .
 Lundahl also pointed NHC 5-446-B . Lundahl described the night mission as ""a milk run."" Lundahl was captured by an Air Force U-2 plane from 14 miles on 14 October 1962 .
 The CIA's skilled photo interpreters used special light tables and stereoscopes to verify that the Soviets had this MRBM site under construction . The CIA was able to find out that the site was under construction in the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy listened to discovered that Soviet military personnel were hard at work on the presentation calmly . Kennedy listened and listened to the presentation .
 According to Army General date date nuclear-armed, medium range ballistic missiles Maxwell D Taylor, only re. date date date . According to the Army General Date, only . date . date of date .
 The Cuban Missile point only 90 miles from Florida, were a different matter . The Cuban missile point was 90 miles away from Florida .
 Khrushchev's plan to secretly transport SS-4 Sandal missiles to Cuba was carried out . Each Sandal carried a two or three-megaton nuS McNamara ordered .
 SS-4s could strike high-level U-2 flights but low within two miles of a target from 1,020 nautical miles away . They could also strike U.2 flights and reconnaissance reconnaissance flights .
 This put a t risk the entire southeastern United States, including the cities of Dallas, Dallas, Texas; St. Louis, Louisiana; and St. Martin, Louisiana . Chief of This put an entire southeastern U.S. at risk .
 Washmiral George W Anderson, ington, D.C.-the nation's capital. St. Louis, Missouri; and Washmiror George W. Anderson, Ington, Washington, DC .
 Sandal concurred with Art Lundahl's could hit the Panama Canal, all of Central America, and part of the Navy's of northern South America . The Sandal could also hit Central America .
 The U.S. Light Photographic Squadron was best suited for bors in the Western Hemisphere . The Soviet SS-5 Skean was the most threatening to the United States and her neigh62 . The SS-2 Skean were best suited to bors .
 VFP-62, intermediate range ballistic missiles for which four launching based at NAS Cecil Field outsites were being built in Cuba when the crisis unfolded . The missiles were based in Jacksonville, Florida, with four launching bases .
 The Central Intelliwas then perhaps the finest gence Agency estimated that these weapons each carried a low-level photoreconnaissance three to five-megaton warhead that was several hundred organization in the United States militimes .
 The men of the Navy could reach out to 2,200 nautical miles and impact within two squadron were especially miles of its intended target . The men could also impact within 2,000 nautical mile of their target .
 From Cuba, the Soviets skilled in navigation, instrucould devastate any city or military site as far north as Canada, and as far south as Lima .
 Fortucollection techniques, and nately, none of these weapons reached Cuba . None of the weapons were ever used in Cuba .
 Even their aircraft, F8U-1P Crusadas Kennedy announced establishment of quarantine, the ers, were equipped with speSoviet freighter Poltava, with launch rings for SS-5 cial cameras .
 Admiral Admiral stowed on her deck, and perhaps missiles in her holds, was en en en route to the island . Anderson alerted the squad to the squad, which is now on its way to Haiti .
 Khrushchev might have been less willing to ready a detachment for to compromise if his deception was discovered after these leoperations over Cuba .
 The squadron deployed six F8U-1P Crusaders along with ground support personnel to NAS Key West . By the thalal weapons had become operational .
 A detachment from Marine Composite Reconnaissance Squadron 2 joined VF'P-62 at Jacksonville . Several days later, a detachment from the squadron joined the base .
 The president assembled a group of defense, intelligence, and diplomatic officials to assist him in handling the crisis . Meanwhile, the president assembled in Washington, D.C., to assist with the situation .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or EXCOM, included Rusk, McNamara, McCone, Bundy, General Taylor, Robert Kennedy, Dean Acheson, and Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, as well as other specialists . The EXCOM was the first National Security
 The president weighed sites in most of North America and northern South America . Soviet SS-4 Sandal MRBMs could hit targets in southern and east U.S. President Kennedy made the key decision .
 Khrushchev had for the military option, as would be followed by the amwillfully deceived them over some of the chiefs of staff phibious and airborne landthe missiles, the president might have had they been preings laid out in OPLAN 3 16 .
 The second option suggested mediately rejected mediately rejecting the third ity of the EXCOM members the combined use of military option . In any case, the majorThe major
 Military action were cautious about launchpressure and diplomatic negohad several adherents, paring combat operations . The military action was cautious about .
 No one could predict how the Soviets ets to remove their offensive and Taylor . No one tiation, compelling the Soviticularly McCone, Acheson, could predict .
 The and several others feared that this stage, however, was a different . The group did not rule out a military recombination of force and a large number of civilian and sponse .
 General Taylor was Chairthat the second option held on inducing the Soviets to man of the Joint Chiefs of the most promise that the withdraw their weapons in ex-Staff, General Taylor . Taylor was the United States use military pressure, short of outright hostilities, to force Khrushchev to back
 EXCOM analyzed the pros and cons of various actions, and new intelligence reached them that raised the anxiety level . The EXCOM was analyzing the pros/cons of various options .
 The U-2missions flown on 17 October revealed construction activity in an area, just west of Havana, that was soon ideniified as a launching site . On 18 October, the president met with for Soviet SS-5 Skean IRBMs .
 On Kennedy was in possession of photos SS-4 and had twice the range . These weapons were more acGromyko at the White House than the Soviets .
 NPIC coned Ambassador Dobrynin listic missile sites in Cuba, but he was not yet ready to confront Gromyko with firmed that the Soviets had and Soviet Foreign Minister this evidence . October, the president met revealing the construction of Soviet bal bal bal .
 Gromyko assured the president that the Soviet Union had not and would not introduce offensive weapons into Cuba . The Soviet Union did not want offensive weapons introduced into Cuba, he said .
 RAdm. Gerald L Coffee and Arthur R Day, two VFP-62 naval aviators, discuss aerial photographic operations . Coffee and Day talk about aerial photographic ops . Coffee, Day, Day and Coffee discuss aerial photography .
 Because of its skilled personnel, excellent planes, and advanced cameras, military leaders considered the squadron firstrate .
 United States Forces Converge as the W hether the president task groups, a n underway United States moved toward ordered air, amreplenishment group, shoretheir staging areas and ~hibious.or airborne based Fleet Air Wing 11 .
 Several aircraft wings Union, nonhostile activities, That same day Dennison orof the Air Force's TAC flew to or a combination of actions, dered the A3J heavy attack Tyndall, McCoy, and Homes . Several aircraft wings Union nonhost
 The Air Defense Comreorganized its command them, twenty Marine A4D mand also moved F-104 interteam . The Air Force Comreordered its command .
 The 1st and 2nd Inordered Vice Admiral Horacio close air support strikes than fantry Divisions prepared for Rivero, Jr., to fill Ward's the A3Js . Ward's A3Js were used to provide air support .
 Commander Second action, and the 1st Armored former billet a s Commander Fleet also deployed . Atlantic squadrons from two carrier started moving to its embarkaFleet .
 Georcommanded the unified Atlanarea. gia. Gia. Dennison, who not only air groups in the Jacksonville. point, Savannah, Georgia .
 The Army also ordered tic Command but its naval . To help deter Khrushchev Hawk missile battalions and . component, the United States Atlantic from launching a surprise atantiaircraft automatic . weapons .
 Joint Chiefs Marine Corps units also Enterprise, with Carrier Air of Staff alerted American Group 6 embarked, sortied strategic forces .
 "USS Proteus" was painted by George from Norfolk on 19 October . SAC bombers and Gray bombers were seen in the painting .
 A submarine tender provides Navy spokesmen stated that ICBMs of the Air Force and alongside support to a Polaris fleet balshe sailed to escape the efthe ballistic missile sublistic missile submarine .
 The press was skeptical because no other Navy's new Polaris subships left port a t the same marines, based a t Holy Loch, time. By mid-October, six of the skeptical marines had left port .
 Enterprise stood out for Scotland, had deployed to the waters north of the their battle stations in the Bahamas . Enterprise was the first ship to be deployed in the UK to join the Royal Navy .
 On the West Coast, takes on fuel from the aircraft carrier InCuba contingency plans . The aircraft carrier is in the process of refueling .
 By this method of resupply, called underway replenish the East Coast, I1 Marine Exactivation of the Fifth Marine Ment . smaller ships of the fleet were peditionary Force, under comExpeditionary Brigade .
 Major General General General Major General posed of four battalions from crisis . Comable to remain on station throughout the mand of Major General Gen. Major General .
 Frederick L Weiseman, got the 1st Marine Division, this ready to embark in the ships brigade . The brigade would embark in Amphibious Group 4 .
 Amphibious Group 3 readied themselves for Cuban force included four BLTs and which would then transit the operations into the operations. armored and antitank supPanama Canal into the Carib.
 Services held a number of landing exercises in America's closest allies of the the quarantine force . Additional Marine of Cuba of Cuba, if that became necescesces .
 The men had lished several guidelines for quarantine . Admiral trouble moving inland bethe quarantine .
 The group eastern-most point of land in wanted to prevent further Cuba . The group wanted to stop further further Cuba.
 Destroyer Squadron based at Mayport, based at . Mayport . Khrushchev . reversed his earlier decision to line ""Walnut."" as these decisions were base missiles on the island made, .
 Over the next three marines, surface warships, and days, Bigelow and Wiland patrol aircraft could exliam. Over the past three marines and surface warships could examine the situation .
 C Lawe , Mcecute that mission without Caffery and Forrest firing a shot . Forrest Forrest fires a shot at Forrest for the first time in a mission . Forrest, Forrest and Mcemute were on the mission .
 No Royal left port for government's permission was their stations on the ""Walnut"" required to deploy a powerful line . Moreover, no Royal left Port for government approval was required .
 Cruisers, other United States fleet into the Atlantic or destroyers, and support ships the Caribbean to establish a sailed from the naval bases at naval bases around the isNorfolk; Charleston, South land of Cuba .
 On the 2 lst, Admiral and search any ship Anderson briefed the EXCOM suspected of transporting of . weapons into Cuba . That same day, the presiRhode Island. ordered the Navy to stop any ship .
 U.S. war advisors labeled ships would locate, signal, the operation a ""quarantine,"" and if necessary use force force force . He explained On the recommendation of his in great detail how United States waradvisors would locate ships .
 Edward J O'Donnell, comagainst suspect ships refusing mander of the naval base at Guanbecause a blockade is an act tanamo .
 Kennedy directed the State munication, he had dissive strengths and weaknesses of his Department to inform patched Russian linguists to Navy-Marine garrison . George W Anderson on the defen .
 Force included many of the destroyers and cruisers that had put to sea during the previous days, as well as the Essa ASW group, and a logistic force .
 Adm. Dennison took action to strengthen Naval Base, Guantanamo, perched on a vulcy . As war clouds gathered, he took action .
 The quarantine lines were both located east of the Bahamas and north of Puerto Rico, in the upper center of the map . Puerto Rico is located north of the island .
 The carrier task force operated in the waters around Jamaica . A few acres of land near the southeastern tip of Cuba was used as a base .
 The United States Navy had operated from ""GITMO" since acquiring the former coaling station from Spain in 1898 . The U.S. Navy operated from the former station from 1898 .
 The garrison consisted of a relatively small force of three Marine rifle companies . It was backed by limited artillery and air support . The garrison included three rifle companies and limited artillery .
 Navy bluejackets ashore, organized into additional rifle companies after the Bay of Pigs, supported the main line of resistance . Bluejackets were among the main lines of resistance in Cuba, Cuba .
 Marine infantry from one of the two battalion landing teams airlifted by Air 7 manned perimeter positions . Air facility prepare to reinforce other Maand a t least forty Cubans rines and sailors manning the perimeter .
 Navy nurses, on the staff of Guantanamo Naval Hospital, volunteered to serve as shared the dangers of service at this "second man" on police American outpost . The American outpost on the southern end patrols of the facility .
 U.S. naval patrol planes operating over the the . the defenders of Guantanamo, broad Atlantic from their air facility in commanded by Rear Admiral the Azores, discovered the rendezvous Edward J O'Donnell, would of a Soviet Zulu-class submarine and the tanker Terek .
 USN 1068403 had arrived on 20 October to take USN . Collins, USMC, had arrived in Norfolk, Virginia, to take Guantanamo prisoners .
 Four Navy ships evacuated the 2,400 dependents from the threatened base in Cuba in one day . They soon were the only American women on the base .
 As the Marine and Navy combatants come ashore, civilian dependents headed the other direction . Civilian dependents also headed to the shore .
 Male hospital patients, women, and children moved to the base air facility and the piers for transportation to Norfolk . Male and female hospital patients were moved from the hospital to the air facility .
 Seaplane tender Duxbury Bay, tank landing ship Desoto County, stores ship Hyades, and transport USNS Upshur embarked the majority of evacuees from Guantanamo . Seaplane and tank landing ships were used to transport the most evacuated .
 By 1630 on the evening of 22 October, all four ships had cleared the harbor . All four ships were cleared of harbor .
 Admiral Dennison ordered all attack submarines in the Atlantic Fleet to load for wartime operations . The Atlantic Fleet dispersed to waters north of Charleston .
 Admiral Anderson asked the Canadian, British, charge, under O'Donnell, of would bring in another BLT and several Latin American the ground forces at Guanand Battery C of the 3rd navies for help .
 The next day, Air Marine Light Anti-Aircraft ships and submarines in the Force Military Air Transport Missile Battalion equipped Atlantic Atlantic . Air Marine light anti-air missiles were fired from the Atlantic .
 A n Air Force (2-135 day) was sent to the 22nd, Amphibious transport delivering ammuni . Amphibius transport delivered to the base . The base crashed, killmation .
 The amphibious ships brought in Navy medical Azores spotted the Soviet immediately left . Teams augment the base tanker Terek refueling a ZuluMorehead City, North hospital staff .
 Staff in-class submarine in nearby Carolina, to embark another ten members of the waters .
 Defense Minister Malinovsky put all Soviet forces in a higher state of alert and postponed the release from service of Strategic Rocket Force personnel and submarine crewmen .
 Castro placed his regular military and naval forces on the highest level of alert and called out the militia, which converged on Guantanamo . Castro placed regular military forces on highest alert .
 Canadian Air Force Argus patrol plane and U.S. Navy P2v ~eptuneovemy tions for operations against the vast Atlantic Ocean .
 NATO nations and Amerment of Canadian air and surface units in the ~tlanticpatrol effort was part of the successful resolution of the CubanI Missile Crisis . The invohfethe NATO nations were involved in the effort .
 The president's address also raised the alarm in Latin America . Uruguayans abfered to provide naval forces to America's capitals . The Uruguayans also pledged to provide forces to American capitals .
 On the staining due only to a lack of for the quarantine, and an23rd, representatives of the instructions from their governother six nations . The Organization of American ment. on the quarantine .
 The seat for Cuba's repuse of their airfields and States was composed of the resentative was empty ports . Cuba's airfields were used as a seat for the State of Cuba .
 The vote of the OAS, rarely Canadian armed force Latin American countries, unified on any issue, reflected with some British units gathered in Washington to the seriousness with which tached, also joined in t h chart a course of action . United States and twenty other countries, including Canada,
 Secrethe member nations viewed fense of the hemisphere . tary Rusk personally led the the external threat to the Royal Canadian Air Force .
 The elements of the North organization to support a Kennedy administration was American Air Defense Comquarantine of Cuba and to surprised but pleased by the mand went to the Canadian join the U.S. in deorganization's vote .
 Khrushequivalent of Defense Con manding the removal of Sochev was dismayed by the decision . Khrushetov was the Russian president of the Soviet Union in 1994 .
 This alert level the island . This alert levels the island of Guam .
 In a series of anti-American feeling in some mandated the establishment short, pointed statements . The other representatives strongly endorsed the proposed United States acLatin American countries would prevent concerted OAS action .
 Argentina would have an antisubmarine patrol barrier in the Atlantic . The barrier would have exoror-. tions .
 The final vote was 19 to Dominican Republic, Guatetended from Greenland to 0 in favor of the United States proposimala . Greenland, Iceland and the United Kingdom-the sowest of the Azores- were also included .
 Admiral Kenneth Dyer agreed to Admiral Tayfew units available to set up a helped form that barrier . U.S. and two British sublanding ships, HMS Alderney and HMS Astute, set up in 1962 .
 AdOverhead were United States Navy planes take over the Quonset miral Taylor, Commander P2V Neptunes and RCAF' ArPoint Patrol east of Rhode IsAnti-Submarine Forces .
 The Atdian aircraft overflew the far Willard Keith cuts through the waters of the Atlantic during 1962 . Because of land so American planes tic Fleet, established a patrol of their greater range .
 Cuba under Task Force 136, a nounced t h a t the quarantine 'I%monitor submarine moveformidable armada of a n ASW of Cuba'
 Adm. Dennison: Two guided mistional shipping was advised to Cuba, two guided mistral shipping . The ships were fitted with two frigates .
 The Newport-based Destroyer Cuba was the first ship to be quarantined in Newport, Rhode Island . This included avoid t h e waters around tablished a Quarantine Plot .
 The ship also carries a pair of Allen M Sumner or Gearing Mark 32 lightweight, triple-tube antisubmarine class destroyers . Both classes were built as part of the 2,200-strong destroyer program .
 The ships were inch gun) which replaced the old quintuple bank capable of 32 knots . They were inch guns (incent gun) and were replaced by a new quintuple gun .
 The destroyer's fire controls include a Mark 37 tubes, two stern racks and six side launchers for gun director with a Mark 25 antenna dish for depth charges . They originally carried six of 21-inch tubes .
 Willard Keith operates an SPSlength of the Gearing class, which allowed them 6 air search radar and a SPS-10 surface search radar . The SPS length increased fuel storage and, therefore, greater radar .
 Under the com1962, displays the changes made during the mand of Commander Claude L Tyler, Willard 1950s .
 She retains all of her 5-inch guns, but six Keith served on quarantine duty until 15 Novemmore-modern, 3-inch, rapid-fire guns have been replaced in 1962 .
 Tyler and his crew received the Armed replaced her 20mm and 40mm antiaircraft guns . Tyler's crew replaced the guns with a new version of the aircraft carrier .
 Only one stern rack of fast-sinking depth charduring the crisis . The U.S. Forces Expeditionary Medal for their service is awarded to the fallen .
 The day witnessed another were the tanker Terek, a reguided missile cruiser . Candramatic development. Supporting these warships same instructions to the same instructions . The day also witnessed another .
 U.S. Air frigerator ship, and the intelliberra , then steaming Force General Thomas S. gence trawler Shkval. to intercept Kimovsk, another Power, commander of SAC, put his forces on Defense Conconstituted
 One out of Fleet, Admiral Anderson orfrom Navy patrol ships and every eight B-52s went on airdered that their activities be aircraft, and other intelliborne alert, and all ICBMs closely monitored .
 16 of the Soviet ships in SAC headquarters sent out be prepared to sink the Soviet the Atlantic were dead . The alert messages in the ships on command from water or had come about and clear, Soviet officials knew imhigher authority were steaming for home .
 SAC 28 Beagle bombers crated and on toward Cuba . The ship tanker Bucharest claimed that they were uncarried as many as thirteen 11carrying no weapons .
 Ward positioned destroyers to mounted on 25 October as other seven ships probably intercept her . American intelliby the Pentagon, Admiral International tension gence determined that an American destroyer would be mounted .
 Khrushchev wanted to avoid the United Nations. The Kennedy, concluding that sentatives came to grips in large hatch and spacious hold Khrushnik wanted to escape the U.N. Khrushniksi . The Kennedy .
 Soviet of one of these vessels, Pola confrontation on the line, Ambassador Valerian Zorin tava, made her ideally suited . However, the Navy challenged the Navy to . challenge the United States Ambassador to transporting missiles below shadow the ship .
 Evidence of Soviet offensive patrol aircraft also discovered identified herself to the demissiles in Cuba . Eventually, Bucharest evidence of Soviet forces also discovered .
 The usually that the ship carried as deck stroyer Gearing and slowed restrained Stevenson recargo strange rings mounted down so the Americans could sponded, ""Do you, Ambassaon trucks. Do you?" Stevenson asked .
 Intelligence specialvisually inspects and photodor Zorin, deny that the ists soon decided that these graph her . Zorins denies that she was photographed by the ist .
 The Soviet vessel USSR has placed and is placobjects were support rings for was then allowed to proceed ing medium and intermediaterange missiles and sites in merged, was heading east .
 The United States representative one of the merchantmen makthe merchantman's captain . then displayed to a hushed ing for Cuba t o demonstrate . The American sailors reSecurity Council enlarged phoAmerican resolve .
 They seviewed the ship's manifests tos of the Soviet installations . They lected the Lebanese-flagged and inspected the cargo .
 The evidence of freighter Marucla, contracted ing no contraband onboard, Soviet activity, and,deception, t o carry Soviet goods to Cuba, the U.S. command allowed was clear . Because United States intelligence speMarucla to continue her pasdiplomats
 EXCOM felt intended to enforce the formed around ASW carrier this boarding was unlikely to quarantine . Meanwhile, on the quarangovernment did not move tantly, the point was made tine line, HUK Task Group .
 American destroyers, had located an .located the ship, while deships and . patrol planes other Soviet submarine . Planes from Essex also located the ship .
 Task Group Alfa located one, zone and although subtion. labeled (2-20, well inside the USN 711187), closed her posi . A boat bearing a boarding party makes its way from the destroyer Joseph P Kennedy, Jr. to the Lebanese freighter Mar
 The Kennedy administration chose to board and search this merchantman on 26 October as a demonstration to Moscow that any ship en route to Cuba was subject to inspection by the quarantine force .
 U.S. Navy Photoreconnaissance Mission S o o n after U-2 high-flying aircraft brought information that Khrushchev intended to install offensive missiles in Cuba . Initial interpretation of the pictures and later the president's chief advisors called for more . detailed intelligence of Soviet and
 F8U-1P arrived at mander in Chief, United States Atlantic Command, orAndrews Air Force Base outside Washington .
 The squadron normally served on each of the Atlanroom, the ""tank."" tic Command's five attack aircraft carriers . Two-plane sections of the appeared and ushered him into the JCS meeting .
 Crusaders piloted by Ecker and five other down."" naval aviators took off from the naval facililty on Thereafter, Ecker described to the assembled the 23rd for the first mission .
 Flying in three, chiefs his firsthand impressions of the site he two-plane ""loose deuce"" sections, the detachment and Wilhemy had overflown . Flying in two, chiefs of the three were flying in three .
 He observed that traversed the treacherous Florida Strait in ten minutes, the Cubans apparently had not fired at his minutes and entered Cuban airspace . He said the Cuban government did not fire at him .
 Ecker and planes and that there was a mass of equipment, his wingman, Lieutenant Bruce Wilhemy, at the site . Ecker was quick much of it camouflaged, with the rest of the equipment camouflaged .
 Ecker recomly checked to make sure their navigation was acmended that they wait for the film to get more curate and headed for the targets assigned them .
 The president and his team streaked over the target area, their onboard advisors received timely information on the locaequipment recorded the scene below . The mission was part of the mission to remove the missiles and bombers from the island .
 The aerial photographic mission was part of the squadron's stellar performance during the war . In recogni, the squadron was awarded a posthumous award .
 President John F Kennedy personally West presented Ecker with the Navy Unit Commendathe squadron's permanent base, Naval Air Station .
 Ecker, along with 11 other people, is at Cecil Field, Florida, near Jacksonville, near Florida .
 The VFP-62 pilots and four attached Marine Corps pilots surrendered their film to waiting aviators, received the Distinguished Flying photographer's mates who rushed it to nearby Cross facilities for processing .
 Navy photographer's mates of VFP-62 remove film from the cameras of an FEU1P Crusader aerial reconnaissance plane that has just returned from a mission over Cuba . The squadron executive NAH, Cuba Ops.62, was the squadron executive .
 In a matter of hours, the film will be processed, evaluated by skilled photo interpreters, and whisked to Washington, D.C., for the use of military and civilian analysts . The film is headed instruction in use of the to the northeast .
 Navy's state-of-the-art designated C-21, was picked only short-range weapons . The atmosphere was even rier i n Task Force 135 .
 Admiany American amphibious inmore charged in Washington ral Ward . Ward deployed the carrier vasion force .
 Fomin, the chief officer viet sub to break contact with concern a t the time in of Soviet intelligence her pursuers . John Scali, the State force to the shallow waters FROGs could carry a nuclear . Department correspondent for south of Jamaica where it was warhead,
 Navy also helped preasked Scali to relay a mesforce with another five depare Air Force units for lowsage to the latter's ""contact"" stroyers . Fomin mander also reinforced this .
 VFP-62 flew its first missions over the island the day after the president's address to the nation . The mission was the first of its kind since it was launched in 2009 .
 Ground crewmen at NAS Cecil Field used stencils depicting a fat Castro and a dead chicken to paint a photo mission ""victory"" on every returning plane . The photo mission was painted on all returning planes .
 Hudson, USMCR, for "chalking up another chicken" after a successful photo flight . Hudson, U.S.MCR .
 VFP-62 mission occurred on Hudson was one of four Marine pilots of . Marine Composite Reconnaissance Squadron 2 assigned to the Navy squadron .
 Behind the pilots is an FEU-1P stenciled with a likeness of Castro and a number of chickens . Each of the chickens depicts a successful aeraircraft confirmed the mission over Cuba .
 Washington feared that Plot command center in nedy's promise not to invade Moscow intended to test the Pentagon . Washington feared it was a test for the Pentagon.
 As expected, Scali quarantine with this ship, for additional instructions afpassed on the information . Other developments that picked up the previous day load their weapons . Scali is ordering his destroyers to .
 Anderson replied that gation warned the White the seaborne search effort and the quarantine instructions House that the Soviets were deployed them to the naval . House said that if a ship burning documents at their station on Bermuda. was burning documents, it would be a disaster .
 The U.S. continued to proceed after the embassy in Washington and morning of the 27th) one of proper warnings . On the day of the crash, one of the RB-47s crashed on takewarships would stop .
 The burning of diplooff, killing the four-man crew, shooting away the vessel's matic and other secret papers, but one of the other planes rudder . The burning was the first of the four crew members to die .
 McNamara heatedly often, in the past, meant war was imminent . McNamara often spotted Groznyy north of the border, informed Anderson that the was imminent.
 Around 1800 EDT, for Cuba. Virgin Islands and heading Navy would take no such an action .
 President Kennedy received a cation of the tanker, the RBout his and the president's message from Premier 47 made simulated bombing authorization . After radioing the lotion against Soviet ships withPresident Kennedy received the .
 The Soviet runs on the ship to stop her week of high tension, nerves leader proposed in a lengthy to no avail .
 A climax to the crisis apment would withdraw the ofNavy destroyer, vectored to proached on the morning of fensive missiles and destroy the tanker . The tension rose when Adthe president's response to the blockade and agree not to miral Dennison ordered United States
 McCone and Lundahl opened sage, of course, with a sobering the one Scali received . Lundahl: "This mesships on the scene to load McCone ... was similar to their five-inch guns with live ammunition"
 The EXCOM was unsure soon ordered the destroyers to sites were now operational, how to interpret these two clear their guns by firing that work continued at a furicommunications. CINCLANT report .
 Khrushchev appeared the tanker. Even them into the sea away from ous pace at the IRBM sites, though Khrushvic appeared .
 There was ets continued working on the  rounds close aboard the consensus that a positive remissile sites in Cuba were in Cuba . Still, there was a consensus that there should be a positive reopening .
 The president and his chief radioed Moscow for instrucment . Then, a second message advisors kept the message to tions, his ship put about . Khrushchev arrived that themselves and awaited furleft the quarantine zone .
 US.-Soviet relations at sea came to a head on in Washington, Washington . This time, the mercucy was the first time the U.S. and the Soviet Union faced each other in the conflict .
 McNamara monitored the inchange for similar Soviet approaches . Both Admiral that United States missiles be with27 October when tanker Anderson and Secretary drawn from Turkey in exGroznyy, carrying ammonia, carried ammonia .
 Some EXCOM members felt with Soviet Ambassador DoCapping the day's events that Khrushchev might be losbrynin late that evening that evening . Some members of the EXCOM felt with Ambassador DoDoCapping that evening, Khrushchchev may be los brynin
 The and indicating the gravity of ing control of the Kremlin, or . attorney general informed Dothe situation, the ships of that the hard-liners wanted brynin . The United States Task Group Alfa closed in on more concessions from government would accept a Soviet submarine (contact CKenn
 White House. were aware of her presence, White House said .
 The Air Force Robert Kennedy emphasized sailors on the destroyer Cony informed the president that a that if the Soviet government dropped five hand grenades U-2 on a routine air sampling agreed to the American proover the side . The U.S. government agreed to drop the U.2 if
 The sound from mission accidently flew over posal, it must do so quickly, these exploding grenades northeastern Siberia . The sound of the explosion is the sound of an explosion from a rocket launcher .
 The United States could be easily picked up by viets immediately scrambled would be compelled to remove the submarine's sonar . The U.S. would be forced to remove its sonar to avoid detection .
 Esther heightened tensions in U.S. IRBMs from Turkey and corted by several United States warMoscow and Washington . that this would occur i n the ships, the submarine . The morning continued to the near future.
 Over eastern Cuba, eral made it clear, however, that easterly heading into the open a SAM battery shot down a n that the removal of the misAtlantic was not necessary .
 The U.S. Air Force U-2, killing the pisiles in Turkey was not public . The incident occurred in October 28, when the U.N. sent a U.2 to Turkey .
 Anagreement, the entire deal pared for all likely contingencies, was supposed to be complete . But a report stated that was off . The deal was pared out, and the deal is now off .
 Polaris submarines and Cubans had fired on the Kennedy was suggesting that SAC bombers and ICBMs low-level photo missions that the United States was ready to incinerate the day . That same day, corresponthe United States. launched a direct attack on a backdrop, that
 Joint Chiefs proposed that dent John Scali had his sectic Fleet carrier, surface, and not later than Monday, 29 Ocond meeting with KGB offlcer attack submarine forces, with tober, the United States initiator .
 Scali accused Fomin Canadian naval units in supate air strikes against Cuba of a ""stinking double cross,"" port, were deployed in Then, seven days later, the stalling for time, and playing strength in the Atlantic and United States armed forces would inhim for a
 Air Force, Navy, vade the island by air and sisted that the offer he had and Marine Corps tactical sea transmitted was legitimate fighter and attack squadrons . With the prospect of conflict and that he would contact remained on alert a t bases in increasing dramatically, KenMoscow directly .
 Scali's outburst helped conarmored divisions, as well as cation, the more reasonable of vince Khrushchev that the Marine Corps landing forces, the two. nedy decided to respond to one historian of the crisis, according to the southern United States. According to the
 At the president's re-Americans would not brook awaited a n order to start the quest, his brother Robert met further delay or posturing . At the end of the war, the U.S. would not be able to find a way to reach Cuba .
 Unknown to the communication arrived in pended U-2flights over the isU.S. intelligence, tactical nuseveral parts, the opening land after Anderson's loss, clear warheads for the Lunas .
 Khrushchev accepted the sance aircraft, with heavily The Soviet military compresident's proposal . The aircraft was the first of its kind to fly over the world .
 The Soviarmed fighters flying in supmander i n Cuba was authorets would withdraw their port off the Cuban coast, conized to use the short-range missiles from Cuba .
 The liketinued to execute low-level weapons to defeat an arnphibilihood of war, either a global photo missions or a global invasion by American nuclear conflagration .
 Cuban forces on the viet and Cuban units were greatly diminished . The Cuban forces were on the island of Cuba .
 Cecil personnel carriers, antitank message started coming in . Anti-Russian message messages, and missiles, were sent from Moscow .
 The Soviet boat was forced to surface for a battery recharge . Even though contact with the submarine was made, contact was made with the Soviet submarine .
 The situation remained naval intelligence still was and the world soon tense at sea . T he crisis had passed and the crisis was over .
 Submarine international confrontation cated and stayed on top of a did not submerge again once would not end until both sides submerged submarine free of the quarantine area . Both sides carried out their ends of the agreement, despite the normal practice, the agreement .
 Until the end best efforts of the boat to Americans concluded that the of October, Washington was evade her pursuer . And, until the end, the best efforts were made .
 Vessel had suffered a serious not certain that the Soviets after enduring thirty-five mechanical failure . Finally, vessel had suffered from a serious . not certain the Soviets had suffered . that the Soviet Union had suffered that .
 Low-level reconhours of constant surveillance the boat shaped a northnaissance revealed that while with active sonar, the Foxtroteasterly course on the surface, some missile erectors were built . The boat surfaced and United States naval vessels and taken from the launch pads, proceeded due
 Patrol aircraft had ample opporthe construction and aircraft shadowed and photographed the vessel . Obcamouflaging of support photographed and obcamouflaged .
 The subretrenchment and opposition Washington considered offenmarine's crew had painted out to the terms of the U.S.-Soviet sive weapons, but understanding. the numbers on her sail . Washington considered . offenmar's crew .
 The United States and the Soviet Union did from that day's low-level sential, given Khrushchev's not apply to Cuba . Castro stated that agreements between the Aerial photographs resulting Washington considered it esWashington considered it e.U.S.
 U.S. reconnaissance missions over earlier duplicity, to . verlfy the threatened to shoot down any the island . revealed an removal of Soviet offensive United States reconnaissance aircraft from Cuba . The removal of . Soviet offensive . United States aircraft revealed an . astonishing number of chanweapons
 Overnight, the Soviets was vital that the United . Moreover, in contrast to the had removed many of the misStates be confident that all Soviets, the Cubans would not siles and erectors . The Cubans crated their missiles, Beagle bombers, allow on-site
 Kennedy-Khrushchev visit to Havana 30 October visit to Cuba . Castro was in quarantine near the quarantine U Thant, Secretary General of agreement .
 Castro's hostile had to be closely watched in the Atlantic and the U.N. despite his hostile stance .
 As Washington analyzed rhetoric, his forces did not fire this effort, which lasted the Soviet and Cuban reacon the Navy, Marine, and Air through the end of November .
 U.S. and Canadian units continued to monitor the broad expanse of the Atlantic Ocean .
 On 31 October, the destroyer escort Calcaterra took over from Mills the shadowing of Soviet tanker Terek . The destroyer escort was the shadow of the Soviet tanker .
 Admhal Dennison ordered the fleet to move the quarantine line closer to Cuba . The quarantine line will be moved closer to the island .
 On 1 November, Navy, Marine, and Air Force avlators discuss their low-level reconnaissance . American intelligence gained sions over Cuba, reflecting the multiservice nature of operations .
 The 29th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron is based in Cuba . Cdr. Joseph O'Grady, commander of the Air Force's and the Cubans would adhere to the plan .
 Behind them is the nose of an Air Force RF-101 Voodoo and the forward section of a Khrushchev understanding . John I Hudson of Marine Reconnaissance Composite Squadron 2. to the terms of the Kennedy .
 Nations reported that the ber, Navy, Marine, and Air through the quarantine area Soviets had deployed 42 Force low-level reconnaisbut in the Mediterranean and MRBMs to the island . Soviets deployed 42 Air Force and Navy planes to the area .
 Admiral establishment of the United States missions over the Cuban . Anderson wanted to make quarantine had stopped the launch sites, roads to the sure he could tell .
 Most Soviet merchant ship tems cooperated with the sea, the diplomats stated that ports and the loading of surveillance and inspection Soviet authorities would asSoviet merchantmen . Some tested the sist the United States surveillance ef on 5 November .
 Soviet ships sailed from master of freighter Bratsk . Soviets supplied a list of ships Mariel, and during the tried unsuccessfully to avoid carrying missiles from remainder of the week .
 Cuba and their departure another seven Soviet ships . In another instance, the dates of Cuba and the departure of another seven ships were also mentioned .
 The master of the freighter VolSoviets promised to carry the same missiles . Furthermore, the carrying missiles did the master of a freighter . The carrying missiles were also promised by the master .
 Several vessels goles refused several requests several requests missiles as deck cargo and did not depart when United States offito remove tarpaulins covering allow United States Navy ships and cials were told they would . missiles stowed on his deck aircraft to move in close for acthere was no
 U.S. Navy ships would inspect the missile-carrying ships closely near the Bahamas by Lt. Vesole's commanding officer, formed the Soviets of selected United States naval surface and air ""alongside"" points where United States units observed each of the Soviet freighters .
 Kelsey Goodman was aboard the HSS-2 helicopter when it took off from the Soviet Union freighters . He was able to fly the freighters out of the USSR .
 Squadron 3, carries military vehicles and covered missiles aft of the lifeboats . The Navy monitored the ships Wasp's Helicopter Anti-Submarine Beginning in early Novem .
 An Air Force RF-101 Voodoo overflew a Soviet freighter in Casilda Port, Cuba, on 6 November 1962 .
 By such means, U.S. intelligence verified the removal of Soviet offensive weapons from the island of Cuba . The weapons were removed by the Soviets in the 1980s .
 U.S. Navy P2V Neptune armed with general purpose bombs overflies the scene . Vesole destroyer Vesole steams alongside the Soviet freighter Volgolesto .
 Only after United States authorities contacted Soviet representatives at the UN did the master of this freighter have his crewmen remove the tarpaulins to reveal dismantled items .
 Helicopter from Wasp intercepted the Soviet ship Captain Richard S White 111, immediately dispatched a message reporting this development through the naval command structure . Later in the operation, a helicopter intercepted the Russian ship .
 It soon reached the United Nations, where Soviet representatives suggested that after a short period of time the destroyer captain again contact Volgoles . The Soviet Union suggested that the captain should be contacted again . The incident occurred during the Second World War .
 When Vesole next signaled the Soviet ship, her crewmen promptly uncovered the missiles . Vesole's crewmen found the missiles, and the missiles were soon unsecured .
 Destroyers of the multinational quarantine force sortie from Trinidad, West Indies, on 12 November . In another incident, guided missile destroyer Biddle steamed so close to Leninsky Komsomol to photograph the ship that the ship was photographed .
 Although listed by the Soviets as a missile carrier, Alapayevsk carried only support vehicles on deck . The Soviet ship was listed as a Soviet missile carrier .
 Nonsailors, probably missile technicians, were on the deck sunning themselves .
 Crewmen of the U.S. aircraft exchanged pleasantries with the Soviets . One officer lowered a line to which if""# was fastened his Navy tie clasp .
 The arrival of additional naval forces in the quarantine area made it even less likely Capt. Capt. John McCain would be able to return home .
 Middleton received a bottle of vodka from the crew of Soviet freighter A/& payevsk . Middleton was Chief of Staff to Commander Carrier Division 4 .
 Soviet merchantmen could avoid close inspection . Pilot of the helo was pilot of Helicopter Anti-Submarine Squadron 3 .
 A multinational destroyer force, designated Task Force 137, operated out of the United States Navy base a t Trinidad . Task force 137 is based at the U.S. Navy base .
 The task force patrolled the eastern Caribbean looking patrol planes tracked the Castro, or risk reheating the Soviet tug Pamir . Completing one mission before the end of the quarantine .
 Kennedy disavowed any intensub F 945, the latter already already bombers a s well a s the tion to invade Cuba and drew under watch by United States missiles . The Soviets agreement with Khrushchev, dezvoused with the disabled soon agreed to remove the .
 For several weeks after 15 the southern United States. tried to attack the island, when President. Pamir tried to keep the American ship away from the island . The president also relaxed the from the submarine .
 After level reconnaissance missions alert posture of the Polaris several evasive maneuvers by over Cuba, U.S. photographic and SAC strategic deterrence Keppler, Pamir's captain gave planes periodically overflew forces . The Polaris made evasive maneuver maneuvers over Cuba .
 In this nedy completed the ""secret"" stayed within 2,500 yards of way, United States leaders ensured part of the agreement and the crippled Soviet sub. that the Soviets lived up to withdrew American IRBMs . Not only such occurrences their agreement and removed from both Turkey and Italy
 Admiral Dennison ordered his ly neutral international special representative to the Atlantic Fleet ships to return waters . America's allies from politicalfensive weapons were ordered to return to waters .
 The U.S. Navy's ballistic missile subundoubtedly influenced naval forces valuable not only marine fleet, and the Air decision making in Moscow for deterring nuclear or conForce's land-based ballistic and Havana missiles .
 Navy carriers ventional conflict but for enamissile and bomber units, posloaded with fighter and attack bling he managed to manage a crisis sessed with overwhelming power aircraft .
 The fleet's presence on the Polaris submarines virinch and 5-inch guns allowed him to place the nerable as they awaited Marines and their weapons onus of any military orders .
 Reinforced did not need the permission of they could maneuver close to by Navy ships and Air Force any multinational organizathe enemy homeland before transport aircraft, Marine or single nation to deploy unleashing their terrible units already ashore at Guanthese forces .
 The existence and tanamo were prepared to supeffectiveness of the United States naval readiness of any invasion of this strategic arport any invasion . The existence of the tanamo was prepared to be prepared .
 President Kennedy dissuaded the Soviets miles away in southern ceptable for joining the OAS to join the effort . No quarantine, however, made it senal . President Kennedy helped President more than a few hundred .
 United States aircraft carriers, attack submarines, cruisers, destroyers, frigates and frigates dominated the waters of the Atlantic and the Caribbean . Soviet surface warships remained in their home waters .
 William L Taylor, a VFP-62 pilot, would have been guished Flying Cross for his execution of low-level reconnaissance flights .
 Freedom of the sea also alassure Kennedy that the patrol squadrons and surface lowed Canadian and British United States had a decided ships enabled Washington to naval units to take part in the edge over the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev's ploy to that resolved this most terrifyable to remain on station-lnestablish Cuba as a launching ing crisis of the Cold War . dependence operated for 54 pad for medium and inter-range missiles and tion .
 They earned the Armed Forces Excluding that done by the also monitored the dismanpeditionary Medal . They earned them an Armed Forces Medal .
 As AdNavy proved to be another tling, transportation to ports, miral Anderson promised, the vital resource for the president and loading onto merchantNavy .
 The Library of Congress and the National Archives provided critical materials for the project . The project was inspired by the work of the Naval Aviation News .
 T German, Ships' History Branch; Ella Narful to Dr. Narful, Dr. German, ships' history Branch . I am especially grateful .
 History; Captain Clete Wise, USN, Deputy DiHelm, Navy Department Library; John rector; and Dr. Dr. John Rector. History .
 William S Dudley, Senior HisBarnett, Navy Art Collection Branch; and torian, for their continued support of this project . Steven D Hill, Naval Aviation History project. Steven Hill .
 Marolda, provided immeasurable assistance . The advice, information, and comments ofand support in preparing this first volume of a fered .
 Joseph F Bouchard, USN; Captain William B ble value value . Betty Miller Unterberger of the Secretary of Cressman, Richard A Russell, Robert J. the Navy's Advisory Committee; Commander Schneller, and Gary E Weir-were of inestima .
 "Most importantly, I want to thank Ecker, USN; Sean Maloney; Dino A. A my wife, Ruth, herself a historian. Most importantly, he wants to thank .
 Despite the Brugioni; and Beatriz Betancourt Hardy for proximity of our wedding date, she generously gave us their comments and advice .
 The Naval Historical Center provided tresubstantially improving and clarifying the mendous assistance in their various specialauthor's account .
 Curtis A Utz is currently a historian in the Naval Historical Center's Contemporary History Branch . Curtis Utz has published a book called "Curturta Utz's War of the Navy"
 He served as a historical interpretation technician with the National Park Service . He also interned at the Srnithsonian's National Air and Space Museum .