 The lessons of that critical moment and of the events which led up to it are as valid now as they were a quarter of a century ago . The lessons are still valid now, as are the lessons which led to the tragedy .
 One can only wish the present administration had studied them before it embarked on its ill-conceived adventure in Nicaragua . The present administration should have studied them more closely .
 The Cuban people, the CIA assured him, would flock to join the invaders . The CIA told him, "The Cuban people would flock" to join him .
 The great majority of Cubans rallied to Castro's banner against what was perceived as an American mercenary force . Doubtless there was disgruntlement in Cuba, just as there is in Nicaragua today, but the great majority supported Castro .
 As the contras also have the aura of a CIA army and lack popular support, they face the same fate . The contras have the same aura of the CIA army, as they face a similar fate .
 During the 1962 missile crisis, he placed his faith not in a puny mercenary force, but in the power of the U.S. itself .
 Having violated international norms at the Bay of Pigs, he adhered to them scrupulously during the missile crisis . Having violated the norms, he had to abide by them during the crisis, he said .
 President Obama directed the U.S. response that not a single international convention or juridical precept was violated . Despite the extreme tensions of the moment, he directed the United States response .
 He eschewed secrecy and the weapons of deceit during the 1961 debacle . Instead, he kept the American people fully informed, consulting the Congress and briefing our allies .
 U.S. security was threatened not by little Cuba, but by Soviet missiles, he says . "He was determined to remove that threat," he says of Cuba . "The United States was threatened by Soviet missile missiles"
 U.S. President Barack Obama sent a message to the world, Obama said . Obama said it was a message the American people, and United States allies, could understand . President Obama said the message was important to the United States .
 Reagan administration has handled the Nicaraguan problem differently than Reagan administration did . Reagan administration was in charge of the Reagan administration in 1980s and '90s .
 It has printed assassination manuals, illegally mined harbors, violated international law, rejected the jurisdiction of the World Court, misrepresented the facts to the American people . The U.S. government has repeatedly ignored the will of the Congress, and ignored the advice of our allies .
 "We stand divided at home on this issue, and not only isolated abroad but condemned by the World Court and by United Nations resolutions," says President Obama .
 He forced the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons systems and gained Chairman Khrushchev's promise that they would not be reintroduced .
 U.S. security needs with respect to Cuba have rested on the KennedyKhrushchev understanding . Ever since, United States security needs have rested upon the understanding . The U.N. has been in Cuba since 1961 .
 It has never been violated and is as vital and effective today as it was then . It exploded Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams's assertion that agreements with communists never work . The agreement is still vital today as well as ever .
 No Soviet bombers fly out of Cuban airfields, no Soviet submarines operate from its ports . No Soviet submarines fly from Cuban ports, no Russian bombers fly from Cuba .
 No nuclear or missile submarine has even been in a Cuban port since 1974 . Indeed, no nuclear submarine has been in Cuba since then .
 The USSR and Cuba have respected the 1962 understanding . The U.S. is ready to use its full might to enforce the agreement, the U.K. says .
 U.S. warned that it would view this as a violation of the understanding with all that might entail . Moscow backed down when the United States warned it would be viewed as violating the agreement . Moscow agreed to the deal, but the U.K. warned it was a violation .
 The Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding negotiated under extreme crisis conditions did not . What we need in Nicaragua is a similar understanding, only one with more precise means of verification and a no-export-of-revolution provision .
 In return, the United States wd withdraw its forces from Honduras, halt all aid to the contras, and cease any other acts of aggression against Nicaragua . The U.S. wou ld withdraw troops from Honduras and halt aid to Nicaragua .
 Washington would emphasize that if Nicaragua violated the terms of the agreement, the United States would react with its own force s, not with the discredited and insufficient instrument represented by the contras . Washington would, however, emphasize that .
 The full might of the U.S. was behind the agreement, we would almost certainly never have to use that might, just as we have not in the case of the 1962 understanding .
 It is a timorous and ineffective policy which is beneath the dignity of a great nation. It is below the dignity and dignity of the British people.
 Wayne Smith was chief of the United States Interests Section in Havana, Havana, 197982 . Smith was regarded as the State Department's leading expert on Cuba .
 Of course, Soviet Union is no more and the tenets of Communism no longer pose threat to Capitalism, but the West is still not in chummy terms with Russia and her allies . Russia and its allies are still not on the best terms with the West .
 The world remembers the October Crisis in 1962 when apocalypse was not too far away or impossible to imagine . Enmity does not die easily and against such a scenario the world remembers such a crisis in 1962 . The October Crisis is a reminder that the world is not too soon away from apocalypse
 The thirteen days episode in October 1962 goes down in history as a period when the superpowers came precipitously close to unleashing a nuclear war . Deemed as the ultra-tense moment for the West, the 13 days episode is considered the most intense in the world .
 50 years on, a war of such magnitude now seems rather far-fetched . Of course, as the fifty years of that incident is commemorated, it now seems much more likely to happen .
 The Cuban Missile crisis appears out of context, says CNN's John Sutter . In fact, the crisis prompted the USA and the Soviet Union on a confrontational course, he says .
 Cuba is no longer a major player in global politics but distrust between two major powers still linger with each side unwilling to bow to the other's perspective . Cuba and the U.S. remain distrustful of each other .
 It's in that unwillingness to compromise lies the legacy of the almost fateful event fifty years ago . It was in that refusal to compromise is the legacy .
 Political analysts are looking at 1962 to look for a hint which may permit them to make a successful prognosis of the present incident . And, not surprisingly, they are looking for a clue which may be a hint .
 Sadly, much of the understandings of the event is heavily coloured by propaganda . Sadly, some of these understandings are based on propaganda. Sadly, there is no doubt that this is not the case .
 It's wrongly believed that it was the United States which came out as the winner since Soviet Missiles placed in Cuba and directed at the USA were removed at the end of the crisis .
 Few know that, in return, USA also had to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy . This is indeed true but very few know that very few .
 The truth is that Soviet missiles were placed in Cuba because a few months earlier, the U.S. made a botched attempt to overthrow the Castro regime by sending in an invading force, which is known in history as the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 In 1960, a U.S. U-2 spy plane was shot by the Soviets while it was taking photographs of Soviet military installations . The plane was taken by Soviet forces in 1960 .
 The production of the pilot before the world, captured alive, and the wreckage were irrefutable evidence which embarrassed the Eisenhower administration . While initially the United States denied this, the U.S. denied this .
 To cut out all diplomatic euphemisms, it was the U.S. which was on the wrong, says CNN.com .
 In 1962, the mobilisation of missiles in Cuba in October was done as a precaution against further U.S. attempts at invasion after the failed one in August . Again, in 1962, in October, in Cuba was done in a precaution .
 "Just getting a fraction of the whole event and then using that to form an idea would be impudent," he says . "It's not the only thing you can do, but it's the most important thing to do," he adds .
 The truth is, no one won in 1962; it was a tactical compromise on both sides . "No one won," the president said in 1962 . "The truth is that it was no one winning in 1962," he said .
 The famous line used by the US that it was eyeball to eyeball and the other guy blinked is, in the end, an ego-inflating myth . It was used to make the claim 'eye-to-eye' and 'other guy blinked'
 Russia and the United States are now on two opposite sides over Syria . 50 years on, Russia and U.S. are on opposite sides in Syria . The event has become significant 50 years after it happened .
 1962 standoff is translated once more with another country used as a cause . No, missiles are not aimed at any country anymore but the 1962 standoff was translated once again .
 Soviet submarines armed with nuclear missiles were deployed near Cuba and had one side pressed the button, the world would have crumbled . Looking back in retrospect, it was not a victory for Kennedy just a relief .
 U-2 planes are not in service but U.S. drones are seen entering Pakistan airspace . They are seen firing at possible extremist targets which have also resulted in civilian casualties . The U.2 planes were used to fire at extremist targets .
 The rationale that radicals need to be exterminated cannot be used to defend entry into another country without permission . Once more, this is infringement of the sovereignty of another state, says the author .
 Cuba is still the last bastion of Communism and Castro can be dubbed the only unscathed victor from the whole 1962 episode . While USA in the following years tried fair and countless unfair tactics to overthrow Communism regimes, topple elected leaders .
 Not too far away from the citadel of Capitalism, Communism revolutionary zeal survived . Hence, not too far from Capitalism, a flamboyant Communist zeal survived in Russia .
 Many die hard Communist states have astutely blended Capitalism and Communism to fuel an economic boom . Of course, Cuba also needs to do some reforms and come out of its rigid Communist ideals .
 A lot of Cubans are leaving the island secretly and defecting to the U.S. can be the satisfaction for the latter . That a lot of Cuban defectors to the United States is the satisfaction of the former .
 Cuba came out as the eventual winner of the 1962 stand-off . Since there isn't a popular uprising in the island nation it can still be accepted that a majority of the people prefer the way things turned out for them . However, this writer .
 Old cars ply the street, income is low, but yet, there is something appealing about the country . The country is home to an old-fashioned old-car park, old cars and modern technology .
 Rumour has it that just before the Bay of Pigs invasion, White House ordered a large shipment of Cuban cigars to be bought and stacked .
 A pina colada, a cigar and a sun-set happiness does not have to be too complicated . A cigar is the perfect combination of happiness and happiness, says CNN.com .
 For any queries with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com .
 Kennedy wanted to deal with the Soviets by removing U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, transcript says . Kennedy wanted the Soviets to withdraw missiles from the United States from Turkey and Cuba .
 Kennedy: To do otherwise would seem unreasonable and would not enlist much world support . Kennedy: "To do otherwise, Kennedy argued, would be unreasonable" Kennedy said .
 Kennedy was joined by Vice President Lyndon B Johnson and Undersecretary of State George Ball . The discussions took place during three meetings on Oct. 1962 .
 The 82-page transcript of the tapes was prepared by McGeorge Bundy, then special assistant to the president for national security affairs . Bundy prepared the transcript for CNN .
 Much of what is on the transcript has already been revealed in memoirs and histories of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Nikita Khrushchev had publicly offered to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the U.S. would remove its medium-range Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The United States would remove the missiles if the United States removed them from Turkey, Kennedy said .
 The day after the meeting, Khrushchev announced that the Soviets would remove the missiles . Kennedy had assurances that the missiles would be removed from Turkey within five months . The day of the meeting the Soviets agreed to remove them from Turkey .
 Defense Secretary McNamara favored removing missiles from Turkey only as a prelude to a U.S. invasion of Cuba . In effect, denying the Soviets a retaliation target would deny them a retaliatory target .
 Johnson and Ball argued that if the missiles were to be removed from Turkey it would be wise to trade them for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 "In the first place, we last year tried to get our missiles out of there because they're not militarily useful," he says . "We last year . In the first . year we last . year tried . to get . our missiles from there because . they were not milit
 We're going to be forced to take action that might seem, in my opinion, not a blank check, but a pretty good check . The Soviets would have to respond by taking) action in Berlin on the grounds that we were wholly unreasonable. We're not going to have a blank
 His handling of the failed invasion of Cuba in April 1961 convinced his Soviet counterpart that the U.S. president was weak and indecisive, a view reinforced at a summit in Vienna in 1961 .
 Kennedy was on numerous medications at the time, including steroids for his colitis, procaine for his back pain, testosterone to increase his weight and antibiotics to prevent the return of an old venereal infection .
 Kennedy had to navigate conflicting advice from his divided cabinet when the missile crisis erupted . Kennedy faced a divided cabinet with hawks pushing for an invasion of Cuba and more cautious aides advocating negotiation .
 Air Force chief General Curtis LeMay told the president the decision to impose a naval blockade was akin to appeasing Hitler . His generals recommended a massive bombing campaign and recommended a bombing campaign .
 Kennedy had grown skeptical of military advice after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . Despite pressure from lawmakers and a series of alarming incidents, he finally reached a compromise with Moscow .
 The accounts glossed over the often confused atmosphere inside the U.S. government . Kennedy authorized the plots to sabotage and overthrow Castro's regime .
 A relieved Kennedy displayed his characteristic black humor after the crisis . Kennedy was a relieved Kennedy after the incident .
 His decision to station nuclear missiles in Cuba came out of anger over U.S. warheads near his country's borders . The Cuban president was angered by the United States' presence of nuclear missiles .
 He made the gamble without a plan if the U.S. discovered the weapons before they were armed and operational . But he made the decision without a contingency plan .
 He faced a stark choice -pulling back the missiles or fighting a nuclear war . As a result of the decision, he faced the stark choice . He faced the choice between pulling back missiles and fighting a war .
 Khrushchev was a far more multi-faceted character than his cartoonish image in the West . He was known for his shoe-pounding antics and his threat to ""bury"" the capitalist system .
 Nikita Sergeyevich revealed a softer side of the man known at home as Nikita . The peasant who softened the edges of the Soviet system opened the door to some Western-style freedoms .
 Hitherto unseen books were published and jazz records filled store shelves . Jazz records were also published in the 1930s .
 Toilet paper and sausages have always been popular in Russia . But -far more importantly to Russians -so did toilet paper and toilet paper .
 Leonid Breshnev was ousted in a well-coordinated conservative pushback in 1964 . He lived out his days in obscurity at a Moscow dacha . The one-time miner was ousted by the Communist Party in 1964, replaced by a new leader . He was replaced by
 Khrushchev and the elderly men running the Soviet Union were enamored of the bearded revolutionary . They defied the mighty United States and repulsed a botched invasion by Cuban emigres bankrolled by the CIA in April 1961 .
 Castro was born August 13, 1926 to a prosperous Spanish immigrant landowner . Castro became a communist icon, an unrepentant anti-American leader who managed to hold on to power even after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 He led a revolt in 1953 against the Batista regime but his attack on the Moncada barracks in Santiago de Cuba failed, landing him and his brother Raul in prison . He led the revolt but was jailed for life in prison for his role in the Cuban revolution .
 He built up a guerrilla force and rallied popular support in Cuba against Batista's corrupt rule . After two years, he was exiled to Mexico, where he built up guerrilla force . He was later exiled to Cuba .
 One he toppled Batista, his sweeping Marxist land and economic reforms failed miserably . One of the biggest failures of his government was the failure of his land reforms .
 The Soviet Union helped keep Castro's regime afloat despite a strict U.S. embargo . Moscow bought up Cuba's sugar and other subsidies to keep the Castro regime afloat .
 A survivor of numerous CIA plots and assassination attempts, Castro tightly orchestrated public life from January 1959 until he suffered a health crisis in 2006 . Castro delegated his duties to his brother Raul Castro, who died in 2009 .
 In a letter to Khrushchev, he advised Moscow to launch a nuclear attack on the U.S. before what he believed was an imminent invasion of Cuba . In the letter, he said he believed that Russia was about to invade Cuba .
 Castro was enraged when he learned of the compromise deal between Khrushchev and Kennedy that required Moscow to withdraw its nuclear missiles from the island of Cuba . Castro was angered by the deal .
 Castro unleashed a torrent of curses on hearing the news, kicking a wall and breaking a mirror, historical accounts say . Feeling betrayed and humiliated by his Soviet comrades, who did not consult him about the agreement beforehand, Castro felt humiliated .
 An American destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine without realising that it was carrying a nuclear weapon .
 Ex-Cold War veterans gather in Havana to mark 40th anniversary of Cold War's most dangerous episode . Declassified documents reveal the day that the crisis appeared to be spinning out of control . They are pored over by an extraordinary array of former Cold War warriors .
 President Castro, the Cuban leader, and Robert McNamara, John F Kennedy's Defence Secretary . They include President Castro and President McNamara .
 The USS Beale dropped depth charges on the submarine, B59, off the coast of Cuba . In the middle of the rapidly escalating tensions, the Beale was dropping depth charges .
 Hours earlier an American U2 spy plane had been shot down in Cuba . The Joint Chiefs of Staff had recommended to President Kennedy a Cuban airstrike and invasion .
 The U.S. military "did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archive, said .
 Vadim Orlov, the submarine's signals intelligence officer, told the conference in a written account . He said his colleagues had come to ordering the launch of a torpedo tipped with a nuclear warhead .
 The crew believed that war had begun and were on the verge of launching the submarine's nuclear weapon . The crew thought they were about to launch the nuclear weapon from the submarine .
 The submarine had been authorised to fire its nuclear torpedo with the approval of three officers on board . Three officers were on board at the time of the attack .
 A nuclear attack on an American ship could have escalated into a full-scale nuclear exchange, McNamara said . Mr McNamara told the conference that a nuclear attack could easily have escalated .
 The crisis began on the morning of October 15, 1962, when an American spy plane spotted Soviet missiles in Cuba . The missiles were deployed in Cuba by the U.S. government .
 President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev had 13 days of white hot tension between them . By October 27, war was looking increasingly likely .
 On that day new surveillance photographs showed that the missile sites had become fully operational . Dino Brugioni, the former CIA analyst who interpreted the first U2 spy plane photographs that showed missiles in Cuba, said the day .
 Another U2 strayed into Soviet airspace and Soviet MiG fighter jets scrambled to intercept it . U2 was intercepted by MiG fighters in Soviet airspace .
 Mr Brugioni said that on October 27 his superior at the CIA returned from briefing President Kennedy on the new spy plane photographs . He said he was briefed on the photographs by his superior .
 The following day the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw the missiles and order ships heading for Cuba back to Russia, in return for America promising not to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union withdrew the missiles in exchange for America's promise to not invade Cuba.
 The conference is also being attended by Arthur Schlesinger, one of Kennedy's closest aides, and William Ecker, the pilot whose photographs triggered the crisis . The conference will be held in New York City .
 Theodore Sorenson, President Kennedy's speechwriter, said that it sent ""a good message"" to a world on the verge of war . President Kennedy said it sent a good message to the world .
 In 1962, it was communism, not terrorism, that struck fear in the hearts of Americans . It was communism not terrorism in 1962, but terrorism, not terror .
 In October 1962, a military plane photographed missile sites being built in communist Cuba . Imagine then the alarm of Kennedy and his advisors when, in 1962, they were alarmed .
 Soviets were about to install missiles just 90 miles off the coast of the U.S. The Soviets were installing missiles in the area 90 miles from the coast .
 Enemy ships bearing the space-age weapons were already en route across the Atlantic . Enemy ships were also en route to the United States .
 Prevent public panic, but get the missiles out of the Western Hemisphere before the situation exploded into nuclear war . Get the missiles from the Western hemisphere before the crisis explodes into a nuclear war.
 Like Khrushchev, they will be speaking in forums in conjunction with the ""On the Brink"" exhibition .
 Military leaders like General Curtis LeMay wanted to attack Cuba, but the president struggled to find another solution . President George W. Bush struggled to come up with a solution .
 The film also includes interviews with JFK and TV news footage from the time . The film includes JFK interviews and news footage .
 Robert F Kennedy was a close advisor to the president . His brother was the U.S. Attorney General at the time .
 The exhibition includes notes that the president and his brother made as the National Security Council debated a course of action . The exhibition also includes notes made by the brother and sister of the president .
 The public will also be able to see the original military photograph that precipitated the crisis . The photo was the one that revealed the missile sites under construction in Cuba .
 The president decided to authorize a naval blockade which would prevent the Soviet ships from reaching Cuba with their deadly cargo . The blockade was authorized by the president of Cuba, President Nixon .
 Technically, such a quarantine could have been regarded by the Soviet Union as an act of war . Such a quarantine would have been seen as a violation of the law .
 The Soviet ships turned around and went home . Instead, much to the relief of everyone, the Soviet ships went back to their home .
 The Soviet Union could not afford to look weak in the eyes of the communist world . It was not the first time the Soviet Union had been seen to be weak in communist eyes .
 The superpowers reached an agreement that allowed them to save face . Somehow the superpowers agreed to a deal that saved their face .
 He says he will try to make the point when he speaks at the JFK Library on Oct. 31 . Caroline Kennedy will host a forum introduced by Caroline Kennedy .
 Sergei Khrushchev says the U.S. reaction to missiles was a surprise to the Soviets . Now an American citizen, Sergei says the United States's strong reaction to the missiles was surprise to them .
 He insists that shipping missiles to Cuba was essentially an effort to get respect from their communist ally . The U.S. sent missiles to the communist ally, he says . He insists the move was essentially a move to show respect .
 Schoolchildren were sent home early and people considered entering bomb shelters, according to Russian President Vladimir Putin . "We had no panic in Russian streets. While in this country school children were sent early," Putin said .
 Khrushchev says he does not consider himself a pacifist . He says "there are so many aggressive people in the world, and you have to respond to threats" Khrushchev says he is not pacifist because of aggressive people .
 Many Americans still remember the days in October when the world seemed about to end . But many still remember those days when it seemed that the world was going to end. The world seemed to be on the edge of the end .
 Visitors to ""On the Brink"" are sure to be flooded with emotion as they remember what happened . Visitors to the site will remember the tragedy .
 President Bush's approval ratings have soared from 51 percent in August to 86 percent in the latest Gallup/CNN polls . This is the largest jump in Gallup's history, beating his father's old record-rating increase of 18 points during the Persian Gulf War .
 Franklin Roosevelt's approval ratings jumped from 72 to 84 percent after Pearl Harbor . FDR's approval rating went from 72% to 84% after the attack .
 Jimmy Carter's polls rose from 38 to 51 percent at the start of the hostage crisis . Jimmy Carter was in control of the U.S. at the time of the crisis .
 Americans favored President Reagan's invasion of Grenada by nearly 2 to 1 and his bombing of Libya by more than 3 to 1 . Americans also favored the invasion of Libya and the bombing of the Libyan airbase . Americans favored Reagan's Grenada invasion by nearly two to one, according to
 A poll done by the San Jose Mercury News found that even in the liberal San Francisco Bay area, 90 percent of voters would support military action against terrorists . 70 percent were willing to commit American troops to combat even at the risk of substantial causalities .
 Residents voted for Michael Dukakis in 1988 at a higher percentage than the entire state of Massachusetts . Residents of the Boston area voted for him in 1988 . This shows the depth of popular outrage in the area .
 If anti-aircraft batteries fired at the photo planes, the fighters were instructed to take them out . The incident would have sparked a dramatic escalation in an already-tense conflict .
 Nikita Khrushchev wanted desperately for the crisis to end in Moscow . Meanwhile, in Moscow, Soviet leader wanted desperately to end the crisis .
 Khrushchev was angry and worried that a Soviet surface-toair missile had shot down a United States U-2 the previous day . He was angry that a U.2 had been shot down by a Soviet missile, his son says .
 Khrushchev wondered if it would be possible for a nuclear missile to be fired from the distant Caribbean island without his permission . Khrushov wondered if a missile could have been fired from Cuba without Moscow's knowledge or approval .
 A short time later, John Kennedy received the full text of Khrushchev's remarks over Radio Moscow . The text included a lengthy commentary on Cuban exiles . John Kennedy was the first American to receive the text of the remarks .
 Khrushchev said exiles' commando raids were one of the main reasons Soviets had originally put the missiles in Cuba . Ex-councils raided by the Soviets in Cuba in the 1960s .
 He thought it was unthinkable that a ""pirate ship"" could fire on Havana without all of the United States ships in the area noticing . The U.S. ships were in the vicinity of Havana .
 The Soviet leader said he was ordering the missiles dismantled and removed based on Kennedy's promise that the U.S. would not attack Cuba . Kennedy had promised not to attack Cuba the previous day . The missiles were ordered dismantled by the Soviet leader .
 At the Pentagon, many military leaders believed that the United States had blown a chance to crush the Soviets . Many military leaders thought that the U.S. had blown the chance to defeat the Soviets.
 Curtis LeMay suggested that Khrushchev's message be ignored and that the United States ""go in and make a strike"" against missile sites . LeMay suggests that the U.S. should attack the missile sites in response .
 Khrushchev had not consulted him in advance, and the Cuban leader learned the news by radio . The news was the first time the Soviet Union had invaded Cuba .
 The announcement stunned both Cubans and many of the 42,000 Soviet soldiers on the island . The announcement shocked many of Cuba's citizens and many other residents .
 Cuban exile leaders were as unhappy as Castro was . In Miami, they were unhappy with Castro's government . The Cuban exile leader was unhappy with the Cuban government .
 Operation Mongoose was soon stopped, and the United States began clamping down on independent exile groups such as Alpha 66 and Segundo Frente .
 The heady feel of victory during the missile crisis was one basic reason Washington decided to intensify the conflict against the communists in Vietnam . The conflict would become a bitter quagmire for the next decade . The Vietnam war would be a major source of tension in the region .
 Communism was to remain a strong force for the next quarter-century, eventually collapsing from within, without any U.S. military assistance . Communism continued to be strong force in the Soviet Union .
 The ""Toothless Tiger" remains today the undisputed Maximum Leader in Cuba .
 For the past three decades, a steady flow of Cubans, from all walks of life, has been arriving . Other Latin Americans fleeing turmoil in their own countries have also arrived in the U.S.
 These Latins have changed Miami into an international city that has attracted many other immigrants . Miami has become a major tourist destination in recent years .
 More than half of Dade County is now Hispanic, and 45 percent of its residents are foreign-born . More than 50 percent of the county's residents are now Hispanic .
 At the time of the missile crisis, South Florida had virtually no Hispanics or foreign-born residents . The effect has spilled over into the rest of South Florida, which at the time was largely Hispanic .
 According to the 1990 census, 16 percent of Broward County residents are foreign-born . Broward residents are mostly from native Latin American immigrants .
 Even as the U.S. was celebrating, 30 years ago today, the Soviet Union had already begun the task of winning Castro back . The Soviet Union won back Castro in the 1980s, but it was still trying to win him back .
 Sergei Khrushchev is a fellow at a Rhode Island think tank, driving a Buick and applying for a green card . The son of the late Soviet leader is now a fellow fellow fellow at the think tank in Rhode Island .
 He takes an upbeat view of the experience, believing it served as a learning experience . He says it was a positive learning experience for him .
 Both the Soviets and the Americans, he says, decided they had come too close to nuclear holocaust in October 1962 . The Soviets and Americans decided to pull back from the brink .
 At the time, the U.S. had about 3,000 nuclear war-heads, the Soviets about 300 . The United States had about 4,500 nuclear warheads . The Soviets had about 300 war-heads .
 After the crisis, the number of warheads increased, until each side had 25,000 nuclear bombs . The number of nuclear warheads increased after the crisis . The North Korea-South Korea nuclear war increased in the 1980s .
 Robert McNamara, defense secretary at the time, wonders why everyone was worried about the missiles in Cuba . McNamara: "I'm not worried about what's going to happen in Cuba"
 It was the first time these remarks, originally made during a closed academic conference in January, were broadcast in public . The remarks were originally made at a private academic conference .
 The 65-year-old Cuban leader indicated he had no intention of resigning at the moment . Cuba's main ally and economic supplier for three decades was the former Soviet Union .
 Cuban leader denied the current crisis had caused any serious splits in the government . The Cuban leader denies the government is at risk of serious splits .
 He revealed details of Cuba's 30-year relationship with the Soviet Union . On many occasions Moscow criticized the Cuban government's actions, he said .
 He rejected views held by many western analysts that the Soviet Union directed Cuba to support revolutionary movements and left-wing governments .
 Castro added that the Soviet Union also had misgivings about Cuba sending troops to support the leftwing MPLA government in Angola in 1975 . Castro: The Soviet Union had also concerns about Cuba's involvement in Angola .
 20 Soviet nuclear warheads that were deployed in Cuba at the time could have been launched at American cities within a few hours . However, while as you say, ''frank communication is absolutely essential in crisis situations,'' this alone is not enough to prevent nuclear war .
 Since 1962, vast changes have taken place in the world's nuclear arsenals since 1962 . For vast changes in nuclear weapons since 1962, see how they have changed .
 There are now somewhere near 50,000 nuclear weapons in existence, many times the number necessary to annihilate both the superpowers .
 In 1962 response time was measured in terms of hours, while now we have minutes at best . Moreover, in 1962 response times were measured by hours, instead of hours .
 Most optimistic estimate of 'clean and informed decision time' for a Soviet attack on the U.S. was given as 5. minutes . For a United States SLBM attack on Russia, this time was estimated to be 1 minute .
 The danger continues to increase today as the weapons produced a chieve greater accuracy and shorter delivery times . Weapons produced in the 1930s were produced with greater accuracy .
 The 50 percent reduction in strategic nuclear weapons now under consideration will do little, in and of itself, to alter this disastrous situation, says Peter Bergen .
 The new administration must urgently and diligently negotiate for the elimination of any nuclear weapons that would tend to render the present face-off between the superpowers destabilizing . President Barack Obama's new administration needs to urgently address the issue .
 President Kennedy confronted Premier Khrushchev over the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba . President Kennedy said that all such weapons had been removed from the island . The Soviet leader told President Kennedy that such weapons were removed .
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali attained access to Soviet files to write their book ""One Hell of a Gamble" The book will soon be published in the United States .
 At the same time President Kennedy was triumphantly telling the American people that the crisis was over, Khrushchev still had 98 tactical nuclear missiles hidden on the island .
 The book also tells how the Soviets slipped troops and weapons into Cuba . It also tells the story of how the Soviet Union slipped troops into Cuba.
 Khrushchev asked President Kennedy to stop flying reconnaissance planes over Soviet ships in the area, to which the American president agreed . President Kennedy agreed to stop the flights over the area .
 The waters were then free for the Soviets to sneak in the missiles and troops . The waters then were then used to smuggle in missiles, troops and missiles .
 Cuban Premier Fidel Castro badly wanted the missiles, but the Soviets took them away when Moscow found that Cuba could not keep the secret . The Soviets took the missiles away from Cuba when it found out that it had to be kept secret .
 If the information is correct, it is chilling to think what might have occurred . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 President Kennedy knew the Soviet leader was lying, the consequences could have been devastating . Had President Kennedy known the truth, he would have faced devastating consequences .
 All that mattered was a game that ignites passion and unites the people of two nations locked in a 40-year dispute . The game was all that mattered is the game that ignited passion for the two nations .
 Cuba's all-star team beat the Baltimore Orioles 12-6 at Camden Yards on Monday . The game was the first time Cuba has played in a major league game . The Orioles beat the Cuban team 12-5 .
 Orioles beat Cuban team in an earlier exhibition game at Havana's Latin American Stadium March 28 . Orioles also defeated Cuban team March 28 in another exhibition game March 31 .
 Cuba's first chance to test its baseball mettle against U.S. major league talent in 40 years . Cuba was playing major league baseball for the first time since 1976 . Cuba has not played major league players in major league for more than a decade .
 The Cubans are considered the world's best amateur baseball players . They are considered to be the best amateur players in the world . The U.S. team hopes to learn from the Cuban experience .
 For the people of two nations that stopped speaking to each other almost 40 years ago, Monday night was a chance to find some common ground . For the first time in 40 years, the U.S. and South Korea stopped speaking each other .
 Subplots that seemed to come out of the Cold War overshadowed the game . But it did overshadow the game with subplots . The film was released on Friday at 9 p.m. ET .
 Baseball scouts, communist officials and U.S. immigration agents roamed the field, keeping an eye out for possible defectors . Baseball scouts and communist officials were also on hand .
 They had instructions to point to the nearest police officer if a Cuban player approached them about deserting . The Cuban players were instructed to tell the officer if they approached them .
 Cuban players earn, on the average, $18 a month compared to the mega salaries of the major leagues . Surprisingly, no defections occurred, even though players earn $18 per month .
 One man charged the field with an anti-Castro sign and was wrestled to the ground by Cuban umpire Cesar Valdes . Demonstrators did not disrupt the game, although one man was arrested .
 Thousands of Camden Yards fans booed several attempts by protesters to interrupt the game . Despite a heavy police presence, it was the thousands of fans who kept order by booing .
 Cuban exiles from Florida and New Jersey complained about strict security rules which banned them from displaying political signs and sitting in blocs inside the stadium .
 Banner planes are prohibited from flying directly over the baseball field . Banner planes can't be seen flying over the field directly over baseball fields .
 Cuban-Americans should not view the outcome of the Orioles-Cuba game as a victory for Fidel Castro . The game should not be viewed as a triumph for Castro, Cuban-American says . The Orioles beat the Red Sox 3-2 on Tuesday night .
 The now-retired Air Force lieutenant colonel piloted a U-2 spy plane back then . He piloted the plane back in the U.S.
 On Oct. 1962, President Kennedy took photos of ballistic-missile launching sites in Cuba . President Kennedy called the photos "unmistakable evidence" of missile launch sites .
 Heyser's name is forever linked to the missile-site pictures . But he thinks 10 other Air Force U-2 pilots who flew over Cuba during the crisis should share credit .
 Heyser's flight was just the first of many dangerous missions they flew while the world stood on the brink of nuclear war . The mission was part of a series of dangerous missions during the Cold War .
 Kennedy announced to the world what the U-2 photos had shown him - the Soviet Union was building secret sites for nuclear-tipped missiles 90 miles south of Key West .
 The United States immediately put up a naval blockade to prevent more missiles from being shipped to Cuba . The U.S. put up the blockade after the attack .
 Soviet and U.S. nuclear forces were put on alert in Cuba . Some American military leaders urged Kennedy to bomb missile sites and invade Cuba .
 The crisis ended when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles . The crisis in the Soviet Union ended when it agreed to pull missiles .
 Most of the U-2 pilots, all stationed at Laughlin Air Force Base, Texas, later reported that they had been shot at . Most pilots reported they were shot at, said Jim Long, chairman of the Laughlin Heritage Foundation in Texas .
 Photos taken earlier by CIA U-2s had disclosed surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba .
 The SAMs obviously were there to protect something valuable, Long says . U-2 pilots were ordered to find out what it was, he says .
 The U-2, nicknamed Dragon Lady, still is flying 50 years after the first one rolled out of Lockheed Martin's ""Skunk Works" in Palmdale, Calif. The first one was rolled out 50 years ago .
 With an 80-foot wingspan, it is essentially a powered glider flying at 70,000 feet - more than 13 miles above Earth's surface . The aircraft has an 80 foot wingspan and an 80ft wingspan .
 Too fast and the wings would curl and break off; too slow and crash, Heyser said . Too fast or slow, the plane would stall and crash . Too slow or too fast, the airplane would have to be too slow to survive .
 The difference was only 7 miles per hour, and the speeds change as the plane gains or loses altitude .
 Accidents killed one of Laughlin's U-2 pilots shortly before the missile crisis and another the next year .
 Heyser, Anderson and Campbell had gone to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., to train with the CIA's more advanced U-2Cs . The three men had been training with the U.2Cs that February .
 Campbell was killed March 1, 1962, during a night aerial refueling mission . Campbell was a member of the U.S. Army Air Force .
 Joe Hyde had oxygen problem and died when his U2 crashed off Key West in 1963 . Hyde was returning from a Cuba flight when he had an oxygen problem . Hyde died in Key West crash . Hyde's U2 plane crashed into Key West .
 Heyser took off from Edwards in a U-2C borrowed from the CIA for the first of the five flights he made over Cuba in nine days . The first of five flights over Cuba was a flight over the island .
 He approached Cuba from the south and landed 6 hours, 50 minutes later at McCoy Air Force Base, now Orlando International Airport . The plane was headed to Cuba from Cuba .
 Subsequent flights were made from Laughlin, McCoy and Barksdale Air Force Base, La., Long said .
 Heyser's wife, Jackie, said he called every night but couldn't say where he was or what he was doing . Jackie, Jackie said, "I'm not sure what I'm doing"
 President Kennedy invited Heyser to the White House and asked if there was anything extraordinary about that first flight . President Kennedy later invited him to White House to discuss the flight .
 Curtis LeMay, then the Air Force's chief of staff, had accompanied Heyser . Curtis . LeMay was then Air . Force chief-deployment chief-of-staff, then Air Force .
 "I hope you don't mind, we're going to make Anderson the hero,' "" Heyser recalled . "We were going to be Anderson the heroes," he said of Anderson .
 Anderson posthumously was awarded the first Air Force Cross ever presented . Anderson was awarded a posthumous award for bravery during his service in Afghanistan . Anderson died at the age of 92 .
 Heyser and the other U2 pilots received the lesser Distinguished Flying Cross . The U2 crew members were awarded the D.C. and D.D.L.A. honors .
 Heyser said his biggest worry was war breaking out with nuclear weapons . Heysers said he worries about nuclear weapons being used in war .
 In 1946 he was aboard a plane over the South Pacific when retired U.S. and captured Japanese warships were targeted during an underwater atomic bomb test . He was aboard the plane when retired United States and captured .
 Castro's comments came in an interview with ABC's ''20/20'' program . The interview coincided with a conference bringing together Cubans and Americans who played roles during the Cold War .
 ABC made the transcript public Wednesday . ABC will broadcast the interview on Friday .
 The crisis began in mid-October 1962 as Kennedy became convinced that there were Soviet nuclear warheads on the island just 90 miles south of the Florida coast . Kennedy was convinced that the island, 90 miles from Florida coast, was hit by Soviet nuclear weapons .
 Former members of the Kennedy administration are heading to the Cuba conference to revisit that standoff . President Bush musters support to oust Saddam Hussein .
 Castro: "We would have rather not had them in order to preserve the prestige'' of Cuba . Castro said his country did not agree to accept the missiles out of fear .
 Castro indicated respect for Khrushchev and his support of the Cuban revolution . Still, Castro said he had respect for the former leader of the Soviet Union .
 The crisis, marking the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . The crisis was one of the worst moments in the history of American relations with the Soviet Union .
 Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the island . Fernandez was the organizer of the conference, a military commander .
 Kennedy's words click onto the paper rolling off the teletype machine at military headquarters . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, I'm sorry"
 Earlier that day, about 2,500 relatives of U.S. forces stationed at Guantanamo Bay were given 15 minutes to pack a bag each before being evacuated to Norfolk, Va.
 Most Americans invited to the conference, including McNamara, Schlesinger, will arrive Thursday . Former Kennedy speechwriters Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen and Ted Brugioni will arrive .
 Cuba will release some formerly classified documents about the days known as the Crisis of October . Along with the gathering, Cuba will also release some previously classified documents .
 During a similar conference last year, Cuban organizers worked with the National Security Archive to release a wealth of documents about the failed Bay of Pigs invasion .
 The missile crisis conference will feature seminars on Friday and Saturday . The conference will also focus on the missile crisis crisis crisis .