 Fedel Castro led a communist revolution that took over Cuba in the late 1950s . Batista was supported by the USA as he opposed communism .
 Fidel Castro created an alliance with the Soviet Union . He also created a better vision for Cuba . He was an excellent propagandist and guerilla fighter .
 Cuban exiles in the U.S. formed powerful pressure demanding actions against Castro . They took over America's owned business and distributed it to Cuban-supporters peasants . They distributed the product to peasants in Cuba .
 Cuban exiles funded and trained by CIA funded by CIA . CIA also trained by Cubans in Cuba . Bay of Pigs was a major source of Cuban influence in Cuba's Cuba .
 Castro asked Krushchev to help Cuba from another American backed attack 3.3.5 years ago . Castro was responding to the threat of an attack by the U.S.
 Kennedy feared other countries might become Communist and enemies of the USA . Kennedy feared that other nations might become Communists and enemies to the U.S.
 Beginning of missile crisis 19621. It initiated once the USSR placed missiles on Cuba . The crisis was triggered by the Soviet Union placing missiles in Cuba .
 After the Bay of Pigs Khrushchev gave Castro large amounts of military equipment . 2.5% of Castro's military equipment came from the Soviet Union . Castro was given military equipment by the Soviet-controlled regime .
 By July 1962 Cuba had the best -equipped army in Latin America . The Cuban army was one of the most equipped in the world .
 The U.S. airforce could not guarantee to destroy all the missiles . Surgical air attack would destroy the missiles before they became operational .
 Diplomatic pressure to involve the United Nations and other international organisations to resolve the dispute was seen as very weak . Involvement of other countries might force the Soviets to remove the missiles without using violence against-It was very unlikely that diplomacy .
 US navy to stop Soviet ships delivering any further weapons to Cuba, along with a demand for missiles already in Cuba to be removed . U.S. demands that missiles in Cuba be removed from Cuba .
 This would show firm action by the USA without using immediate force . ForThis would show . firm action . without using . immediate force. For this .
 It would give Khrushchev time to consider his next actions, and the USA the option of an air strike or invasion later if the blockade did not work . The U.S. would then be able to decide whether to use air strikes or an invasion .
 Kennedy was under serious pressure from U.S. military leaders to bomb and invade Cuba immediately . Kennedy was facing serious pressure to bomb or invade Cuba .
 Kennedy tried to give himself and Khrushchev a means of solving the crisis without immediate conflict . Kennedy was trying to give the two sides a chance to solve the crisis .
 Kennedy used the opportunity of Khrushchev's first letter to explore ways to solve the crisis . Kennedy also convinced the Soviets that he was prepared for war .
 Khrushchev admitted the presence of the missiles in a long personal letter to kennedy . Ex-comm formed .
 It became clear that despite the USSR had fewer weapons or technology, they could still threaten USA as it would have been enough to cause great damage . Cold war helped stabilise the relationship between USA and USSR .
 Cuban exiles in the U.S. formed powerful pressure demanding actions against Castro . They took over America's owned business and distributed it to Cuban-supporters peasants . They distributed the money to peasants in Cuba .
 Castro asked Krushchev to help Cuba from another American backed attack . Castro was asked to help his country from another attack on Cuba .
 Kennedy feared other countries might become Communist and enemies of the USA . Kennedy feared that other nations might become Communists and enemies .
 After the Bay of Pigs Khrushchev gave Castro large amounts of military equipment . The Castro regime was given military equipment by the Soviet Union .
 America became increasingly worried about the Soviet military build-up in Cuba . The U.S. became increasingly concerned about the growing military presence of Cuba .
 Khrushchev wanted to produce more nuclear warheads and close the gap between the U.S. and USSR . Khrushchevs wanted to close the 'missile gap' between the two countries .
 The USA had missiles in Western Europe and Turkey, well within range of the USSR . The USA also had missile bases in Turkey and Western Europe .
 The USSR had many more cheap, medium-range missiles than the USA . A launch site in Cuba, close to the United States coast, was an ideal place to launch missiles .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba would strengthen Khrushchev's bargaining power against the USA . The U.S. would also strengthen its influence in Cuba .
 Kennedy also realised that he needed to give Khrushchev a way out without appearing to humiliate the Soviet leader- that is why, in private, he agreed not to invade Cuba and later removed United States missiles from Turkey .
 Khrushchev admitted the presence of the missiles in a long personal letter sent to kennedy . Ex-comm formed .