 The accidental intrusion into Soviet air space by a U-2 belonging to the Strategic Air Command on October 27, 1962, is still classified top secret . The incident has received little attention from missile crisis historians .
 Both the Soviet Union and the U.S. were conducting nuclear tests in the atmosphere in October 1962 .
 U.S. sent U-2 planes to the North Pole to collect high altitude radioactive air samples . In order to monitor the Soviet tests at Novaya Zemlya, the United States sent U.2 planes .
 The atmospheric nuclear tests and the air sampling missions continued throughout October 1962 . The two superpowers prepared to go to war over Cuba over Cuba .
 His return mission to the North Pole was scheduled to last eight hours . The mission was scheduled for an eight-hour period .
 A Duck Butt air rescue plane accompanied him as far as Barter Island off the northern coast of Alaska . The rescue plane took him to Barter island off the coast of the state .
 Half way to the North Pole, Maultsby was blinded by the aurora borealis, or northern lights . He had trouble taking fixes with the stars and had trouble with stars .
 At the time that he should have been landing back at Eilson AFB-noon EDT--he penetrated the borders of the Soviet Union . The U.S. Air Force veteran was on his way back to the base base .
 Mig fighters were scrambled from Pewek air base off the northern coast of Chukotka at 1556 GMT--1156 EDT--in an attempt to intercept Maultsby . According to a chart found by Dobbs at the John F Kennedy library, Mig fighters are scrambled off the
 They accompanied him as he flew south over Soviet territory, but were unable to shoot the U-2 down . They were able to shoot him down .
 A chart shows the MiGs tracking Maultsby as he turned eastwards back toward Alaska . Dobbs found the chart in the records of the State Department Executive Secretariat at the National Archives .
 Former SAC pilots and SAC headquarters staff told Dobbs that the U.S. was able to track both Maultsby and the Soviet Migs attempting to shoot him down, by intercepting Soviet air defense traffic .
 The pilot was unable to share this information with the pilot, as the United States eavesdropping capabilities were a closely guarded national secret . The pilot and the pilot were able to speak to each other but were unable to do so .
 Navigators guided Maultsby out of Soviet air space by ordering him to turn left until he could see Orion's Belt off his right wingtip . Navigators also ordered him to leave Soviet airspace by turning around until he was out of the Soviet airspace .
 With the constellation observable to his south, Maultsby would be flying westwards, back home toward Alaska . The constellation is visible to the south, with the light of the sun .
 Alaska Air Defense Command scrambled a pair of F-102 interceptors armed with nuclear warheads from Galena AFB to guide Maultsby home and intercept the Soviet Migs . The Alaska Air Force interceptors were armed with warheads .
 Maultsby ran out of fuel as he exited Soviet air space . He glided for nearly an hour before landing at an airstrip at Kotzebue on Alaska's western tip .
 U-2 went missing over the Soviet Union on the most dangerous day of the crisis . Pentagon and White House had not considered the possibility that a U-1 might go missing over Soviet Union .
 Des Portes had his hands full with the simultaneous shootdown of a U-2 over Cuba . The shootdown was the first of its kind since the U.2 was shot down in Cuba .
 Pentagon and White House records show that defense secretary Robert McNamara was not informed that the U-2 was missing over the Soviet Union until 1.41m. The U.2 went missing over Soviet Union over the weekend .
 Maultsby entered Soviet air space more than an hour and a half after entering Soviet airspace . He was the first person to enter Soviet airspace since the mission began .
 McNamara rushed out of a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Tank . He informed the president by telephone four minutes later, at 1.45m .
 The Pentagon informed the State Department at 1.47m, according to a contemporaneous State Department memo . The State Department was informed by the Pentagon at 1:47m .
 According to a 1975 oral history interview with Air Force General David Burchinal, McNamara rushed out of the Pentagon meeting yelling hysterically ""this means war with the Soviet Union" McNamara was the president of the United States .
 Washington-Moscow hotline was only installed after the missile crisis . Burchinal probably embroidered this acount ssomewhat as the hotline was installed .
 The U-2 made a flight of 10 hours, 25 minutes, the longest ever recorded for a U.2 . It was the longest flight of the U.S. Air Force One . The flight was recorded at 10 hours and 25 minutes . The mission was the first time a
 McNamara ordered the recall of a second U-2 plane that had followed him on another air sampling mission to the North Pole . The plane was followed by a second plane, the Pentagon memo says .
 He also ordered the cancellation of all U-2 air sampling missions and a full Air Force investigation into the causes of the accident .
 Kennedy administration hushed up the incident as best it could . Kennedy administration ordered the temporary grounding of all U-2 missions, but hushed it .
 The results of the Air Force investigation have still not been published . Forty-six years later, the results of that investigation are still not published .
 If you have Google Earth installed on your computer, you can follow Maultsby's overflight of the Soviet Union through precise coordinates and photographs by downloading this Google Earth layer and opening it in the free Google Earth application .
 Maultsby's overflight of the Soviet Union is available in One Minute to Midnight, available through Amazon.com .