 People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church, and 3 more Atheists . Fidel Castro in 2003 . People ex-communicated from the Catholic Church .
 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was one of the primary leaders of the Cuban Revolution . He was the Prime Minister of Cuba from February 1959 to December 1976 . He resigned from the Council of State of Cuba in February 2008 .
 His political career continued with nationalist critiques of Fulgencio Batista, and of the United States' political and corporate influence in Cuba .
 He gained an ardent, but limited, following and also drew the attention of the authorities .
 He eventually led the failed 1953 attack on the Moncada Barracks, after which he was captured, tried, incarcerated, and later released . He was captured and tried, imprisoned, and released .
 He then traveled to Mexico to organize and train for an assault on Batista's Cuba . He then went to Mexico and traveled to Cuba to prepare for the assault .
 He and his fellow revolutionaries left Mexico for the East of Cuba in December 1956 . He and other revolutionaries left for Cuba .
 Castro came to power as a result of the Cuban revolution that overthrew the U.S.-backed dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista . Shortly thereafter he became Prime Minister of Cuba .
 In 1976 he became President of the Council of State as well as of the . Council of Ministers . He was also President of State in 1976 and of Council of . Ministers .
 He also held the supreme military rank of Comandante en Jefe of the Cuban armed forces . He was also known as the Cuban President of the 1990s .
 Castro has been portrayed as a dictator in spite of his disapproval of dictatorships . Castro has said he does not want to be seen as dictator . He has been accused of being a dictator .
 Castro transferred his responsibilities to the First Vice-President, his younger brother Raúl Castro, on July 31, 2006 . Castro had intestinal surgery from an undisclosed digestive illness believed to have been diverticulitis .
 On February 19, 2008, five days before his mandate was to expire, he announced he would neither seek nor accept a new term as either president or commander-in-chief . He announced in February 2008 that he would not seek or accept a second term .
 The National Assembly elected Raúl Castro to succeed him as the President of Cuba in 2008 . Castro was elected by the National Assembly on February 24, 2008 .
 Other countries 5 Religious beliefs, 6 Succession 7 Succession, 8 Family 9 Controversy and 8 Controversies . Public image, public image and family image are the most important issues .
 Fidel Alejandro Vittore Castro Ruz was born on a sugar plantation in Birán, near Mayarí, in the modern-day province of Holguín . He was born in the now-defunct Oriente province .
 He was born to Ángel Castro y Argiz, a Galician immigrant from the impoverished northwest of Spain . He became relatively prosperous through work in the sugar industry and successful investing .
 Castro's mother, Lina Ruz González, was a household servant . Castro also acknowledged having some Marrano ancestry .
 Angel Castro was married to another woman, Maria Luisa Argota, until Fidel was 15 . Fidel as a child had to deal with his illegitimacy and the challenge of being raised in various foster homes .
 Castro had two brothers, Ramón and Raúl, and four sisters, Angelita, Juanita, Enma, and Agustina, all of whom were born out of wedlock . All of the siblings were married .
 He also had two half-siblings, Lidia and Pedro Emilio who were raised by Ángel Castro's first wife .
 Fidel was not baptized until he was 8, also very uncommon, bringing embarrassment and ridicule from other children . Fidel was baptised at age of 8, bringing ridicule from others .
 Castro was formally recognized by his father when he was 17, when his surname was legally changed to Castro from Ruz, his mother's name . He spent many years in private Catholic boarding schools, finishing high school at El Colegio de Belén in Havana in 1945 .
 There are persistent rumors that Castro was scouted for various . United States of America U.S. baseball teams . There is no evidence that this ever actually happened .
 He became immediately embroiled in the political culture at the university, which was a reflection of the volatile politics in Cuba during that era . He became immersed in the culture of Cuban politics .
 He was implicated in a number of shootings linked to Rolando Masferrer's MSR action group . He returned to the university from a brief hiatus to involve himself fully in the university elections .
 A charismatic figure, Chibás attracted many Cubans with his message of social justice, honest government, and political freedom . He was a charismatic figure who attracted many with social justice .
 Chibás was running for president against the incumbent Ramón Grau San Martín . The incumbent had allowed rampant corruption to flourish during his term .
 It aimed to instill a strong sense of national identity among Cubans, establish Cuban economic independence and freedom from the United States, and dismantle the power of the elite over Cuban politics .
 Castro, considering Chibás his mentor, remained committed to his cause, working fervently on his behalf . Though Chibáas lost the election, Castro remained committed, and worked fervently for his cause .
 In 1951, while running for president again, Chibás shot himself in the stomach during a radio broadcast . In 1951 he shot himself during a broadcast .
 Castro was present and accompanied him to the hospital where he died . Castro was twice linked to political assassinations during his life .
 He was suspected of Manolo Castro's assassination that took place on February 22 . He is suspected of being behind the assassination of the Castro family .
 Dying Oscar Fernandez and other witnesses identified Castro as the assassin . Oscar Fernandez was shot in the head by Castro . Castro was the assassin of Fernandez .
 Castro joined anti-American demonstration trip to Bogotá, Colombia, paid by Argentinean army colonel and President Juan Perón . Castro joined an anti-U.S. demonstration trip in 1948 .
 Castro joined mob violence and property destruction, and later sought refuge in the Argentinean embassy . Castro was forced to flee to Argentina's embassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina .
 In 1948, Castro married Mirta Díaz Balart, a student from a wealthy Cuban family . Castro was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite through which he was exposed . Castro's wife was a wealthy student who he married .
 Castro also received a $1,000 wedding gift from Fulgencio Batista, the ex-President who was a friend of both families . Castro and Batista's families were friends .
 In 1950 he graduated from law school with a Doctor of Laws degree . He began practicing law in a small partnership in Havana . He was born in Cuba and died in 1961 .
 By now he had become well known for his passionately nationalist views and his intense opposition to the U.S. He became well known .
 Batista was supported by establishment elements of Cuban society, powerful Cuban agencies, and labor unions . Batista's government was in full control of Cuba's entire political system .
 Castro abandoned his law practice and formed an underground organization of supporters . His brother, Raúl, and Mario Chanes de Armas, were also underground supporters of the Batista coup .
 Moncada Barracks, Batista's largest garrison outside Santiago de Cuba, was attacked by Cuban troops . They collected guns and ammunition and finalized their plans for an armed attack . The attack was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 More than sixty of the one-hundred and thirty-five militants involved in the attack were killed . The attack proved disastrous and more than 60 of the militants involved were killed.
 Castro and other surviving members of his group managed to escape to a part of the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains east of Santiago . They were eventually discovered and captured in the mountains . Castro and others escaped and were eventually captured .
 Castro and his brother, Raúl, were not executed on capture as many of their fellow militants were . There is evidence that an officer recognized Castro from his university days and treated the captured rebels compassionately .
 Others, such as Angel Prado, say Castro's driver got lost and he never reached the barracks .
 The streets of Santiago de Cuba were filled with party goers . That night was the night of “El Carnaval de Santiago” and the streets of the island nation were full of partygoers .
 Castro was tried in the fall of 1953 and sentenced to up to fifteen years in prison . Castro was found guilty of attempted murder in 1953 . He was sentenced to 15 years behind bars .
 "I know that the regime will try to suppress the truth by all possible means," he says . "There will be a conspiracy to bury me in oblivion. I know that there will be an assassination conspiracy"
 While he was being held at the prison for political activists on Isla de Pinos, he continued to plot Batista's overthrow . Upon release, he planned upon release to reorganize and train in Mexico .
 Castro was released in May 1955 due to a general amnesty from Batista who was under political pressure . Castro reunited with other Cuban exiles and founded the 26th of July Movement, named after the failed attack on Moncada Barracks .
 Castro learned from Moncada experience that new tactics were needed if Batista's forces were to be defeated . Castro had learned from the Moncado experience that he needed new tactics to defeat Batista .
 This time, the plan was to use underground guerrilla tactics, which were used by the Cubans the last time they attempted to overthrow an imperialistic regime . The plan is to use guerrilla tactics used in the last attempt to overthrow the regime .
 The Cuban war of Independence against the Spanish was Cuba's introduction to guerrilla warfare . Emilio Aguinaldo in the Philippines took up guerrilla warfare after the Cuban campaign ended in Cuba .
 In Mexico Castro met Ernesto ""Che" Guevara, a proponent of guerrilla warfare . Castro met Che Guegara in Mexico in the early 1950s .
 KGB agent Nikolai Sergeevich Leonov went to the United States to gather personnel and funds from Cubans living in the U.S. Leonov was a KGB agent in Mexico City . Leonov had contacts with the Cuban government but failed to get weapons .
 Back in Mexico, the group trained under a Spanish Civil War Veteran, Cuban-born Alberto Bayo . Bayo had fled to Mexico after Francisco Franco's victory in Spain .
 Castro and his group of 81 followers set out from Tuxpan, Veracruz, aboard the yacht Granma . The rebels landed at Playa Las Coloradas close to Los Cayuelos near the eastern city of Manzanillo on December 2, 1956 .
 In short order, most of Castro's men were killed, dispersed, or taken prisoner by Batista forces . Castro was killed or dispersed by Batistas forces .
 It is agreed that no more than twenty of the original eighty-two men survived the bloody encounters with the Cuban army and succeeded in fleeing to the Sierra Maestra mountains . The exact number is in dispute .
 The group of survivors included Fidel Castro, Che Guevara, Raúl Castro, and Camilo Cienfuegos . The survivors were survivors of the Cuban Revolution .
 They regrouped in the Sierra Maestra in Oriente province and organized a column under Fidel Castro's command . The group was organized by Fidel Castro and organized under him in the military .
 The strongest was in Santiago formed by Frank País . País's organization merged with the 26th of July Movement of Castro in 1957 .
 Castro's movement gained popular support in the cities and countryside . It grew to over eight hundred men . Castro's group was over 8,000 strong .
 Castro and Matthews were followed by the TV crew of Andrew Saint George, said to be a CIA contact person . Saint George is said to have worked for the CIA in the past . The crew of the CIA followed the pair .
 In 1957, Castro signed the Manifesto of the Sierra Maestra in which he agreed to call elections under the Electoral Code of 1943 within the first 18 months of his time in power . Castro also agreed to restore all of the provisions of the Constitution of 1940 that had been suspended under
 Cuba failed to have elections, the most important part of the program, within the allotted time . Cuba's president took steps to implement some of the measures in the Manifesto .
 Castro published in Coronet Magazine a famous statement of the goals of the movement . Castro published the statement in February 1958, 1958 .
 He promised to prepare and conduct honest general elections within 12 months after success . He stated that he is fighting to do away with dictatorship in Cuba .
 He justified attacks on Cuba's economy as the only way to bring down the Batista dictatorship . He also justified his attacks on the Cuban economy .
 Despite denouncement of dictatorships, Castro himself has been described as a dictator . Castro has been accused of being a dictator in Cuba .
 Batista launched Operation Verano in 1958 to crush Castro and other anti-government groups . Batista was overthrown by the government in 1958 .
 Castro's guerrilla forces scored a series of victories, largely aided by mass desertions from Batista's army of poorly trained and uncommitted young conscripts . Although on paper heavily outnumbered, Castro's forces were heavily outnumbered . Castro's guerrillas scored a number of victories against Bat
 During the Battle of La Plata, Castro's forces defeated an entire battalion . Castro's troops defeated the entire battalion in the battle . The battle took place during the Second World War .
 Castro's small army came close to defeat during the Battle of Las Mercedes . He managed to pull his troops out by opening up negotiations with General Cantillo .
 When Operation Verano ended, Castro ordered three columns commanded by Guevara, Jaime Vega and Camilo Cienfuegos to invade central Cuba . The columns were supported by rebellious elements who had long been operating in the area .
 Huber Matos, Raúl Castro and others were operating in the easternmost part of the province . They were supported by Huber .
 On the plains, Castro's forces first surrounded the town of Guisa in Granma Province and drove out their enemies . Then proceeded to take most of the towns that had been taken by Calixto García in the 1895-1898 Cuban War .
 In December 1958, Che Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos continued their advance through Las Villas province . The Battle of Yaguajay took place in December 1958 .
 They succeeded in occupying several towns, and then began preparations for an attack on Santa Clara, the provincial capital . They then began preparing for the attack .
 Guevara's fighters launched a fierce assault on the Cuban army surrounding Santa Clara . A vicious house-to-house battle ensued, with house to-house battles taking place .
 Cienfuegos won the Battle of Yaguajay . They also derailed an armored train which Batista had sent to aid his troops in the city .
 The provincial capital was captured after less than a day of fighting on December 31, 1958 . The province was captured by the Soviets in 1958 .
 After the loss at the Battle of Santa Clara, Batista boarded a plane and fled to the Dominican Republic in the early hours of January 1, 1959 . Batista was expecting betrayal by his own army and having lost all backup from the previously supportive United States government .
 Eulogio Cantillo was recently the commander in Oriente province, the center of the Castro revolt . Cantillo is the current commander of the province, Oriente Province .
 Carlos Piedra, the oldest judge of the Supreme Court, as provisional President of Cuba as specified in the Constitution of 1940 . Pieda is the oldest . judge of Cuba's Supreme Court .
 Fidel Castro refused to accept the selection of Justice Piedra as provisional President . The Supreme Court refused to administer the oath of office to the Justice . The rebel forces of Fidel Castro seized power throughout the island .
 At the age of 32, Castro had successfully masterminded a classic guerrilla campaign from his headquarters in the Sierra Maestra and ousted Batista . Castro was 32 at the time of his ousting of the Batista government .
 Fidel Castro's army rolled victoriously into Havana on January 8, 1959 . Castro said power does not interest me, and I will not take it .
 The black and red flag of the 26th of July Movement waved on automobiles and buildings . The black & red flag waved on cars and buildings.
 Former judge of the Urgency Court of Santiago de Cuba to be installed as provisional President instead . Urrutia, former judge, will be the provisional President .
 The Cane Planters Association of Cuba issued a statement of support for Castro and his movement . Cuba's crucial sugar industry supports Castro's movement .
 Law professor José Miró Cardona created a new government with himself as prime minister and Manuel Urrutia Lleó as president on January 5 . The new government was created by a law professor and a president .
 The United States officially recognized the new government two days later . The U.S. officially recognized it two days after the election .
 Castro assumed the post of Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces on January 8 . Castro himself arrived in Havana to cheering crowds and assumed his post . Castro arrived in Cuba in January 8 to take over the Cuban government .
 In February professor José Miró Cardona had to resign because of Castro's attacks . Professor José Miro Cardona resigned from his job in February .
 Professor Miró participated in the Bay of Pigs Invasion against Castro's form of government . Miró soon went into exile in the United States, and would later participate in the invasion of Cuba . He would later go into exile .
 Castro opposed free elections . President Manuel Urrutia Lleó wanted to restore elections, but Castro opposed it . Castro was president of Cuba in the 1960s .
 The new government began expropriating property and announced plans to base the compensation on the artificially low property valuations that the companies themselves had kept to a fraction of their true value .
 Castro and a delegation of industrial and international representatives visited the United States of America as guests of the Press Club . Castro visited the U.S. of America between April 15 and April 26 . Castro was accompanied by a group of industrial, international representatives .
 Castro hired one of the best public relations firms in the U.S. for a charm offensive visit by Castro and his recently initiated government . Castro hired the best PR firm in the United States for the visit .
 Castro answered impertinent questions jokingly and ate hot dogs and hamburgers . Castro answered them jokingly . Castro: "I'm not afraid to ask questions. I'm glad to answer them"
 His rumpled fatigues and scruffy beard cut a popular figure easily promoted as an authentic hero . He was seen as a hero in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 Castro resigned as Prime Minister of Cuba and later that day appeared on television to deliver a lengthy denouncement of Urrutia . Castro himself resigned as PM of Cuba . He claimed Urruttia's anti-Communism was having a detrimental effect on Cuba .
 Castro's sentiments received widespread support as crowds surrounded the presidential palace . Urrutia's resignation was duly received, prompting crowds to demand his resignation .
 Castro resumed his position as premier and appointed Osvaldo Dorticós as the new president . On July 23, Castro returned to his post as premier .
 As early as July 1959, Castro's intelligence chief Ramiro Valdés contacted the KGB in Mexico City . The KGB had been in contact with the Castro government .
 The USSR sent over one hundred mostly Spanish speaking advisors, including Enrique Líster Forján, to organize the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution . Subsequently, the USSR sent .
 When U.S.-owned refineries in Cuba refused to process the oil, they were expropriated . The United States broke off diplomatic relations with the Castro government soon afterward .
 Cuba began to establish closer ties with the Soviet Union . Eisenhower administration was concerned about Cuba's relations with the USSR . Cuba's relationship with Soviet Union was a concern for Eisenhower administration .
 U.S. disappointment with their lack of power in Cuban decision making fueled Castro's fears leading to increasing Cuban dependence on USSR support . United States disappointment with lack of control in Cuba led Castro to increase reliance on Soviet support .
 On May 1, 1961, Castro declared Cuba as socialist state and officially abolished multiparty elections . Castro declared the state of Cuba as a socialist state .
 In June 1960, Eisenhower reduced Cuba's sugar import quota by 7,000,000 tons . Cuba nationalized some $850 million worth of U.S. property and businesses in response .
 The new government took control of the country by nationalizing industry, redistributing property, collectivizing agriculture and creating policies that would benefit the poor . New government took over from previous government .
 These policies alienated many former supporters of the Cuban revolution among the Cuban middle and upper-classes . While popular among the poor, these policies alienated some former supporters .
 Over one million Cubans later migrated to the United States of America . They formed a vocal anti-Castro community in Miami, Florida, supported by successive U.S. administrations .
 By the early autumn of 1960, the United States government was engaged in a semi-secret campaign to remove Castro from power . Castro created Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which implemented neighborhood spying in an effort to weed out ""counter-revolutionary activities"
 By the end of 1960, all opposition newspaper had been closed down . All radio and television stations were in state control, run under Leninist principle of Democratic Centralism .
 He was accused of keeping about 20,000 dissents held captive and tortured under inhuman prison conditions every year . He was also said to have tortured about 200,000 people under inhuman conditions .
 Loyalty to Castro became the primary criteria for all appointments in the island . Loyalty was the main criteria for appointments to the island's leadership .
 Castro exhibited Soviet tanks and other weapons in the 1961 New Year's Day parade . Castro showed Soviet tanks in the parade .
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion was an unsuccessful attempt by a US-trained force of Cuban exiles to invade southern Cuba with support from United States government armed forces, to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro .
 The plan was launched in April 1961, less than three months after John F Kennedy assumed the presidency in the United States .
 Cuban armed forces trained and equipped by Eastern Bloc nations defeated the exile combatants in three days . Cuba's armed forces, trained and armed, defeated the exiled combatants in just three days.
 The invasion is named after the Bay of Pigs, which is just one possible translation of the Spanish Bahía de Cochinos . The invasion was named after a Spanish word .
 The main landing at the Bay of Pigs specifically took place at the beach named Playa Girón . The beach is a beach in which the main landing took place .
 Castro declared he was a Marxist-Leninist in a nationally broadcast speech on December 2, 1961 . Castro declared that Cuba was adopting Communism in a national broadcast .
 On February 7, 1962, the United States imposed an embargo against Cuba . The embargo was imposed on Cuba by the U.S. in February 1962 .
 This embargo was broadened during 1962 and 1963, including a general travel ban for American tourists . The embargo was also broadened in 1963, when American tourists were not allowed to travel .
 Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing missiles in Cuba as a deterrent to a possible U.S. invasion . The move justified the move in response to United States missile deployment in Turkey .
 He met with a Cuban delegation led by Raúl Castro in July in order to work out the specifics . After consultations with military advisors, he met with his military advisors .
 It was agreed to deploy Soviet R-12 MRBMs on Cuban soil . But U-2 reconnaissance discovered the construction of the missile installations on October 15, 1962 .
 The United States viewed the installation of Soviet nuclear weapons 90 miles south of Key West as an aggressive act and a threat to U.S. security . The installation of nuclear weapons was viewed as an 'aggressive act'
 The U.S. implemented a quarantine around Cuba that would actively intercept and search any vessels heading for the island . As a result, the United States publicly announced its discovery on October 22, 1962 .
 Nikolai Sergevich Leonov, who would become a General in the KGB Intelligence Directorate and the Soviet KGB deputy station chief in Warsaw, was the translator Castro used for contact with the Russians during this period . Castro's translator was Leonov who would go on to become a general in the
 In a personal letter to Khrushchev dated October 27, 1962, Castro urged him to launch a nuclear first strike against the U.S. if Cuba were invaded, but he rejected any first strike response . In 1962, the Cuban leader wrote that he would launch a first strike if
 Soviet field commanders in Cuba were, however, authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons if attacked by the U.S. They were authorized to attack by the United States .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba and an understanding that the United States would secretly remove MRBMs targeting the Soviet Union from Turkey and Italy . The United States implemented the measure a few months later .
 Fabian Escalante, who was tasked with protecting the life of Castro, estimated the number of assassination schemes or attempts by the CIA to be 638 . The CIA is believed to have attempted to assassinate Castro .
 Some such attempts allegedly included an exploding cigar, a fungal-infected scuba-diving suit, and a mafia-style shooting .
 Ex-lover Marita Lorenz attempted to kill him in the 1960s . Marita was the subject of numerous attempts by his ex-lovers to kill her .
 She allegedly agreed to aid the CIA and attempted to smuggle a jar of cold cream containing poison pills into his room . She allegedly tried to sneak the pills into the room of the alleged CIA operative .
 When Castro realized, he reportedly gave her a gun and told her to kill him but her nerve failed . Castro reportedly told her he would kill him if she killed him .
 Family Jewels documents declassified by the CIA in 2007 . One such assassination attempt involved Johnny Roselli and Al Capone's successor in the Chicago Outfit, Salvatore Giancana .
 Robert Kennedy personally authorized by then U.S. attorney general . Go-between from CIA, Robert Maheu, contacted Giancana and Miami Syndicate leader Santos Trafficante .
 Maheu had presented himself as a representative of numerous international business firms in Cuba that were being expropriated by Castro . He said he was representing international firms that were expropriating by Castro in Cuba .
 Giancana suggested using a series of poison pills that could be used to doctor Castro's food and drink . According to the files, it was suggested using poison pills .
 Giancana presented Juan Orta as an official in the Cuban government who was also in the pay of gambling interests, and who did have access to Castro . Orta demanded to be let out of the mission, handing over the job to another participant .
 Later, a second attempt was mounted through Giancana and Trafficante using Dr. Dr. Juan Carlos . Dr. Carlos was the first person to attempt to carry out the rescue mission .
 It is unknown how far the second attempt went, as the entire program was cancelled shortly thereafter due to the launching of the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The second attempt was cancelled soon after .
 Jose Maria Aznar, former Spanish Prime Minister, wrote that the embargo was Castro's greatest ally . Aznar wrote that Castro would lose his presidency within three months if the U.S. embargo lifted .
 Castro retained control after Cuba became bankrupt and isolated following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Castro retains control of Cuba after it became bankrupt following collapse of Soviet Union . Cuba is now isolated and isolated .
 In 1994, Cuba's economy plunged into what was called the ""Special Period" The island's economy was teetering on the brink of collapse . The contraction of the Cuban economy resulted in eighty-five percent of its markets disappearing .
 Cuba legalized the United States dollar, turned to tourism, and encouraged the transfer of remittances in U.S. dollars from Cubans living in the USA to relatives on the Island . The island nation legalized the US dollar in 2009 .
 The United States authorized the shipment of food in 2001, the first since the embargo was imposed . Castro proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States while declining a United States offer of humanitarian aid .
 Castro was able to build a formidable military force with the help of Soviet equipment and military advisors . Castro built a formidable force in Cuba with the aid of the Soviet Union .
 Castro's alliance with the Soviet Union caused something of a split between him and Guevara . Castro was one of the leaders of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba . Castro's relationship with the USSR caused a rift between the two .
 In 1966, Guevara left for Bolivia in an ill-fated attempt to stir up revolution against the country's government . He was killed by the government in 1966 .
 On August 23, 1968, Castro made a public gesture to the USSR that caused the Soviet leadership to reaffirm their support for him . Castro made the gesture in 1968 . The Soviet leadership reaffirmed its support for Castro in August .
 Two days after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia to repress the Prague Spring, Castro took to the airwaves and publicly denounced the Czech rebellion . Castro denounced the uprising two days after it was launched .
 Soviet allies were deeming the invasion an infringement of Czechoslovakia's sovereignty . In return for his public backing of the invasion, the Soviets bailed out the Cuban economy .
 In 1971, despite an Organization of American States convention that no nation in the Western Hemisphere would have a relationship with Cuba . Castro took a month-long visit to Chile, following the re-establishment of diplomatic relations with Cuba with the country .
 The subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 had an immediate and devastating effect on Cuba . Cuba was devastated by the collapse of its Soviet Union . The collapse of Cuba in 1991 was a devastating blow to Cuba .
 On November 4, 1975, Castro ordered the deployment of Cuban troops to Angola in order to aid the MPLA-ruled government against the South African-backed opposition forces .
 Moscow aided the Cuban initiative with the USSR engaging in a massive airlift of Cuban forces into Angola . The USSR airlifted Cuban forces to Angola .
 Cuban troops were also sent to Marxist Ethiopia to assist Ethiopian forces in the Ogaden War with Somalia in 1977 . Cuban troops also were sent to assist in the war with Marxist Ethiopia .
 Castro extended support to Marxist Revolutionary movements throughout Latin America . He aided the Sandinistas in overthrowing the Somoza government in Nicaragua in 1979 . Castro also extended support for Marxist movements throughout the region .
 An estimated 14,000 Cubans were killed in Cuban military actions abroad, it has been claimed . The Carthage Foundation-funded Center for a Free Cuba claims .
 Castro never disclosed the amount of casualties in Soviet African wars, but one estimate is 14,000, a high number for the small country . Former Cuban Intelligence Major who defected in 1987 says the regime made large amounts of money from drug trafficking .
 Norberto Fuentes, a defected member of the Castro brothers' inner circle, has provided details about these operations . Fuente has been in contact with the Cuban government since the 1960s .
 An operation conducted in cooperation with the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine helped Cuban intelligence to steal one billion by robbing banks in Lebanon during the 1975-76 civil war . According to him, the operation was carried out during the war .
 Gold bars, jewelry, gems, and museum pieces were carried in diplomatic pouches via air route Beirut-Moscow-Havana .
 Cuba and Panama restored diplomatic ties in 2005 after breaking them off a year prior . Panama pardoned four Cuban exiles accused of attempting to assassinate Fidel Castro in 2000 . Castro personally greeted the robbers as heroes .
 The foreign minister of each country re-established official diplomatic relations in Havana by signing a document . The document describes a spirit of fraternity that has long linked both nations .
 Cuba, once shunned by many of its Latin American neighbours, now has full diplomatic relations with all but Costa Rica and El Salvador . Each side appears to make attempts to improve it .
 In 1998, Fidel Castro apologized for remarks he made about Mickey Mouse which led Mexico to recall its ambassador from Havana . Mexico recalled its ambassador to Havana .
 Mexican children would find it easier to name Disney characters than to recount key figures in Mexican history, he said . He said he intended no offense when he said earlier that Mexican children found it easier naming Disney characters instead of key figures .
 Mexican president Vicente Fox apologized to Fidel Castro in 2002 over statements by Castro . Fox forced Castro to leave a United Nations summit in Mexico so that he would not be in the presence of President Bush, who also attended .
 On a visit to South Africa in 1998 he was warmly received by President Nelson Mandela . He was warm-received by President Mandela in South Africa .
 President Mandela gave Castro South Africa's highest civilian award for foreigners, the Order of Good Hope . President Mandela also gave Castro a South African honour for foreigners .
 In 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba to meet President Castro and highlight their close ties . The two countries have a close relationship .
 He is the first Canadian government leader to visit the island since Pierre Trudeau was in Havana in 1976 .
 In December 2001, European Union representatives described their political dialogue with Cuba as back on track after a weekend of talks in Havana . The talks were described by the EU in December 2001 .
 EU praised Cuba's willingness to discuss questions of human rights . EU praised the willingness to talk about human rights in Cuba . Cuba's human rights record has been criticized by the EU .
 Trade with individual European countries remains strong since the United States trade embargo on Cuba leaves the market free from American rivals .
 Cuba's imprisonment of 75 dissidents and the execution of three hijackers have strained diplomatic relations with the U.S. Cuba has imprisoned 75 dissidents . Cuba has also executed three of the hijackers who hijacked the plane .
 EU commissioner was impressed with Fidel Castro's willingness to discuss concerns . But he received no commitments from Castro from the Castro .
 Castro is seen as an icon by leaders of recent socialist governments in Latin America . Cuba does not admit to holding political prisoners, seeing them as mercenaries in the pay of the U.S.
 Hugo Chávez of Venezuela is a long-time admirer of Cuba . He reached agreements with Cuba to provide subsidized petroleum in exchange for Cuban medical assistance . Venezuela reached agreements to provide subsidies to Cuba in return for medical aid .
 Castro was raised a Roman Catholic as a child but did not practice as one . Castro did not attend a Catholic school and was raised as a Catholic but didn't practice it . Castro has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Pope John XXIII excommunicated Castro in 1962 on the basis of Pope Pius XII's Decree against Communism, a 1949 decree forbidding Catholics from supporting communist governments . In Oliver Stone's documentary Comandante, Castro states he has never been a believer .
 Pope John Paul II visited Cuba in 1998, the first visit by a reigning pontiff to the island . Pope's visit was the first by a pope to Cuba .
 Castro and the Pope appeared side by side in public during the Pope's visit . Castro and Pope appeared together in public on several occasions during the visit .
 Castro wore a dark blue business suit in public meetings with the Pope . Castro treated him with reverence and respect . Castro wore the business suit when he met with the pope .
 Cubans are again allowed to mark Christmas as a holiday and to openly hold religious processions . Cubans were allowed to celebrate Christmas with openly religious celebrations in Cuba .
 The Pope sent a telegram to Castro thanking him for restoring Christmas as a public holiday . Castro attended a Roman Catholic convent blessing in 2003 . The Pope also thanked Castro for restoring the holiday to Cuba .
 Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I consecrated a cathedral in Havana and bestowed an honor on Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was awarded the title of the cathedral in Cuba .
 An emotional Castro attended a mass in his honor in Havana's cathedral after Pope John Paul II's death in April 2005 . He signed the Pope's condolence book at the Vatican Embassy . His aides said that he was responding to the decision of the Cuban Government to build and donate to the
 He had last visited the cathedral in 1959, 46 years earlier, for the wedding of one of his sisters . He was last seen in 1959 for a wedding of his sister .
 The First Vice President of the Council of State assumes presidential duties upon the illness or death of the president . Article 94 of the Cuban Constitution states that the first vice president of the council of state is the president of Cuba .
 Raúl Castro was the person in that position for the last 32 years of Fidel Castro's presidency . He was the leader of the Cuban government for 32 years .
 On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People's Power unanimously chose his brother, Raúl Castro, as Fidel's successor as President of Cuba . Fidel Castro's brother was chosen by the assembly of the People's Assembly as the successor to him .
 Castro projected an image of a perpetual revolutionary . He wore military-style uniforms and led mass demonstrations .
 He was mostly seen in military attire, but his personal tailor, Merel Van 't Wout, convinced him to occasionally change to business suits .
 Castro's fiery speeches typically lasted for hours . Large throngs of people gathered to cheer at Castro speeches .
 Many details of Castro's private life, particularly involving his family members, are scarce as the media is forbidden to mention them . Castro's family members are also forbidden from talking about them .
 Castro's image appears frequently in Cuban stores, classrooms, tax-cabs, and national television . Castro is Cuban president of Cuba, who died in 2009 .
 Castro had a son named Fidel Ángel ""Fidelito"" Castro Díaz-Balart, born on September 1, 1949 . His first wife Mirta was born on October 11, 1948, and he married her in 1949 .
 Díaz-Balart and Castro were divorced in 1955, and she remarried Emilio Núñez Blanco . She was married to another man in 1955 .
 Díaz-Balart reportedly returned to Havana to live with Fidelito and his family . After a spell in Madrid, Spain, he reportedly spent most of his life in Cuba .
 Díaz-Balart's nephews are Republican U.S. Congressmen Lincoln Diaz-Bartart and Mario Diaz-Balar .
 While Castro was married to Mirta, he had an affair with Natalia ""Naty"" Revuelta Clews, born in Havana in 1925, resulting in a daughter named Alina Fernández-Revuelta . Antonio, Alejandro, Alexis, Alexander ""
 Alina left Cuba in 1993, disguised as a Spanish tourist, and sought asylum in the U.S. Alina was born in Havana, Cuba, and has since been granted asylum .
 Fidel had another daughter, Francisca Pupo, the result of a one night affair . Fidel also had a daughter from a one-night affair .
 His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States of America since the early 1960s . Pupo and her husband now live in Miami, Florida, with their sister .
 When she emigrated, she said: "I cannot longer remain indifferent to what is happening in my country" When she said she couldn't longer be indifferent to the situation in her country .
 My brothers Fidel and Raúl have made it an enormous prison surrounded by water, he says . "I'm not afraid to go to prison," he says of the prison .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro established ""Fidel's checking account" from which he could draw funds as he pleased . Castro established the account in 1959, according to Gonzalez .
 Once-close friend of Castro's wrote that Castro had huge accounts in Swiss banks . Gonzalez asserts that the Comandante's reserves have been linked to counterfeiting and money laundering .
 Gonzalez believes Cuba's paucity of trade with Switzerland contrasts oddly with the National Office of Cuba's relatively large office in Zurich . Gonzalez believes that Cuba's trade with Swiss contrasts oddly . Gonzalez: Cuba's lack of trade between Switzerland and Switzerland is odd .
 Forbes listed Castro among the world's richest people, with an estimated net worth of $550 million . Forbes said Castro had a personal guard of more than 9,700 men and three luxurious yachts .
 Magazine claimed that Cuban leader's personal wealth was nearly double that of Britain's Queen Elizabeth II . Despite anecdotal evidence from diplomats and businessmen that the Cuban leader was notably austere . The estimates were ""more art than science"
 The assessment was drawn by making economic estimates of the net worth of Cuba's state-owned companies . Forbes magazine later increased the estimates to $900 million, adding rumors of large cash stashes in Switzerland .
 The magazine offered no proof of Castro's entry on the rich list . Castro said the claims were part of a U.S. campaign to discredit him . Castro considered suing the magazine .
 Whether his legacy will be interpreted in a positive or negative light is frequently debated in political circles . Whether he will be seen as a good or bad in the future is debated .
 Cuba has one of the world's highest literacy rates and most effective healthcare systems, low wealth inequalities, stable government, and record of supporting international populist struggles in Africa . Those who supported his government generally state that Cuba has a stable government .
 His detractors point out Cuba's bleak human rights record, authoritarian state, stagnant economy, and repression of political dissent . Cuba's government has been accused of human rights abuses .
 In October 2009, Castro was named ""World Hero of Solidarity" by the United Nations General Assembly . Castro was also named a World Hero by the UN in October 2009 .
 Cuba marks 50 years since 'Triumphant Revolution' by Jason Beaubien, NPR All Things Considered, January 1, 2009 .
 Sweig 2002: Cuba the Pursuit of Freedom . Bardach, Ann Louise : Cuba Confidential. Bardach and Ann Louise Bardach wrote a book on Cuba .
 An Empire of Liberty in an Age of National Liberation, Jules R Benjamin, 1992,131, is published in 1992, .
 A videotape of Fidel Castro denying his support of communism was re-aired on NBC ""Meet the Press"" on November 25, 2007 . A video of Castro denying supporting communism was aired on NBC in November 2007 . Fidel Castro's Revolutionary Propaganda .
 An earlier version of this article was published in a slightly edited form as The Defiant One, in The Guardian, Friday Review, June 2001 .
 Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted . People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church Atheists and Atheists .