 Director McCone circulated copies of the attached memorandum on the status of the Soviet military forces in Cuba .
 The President asked that the U.S. Intelligence Board statement of the Cuban situation be sanitized and made public tomorrow/2/ and similar statements at frequent intervals thereafter . President asked for the statement to be made public .
 Mr McCone should make clear that the Board wanted to receive all information from anyone who had it, he says .
 The Board would be in the position of welcoming information from all sources with a view to obtaining the best picture of the Soviet military posture in Cuba .
 The President also asked Mr McCone to ask Congressman Bruce for the information which he has . The President has also asked him to ask for information from Bruce .
 President Obama: "If we acted promptly in putting out all our information within the next two or three days, we would be able to stem the tide of Congressional criticism"
 He said the briefing on intelligence from Cuba would be very impressive . He said it would reveal how extensive our surveillance efforts have been and now are .
 Secretary McNamara gave a special briefing at the Department of State on Soviet military presence in Cuba on February 6 at 3m.
 General Taylor noted that Congressional hearings on the Defense Department budget had turned into a Congressional investigation on Cuba . General Taylor said hearings on defense budget turned into an investigation into Cuba .
 Most of the time Secretary McNamara has spent on the Hill was taken by Cuban questions rather than military budget problems . McNamara's time on Capitol Hill was spent on Cuban questions .
 The President said the way to clarify the numbers problem was to refer to the level of Soviet military forces in Cuba in July, in November, and today, rather than to compare the level from July to today .
 He suggested that correspondents from the Hill and State Department be invited to join briefings about the situation in Cuba .
 4500 Russian troops which have withdrawn from Cuba since about November 1st is conclusive proof that there is not a Soviet military buildup in Cuba . He said that the 4500 Russians which have been withdrawn from the country is proof that it is not an ongoing military buildup .
 General Carroll suggested that General Carroll's briefing on Cuba might be made public . He suggested that general Carroll's briefings on Cuba may be released .
 A backgrounder could be held following Director McCone's statement to the Congressional Committee .
 The President stressed the importance of speaking with one voice in Cuba . The Soviet military presence in Cuba is a key part of the Cuban military presence .
 He said we should neither exaggerate nor minimize the Soviet presence in Cuba . He said it was important that military and civilian officials take the same line .
 He acknowledged that we do not know why the Russians are keeping their troops in Cuba . He said we don't know why Russia is keeping its troops there . The Cuban government has not been able to find out why .
 They may think we are planning an invasion and therefore want their troops there, says David Cameron . They may also think they are planning to invade the country, he says .
 On the other hand, they may be keeping their troops in Cuba in order to control Castro . The U.S. may also want to keep their troops there to control the situation .
 Secretary Rusk pointed out that domestic partisan pressure for an invasion of Cuba can be dealt with by pointing out that the previous Administration did not invade Cuba when it would have been easy to do before the Soviet buildup .
 Attorney General expressed his concern that in all statements about Soviet military presence in Cuba we should not forget to include a caveat that we may not be seeing everything going to Cuba . The Attorney General expresses his concern .
 He did not think we should take the risk of being accused later of not having seen something in Cuba now which turned up there in the future . He said he did not want to be accused of not being able to see something that turned up later .
 He also was uneasy about the prospect of our helping the Russians by . giving the public everything we know about Soviet military presence in Cuba .
 President suggested release of sanitized intelligence information should be done via Congressional Committees rather than directly to the public .
 The President said he had been unsuccessful in convincing many people that we knew exactly what was going on in Cuba .
 He said he believed a new effort should be made, namely to use the USIB in the hope that doubting citizens would accept the testimony of our top intelligence officials .
 He repeated his belief that we should go as far as we possibly can in making public intelligence information in an effort to get the situation under control .
 Thereafter, we might talk to responsible Congressional Committee chairmen, proposing a procedure similar to that suggested by the Attorney General . The Attorney General suggested that the procedure should be used in the future .
 The President called attention to reports that a Soviet incoming ship would arrive on February 8th loaded with what was suspected to be military equipment . The ship is believed to be a Soviet ship loaded with suspected military equipment.
 He noted the request of KOMAR/4/ for low-level reconnaissance flights in order to be certain that we knew the exact nature of the cargo of this Soviet ship .
 Low-level flights might influence a Soviet decision involving the removal of their troops from Cuba .
 The Russians might misread low-level reconnaissance flights as an indication of our preparing ourselves for military action in Cuba . They might decide that their forces must remain to counter anticipated United States actions .
 He requested that a letter to Khrushchev be drafted raising again the question of when the Russians plan to pull back their troops .
 In response to a question from the President, McCone answered that the Simferopol was under careful surveillance . McCone: The Simfopol is under surveillance .
 If the ship offloaded at Havana, low-level reconnaissance would not be productive because of the proximity of receiving warehouses to the dockside . The ship is expected to arrive at the end of the year .
 If the ship docked at Matanzas or Mariel, low-level photography would be productive . Low-level photos would be helpful .
 If it came into Havana, the problem of knowing the nature of the cargo was much more difficult than if it docked at Mariel, where facilities were such that its cargo would have to be displayed on the dock .
 Secretary McNamara said that the USIB had listed twenty-one targets in Cuba which they wish to cover with low-level reconnaissance missions involving 14 sorties . Secretary said that they wanted to cover the targets with reconnaissance missions .
 The risk of the loss of a low-level U.S. plane is very slight, but the risk of a strong Soviet and Cuban reaction is very high, he says . He says the risk is very low, but risk of strong Soviet-Cuban reaction is high .
 Secretary McNamara thought a low-level flight might initiate escalating actions which would place in jeopardy our current high-level reconnaissance flights . McNamara: "A low level flight might trigger escalating actions"
 He said he saw no military need for the low-level flights but did recognize that there was a domestic political problem which had to be met . He said there were no military needs for the flights .
 Low-level flights are justified only under two circumstances: when we have reason to suspect offensive weapons are being reintroduced into Cuba, and when we are preparing for an invasion, he says . He says we must have current information in order to do military planning .
 General Taylor acknowledged that there was a military need to know but not necessarily tomorrow . General Taylor acknowledges that there is a need for the military to know .
 He agreed with Secretary McNamara that there was very little risk of one of our planes being shot down . He said there was little risk one of the planes would be shot down. He said .
 He also referred to the requirement that our intelligence be kept up to date so that we could keep our invasion plans current . He said intelligence must be kept current so that our plans are accurate .
 Chiefs prepared to recommend low-level flights on a case-by-case basis . With respect to intelligence on incoming Soviet ships, Chiefs felt less strongly about the need for intelligence .
 He acknowledged that once a Soviet ship was in harbor we obtained a great deal of information from agents in Cuba . "We obtained a lot of information," he said .
 The President decided to send a letter to Khrushchev on the Soviet troop withdrawal problem but not undertake low-level reconnaissance flights until we knew where the Soviet ship would dock .
 Director McCone said that the intelligence community is very concerned about unexplained military activity taking place on Cape Francis, an island some ten miles offshore Cuba .
 He suggested that a low-level flight over this area would be highly useful but added that he shared the views expressed by Secretary McNamara and General Taylor as regards the United States prisoners in Cuba .
 Donovan would be concerned if asked what effect such flights would have on his negotiations, Donovan said . Donovan said he suspected that Donovan would have been concerned if he were asked about the effect of such flights .
 The President said we would decide on the reconnaissance missions on Friday . President said he would decide whether to send reconnaissance missions to the region .
 His current view was that if the Soviet ship went to Mariel we should probably overfly it . He said it was a good idea to overfly the ship .
 If we carried out this mission, we should probably also overfly Cape Francis . If we did, we would probably also fly Cape Francis over .
 Mr Bundy summarized the instruction to U.S. agencies which would prohibit the shipment of United States -owned goods on Free World ships engaged in the Cuba trade .
 The President approved the directive and agreed that its release should be made from the White House . The President agreed that the President should make the announcement from a White House.
 Deputy Under Secretary Johnson reported that the proposed action had been explained to numerous Congressmen who felt it was a proper action to take .
 Efforts will be made to explain the directive to the International Longshoreman's Association in the hope that this Union and labor in general would not frustrate the implementation .
 The Secretary of State is to be consulted on the form and content of any such assurances .
 The Secretaries of State, Defense, and Agriculture were directed to take such steps as may be necessary to carry out this policy . Secretary of State and Defense were told to take "such steps"
 The Secretary of Commerce is to make available to the appropriate Departments current pertinent information which he may have on ships engaged in Cuba trade .
 DCI met with Secretaries Rusk, McNamara and Ball on February 5 to discuss the COMOR proposal for low-level overflights . DCI also met with the Secretaries of Defense and Foreign Policy .
 Secretary McNamara explained the plan for seven sorties to cover all of the targets . McNamara: Seven sorties will cover the targets in seven days .
 This is exclusive of the COMOR recommendations for covering the unloading of ships by day and night . COMOR recommends covering unloading ships by night .
 DCI advocated the program; Rusk stated he did not advocate it but did agree to the mission over Cayo Francis . Rusk also said he agreed to go on the mission .
 McCone stated he felt the situation in Cuba was more ominous than thought by many in the Administration . He felt that if the Soviets wished merely to control Castro and to maintain Cuba as a base for infiltrating Latin America, they could do so at much less cost and with much less provocation
 He warned that in his opinion we could expect a more ominous situation relative to Cuba- perhaps the introduction of offensive weapons .
 DCI said that Khrushchev had taken one step backward, we could expect him to take two steps forward surreptitiously . DCI: 'We could expect two steps back surrepsitiously. We could expect nothing'
 The discussion revolved around conditions in Cuba and the presentation to be made to the Executive Committee later in the afternoon . The presentation will be made by the Committee of Representatives .
 The President said that would bring a new confrontation and that as far as he was concerned would require action . President Obama said it would bring 'a new confrontation'
 McCone said he felt that Rusk and McNamara did not share this determination . McCone: Rusk, McNamara should not have chosen Rusk or McNamara .
 It was agreed that the DCI should make a public statement on the situation in Cuba . The President ordered a statement prepared, and the President ordered it prepared .
 The attached military training program/1/ for members of the 2506 Cuban Brigade, is approved .
 The Secretary of the Army, as the Department of Defense Executive Agent for all aspects of Cuban policy, will direct implementation of this program by the Services .
 The military departments will be prepared to begin processing both enlisted and officer Brigade members by 25 February 1963 . Brigade members will be processed by February 25 February .
 It is recognized that adequate personnel standards must be maintained, but the objectives of this program must not be frustrated by unduly rigid adherence to current high induction standards . The U.S. military has been criticized for not being able to recruit new recruits .
 The age limit for induction of enlisted men of the 2506 Cuban Brigade for the attached program will be 18 through 34 . The Cuban Brigade is based in Cuba .
 The age limit for commissioning Brigade officers will be 21 through 45 . Brigade officers are 21 to 45 years old .
 Non-declarant aliens will be commissioned in the Service of their choice as ensigns or second lieutenants . Brigade personnel who apply for officer training and meet stated requirements will receive commissioned in their choice .
 Brigade members who want to continue on active duty will be permitted to do so if they qualify and are selected . After completion of training, Brigade members will be allowed to continue to serve in the military .
 Enlisted trainees who, upon completion of their training, do not continue on active duty may be discharged or become members of the standby Reserve . If they desire and are qualified, they will become members .
 Officers who, upon completion of their training, do not continue on active duty will be released or released . If they desire and are qualified, they will become members of the standby Reserve .
 The Air Force will conduct all English language training provided for in the attached program . The program will be conducted by the Air Force .
 The Army will induct Brigade members from age 35 through 50 who volunteer and meet appropriate qualifications for a special eight week military training program . Brigade members will be inducted into the Army's Army Corps of Engineers .
 Upon completion of this training program, such inductees, if they desire and are qualified, will become members of the standby Reserve . Such inductees will be inducted into the Army Reserve .
 The Miami Armed Forces Induction and Examining Station will provide for group processing of Brigade members . Brigade members will be transported to designated training centers .
 Funding and manpower requirements resulting from implementation of the program will be absorbed by the military departments . The military departments will be responsible for the program .
 Expenditures in connection with this program should be identified separately . Expenditure in connection to this program is identified separately.
 Robert S McNamara/2/ /2/ printed from a copy that indicates McNamara signed the original . Robert S. McNamara was assassinated in 1968 .
 The meeting took place in Rusk's office and lasted approximately 45 minutes . Rusk: The meeting was held in the office of Rusk .
 Ambassador Kohler had referred to Cuba as something that was poisoning our relations with Cuba . This was an accurate statement, Ambassador Dobrynin said .
 President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev understand that the U.S. has no desire or intention to invade Cuba . President Kennedy believes that the United States has no intention of invading Cuba .
 It was not possible, however, to make a wholly unqualified commitment concerning the future, as this depends on the attitude of the Cuban Government .
 If Cuba wishes to live in peace then there will be peace in the Caribbean, says Cuban president . If Cuba wants to live peace in peace, there is peace in Caribbean, he says . Cuba is one of the most powerful countries in the world, Cuba says .
 Castro has attempted since January to whip up violence in Latin America . However, we are not encouraged by the way in which Castro has tried to whip-up violence .
 Subversive activities in Venezuela and elsewhere make the future very uncertain . The future of Venezuela and Venezuela is very uncertain, says the Venezuelan government . Subversive activity in Venezuela, Venezuela and other countries is also uncertain .
 The United States is concerned over the fact that the movement of Soviet forces out of Cuba has stopped while additional military equipment continues to enter the island . The U.S. is concerned that the move of Soviet military equipment has stopped .
 We had supposed that the troops connected with the operation and protection of the missiles which had been emplaced in Cuba would be removed from Cuba . We had hoped that troops . would remove them from Cuba, but they were not removed .
 Evidently some Soviet troops had been sent there initially to protect these weapons . These troops were still there although the weapons had been removed from the site . The weapons were removed but some of the Soviet troops remained there .
 Training was clearly not the mission of these troops as there are few Cubans to be found where the Soviet forces are . There are no Cubans in the Soviet presence in Cuba .
 "The presence of these troops contributes to the heightened tensions in our relationship," says President Obama . "These troops contribute to heightened tensions," he says .
 There is no Soviet military build-up in Cuba and there is an intent to further reduce the number of Soviet forces there, as Khrushchev had indicated would be the case .
 The Secretary had noted a press report of a conversation which Khrushchev had had with a Canadian businessman in which he had stated all the Soviet troops in Cuba were on a training mission .
 Clearly, the Secretary said, not all of them were there for this purpose. Clearly, not some of them are there for that purpose. The Secretary of State said, 'Not all of these are there to this purpose'
 Secretary went on to say that the President has a serious problem over Cuba . The Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that Cuba is a problem for Obama .
 Last August and September he had tried to calm down the American people on this issue, he said . Last August, September he said he would calm down Americans' concerns .
 The events of September and October had reduced the President's credibility in the eyes of his own people . However, the events in October were not only serious in themselves but had reduced his credibility . The events in the past month had reduced him credibility in his own country .
 President Obama had hoped to reassure the country over Cuba . Now, it was not so easy for the President to reassure him over the matter .
 The American people remember what Senator Keating had said last August and what the President had said and what Keating's speculation had turned out to be correct .
 "This situation makes it very difficult for the President to calm the atmosphere in the United States," says President Obama . "It is very hard for the president to calm," says Obama .
 We hope steps will be taken in Cuba to make it clear that Cuba is not being prepared as a base for adventure in the rest of the hemisphere . We hope, therefore, that steps will take in Cuba .
 "We do not agree that a Soviet military presence in this hemisphere is a normal situation," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not satisfied with a Soviet presence in the Americas"
 The Cuban question is clearly poisoning U.S. relations with the Soviet Union, says the U.K. State Department . The U.N. urges the Soviet Government to reduce this complication .
 Ambassador Dobrynin replied that he assumed the Secretary's reference to Castro's activities since January referred to the Castro's speech of January 2 . He said he assumed he assumed that he . assumed the . Secretary of State John Kerry made the remark .
 It should be remembered that many things were being said in the U.S. in the United States. It's not the first time the country has seen such things being said .
 Castro's speech was a point by point reply to statements made by the President . Castro's remarks were a response to the President's statements . Castro was speaking in response to Obama's comments .
 The President had just told the Bay of Pigs prisoners that their banner would again fly in Cuba . The President told the prisoners that they would again be allowed to return to Cuba .
 The Ambassador asked the Secretary to consider how Castro regards threats from the U.S. The Ambassador said the Secretary of State asked him to consider the situation . Castro was asked to respond to the request .
 Cuban Government unhappy with result of U.S.-Soviet negotiations on Cuba . Cuban government unhappy with the result of the United States-Soviet talks . Cuban President Castro Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 Ambassador said he could not believe the U.S. fears Cuba and that the Cubans have a rather natural resentment against the large country only 90 miles from their shores .
 President's pledge not to invade Cuba was met with skepticism . President Obama said he would not invade Cuba, but the Cubans believed it .
 The Secretary replied that we do not fear Cuba, but that we link Castro's speeches with subversive activities in other countries . The Secretary of State Secretary said that Cuba is linked to subversive activities .
 Ambassador tells Ambassador he would give him more precise information about Cuban subversive activities . Ambassador says he will give him details of Cuban subversive activity .
 The Ambassador asked whether the Secretary was seeking some clarification regarding the status of the Soviet military personnel in Cuba . The Ambassador said the Secretary of State was seeking clarification .
 The Secretary replied in the affirmative and reiterated that we were looking for some outward movement of Soviet forces now there .
 Message from Director of Central Intelligence McCone to Secretary of State Rusk Washington, February 13, 1963 .
 Carter assured the addressees that the Deputy Director and the Office of National Estimates were at work evaluating the matters raised by McCone .
 The agent report of deep verticle wells in Pinar del Rio is not satisfactorily answered by negative surface indications or the absence of spoils as quantities of earth involved could be trucked away and hidden from view .
 I feel we cannot dismiss this possibility on the basis of negative photographic interpretation and analysis . I therefore feel we can't dismiss it as a result of a negative interpretation of the photograph .
 "I wish the entire Intelligence Community to intensify efforts to satisfactorily answer this question. Several recent events contribute to my growing concern," he says .
 The receipt of two shiploads of unexplained military cargo and the precipitous discharging of the cargos by military personnel, together with news of a possible third cargo, is to me an ominous sign .
 Khrushchev's false and absolutely misleading statement that his technicians were in Cuba to train Cubans is inconsistent with the facts as were his and Dobrynin's statements prior to the October crisis . In addition Khrushchev said technicians were training Cubans in Cuba .
 The disarmament proposals by the Soviets in Geneva yesterday were so obviously unacceptable to the West that I believe they were stated as a justification for a Soviet offensive weapons base in Cuba than for any other purpose .
 "They were not advanced for the purpose of serious negotiation," he said . "We are not going to be able to negotiate with them," he added .
 In view of all of the above, I am inclined to the view that it is highly dangerous for the Intelligence Community or spokesmen for the Government to take a categoric position concerning the possible exist-ence or future clandestine development of an offensive threat .
 There seems to be very little doubt that Cuba has been substantially isolated from the Free World . Cuba seems to have been significantly isolated from its neighbors .
 Only about 5 OAS countries maintain diplomatic relations with Cuba . All of the OAS nations, to a lesser or greater degree, regard Castro as a menace . Cuba is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 Free World shipping to Cuba has fallen precipitously during recent months . Free World Shipping has fallen sharply in recent months in recent years .
 There are about 1/2 as many Free World ships travelling to Cuba now as opposed to the period before the quarantine . The quarantine was imposed in Cuba during the quarantine period .
 Cuba's trade with the Free World has dropped considerably over the past few years . Trade with Free World totaled about $1-1/2 million in 1958- as opposed to $200 million in 1962 .
 President should not play too hard this afternoon on isolating Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Cuba isolation may come back to haunt us, he says .
 It may well be that at some future date we will find it in our interest to back off some of our formal and informal restrictions on contact between the Free World and Cuba . It may be in the interest of backing down some of these restrictions .
 The real crux of the matter, of course, is to isolate Cuba from the Soviet Bloc, writes CNN.com's John Defterios . "Real crux is to ... isolate Cuba," he says .
 I would much prefer to see the President steer away from the isolation issue and instead try to get across to the American people a sense of perspective in viewing the Cuban problem . I would like to see President steer from isolation issue to try and get Americans to understand the issue .
 Department of State's Bureau of Intelligence and Research prepared an assessment on February 18 of reports of a possible revolt .
 The assessment acknowledged the possibility of a small uprising in one or more parts of Cuba . But doubted the likelihood of a large-scale uprising, the assessment said .
 The discussion at State this afternoon brought out the possibility of a revolt in Cuba on February 20th . The discussion was brought out by the Cuban government .
 CIA noted that if such a thing were about to happen, the report of it would come in just this way . CIA noted, however, that such a report of such an event would come out of the way .
 The revolt should have a potential political appeal to a large cross section of Cuban people, say Cuban officials . The revolt has potential political appeals to large parts of the Cuban people .
 A revolt by disgruntled farmers would not meet this criterion . For example, a revolt by a number of disgruntled farmers wouldn't meet this criteria .
 First, there could be a deniable airdrop of supplies by CIA while the U.S. military arm began to wind up .
 This could be followed by a limited airstrike within about twenty-four hours and a full island air-strike within seventy-two hours . A limited airstrike is expected to take place within two days .
 It would take a maximum of eighteen days to mount a full invasion force to mount an invasion force . A full invasion could take 18 days to take place .
 Between the full airstrike and the invasion of Cuba, things could be going on—g.g. special forces dropped in Cuba .
 A diversionary action should be initiated quickly so that Castro cannot concentrate his forces on the insurgents, leaving us no one to liberate . Castro's forces should be able to concentrate their forces on insurgents, the author says .
 The presence of Russian troops, of course, presents a very sticky problem . Russia's presence of troops in the region is also a problem .
 One of the first targets would be the SAM sites and inevitably Russians would be killed . The SAM sites would be first targets, and inevitably Russian Russians would die . The first target would be SAM sites .
 Perhaps we could tell Khrushchev what we are going to do and advise him to take all Russians off the SAM sites and move them to restricted areas . Perhaps we should tell him what we would do and move all Russians from SAM sites .
 We could risk a flight or two over the SAM sites to test whether he has followed our advice . In this regard, we could risk flying over SAM sites over the next few days .
 If prospects for removal of Russian troops in the near future look very good, we may want to dampen the revolt for now-broadcasts by Cuban exiles that Castro is setting a trap .
 The present Department of Defense off-the-cuff estimate of fighting in Cuba is that there would be four or five days of heavy fighting and another thirty days of less severe fighting .
 If the campaign is short and sweet, there probably will be less guerrilla fighting afterwards . The campaign is likely to be short and short, and there probably won't be more guerrilla fighting .
 The plan of action envisioned recognition of and assistance to the insurgents including air strikes, unconventional warfare, and an invasion of Cuba by U.S. forces .
 The plan recommended no action until the uprising occurred and there was a call for help from the insurgents . The plan was approved by the U.S. government and the Taliban .
 A handwritten note on the cover memorandum indicated that Rusk said it was ""O.K. with him,"" and Bundy's office was informed . Bundy was informed by Rusk's office that he was OK with Rusk and Bundy was OK .
 A consensus emerged among the four of us on the following guidelines for discussion of various aspects of the Cuban problem, both in public and in Executive Session .
 Only those who had had an active part in the April invasion would discuss it before Congressional committees . The invasion of April 1961 and its aftermath was agreed that only those who were part of the action would be allowed to discuss it .
 All questions would be referred to Mr Nicholas Katzenbach or Mr Robert Hurwitch, who would be made available to testify to any appropriate committee .
 Questions relating to the future of the released prisoners would be referred to Mr Cottrell of the Cuban Coordinating Committee . Questions will be asked to be answered by the committee .
 Intelligence collection and evaluation in September and October 1962 . It was agreed that the first responsibility in discussion of this subject belonged to the Director of Central Intelligence .
 With respect to statements made by Administration officials in September and October, it was our expectation that these statements would turn out to be consistent with the agreed estimates of the intelligence community, except where an individual might have signalled a personal view .
 It was agreed that all witnesses should explain that unverified refugee and agent reports were not normally forwarded to high policy officers . The prevailing intelligence judgment was not credible evidence of offensive missiles in Cuba .
 All flights requested of the President were authorized by him . Only one low-level flight was proposed by a senior intelligence officer, and this one was held up .
 The absence of this low-level flight did not prevent positive identification of the Banes site in intelligence publications of September 17th . The Banes Site was identified by intelligence publications .
 It was agreed refugee reports proved useful, but that they were not adequate for positive identification without photographic confirmation .
 We also agreed that Senator Keating was not in fact way ahead of the Government with respect to offensive weapons . We agreed that Keating had not been way ahead with regards to the Government .
 His first assertion that there were missile bases in Cuba came on October 10th . He first made the claim on October 11th .
 Senator Keating appears to have relied on raw reports of the sort upon which he relied . By that time, the President had already authorized the flight of October 14, which was targeted .
 "The Executive Branch made arrangements to check it in the most effective possible way," says the White House .
 There was no special control over the dissemination of verified information except between October 15th and October 22nd . With respect to ""management of news,"""The fact is that there was . no special . control over . the dissemination . of verified . information .
 There were justified limitations upon widespread dissemination of unverified information . There are justified limitations on the dissemination of the unverified material .
 Some Administration spokesmen said we did not have credible evidence of Soviet personnel and weapons beyond those in the agreed estimates . Some claimed that no such personnel or weapons were in fact in Cuba . Others said there was no credible evidence that Soviet personnel were in Cuba.
 This was to assert a negative which in the nature of things could not be certain, and we should accept the fact that some overstatements were made. We should accept that some of the overstatments were made, he said .
 We agreed that, on balance, and judged by the result, a basically creditable job was done on the intelligence front . We also agreed that the intelligence on the ground was done well .
 Effective and timely reports were produced on all weapons systems before they became operational . The U.S. government had to provide timely and accurate information on weapons systems in order to ensure their effectiveness .
 That very sensitive intelligence weapon, the U-2, was used without public clamor and with decisive effect . The U.2 was used in the U.S. in the 1980s and '90s, but was not widely publicized .
 Remedial action on all these matters is in hand under the Director of Central Intelligence, who himself accurately anticipated the Soviet move, says President Obama .
 The agreed number of missiles and bombers did leave and that our inspection at sea was convincing . That is the case, the British government says .
 Our policy on surveillance is to conduct steady high-level overflight and to use low-level flights when it is agreed in particular cases that they are necessary . That our policy on . surveillance is . to conduct . high level overflight . and to . use low level flights .
 That our estimates on MIGs, submarine bases and FROGS are what they are, and that any apparent discrepancies are due to personal opinion or differences in methods of statement not to disagree to estimates .
 There is an important distinction between offensive weapons and defensive weapons-a distinction first made by the President in September- although many spokesmen have correctly pointed out that one must be careful about making this distinction too hard and fast .
 It was agreed that the State Department would take the lead in stating our view of policy toward subversion toward Cuba . Mr Edwin Martin has agreed to circulate to all concerned his authoritative statement on the subject to the Latin American Sub-Committee .
 It was agreed that insofar as possible, we would all be guided by authoritative Presidential statements on these matters, and I shall circulate later today a set of the relevant Presidential statements since November 20 .
 On February 21, 1963, the U.S. Intelligence Board considered and approved a report of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance recommending that high-level photography of activities related to impending movement of Soviet personnel and equipment in Cuba be supplemented by low level photography .
 Low-level photography would target Soviet ships in Cuban ports and unidentified installations . Soviet ships would be photographed in Cuba, Cuba's ports and unknown installations .
 For text of the memorandum and the attached report, see the Supplement . FRC 71 A 2896, Cuba 381, Feb. thru April, 1963, for text .
 The estimate concluded that Soviet and Cuban forces would refrain from hostile action against three or four low-level missions per week for 2 weeks . The estimate was based on a two-week period that would end hostile action .
 Castro would press the Soviet Union for military counteraction . If flights continue without interruption or increase, Castro would call for military response .
 The Soviet Union would temporize, seeking a political or propaganda campaign against the flights . It would be the first time a plane was allowed to fly over the U.S.
 The Soviet Union might pass private warnings to the United States and initiate diplomatic negotiations to end them . The U.S. might also begin diplomatic negotiations with the Soviet Union .
 The estimate suggested that Castro would probably take unilateral action against low-level reconnaissance planes . Faced with continued flights and Soviet refusal to act, the estimate suggested .
 The Special Estimate did not predict what point Castro would attempt to act . Castro has been criticized for not acting on the situation .
 Passenger ships are en route to Cuba for that purpose . This government understands that passenger ships are going to Cuba .
 I inquired whether he thought his Government would object to our keeping in reference to the fact that there had been discussions between us on this subject . I asked him if he thought it would be OK to keep it in the UK, he replied .
 He said he was not authorized to agree to any change and understood that if we accepted the proposed Soviet draft, Moscow would not feel obliged to make any statement . The draft draft was proposed by the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Government would probably make a statement of its own in which it would set forth its position . If this were not the case, his Government would have made a statement .
 I said it did not seem to be either in their interest or ours for it to appear that the Soviet withdrawal was a result of all the noise that had been going on recently about this matter . I asked if he thought there would be any objection to the President making the statement as proposed
 In this connection statements are made, one more reckless than the next . In this case, the statements were made in this connection, one of the most reckless statements made .
 Some permit themselves even to resort to threats against the Soviet Union . Some even resort to threatening threats against Soviet Union. Some allow themselves to threaten Russia, some say .
 "It stands to reason this will in no sense contribute to a clearing of the international atmosphere," he says . "This will not contribute to an improvement of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States," he adds .
 If all this continues, if the necessary restraint is not shown, then naturally, this will require the other side to state its attitude toward such a kind of performance in the USA and give the necessary rebuff to irresponsible people . People who raise a provocational racket in connection with the
 They clearly fail to take into account that other countries, in this case the Soviet Union, have the possibility of putting such people in their places, if they themselves don't know how to put themselves there and come to reason .
 I pointed out that the position of my Government on the presence of Soviet troops in Cuba was well known and I saw no need to repeat it, he said . I pointed to the fact that my Government .
 He was aware that we did not control nor inspire such statements . So far as statements by others were concerned, he was, of course, aware of that .
 The Ambassador said he understood and that his Government had similar problems . Ambassador said that he understood that his government had similar issues .
 The United States would appreciate further information concerning arrangements for withdrawal of troops from Cuba . The aide-memoire of February 25, 1963, stated that the United States .
 The Soviet Ambassador telephoned me about 10:00 this morning to say that he could not transmit to Moscow the attached memorandum which was handed to the Soviet Counselor by Mr Guthrie .
 He pointed out that the memorandum implied an agreement which did not exist . He said it was not an agreement that existed but an agreement was not there .
 I inquired if it would be satisfactory if we left out any reference to the conversation I had had with the Ambassador. I asked for it to be left out of the conversation, I said. I inquired .
 He said if we wished to propose an agreement with the Soviet Government on this subject, he would, of course, transmit our proposal . But he could not transmit the memorandum, he said . He said he would transmit the proposal, but could not .
 In the course of the conversation, I said I had just been on the point of suggesting to the Ambassador that it would be in our mutual interest for them to arrange a boat drill on the vessel taking Soviet troops out of Cuba .
 FRC 71 A 2896, Cuba 381, Feb-April 1963) After discussion with the Secretary, Mr Johnson, Mr Bundy, who discussed the matter with Secretary McNamara by telephone, and after clearance with the President, at 1:00m. today I handed the Soviet
 After reading the aide-memoire, the Ambassador inquired what kind of information we were seeking, he said . The Ambassador responded to the request, saying, 'We are seeking information'
 I replied that it would be helpful to know the names and times of departure of the ships involved, and added that if the Soviet Government could do so, I thought it was most helpful to be informed of the numbers and types of troops involved . I replied: "I thought it would
 The Ambassador inquired whether it was intended that this information be made public . The Ambassador said he was not aware of the fact that the information had been made public.
 I replied that I did not think we would need to make public the fact that we might be informed of the names and departures of the ships, but that if they could give us the numbers of troops, it would be to our mutual interest that we be allowed to make this information public
 I pointed out that our whole thought in this operation was that it was in our mutual interest that the public be convinced that the useful action being taken by the Soviet Government be convincingly confirmed . The operation was in the interest of the public being convinced that this was in their mutual interest .
 This information is being provided in order that it will be understood by both the U.S. ship/aircraft and Soviet passenger ships involved as An intention to approach closer without hostile intent .
 Bundy said in light of their comments, he had decided not to attempt a resume of guidelines for Congressional testimony as it would be subject to misunderstanding . Bundy said he did not attempt to make a resume resume of Congressional testimony . Bundy also said he would not try to resume a resume as it
 In a follow-up to our discussion of last week, I am circulating herewith certain documents which I think may be helpful to all who are called upon to discuss the problem of Cuba either in Executive Session or in public .
 First, a compendium of the President's own principal comments on Cuban affairs . President's comments on the Cuban situation .
 The second major document enclosed is a report prepared under the direction of the Director of Central Intelligence with respect to intelligence on Cuba before and during the October crisis . The report is based on intelligence from the CIA .
 Since the subject is highly classified, it is assumed that witnesses without appropriate clearance will be cautious in commenting on it . Witnesses who are more fully informed will take appropriate precautions as to the character of hearings .
 Discussion of possible modifications in intelligence procedures should be avoided by any witnesses not having direct responsibility . Discussion of any possible modifications to our intelligence procedures .
 I am circulating copies of a public statement presented by Assistant Secretary Martin on February 18 . The statement was presented by assistant Secretary Martin, who is in charge of the US Senate .
 All the Chiefs were present at the above meeting which lasted from 5:30m. to 6:45m. The meeting was held on 28 February 1963 .
 In order to reduce this time to something like 7 days, considerable prepositioning would be required in order to get Army /Marine units to the East Coast .
 Chiefs expressed the view that it was unlikely that a period of tension would not precede a decision to invade Cuba which would allow ample time for preparatory measures . It was undesirable to make permanent changes of station of Army and Marine units .
 The President expressed interest in the possibility of getting some troops quickly into Cuba in the event of a general uprising .
 He was told that only the airborne troops could arrive with little delay . First Marine elements would require about 7 days before landing, he said .
 Chiefs have to develop specific plans in anticipation of the need for this kind of quick reaction . Chiefs have asked for specific plans to deal with the situation . Chiefs say they are working with the Chiefs to prepare for the need .
 Chairman transmitted the decision to Director of Joint Staff for transmission to the field . Chairman transmitted this decision to the Director, Joint Staff .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed to amend the present Rules of Engagement . The rules were approved in November, 1960, and were approved by November 1960 .
 The President also made it very clear that according to the present Rules, in the case of an incident where we are attacked, etc., we can chase them to the Cuban airspace and not into it .
 The President feels that we must have a chance to decide in Washington whether or not this has been a political decision of Castro's government before we risk one of our aircraft flying clear into Cuban airspace and being shot down by Cuban SAM outfits .
 He would hate to have this sequence of events occur without having a chance to evaluate the situation, he says .
 President felt an attempt was being made to drive a division within the Administration, most particularly between CIA on the one hand and State and Defense on the other .
 This he said worried him and he hoped we could avoid any statements on the Hill, publicly or to the Press, which would exacerbate the situation . This worried him, he said .
 I replied that I felt there was no reason for all the furor and that I had prepared a background memorandum/1/ which, if used, would correctly project what had happened, and avoid the situation that worried him .
 CIA felt that throughout September they had operated under an inhibiting policy . CIA had recommended only most limited overflights in September as they felt, and I feel correctly felt, that recommendations for a more aggressive program would undoubtedly have been refused to them . I then pointed out that .
 "U-2 Overflights of Cuba was adequately covered in my memorandum (referring to memorandum of 27 February,")/2// . "I felt that any photography prior to October 16 and 17 would not produce the type of evidence necessary for Executive action," he said
 Johnson suggested that the memorandum be revised to exclude the descriptions of positions taken by various individuals and institutions . Johnson suggested a revised version of the memorandum .
 Johnson recommended that the memorandum be changed to a factual account of events . Johnson: "I want to change the memorandum to reflect the events of that day" Johnson: The memorandum should be changed .
 McCone responded in a March 7 memorandum to Johnson that it would not be possible to make the changes suggested by the Department of State . Most of the USIB members had already testified before Congress, McCone said .
 I then said there was considerable distress within CIA over their failure to act on my telegrams . I then read to the President excerpts from several of the September telegramrams .
 He recognized that there was bound to be something of an internal problem but felt that we should minimize it and should not permit it to get into an interdepartmental row . He said: "We should minimize the problem and should avoid it getting into an internal row"
 The President asked me for information on CIA people killed or imprisoned in our operations, I said I would supply him with this information . The President said he wanted to know the number of CIA people who had been killed .
 In summary the purpose of his asking me to call was to try to avoid a split within his organization and I assured him that I did not think one was necessary . In summary, his purpose of calling me was to . try to . avoid a . split within the organization .
 "Extreme caution was used through September in considering U-2 operations over Cuba," U.N. official says . The U.S. military says it was necessary for everyone to recognize and to understand that .
 On March 1 1 McGeorge Bundy sent the members of the National Security Council a memorandum explaining that the President was calling the meeting to have a ""broader exchange of views" on Latin American and European policy .
 Mr McCone reported that Soviet troops were withdrawing from Cuba; that between 1700 and 2000 had already left, more were probably leaving, but we had no knowledge of how many thousands would actually depart .
 We do not know whether the withdrawal has actually affected the Soviet military capability in Cuba . Because there appears to be no movement of major items of military equipment, we do not think it has affected the situation .
 Donovan will be in Havana this week to arrange for the release of all U.S. prisoners without more conditions . Mr Donovan is expected to be in Cuba this week .
 Mr McCone said we have held off flying low-level reconnaissance missions until the U.S. prisoners were out of Cuba .
 He hoped we could fly low-level missions just as soon as the prisoners were out of the prison system . He said he hoped we would soon be able to fly missions without the prisoners .
 Director McCone reported that the Stennis Congressional Committee will make a favorable report . Director said that the report will be made favorable . Director says the report is expected to be made public .
 Mr McCone said the Congressional group pressed very hard with respect to future policy toward Cuba and Latin America . He said it was very hard to come up with Cuba's Cuba policy .
 He said he told the group policy was beyond his competence . But on being pressed he told them there was a Cuba problem and a separate Latin American problem . He said there was also a Cuba and Latin American problems .
 He favored taking positive steps to prevent any other country from falling to Communism . He said he favored taking measures to prevent other countries from falling into Communism .
 Mr McCone favored a military uprising rather than a civil uprising . He said first we must get the Soviets out and, after that, the Castro government can be broken up by a military coup .
 He concluded by predicting that the investigation of past actions in Cuba was about finished on the Hill .
 The report concluded that while the Central Intelligence Agency and other intelligence organizations made mistakes in some areas, the United States intelligence ""performed creditably"" in other areas .
 The report discounted the idea of an ""intelligence gap"" between September 5 and October 14, 1962, but expressed concern that all Soviet strategic bombers and missiles might not have been removed . There was a minimum of 17,500 Soviet troops remaining in Cuba, according to the report .
 The President indicated the Soviets may be pulling away from a Cuba withdrawal and apparently are not taking out the four armored groups now there there . (XIX, 1963, 316)
 Secretary Rusk said if the armored groups do not come out, we can go back to the Russians and remind them that these groups, which were used to protect the missiles, should come out as part of the commitment to remove missile-associated forces .
 The President referred to a State cable which reported that Khrushchev is saying that we are moving away from our no-invasion pledge . The President refers to the State cable .
 Secretary Rusk indicated that we are keeping the pressure on, but acknowledged that unless the British take immediate action, we would have to raise with them the question of U.K. ships in Cuba trade .
 Assist-ant Secretary Martin called attention to the pressure which he had put on NATO members during a recent trip to Paris . Martin said the pressure had been put on the NATO members .
 President asked for a report on current shipping restrictions and what actions we would take as soon as the U.S. prisoners were out of Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk said he did not believe it would be useful to demand the withdrawal of all Latin American missions from Havana .
 Bolivians and Uruguayans have been working bilaterally on the Bolivian and Uruguayan governments . They are working to persuade them to break relations with Uruguay and Bolivia .
 The President, referring to his forthcoming trip to Costa Rica,/5/ wanted to be certain that we avoided the impression that we want to go further on Cuba than we actually do .
 He was concerned that the Nicaraguans and Guatemalans would want to take more forceful action than we are now prepared to take, he said .
 He asked that we make certain that the other countries were aware of this problem prior to the opening of the Costa Rica meeting, he said .
 Secretary Rusk commented that he believed that there was a real falloff in Congressional demands for the invasion of Cuba . Rusk said he believes that he believes there is a 'real falloff' in congressional demands .
 He felt that in the last ten days the demands for military action had been decreasing substantially . He said he felt in the past ten days that the demands had decreased substantially .
 The President commented on the problem of persons going to and from Cuba . The President said the problem was a problem of people going to Cuba .
 He said we have little hard evidence on who was moving . He referred to Time magazine's use of the word ""flood"" to describe persons going to Cuba .
 Mr McCone indicated that he had told Mr Luce that the use by Time of the word ""flood" to describe the number of persons going to Cuba, was wrong .
 The President said he had also told Mr Luce that the use of the word ""flood"" by Time's staff was an excellent illustration of how Time overstated situations .
 There resulted a humorous exchange to the effect that the President was delighted that Mr McCone supported him in telling Mr Luce that the word ""flood"" was wrong . President suggested that we should have meetings more often to ensure we were taking the same line .
 The number of trainees in Cuba has dropped off since last October, Mr Martin said .
 President asked how we could sort out the students who come back from Cuba . In this connection, the President asked for help . The President said he would like to see how we can sort out students who return from Cuba.
 Some become obviously activists in the Communist movement, but not all . Some become obvious Communist Party activists . Others become obviously Communists .
 Murrow reported that we are getting our message through to the Cubans by radio even though some of our programs are being jammed . Mr Murrow said that some of the programs were jammed .
 He believes we must present long-range plans on the future Cuba after Communism . He believes long-term plans must be presented on Cuba's future .
 He said that we are unable to talk about the promise of the future. Now, he said that . Now, we are . unable to . talk about . the future, he added. Now he said .
 President asked whether or not we had a speech on what we hope for the future of Cuba . Martin referred to the comments made to the Brigade in Miami .
 The President said he doubted that we could do better than to try to get a statement from the Cubans of what they want . President Obama said he doubts that he doubted .
 Murrow said what was required was a U.S. government statement . Murrow: What was needed was a United States statement .
 Secretary Rusk said we did not want to do anything which would get in the way of the movement of Soviet troops out of Cuba . He said we wanted to prevent the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Cuba .
 Mr Bundy expressed doubts as to whether actions we take now affect the withdrawal of Soviet troops . Bundy expressed his doubts about whether actions taken now affect withdrawal .
 Under Secretary Ball thought we should involve the OAS in the work of developing plans for Cuba of the future .
 The President commented on the continuing pressure which he thought he thought we would get from the Hill when it became clear that not all Soviet troops were leaving Cuba .
 He said we should protect ourselves as best we can with the shipping policy, the trade matters, and the movement of persons . The overall purpose of increasing the isolation of Cuba is to increase the isolation, he said .
 He postponed discussion of European policy until his return from Costa Rica . Mr Obama postponed discussion until he returned to Costa Rica to discuss EU policy .
 Drafted by Alexis Johnson; cleared with Ball, Martin, and Bundy; and approved by Rusk and Johnson . Draft by U. Alexis Johnson .
 Trevelyan: President's position has been entirely consistent on Cuba matter . President concerned that Khrushchev should feel there has been any change . President wanted to point out that the position had been consistent .
 The President clearly set forth our policy in his November 20 press conference, which stated inter alia ""as for our part, if all offensive weapons systems are removed from Cuba and kept out of the Hemisphere"
 President regretted that Chairman Khrushchev had not been able to persuade Mr Castro to accept a suitable form of inspection or verification in Cuba .
 President finds it difficult to understand how Chairman Khrushchev could believe that he is now in any way departing from his previous policy, as noted in the President's letter of December 14 . President has subsequently been very careful not to depart from the position taken in his press conference of November 20
 In your discretion and in manner you consider most appropriate, you should reiterate to Khrushchev that, in view of history this affair this affair . In absence other means of verification contemplated in original undertaking embodied in President's letter of October 27,/2/ we must continue to rely upon
 Chairman Khrushchev should also understand that Castro's belligerent attitude toward the other states of Latin America creates a most difficult situation for the President, writes the Soviet Union .
 Castro's threats toward Betancourt, in Venezuela, followed by terrorist attacks, sabotage and bombing by terrorists within Venezuela who are publicly supported by Castro, make it difficult to believe that Castro desires to live in peace with his neighbors . Castro has threatened such forward-looking and progressive leaders as
 The President hopes that Chairman Khrushchev continues to share the President's desire to reduce tensions in the Caribbean area and will thus exercise his influence .
 Kuznetsov responded he should first of all say that he was very surprised by such a statement . Following translation, he said he was "very surprised" by the comments .
 Kuznetsov was now wondering why USG was making such statement at this time . He asked why U.S. had made such statement .
 SovGovt has stated its views with regard to President's statement in his November 20 press conference and with . regard to questions he had raised there . He continued to say that the government has not responded to any of the questions he raised .
 Basic documents were letters exchanged by Khrushchev and President October 27 and 28, which contained obligations of two sides . Basic documents in this matter were letters exchange of October 27 .
 With regard President's November 20 statement, SovGovt could not accept it in full . Russia's President's statement was published on Nov. 20, 2014 .
 Russia did not agree with claim of USG that it had assumed right to conduct flights over territory of another state . He wished to recall to me that SovGovt had not agreed with claim .
 By virtue of this claim, USG was disregarding sovereign right of Cuba and was assuming policy ""from position of strength"" towards Cuba . Cuba was disregarded sovereign right to Cuba and assumed policy from 'position of strength'
 My raising question of so-called on-site inspection evoked very great perplexity. My raising . question . evoked . very perplexity . My . raising question . of inspection evokes very great . perplexity, he said .
 Khrushchev's letter of October 27 said that such inspection could be conducted if Cuban Govt agreed . If legal side of matter were considered, Khrushvic's letter was considered, if legal side was considered . The letter was sent to the Cuban government on October 27 .
 SovGovt, with agreement Cuban, had given United States authorities opportunity to verify withdrawal of weapons, to photograph and count them . U.S. authorities had been given chance to photograph, count and photograph weapons withdrawal .
 Cuba and U.S. would have been inspected by the UN on terms of equality . Cuba and the United States would not have been allowed to inspect each other .
 USG had refused to consider, let alone accept, these proposals and must bear responsibility for their non-adoption . USG 'must bear responsibility'
 Making such statement now to SovGovt evokes great lack of understanding, says Ravi Agrawal . Making such a statement now evokes very limited understanding, he says .
 President's November 20 press conference made statements of arbitrary character . He said USG could conduct inspections it wished to . President's statements were arbitrary character, he said .
 President said USG could decide unilaterally whether Cuba was danger to U.S. and other Western Hemisphere states . President: USG can decide unilaterally if Cuba is danger to United States and other . Hemisphere states. Cuba is a major threat to the United States .
 USG officials and U.S. intelligence fabricated data to show Cuba has been conducting subversive acts . USG. officials and United States. intelligence even fabricated data .
 Kuznetsov said he must resolutely reject effort to raise this now with SovGovt . He said he would try to engage it in discussion of question of events in Venezuela . Kuznnetsov: "I will not engage in discussion"
 USG always tried to explain such events by talking about ""hand of Moscow"", ""Communist plots"", and so forth, but all that is simply invented . USG tried to talk about 'hand of Russia' and 'Communist' plots, but that was simply invented
 USG does not want to let Cuban people decide on their own way of life . Trouble is USG wants to let Cuba decide on its own way to life, Cuban president says .
 If United States thinks it suffers from existence of Cuban regime, why shouldn't USG meet with Cuban representatives and discuss these questions? USG says it's an effort to find solutions to these questions .
 Cuban representatives, including Premier and President, have expressed willingness to discuss these questions . Cuban representatives have expressed their willingness to talk about these questions, CNN.com reports .
 Provisionally, Kuznetsov rejected assumption contained in statement to effect that SovGovt should discuss matters relevant to Cuban Govt as though it had taken upon itself some obligation .
 He could not say definitively, he was not sure SovGovt would accept it . He said he was unsure if it was accepted .
 This was oral statement which I was asking him to communicate to Chairman Khrushchev . This was an oral statement that I was asked him to make to the chairman of the Council of Soviet Union . Mr. Nixon was assassinated in 1968, assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Reason for statement was found in remarks Chairman had made to foreign diplomat . Chairman said remarks were made in remarks made by foreign diplomat in remarks .
 Purpose of statement was not to raise new questions, but to reassure Chairman Khrushchev that his doubts about a change in President's policy were not founded, but that President's . policy remained unchanged. Purpose of making statement was to reassure him that his . doubts about change in policy were
 President wanted only to reassure Chairman. Consequently, I was surprised by what Kuznetsov had said in commenting on statement, since President wanted to reassure chairman .
 Kuznetsov said that what surprised him was part at end where President talked about Venezuela as though USG wanted to make SovGovt responsible for something that had happened there . He said that part of USG's plan was to make Russia responsible for what happened in Venezuela . K
 He asked me to repeat this part, since that was part of the part he could not accept . "He asked me . to repeat it," he said, "since that part he cannot accept."
 Kuznetsov said he wished to re-emphasize that this was not merely simple restatement of U.S. policy but raised question of . SovGovt and Khrushchev using influence on Castro, he said .
 It therefore sounded very funny for USG to ask SovGovt to take steps towards Cuba . USG also asked Russia's government to take action against Cuba .
 There had been noise when invaders returned and about economic sanctions . There was also talk about the threat of economic sanctions against Russia .
 It should be apparent to U.S. from history of history of Bolshevik Revolution how futile our efforts were. U.K. President Barack Obama should not have tried to win support of Russia .
 If we wished to put responsibility on SovGovt for events in Latin America, that was really too much, he said . He continued, if . we wished . to put . responsibility on Russia, that would be too much .
 President Obama had recently made statement to effect that events in Latin America were not ones for which Moscow or communism could be held responsible for .
 I said I thought I should understand whether he wished to transmit this statement to Khrushchev . I said he wanted to understand if he wanted it to be passed on to him . I told him I wanted to know if he had intended to make the statement . He said he did not
 Kuznetsov answered that he was not sure Khrushchev would accept it . He would have to ask him if he accepted the offer .
 I said I should emphasize once again that this was response to Chairman's doubts about President's policy. I said he should emphasize that this . I said . I . said I . should emphasize . that this is response to chairman's doubts that President's . policy was not about policy,
 We regarded belligerent attitude and threats of Castro as cause of tension in Caribbean . Castro was considered to be a major factor in tension in the region .
 We think he has broken his word by imposing his regime on Cubans without giving them promised opportunity to express their will . We think that he's broken his promise by imposing a regime on Cuba, we think .
 President asked Chairman to exercise influence on Castro, this was expression of President's hope . With regard to last words in statement, last words were expression of hope, he said .
 Perhaps this hope would not be realized, but understandable he should express it . It's understandable he would express it, but it's understandable to express it.
 At this point Kuznetsov asked which remarks of Chairman President had been in mind in making statement . At this time Kuznnetsov was asked what he thought of the remarks .
 I said they were remarks made to Sir Humphrey Trevelyan, in which Chairman had expressed view President's position had changed with regard to Cuba . I said the remarks were made in reference to remarks made by Chairman of the Council of States .
 President wanted final words of statement, ""and will thus exercise his influence on Castro to this end,"" included . Kuznetsov then asked whether President wanted last words to be included .
 While Kuznetsov was serious during this discussion, his attitude and manner were not unfriendly . The encounter ended as it had begun, with good-natured personal small-talk .
 Kuznetsov handled himself well, as usual, says Trevelyan . "I got definite impression he was either not aware of what Khrushchev had said or had regarded it as routine effort to warn United States against increasing pressure on Cuba"
 It is possible that, particularly in view all he said, Soviets will refuse accept statement . It is of course possible that . that, especially in view of . all he . said, that it is possible . that it was possible that he would not accept the statement .
 In Khrushchev's absence, Foy Kohler delivered his oral message to Kuznetsov . Khrushchevski was in the Soviet Union at the time of the incident .
 Kuznetsov's comments are at Tab 171/ At Tab 2 for reference are Kohler's instructions . At Tab 171 and Tab 2 are required to read the comments .
 He expects to have one more meeting with Castro this morning and will be back in Miami at 5:00 P.M. When we will know more, we will be in touch with the White House .
 He spent yesterday with the United States prisoners, seeing 17 at the Isle of Pines and others in confinement near Miami .
 The Isle of Pines are in better shape than the ones on the Isle of the Pines, he says . He has reported that all are in reasonable condition . He says they are in good condition .
 He has arranged for the release of the two women and one mentally ill man . The two women have been released and one man is being held in custody .
 The Cubans have agreed to release the rest of the natural born U.S. citizens once all the goods are delivered, but are still holding out on the naturalized citizens . The Cuban government has agreed to free the other natural born United States citizens, but is still withholding the natural
 The Department is working hard on getting shipping and hopes to have the deliveries completed in two weeks . The deliveries are expected to be delivered by the end of the month .
 Report of the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, Department of State Washington, March 21, 1963 . Report: Cuban Affairs Coordinator of Cuba Affairs .
 Executive Secretary Brubeck sent this report to McGeorge Bundy on March 21 . Executive Secretary of the U.S. House of Representatives sent the report to Bundy this week .
 Reports will be issued twice monthly to provide, in summary form, a guide to the recent activities of the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs .
 A separate section will be devoted to each NSAM or Presidential memoranda directed to the activities of the Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee .
 The Coordinator of Cuban Affairs has taken over responsibility for the day-to-day coordination of Cuban affairs .
 An Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairs, chaired by the Coordinator, has been established . The Coordinator is the Coordinator of the Cuban Affairs .
 It consists of the Coordinator, Secretary of the Army Cyrus R Vance, representing the Department of Defense, and Deputy Director Richard Helms of the Central Intelligence Agency . The Coordinator is the Coordinator of the Defense Department .
 Officers have been detailed to the Committee from State, Defense, Justice, HEW, CIA, and USIA to work as necessary in particular cases .
 A White House representative from the office of Mr McGeorge Bundy has maintained close liaison with the Coordinator and Committee .
 The Coordinator works through these assigned officers in meeting the responsibilities in above . The Coordinator is the Coordinator of the Coordinator .
 The Coordinator has assumed the same responsibility for covert as for overt operations . He is to report on covert matters to the Special Group, which will be guided by broader policy .
 The Coordinator receives reports from these agencies indicating what steps have been taken . He receives reports of these agencies .
 The Secretary of Commerce is making available to the Coordinator, through the Bureau of Economic Affairs of the Department of State, reports on ships engaged in Cuban trade .
 President asked the Departments of State and Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency to prepare under coordination of a CIA official specific proposals on lessening and possibly eliminating the flow of labor leaders, students, and others from Latin America .
 President outlined three general avenues through which the problem should be approached . The President outlined a number of ways to address the problem .
 The talks are bilateral negotiations with friendly Latin American countries . They are working through the Organization of American States .
 Report highlights highlights of government-wide efforts to solve problems . Report: So much work has been done over the past month .
 It has been trying to have governments withhold permission to their nationals to travel to Cuba . It is also trying to reduce further freeworld air traffic, both scheduled and unscheduled, to Cuba.
 The Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairs met to study the subversive problem on February 15 . A working group headed by Ambassador Thurston submitted a report on February 25 which encompassed the SCCS Report .
 The Coordinator, on the basis of these studies, appointed a Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion . The Subcommittee is based on the studies .
 It was established on February 27, with Major General Victor H Krulak, USMC, as chairman . It is the first branch of the U.S. Marine Corps to be established .
 The Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion submitted its first report on March 8 . This report on movement of personnel to and from Cuba was forwarded by the Coordinator to the White House .
 Subsequently, the Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion has prepared action papers on the movement of propaganda materials, arms and funds . Action papers also include the establishment of a surveillance system in the Caribbean .
 The Office of Regional Political Affairs in the Bureau of InterAmerican Affairs, Department of State, submitted to the Coordinator on March 8 a draft OAS Resolution on Cuba . Draft OAS resolution was forwarded to the White House via the Coordinator and the Secretary of State .
 This office submitted talking points on Cuba for the President at San Jose, Costa Rica . This office also submitted talking point on Cuba .
 Our posts in the Caribbean were informed on March 13 that we desire to consult with them on possible additional U.S. training and other assistance . This may be required to develop or improve border and coastal patrol capabilities .
 This program would involve possible assistance to Colombia, Venezuela, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Panama, Panama and the Central American countries of Guatemala, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Honduras .
 The Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee will make further recommendations on the problems raised in the President's memoranda . Central American and Panamanian Presidents will meet in San Jose .
 At the President's press briefing on Thursday morning ,/1/ the question of the activities of Alpha 66 and similar groups arose .
 We might well want to prevent them from engaging in further raids, and at the present we appeared to be without any capability to do so . We might not be able to prevent further raids on the island .
 He also stated that the United States did not support the group and had no connection with it . The U.S. did not have any connection with the group, he said .
 Alpha 66 was in clear violation of the United States neutrality laws, Ball noted . Ball noted that the actions of Alpha 66 were in clear violations of the U.S. neutrality laws .
 In consequence of this observation, I spoke with the Attorney General, Mr Helms and, the next day, with Mr McCone . The next day I spoke to the Attorney Secretary of the State Department, Mr. Helms .
 President Obama expressed concern that a jurisdictional boundary line between the FBI and the CIA could prevent our doing as much as we should be able to do in this matter . I expressed the President's concern and made the point .
 All agreed that the matter would be examined and an improvement in our means of dealing with it was effected .
 Also attached as Tab 1 is Carl Kaysen's memo to the President on press conference day . Also attached is a memo from the President's deputy secretary .
 President's interest in knowing whether Castro's present reluctance to release the prisoners reflects a change in his December commitment to release them .
 State recommended that the numbers game be avoided . President announced at his press conference on March 21, 1963 that three thousand Russian troops had been withdrawn .
 Attached as Tab 2 is the pertinent excerpt from the President's press conference . Attached is Tab 2 of the pertinent excerpts from the speech .
 The incident highlighted a jurisdictional problem between the CIA and the FBI-i.e. who is responsible for knowing about the activities of these groups .
 The answer is probably that both have an interest in the activities of these groups which seem to operate both from within and without the United States . The answer to the question is that both the U.S. and the world have interest in these groups .
 We have been in touch with State, CIA and FBI and urged them to get together on this question . They will also get together regarding what, if anything, we want to do or can do to stop the raids .
 Reps. Pepper and Fascell held unofficial hearings on the impact of Cuban refugees on Miami area . HEW's John Thomas told me about the recent unofficial hearings held in Miami by Reps. Fascell .
 The hearings tended to exaggerate the problem and to cover up for indigenous problems in the Miami area-e.g. the bad year for citrus fruit industry and a decline in the tourist industry .
 Representative Pepper used the hearings primarily as a political device to further his own career, Thomas Thomas said . Mr Thomas felt that while Fascell has a real interest in the Miami situation and is probably aiming to get federal works projects, etc., .
 Mr Thomas will send us a copy of the hearings as and when they are published . The hearings are expected to take place in the coming weeks .
 Mr Thomas does not regard the Miami situation as explosive, he does not at all happy about it . Mr Thomas says he is not happy about the situation .
 Fifty-six thousand refugees have been resettled but over one hundred thousand still remain . Over 100,000 refugees still remain in refugee camps .
 Miami has a substantial outflow from the city, but it's necessary to show that, it's not all the money coming in . The city's mayor's office says it's important to show the public that there is a substantial flow of money .
 Mr Thomas noted that the problem is to make a dent in the settled refugee population . Mr Thomas said that the refugee population is not the only problem .
 Mr Thomas hopes to increase the rate from four hundred to eight hundred per week per week . He says he hopes to resettle more people than newly-arrived refugees .
 In about a week, he hopes to surface an organizational mechanism whereby Protestant resettlement facilities will be used to assist in resettling Catholic refugees . Catholic refugees will also be resettled in the United States .
 The Krulak Subcommittee is now working on a paper to control the movement of Cuban funds in Latin America . The paper is now looking at controlling the flow of funds to Cuba .
 The Subcommittee is focusing on preparations for a meeting in Managua with Central American governments . Also, the Subcommittee is preparing for preparations for the meeting .
 The meeting, called for at Costa Rica, will be held on April 3 and 4 .
 Tab 6 is an excerpt from the President's March 21 press conference regarding the travel of Americans to Cuba . Attached as Tab 6, the President spoke about the issue in a press conference on March 21 .
 Note by Director of Central Intelligence McCone Washington, March 26, 1963 .
 This was an addendum to a conversation between McCone and the President on March 25 lasting from 12:15 to 1m. This was a conversation that lasted between 12 and 1:30m.
 The President and I engaged in a brief discussion of the Soviet plans with respect to Cuba . The President of Cuba was in the midst of a meeting with the President .
 He indicated that he once felt that the Soviets would withdraw all of their forces from Cuba, but that he now reached the conclusion that he had now concluded that the plan had changed .
 Bundy volunteered that they at no time had said specifically that they were to withdraw all of their forces, in fact their particular wording was somewhat vague, Bundy said . Bundy said the wording was vague and that they had no specific instructions for withdrawal .
 Report of Castro's own statements would lead one to the conclusion that a gradual and continuing withdrawal would take place . The Cubans were trained and became proficient in operating advanced sophisticated Soviet equipment .
 Castro welcomed this period of time because it would mean a continuing Soviet interest in Cuba . This would take many months, probably the balance of the year, he said . Castro welcomed the move because of a continuing interest in the country .
 DCI pointed out that building of permanent installations and the arrival of undisclosed but apparently sophisticated equipment, although in small quantities, nevertheless important volume would indicate a conclusion that Soviets were there to stay, but perhaps on a somewhat reduced scale .
 Deptels 1933 and 1950;/1/ Embtels 2315/2/ and 232173/ Gromyko called me in at 4:00 a.m. Deptels. 1933 and . 1950 .
 Moscow time to make oral statement in response to March 16 statement to Kuznetsov . Moscow time: "Moscow time is Moscow time for Moscow time" Moscow time is March 16 .
 Kohler did warn that Khrushchev could "decide to come back hard and publicize" Kohler . Kohler warned that Khruschev could return hard to publicize .
 Gromyko asked me to transmit contents of statement to President and said he wished to add a few words about note Embassy received earlier today regarding attack on L'Gov 75/ He said MFA had received word just before our meeting about analogous provocation involving another Soviet ship in Cuban port .
 U.S. underestimated gravity of such provocative actions against Cuba and Soviet ships . But, it appeared USG underestimated gravity .
 If it correctly estimated gravity of such actions, it would not permit them to take place . If it was correct, the government would not allow such actions to occur .
 See memoranda from Chase to Bundy and Clifton to the President, March 27 . See . Chase to McGeorge Bundy and Bundy . Bundy to President .
 On March 30 the Departments of State and Justice issued a statement that they neither supported nor condoned these attacks which were probably counter productive . The Departments said they did not support nor condone these attacks .
 President's intention had been to give private reassurance to Chairman Khrushchev as result of doubts President felt Chairman had expressed regarding USG policy towards Cuba . President's intent was to give reassurance .
 President had also wished express hope that SovGovt might exercise influence to alleviate situation . President had expressed hope that he would be able to help ease situation in Russia .
 I said I should certainly report statement to President, assumed this remained a private exchange . I told him I would certainly report statements to President and assumed this was a private conversation . President Obama said he would not comment on the matter .
 Soviets had no intention of giving information on exchange to press . Gromyko said that was correct; for time being Soviets had not intended to give information .
 I said that, since I had no new instructions, I would not reply now to statement but would stand on what I had said before . I would stand by what I said before, he said . I said, since there were no new . instructions, he would not say what he
 I said these statements were already on record and it was appropriate to cite them today . I said it was already on the record and should be cited today .
 Gromyko said SovGovt is acquainted with these statements, but has to ask itself how we can make such statements and at same time act in direct contradiction to them . Grobotko: "SovGovt must ask itself"
 State Department statement is that if raids were bigger and more successful, that would be a different thing . State Department says it's understanding of State Dept. statement . If raids are bigger than successful, it would be different thing, says State Department .
 USG is not attributing serious significance to these acts . USG wishes to emphasize that USG does not attribute them serious significance .
 Gromyko: Caribbean crisis had apparently been settled, but he and I, like U.S. and . representatives elsewhere, had to keep reverting to it . He says U.N. and Sov representatives in the Caribbean had to continue to use it .
 In Soviet view, this lies in best interests of U.S. and whole world, says Soviet leader . In Soviet world, this is best interest of United States, says Vladimir Putin .
 I said I felt I had to comment now because Gromyko's additional remarks had called into question statement of President. President. He said he felt he had a right to comment . President. I said he had to respond to the statement of the President.
 With regard to ""scum"", we have different understanding from Soviets of who are scum and who are honest people. We have a different understanding of who is scum," he said . He said .
 As to question of fulfilling terms of Oct.-28 agreement, they had never been fulfilled, says CNN.com . "They had never fulfilled terms of October-28 agreement"
 Just as Soviets expect many countries to opt for communism, many countries, including Cuba, will opt for freedom . Just as many countries as Cuba, we expect many nations to opt out of freedom, says Cuban president .
 I had pointed out to Dobrynin in Washington that this problem was poisoning our relations. I had said that it was poisoning relations with the U.S. Russia and the United States .
 Oct.-28 agreement had never been fully realized, and that must be recognized . But Oct. 28 agreement never was fully realized .
 Gromyko, moderating his tone, asked again whether we expected people who would believe our statements that USG can do nothing about actions of these emigre groups . Grophyko asked again if we expected to find people .
 He fully recognized and appreciated that it did not please United States when he pointed out there was no way of reconciling statements of top U.S. officials with facts of provocations .
 SovGovt was expressing hope that USG and President would take more sober approach to such serious provocations and would act in spirit of agreement that had been reached Oct.-28 .SovGovt expressed hope that U.S. and . President would act more soberly .
 USSR had always and would always act in accord-ance with this agreement, says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin . USSR had 'always' acted in accord with agreement, Putin says .
 He was sorry to have to protest and would prefer not to do it, but circumstances compelled it, he said . He said: "I'm sorry for having to protest. I'm sorry I've had to protest"
 I did make it clear to him that USG did not intend to institute blockade of Cuba in order to stop such raids . I did, however, want to make it . clear, he said, "I did ... but I did ... not intend ... to institute a blockade" of
 Way to solve problem was to remove this element which poisoned US-Soviet relations. Way to solved problem was removing this element from US-Russian relations. U.S.-Russian relations were poisoned by this element.
 Gromyko said difference in our positions was that USG was threatening Cuba and Cubans were taking steps to protect their frontiers . Cuba was taking steps in order to protect its frontiers, he said . Gromykos said difference was that U.S. was threatening Cuban citizens
 Chairman had explained this to President and there was little he could add at this time to that explanation . Chairman said he was disappointed with the outcome of the situation .
 As afterthought, Gromyko said he assumed that by ""poison"" I meant these raids . He said that by "poison" I meant the raids .
 The pair regarded exchange of oral statements as private and did not intend publish . But, for time being, they regarded exchange as private .
 This telegram was inadvertently filed under the discontinued decimal filing system . The telegram is an example of a mistake by filing under the decimal system .
 I have been instructed to deliver following oral reply to that statement . I have also been told that I will not be allowed to speak to the public again . I'm not allowed to comment on the matter .
 Khrushchev's opinion regarding Cuba had some way changed recently . President's opinion, President's position regarding Cuba, had been changed recently. Khrushov's opinion of Cuba had changed recently, he said .
 Khrushchev's conversation of March 6, 1963, with Mr Trevelyan, Ambassador Great Britain in Moscow .
 Khrushchev pointed out in above-mentioned conversation with Trevelyan as well as on number other occasions, that remarks are heard more and more frequently in USA to effect that USA Government had made no commitment not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev emphasized that such remarks are very dangerous and fraught with fatal consequences, since this can lead to destruction in embryonic stage of that confidence— even though it be slight-in-the-word . The remarks were made during settlement of crisis in Caribbean area, which developed .
 There were more than adequate grounds for these remarks of Chairman USSR Council of Ministers . Chairman USSR council of Ministers said: 'There are more than enough grounds for this'
 Government USA is of course aware of this and there is hardly need to enumerate now all statements, including those of American officials, which cast doubt on fact that U.S. had taken upon itself commitment not to invade Cuba .
 President's position in regard to Cuba has not undergone any kind of change, says Ambassador . U.S. Ambassador has stated in name of President, that President's stance on Cuba hasn't changed . Cuba has been a source of tension in Cuba for decades .
 Substance of commitments which parties assumed during exchange of messages between Chairman of USSR Council of Ministers and President of United States on October 27 and 28, 1962, are well known .
 It is not necessary to prove that fulfillment of these commitments by parties is most important guarantee for maintaining peace in Caribbean area . It's not necessary for proof that these commitments have been fulfilled by parties .
 As far as Soviet Government is concerned, it, showing its concern for strengthening of peace and normalization of situation in this region, it is conforming invariably to understanding laid down in above-mentioned messages and is strictly observing commitments .
 Soviet Government has often undertaken steps, including some quite recently, which go even further than commitments which it took upon itself on October 27 and 28, 1962, regarding settlement of crisis in Caribbean area . The Soviet government has also taken steps, such as some recently, to deal with the crisis
 Soviet Government has a right to expect from Government of USA a similar attitude toward its commitments including, of course, commitment on non-invasion of Cuba . U.S. should expect similar attitude from Soviet Government of USSR .
 Statement transmitted by United States Ambassador on March 16, can also be understood in different sense . Unfortunately, however, statement transmitted by U.S. Ambassador can be understood as a different sense, Ambassador says .
 This statement bears strictly unilateral character and therefore has never been considered and cannot be considered as integral part of understanding which was achieved on settling crisis . In addition, this statement bears solely unilateral character . It is not considered as part of the understanding that the crisis was settled, it is said .
 It is in direct contradiction both to commitments of USA for settling crisis in Caribbean area and also to norms of international law . It is a direct contradiction to commitments to settle crisis in the Caribbean area, USA says .
 It is not difficult to imagine dangerous consequences to which such a policy could lead and serious trials to which it could subject world to . It could lead to dangerous consequences, serious trials .
 U.S. Ambassador: Cuba is threatening Government of Venezuela and supporting some sort of actions undertaken against Venezuela . In statement, transmitted by United States Ambassador on March 16, it was claimed that Government of Republic of Cuba is . Cuba is accused of threatening Venezuela .
 President of U.S. should not take 'dangerous steps' against Cuba, Cuban leader says . Cuban leader: "It's not the real intention that of undertaking new dangerous steps against Republic of Cuba"
 It is not Cuba which threatens Venezuela or any other states in Western Hemisphere, but, on the contrary, USA and some of its allies which threaten Republic of Cuba, call for overthrow of its government, and organize subversive activity against Cuba on wide scale . It is certainly well known to all
 It is precisely this policy of USA, and not any sort of ""aggressive Communist initiatives,"" which are source of new danger to preservation of peace in Caribbean area, writes . It is not the "aggressive Communist initiative" that is source of "new danger to preserve peace"
 Government of USA to continue reconnaissance flights over territory of Cuba, Cuba . U.S. has made reference again to intention of continuing such flights . Cuba says it will not accept request to fly over Cuba .
 Government of USA knows well that Soviet Union always opposed and continues to oppose such actions by USA, which are crude violation of international law and of UN Charter . U.S. government of USA know well that . Soviet Union has always opposed such actions .
 Efforts to justify continuation of such flights by references to necessity of inspection of territory of Cuba "cannot be recognized as having any basis" since question of inspection has not existed for a long time .
 There is no point now in returning to all the ins and outs of this question; it was resolved in course of settling crisis in Caribbean area . There is also a point to not return to the details of the crisis in the Caribbean area, says CNN.com .
 It is only necessary to emphasize that continuation of completely unjustified provocative flights by American planes over Cuban territory, which evoke legitimate indignation, particularly in Cuba, can lead to most serious consequences . Full responsibility for which will rest on Government of United States, and only on it .
 We believe that situation in Caribbean area can be normalized once and for all . Conditions can be created there for establishment of a really durable peace, says the president . We hope that situation can be normalised once again .
 U.S. should not interfere in internal affairs of Cuba and should renounce attempts to export counterrevolution to Cuba, he says . Cuba should not be allowed to interfere with its internal affairs, he adds .
 If President of USA would use his influence in this direction, he would thereby make great contribution to cause of eliminating dangerous tension which still exists in Caribbean area, he says .
 Soviet Government is convinced that precisely such a course of policy corresponds both to interest of establishing peace in Caribbean area and to . interest of improvement of . SovietAmerican relations and relaxation of international tension .
 As far as Soviet Government is concerned, it invariably stands for such a course in international affairs, says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 Letter from Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy was sent March 28, 1963 . Rusk was secretary of state of state at the time of the assassination .
 Drafted by Robert Follestad, Officer in Charge of the Office of the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, and cleared .
 I am concerned that hit and run raids by Cuban exiles may create incidents which work to the disadvantage of our national interest . I am also concerned that such raids may create problems for the UK .
 Increased frequency of these forays could raise a host of problems over which we would not be able to control . Increased frequency would raise a number of problems, such as a lack of control .
 The attack caused substantial damage to the Soviet vessel may complicate our relations with the USSR without net advantage to us . Actions such as yesterday's attack which caused substantial . damage to a Soviet vessel .
 Chase proposes several measures that could impede or deter further attacks of this nature . Chase: "I therefore propose several measures which could ... deter or discourage further attacks"
 Chase also informed Bundy of his conversations at the Department of Justice on March 27 . Bundy says he has spoken to Chase about his conversations with the DOJ .
 The discussions indicated that the FBI is not doing a stellar intelligence job, Chase says . Chase: "They seem to know remarkably little about the activist groups" Chase: The FBI seems to know "remarkable little" about activist groups .
 The intelligence community could increase its efforts in Miami to develop hard information about projected raids .
 This is currently communicated to Customs authorities charged with investigation of violation of arms control . This is being investigated by the Customs authorities .
 Customs and the Coast Guard, on the basis of this information, can stop and search the vessels . Second, Customs and Coast Guard will be able to search vessels based on the information . The information can also be used to identify the vessel .
 Arms and vessels are confiscated, and participants arraigned if a violation of law has occurred . Participants are charged with a crime if they commit a breach of the law .
 An increase of one or more vessels to facilitate current Customs and Coast Guard operations in the Miami area would be helpful, officials say .
 CIA, FBI and Customs officials in Miami could quietly inform suspects in the exile community that the U.S. intends to intensify enforcement of laws relating to exile raids . Third, CIA could quietly tell suspects in Miami that the United States intends to intensified enforcement of violations of pertinent laws .
 Fourth, the FCC could locate and close down illegal radio transmitters operating out of the Miami area in connection with these raids . The FCC could also locate illegal transmitters in the area .
 Fifth, we can inform the British Government of our plans to try to control these activities . British Government has become increasingly concerned about the possibility that British territory in the Bahamas may be used for these raids .
 These measures have not been discussed with any of the senior officials of the Departments concerned, but if any of them commend themselves to you, I suggest that a meeting of the interested Departments be called to discuss the problem .
 The President said he had asked the Council to meet in order to talk about the two recent hit-and-run raids staged by anti-Castro refugees .
 The State Department has twice said that these raids are not particularly helpful to the U.S. State Department officials have said they are not helpful .
 The question is whether we should take direct action in the U.S. to cut off their supplies . The raids would draw less press attention and arouse less acrimony in Moscow, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The raids are actually staged from the Bahamas and other than United States territory . Anti-Castro groups purchase supplies in the U.S. and come in and go out of the United States .
 The raiders would be extremely difficult to control because they are brave men fighting for freedom of their country, says the president .
 Mr McCone said the continued raids would cause trouble inside Cuba and would discredit Castro in Latin America if he was unable to prevent the raids .
 The Soviets, if the raids continue, might reappraise their support of Castro or, alternatively, raise directly with the President the continuance of the anti-Castro raids .
 Mr McCone said his personal view was that there would be intense public and press criticism if we stand down these raids .
 He recommended that we officially disallow the raids without acting to prevent the raiders from using the U.S. as a base .
 Secretary Rusk said that the hit-and-run raids against Cuba, in an area which is under our military umbrella, will be blamed on us no matter what we say . Cuba is under the military umbrella in the region, he said .
 If anyone is shooting Russians we ought to be doing it, not Cubans who are acting beyond our control . No one would believe that we do not have the capability of preventing the raiders from leaving the U.S.
 If the raids continue, Cuban and Russian forces will be drawn further outside the territorial waters of Cuba . Cuban forces will try to stop the raiding ships at sea and before they reach Cuban ports .
 Cuban planes will be patrolling farther off shore, searching for incoming raiding ships . Our air surveillance of Cuba will be complicated and the cost of continuing overflights will increase .
 He recommended that the least we should do is to stop the violation of our laws . He said that we should stop the violations of our law .
 If we decide that such raids should be conducted, we should plan them ourselves and see that they are carried out under our control rather than as now occurs . We should plan such raids ourselves, rather than be carried out as now .
 The President pointed out that the United States private ship, the Floridian, was probably shot at in retaliation for earlier anti-Castro raids . The President said that the ship was shot at by the U.S. private ship .
 He said that after the ships leave Florida, they proceed to an island from which the raid is launched at a later time . The raid is said to be carried out from an island, he said .
 In some cases larger ships leave U.S. ports and rendezvous with smaller ships at sea . Smaller ships leave United States ports to rendezvous at sea with smaller vessels .
 The Coast Guard does not have enough boats to carry out this assignment . Coast Guard says it is too busy with boats to do this .
 Secretary Rusk noted that in discussions of the raid problem with Congressmen, he had noted a mixed reaction . If our intelligence on the raiders improves, we can do much more to prevent them leaving the United States, he said .
 The Bahama Islands are being used by the raiders as the take-off point . Mr McCone said the Bahama islands were being used as the launch point .
 The President commented that these in-and-out raids were probably exciting and rather pleasant for those who engage in them . The President said that these raids are probably exciting .
 This exciting activity was more fun than living in the hills of Escambray, pursued by Castro's forces .
 Secretary Rusk doubted that the Russians would get out of Cuba as an answer to the harassment of the raiders, but rather will build up the power of the Cubans to prevent them from doing any damage at sea .
 Secretary McNamara said that we can stop the raiders if we use the Navy. Secretary . McNamara . Secretary McNama said that . we can . stop the raidsers if . we use . the Navy .
 If we don't want to stop the raids, we can modify them, he says . We can make it difficult for the raiders to attack targets not of our choosing, he adds .
 The President suggested that we first tell the British and then, on a background basis, tell the press that the raiders are staging out of the Bahama Islands . In any event we can so act that we disassociate ourselves .
 The Attorney General said that we can slow down the raids if we wish and later stop them entirely if we so desire . Attorney General: We can slow the raids down if we want to .
 We can prosecute cases against those who supply ammunition to the raiders . We can also prosecute those who are supplying ammunition to raiders.
 We can prosecute the ten Americans who were picked up recently at sea with arms which were to be used by the raiders . We can also prosecute the 10 Americans picked up at sea . The raiders were to use the arms they had been found .
 Ambassador Thompson said we must prevent any raider plane bombing a Soviet ship . Ambassador Thompson emphasized that we must . prevent any . raider planes bombing Soviet ships .
 Secretary Rusk repeated his view that raids which do not result in a penetration on the ground in Cuba are fruitless .
 The Attorney General commented that we did have a problem domestically of explaining why we were stopping the raids . We can stop them by prosecuting those involved and by making the raiders' stay in the United States very unpleasant, he said .
 Ambassador Thompson said attacks on Soviet ships could prevent withdrawal of Soviet troops from Cuba . Ambassador Thompson noted that we could say that attacks . could prevent the withdrawal of . Soviet forces from Cuba.
 Mr Harriman agreed with Secretary Rusk that the raids will not prompt the Soviets to leave Cuba, but rather to step up participation in Cuban military activities . The raids are expected to continue to take place in Cuba .
 He agreed there was no value in the pin-pricking hit-and-run raids . He agreed that there were no value .
 Secretary Dillon pointed out that even if we did not succeed in catching the raiders on their way out, we would have a serious effect on future raids if we caught them .
 President asked that we handle this problem in such a way as to avoid the appearance of prosecuting Cuban patriots . The President asked for us to handle this issue such a . way .
 He suggested that we tell the raiders that they must not attack Soviet ships-but could attack purely Cuban targets . He suggested we tell them that we would only attack Cuban targets only .
 The purpose would be to avoid heating up the situation to the point where the Russians would send destroyers to protect their ships in Cuban waters . The purpose of the mission is to avoid the situation heating up, the official says .
 We might tell the raiders that if they stop their present attacks and undertake to carry out assignments as guided by the CIA, they could continue, but if they refuse to accept CIA guidance, we would take action to prevent further raids .
 Secretary Rusk felt there should be a prohibition against attacks on all kinds of shipping and a halt to all hit-and-run raids . Rusk said there should also be a ban on attacks on shipping .
 Mr McCone noted that the raiders will not go ashore because they know they will be caught . The raiders are not going ashore because of the fact they will not be caught, he said .
 He said that even with extensive planning it is difficult enough to put in controlled agents . He said it was difficult to put into controlled agents even without extensive planning .
 CIA has means of informing raiding groups that they should stop attacks on Soviet shipping or attacks on all shipping . CIA also has means to tell raiding groups to stop attacks against Soviet shipping .
 The President asked why we could not put pressure on the suppliers of the raiders . The president asked why he could not pressure the suppliers, he said .
 The Attorney General reported that the FBI is investigating the source of the raiders' supplies . The raiders raided the U.S. National Guard headquarters .
 He said raiding groups are very small and it might not be possible to communicate with every group . He said the raiding groups were very small .
 We could proceed to arrest the raiders and later prosecute those against whom we had sufficient evidence . The raiders could be arrested and later prosecuted, police said . We could then proceed on to arrest and prosecute those who had insufficient evidence .
 It did not appear likely that before the middle of April we would have a grand jury which would be responsive to our efforts to indict the raiders . The raiders raided the home in April, police say .
 "In the meantime, however, we could slow down the raiders by passing word to them through the Coast Guard, the FBI, and other channels that we would not permit the continuance of their activities"
 Secretary Rusk said more public knowledge of the pressures we are putting on the raiders would, in his view, help our position .
 Vice President said we would be irresponsible if we did not act against the raiders who were carrying out irresponsible actions that could result in getting us involved in a war . In reply to a Presidential question, the Vice President .
 He predicted that, just as we would, the Russians will shoot back if the raiders continue shooting at Soviet ships . The raiders will continue to shoot, he said .
 He acknowledged that there would be some criticism of our action, but felt there would have been much more criticism if we did not stop the raids .
 He urged that we inform the appropriate Congressional Committees and other governments of our intention to stop the raiding . He urged us to inform Congress and other government of our intentions .
 The Attorney General said that one way of dealing with the raiders would be to prevent their return to the United States if they once leave without permission .
 It would involve warning individual Cubans that if they left the U.S., they would not be permitted to return . It would be the first time the government has threatened to take action against Cubans .
 The President hoped we could pick out a good case for the first one to prosecute-not Robert Emmett, but rather an ancient arms dealer .
 The Attorney General noted that Americans are supplying the arms used by the Cuban raiders . The attorney general also noted that U.S. is supplying the weapons .
 Discussion with the British about the use of the Bahama Islands by the raiders .
 Consideration of whether we should inform the press for background that the raiders are taking off from the Bahamas . Consideration was considered of whether to inform the media for background .
 The U.S. government is trying to prevent a planned airplane raid, if necessary, by stopping it . It would be the first attempt to stop the raid so that if it takes place, all would be warned .
 Ways of preventing the return of raiders leaving U.S. jurisdiction .
 The President suggested that the group discuss their recommendations with him tomorrow . The group will meet tomorrow to discuss their proposals .
 The President raised the question of what should be our policy on hit-and-run raids and asked my views .
 Secretary Rusk stated that the U.S. would be blamed for unauthorized raids, the Soviets would expect that we could stop them and they would immediately take counter actions such as escorting ships, etc. Rusk said .
 "On a minimum, we should act to disassociate ourselves and do all possible not to permit the continuance of unauthorized raids. On a minimum of disassociating ourselves," he said .
 Dillon stated that we could not stop them because of the number of ports, small ships, inadequate coast guard facilities, etc. Dillon said that we cannot stop them due to the size of the ports and small ships .
 McNamara countered by saying that we could stop them by utilizing military resources . McNamara said we could use military resources to stop them . He said that it was possible to use the military to prevent them from happening .
 As a second alternative he suggested we might explore modifying our course of action and finally, should disassociate ourselves from responsibility . Finally, he suggested that we might consider modifying our way of action .
 The Attorney General outlined various steps that could be taken to identify the leadership of the various groups and to either prosecute them or exclude them from the country through immigration procedures .
 Thompson and Harriman expressed particular concern over the reported airplane that was ready to bomb Soviet ship . The plane was reported to be ready to attack the Soviet ship, but was not bombed .
 Practically all in attendance thought that we should try and guide the operation away from attacks on Soviet ships because of obvious reaction of the Soviets . The operation was thought to be off-shoot of the Soviet Union .
 The Vice President felt that we would be criticized either from letting them go on the one hand, or stopping them on the other, he said . He said the Vice President wanted to avoid being criticized for stopping them .
 He felt the military should immediately study that which should be done to stop them . All actions should be taken to halt the unauthorized raids, he said .
 The President suggested a meeting be held this afternoon to determine a number of matters .
 We should establish what our contacts are with the groups so that we can guide them effectively, whether we can stand down operations. We need to establish what we can do to help them effectively. We should be able to stand down the operations,’s minister says .
 There is evidence that much of this originated in the Bahamas . Discussing with UK since there are evidence that there are links to Bahamas .
 AG, McNamara, McCone, Cottrell, Dillon, and Dillon attend meeting in Miami . FBI, CIA, Immigration officials, Coast Guard, etc. sent to Miami this afternoon for discussion .
 Find out all we know about the groups, who they are, where they are and what can be done about them . Find out what we need to know about them and what we can do about them.
 CIA and FBI in Miami have not been able to exchange intelligence between the two agencies . "Apparently there is not sufficient exchange between CIA andFBI in Miami," FBI says .
 Warning the unauthorized groups in advance of . actions we intend to take against them . Warning the . unauthorized groups . Warning .
 FCC shut down illicit radio stations, provide a truck equipped with DF-equipment to locate the stations . FCC provides a truck with DF equipment to locate stations .
 Explore what could be done to influence the groups away from Soviet targets . Explore what you can do to help the groups change their targets .
 AG favored a complete stand down before any attempt to guide the groups . AG: Stand down should be made before any attempts to guide groups .
 Alexis Johnson expressed greatest concern over the plane matter and asked that the group take immediate action to immobilize the plane . Alexis Johnson asked that that the plane be immobilized .
 Organizations such as the Second Front of Escambray, Alpha 66, and Lambda 66 are well-known in the Cuban colony in Florida and Puerto Rico .
 Their plans are discussed openly, are picked up by CIA and reported almost daily in our CIA bulletins . Their plans were discussed openly by the CIA, the CIA says .
 There is no doubt that the individuals are in and out of Florida and Puerto Rico . The individuals are believed to be involved in the criminal activity .
 The operations were skillfully executed by men of obvious courage and dedication . The operations are skillful executed .
 Apparently the organizations are building up and we can expect more rather than fewer instances in the future . We can expect even more instances of this type of behavior .
 Raids will exacerbate problems with Castro and more particularly the Soviet Union, says author . Raids are undesirable, he says, and are undesirable .
 A successful harassment will create very considerable annoyance, will stimulate internal dissension, will complicate Castro's problems, and will have very considerable effect in discrediting Castroism in Latin America . However, successful harassment would create very much annoyance .
 Inability of Castro to deal with these raids might cause the Soviets to question the strength of his position and therefore reappraise their own position in Cuba . The Soviets might reappraise themselves in Cuba after the failure of Castro .
 Cuba could open up a discussion of its presence with the United States, CNN's John Sutter says . Cuba's U.S. presence in Cuba could lead to questions about its presence, he says .
 A concerted and publicized effort to ""stand down" these operations would probably draw more public and press criticism in the United States than would result from tolerating these acts while officially disassociating the government from them through denial of responsibility and control .
 On March 31, 1963, British and Bahamian armed forces captured an armed motor boat, the Violynn III, carrying 16 Cuban exiles and 1 American . The boat was captured on Exuma Island in the Bahamas .
 The United States had informed British/Bahamian authorities that the Violynn was seeking to refuel in preperation for an attack on a Soviet tanker . The U.S. had informed the British and Bahamas that the ship was seeking refueling .
 At the 510th meeting of the National Security Council, April 2, the President and the Council discussed the status of the arrested raiders . The President, the Council and the President discussed the arrest raiders.
 If they refuse to come into the United States territorial waters, the Coast Guard ship would follow them but not fire on them . The Coast Guard would follow the ship, but would not fire at them .
 We would soon know the names of the raiders on the ship and would seek to apply pressures on them to agree to enter a U.S. port . The raiders' names would soon be known and would be sought to apply pressure on them .
 When, and apparently if, it returned to Miami, the Violynn would be impounded, and the American and Cubans who were not parolees would be questioned and released within a few hours .
 Cuba Coordinating Committee— Covert Operations in Cuba discussed at a meeting of the Cottrell Committee on April 1 .
 Meeting was attended by Secretary Vance, Joe Califano, Dick Helms, Dez FitzGerald, and Bob Hurwitch . The meeting was also attended by Joe Californiaano and Dick
 The leaflets will attack Castro's henchmen, and contain cartoons illustrating sabotage techniques . They will also contain cartoons of sabotage techniques.
 The decision on the balloons is scheduled for another review during the week preceding May Day . The decision will be made again in the next week .
 CIA and the Army are now working on this one to find appropriate installations . Training of CIA-Sponsored Cuban Exiles on Military Reservations is underway .
 It decided against setting up an [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on the grounds that it is an unnecessary duplication . The decision was made on the basis that it was unnecessary .
 In approving the three programs for Special Group consideration, the Committee recognized that they will probably be of marginal value only; however, they will cost us very little, financial or otherwise . In approving them, the committee said they would probably cost us little .
 The Committee discussed three forms of sabotage: limpets, incendiaries in the cargoes, and abrasives in the machinery . The Committee also discussed three types of sabotage .
 The Committee decided against limpets and even though it would be a dramatic morale booster, decided not to limpets . The Committee also decided against limpeting .
 A limpet could sink a ship and the sinking could be billed as a U.S. submarine attack . Unfortunately, there is no certain way of controlling a limpet; it could sink the ship .
 Committee will recommend to the Special Group the incendiaries which would be timed to go off in international waters and the abrasives in the machinery .
 While the propaganda boost might be nil, they are easier to effect than limpets, they could really hurt Castro . Castro's government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 The Committee gave CIA the option of using either its own Cubans or of using DRE as a cut-out . The CIA was given the option to use DRE to cut out its own Cuban citizens .
 Dick Helms pointed out that although these groups may start out to get a non-Soviet target, once you let them go, you can never really be sure what they will do . Helms: You can never know what you will do if you let these groups go .
 Bob Hurwitch seemed to favor the approach that attacks and sabotage should appear to come from inside rather than from outside Cuba . Hurwitch: "Sabotage should appear from inside"
 Secretary Vance expressed some concern that this would lead to a conflagration between the Cubans and the Soviets . The Committee decided in favor of this course of action .
 While the results will probably not be startling for our side, the costs and risks are small, the risks and costs are small . The results are probably not surprising for us, but the risks are very small .
 In considering specifics of a covert program, I think we should keep in the back of our minds, he says . We should also consider the possibility that we may want to turn our policy around sometime in the future .
 Russian targets in Cuba could be targeted, says U.S. State Dept. of Cuba . Cuba may consider the risks involved in directing more violent efforts against selected Russian targets .
 "I like an active covert program. Assuming we continue our present policy or consider a turn-around policy very far down the road," says President Obama .
 It seems to be a good sabotage program is one of the few tools we can use to really hurt Castro economically, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It seems to me that a good sabotaging program is a good tool"
 Our present policy of isolating Cuba from the Free World is not going to bust Castro . Castro's Cuba will not bust Castro, says President Obama . Cuba's isolationist policy will not work, says Obama .
 With no effective U.S. covert intervention, it will probably grow healthier from here on . The Cuban economy will move from the difficult transition stage between economic dependence on the West and economic dependency on the Bloc .
 The Cottrell Committee held a meeting on Wednesday afternoon to discuss covert operations . Cuban Coordinating Committee: Covert Operations .
 The Committee discussed the program outlined in the attached document/1/ and agreed to recommend it to the Special Group . Propaganda Inciting Cubans Within Cuba to Attack Soviet Troops was discussed .
 These attacks will tend to exacerbate relations between every Cuban and every Russian in Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Avlon . "These attacks will be useful," he says . Avlon says .
 There was an interesting discussion about where to stop regarding Cuban attacks on Soviet troops and installations . There was also a discussion about stopping the attacks .
 The general consensus was that it was O.K. for individual Cubans to attack Soviet troops or installations but it was undesirable for groups to organize attacks against the Russians . Cubans attacked Soviet troops and installations but not groups of Cubans .
 Dez FitzGerald pointed out that, under present circumstances, any action which requires organization is highly dangerous . Dez said that under current circumstances, the situation is extremely dangerous .
 The Committee felt organized attacks would initiate wide-spread reprisals by the Castro government . This was not generally considered a good thing . Also, the Committee felt that the organized attacks . would initiate . wide-wide reprisal .
 Dez FitzGerald brought up again the issue of attaching limpets to Cuban ships . This had been turned down by the Committee on Monday/2/ because of the possibility that the limpets would sink a ship .
 Dez said that, upon further reflection, he felt we were giving up a good thing . Also, the danger of a sinking was a very small one, he said . Dez: "I feel we're giving up the good thing. Also, also, the risk of a
 Dez came away from Wednesday's meeting with the President/3/ with the feeling that the President would like some noise level in our sabotage program for morale purposes; limpets fill the bill . Dez went on to say that he came away with a feeling that he felt that the
 Secretary Vance was reluctant to submit the limpet plan to the Special Group on Thursday . The limpet proposal is expected to be submitted to the committee .
 He suggested that the limpet plan be included on the list of major sabotage acts which is due to be submitted to the President next week . Instead, he suggested that it should be included in the list .
 Mr Markov of the Russian Embassy/1/ called this morning and said that the Russian Ambassador wished to come by and see me . He said that he wished to meet with the Russian ambassador .
 Norman Cousins told me that Norman Cousins had asked to see Khrushchev and he had arranged it . Norman Cousins said he had been asked to meet the former leader of Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev sent the message to the President of the Soviet Union . It was ostensibly to me from the Ambassador but it was from the President . The message was ostensibly from the ambassador but was actually from the Soviet leader .
 Another point that was made was a sharp and bitter criticism about the raids that had taken place against Russian ships . Another point was made .
 These were piratical acts and the U.S. must take responsibility for them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States needs to take responsibility"
 "It isn't possible to believe that if we really wanted to stop these raids that we could not do so," says minister . "We can't believe that we really want to stop them," he says .
 The arrests that we made would be the criteria by which they would judge our sincerity . They were glad to hear of the steps that are being taken lately but in the last analysis the specific acts, namely, the arrests that were made, were the criteria .
 The Soviet Union questions whether in fact we wish to end these attacks for our criticism of them has been not that they were wrong . It has not been the case that the Soviet Union was wrong but that it was ineffective, says historian .
 The clear implication was that if the raids had been effective they would have had our approval . The raids would have been approved by the British government, the official said .
 "Our efforts to isolate Cuba, to build a virtual wall around it, was a barbaric act," he said . Further, he said, the efforts were "barbaric" and "a barbaric act"
 U.S. "actions to stifle Cuba's commerce and create economic difficulties and isolate her from her neighbors in Latin America were completely unwarranted," the White House said .
 The support given to counter-revolutionaries and the statements to the barbaric mercenaries in Miami by the President were also bitterly criticized . The President also criticized for his support for the Cuban rebels in Miami .
 The document also stated that the President should understand that the continued pressure on the Soviet Union for the withdrawal of troops from Cuba was not going to be effective .
 "They had already withdrawn twice as many troops as the largest number that had appeared in the newspapers here in the U.S. The United States. As a matter of fact, they had already pulled twice the number of troops as they had appeared .
 He said he would not give the actual number withdrawn because of pressure from the U.S. However, he said that he was going to refuse to give the number of withdrawn .
 This letter took note of the criticism of the fact that the Russian SAM sites remained within Cuba . This letter was written to the Cuban government .
 The author of the letter wanted us to know that those groundair missiles were going to stay in Cuba for the protection of the Cuban people . The Cuban people were protected by the missiles, the author said .
 The overflights that were taking place were deeply resented by the Soviet Union and by Cuba . Cuba was resented for their use of overflights .
 He said U-2 planes would be shot down and that this had better be clearly understood in the U.S. He then went on to say clearly and distinctly that these U.2 planes . He then said that this was better than the United States .
 The U-2 plane that Eisenhower sent over the Soviet Union was shot down . The same thing would be done in those flights over Cuba over Cuba . Eisenhower's plane over Cuba was also shot down by the Soviets .
 The document returned to the theme that we were treating the Soviet Union as inferiors; that this could not be continued . It said that McNamara and Malinovski's statements were brought about by McNamara's warlike pronouncements .
 The United States was interested only in making profits from munitions, building up their efforts to dominate the world through counter-revolutionary activity . The U.S. was interested in making profit from munitions .
 We were run by capitalists and we should understand that we could not push the Soviet Union around. We should not push it around, he says .
 He also expressed deep concern about the deployment of the Polaris submarines in the Mediterranean . The Polaris submarines are replacing the Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 If President Kennedy wanted to reopen this area of contact he would be glad to accept it . President Kennedy would be happy to accept the invitation .
 He also said that as far as a meeting between Khrushchev and President Kennedy he thought that that might be helpful . He also thought that a meeting with Kennedy might have been helpful .
 I pointed out to him that I had met with him frequently and that he had never talked like this before . "I pointed out that I . pointed out he had met him frequently, that he . had never spoken like that before," he said . "He had never been able to
 I asked what was the explanation for this document and he said that I should understand that it came from the Soviet Union . He said that he was told that it was a Soviet document . The document was signed by Vladimir Putin in 1991 .
 I said it demonstrated a complete lack of understanding of the U.S. and President Kennedy . I thought it was so insulting and rude to the President and to the . United States that I would neither accept it nor transmit its message, he said .
 I said if they had a message of that kind to deliver it should be delivered formally through the State Department, not through me. I said . I said that if they wanted to deliver that kind of a message, they should go to the State Dept.
 I said that during our conversations in the past we attempted to work out matters on a mutually satisfactory basis, I said . I said I said during . during . conversations in . the past, we attempted . to work . out matters in the . past, he said, "I said
 "I said we might disagree but I never insulted or offended him or his country or Mr Khrushchev," he said . "We might disagree ... but we never insulted him," he added. "I never insulted Mr Khruschev or any of his country"
 I said I thought this kind of document did not further that effort or our mutual interests . I repeated that if they intended to transmit that kind of message that it should be done through the State Department, he said .
 Thompson also met with Dobrynin on April 6, to discuss the message of April 3 . Thompson met April 6 to discuss April 3 message . Thompson also discussed the message on April 4 .
 Thompson said there seemed to be a misunderstanding developing between the U.S. and Soviet Union . Thompson said that the United States and the Soviet Union were at odds with each other .
 Thompson said he was thinking of suggesting to the President that a special envoy who had close contact with the President should see Khrushchev . Thompson stated that he thought of suggesting that he was suggesting that the President's special envoy should be sent to see Khruschev . Khrushi was
 The President rejected the balloon item on the recommendation of Ed Murrow . The President also rejected the idea of using the balloon on a national broadcast .
 The President approved the propaganda item (inciting Cubans to harass, attack and sabotage Soviet military personnel in Cuba) provided every precaution was taken to prevent attribution .
 The President rejected such broadcasts by exile groups over Radio Caribe in the Dominican Republic, and rejected black intrusion on Radio Moscow Russian language broadcasts, pending consultation with Llewelyn Thompson .
 The Pentagon has agreed to provide weapons training on a military reservation . The trainees would not know they were being trained by military personnel .
 Parachute jump training under comparable circumstances will commence at a later date but within the next few weeks . Parachue jump training will commence under similar circumstances but within a few weeks.
 We have agreed with CIA that we would spot about 20 inductees now in training at Fort Jackson . We consider these inductees to have the necessary characteristics for CIA operations inside Cuba . We have also agreed with the CIA that .
 These personnel would also be used in advance of the introduction of Special Forces, if there was a decision to invade Cuba .
 Americans imprisoned on the Isle of Pines to be released on 22 April . As a result of talks with Castro, the Americans will be released from prison .
 Castro will observe closely U.S. policy toward Cuba . Castro will make sure that Red Cross deliveries are concluded in good faith . Castro says he'll observe closely American policy .
 The main thrust of Donovan's discussion, however, was political and can best be evaluated by a confidential statement made to Donovan by a close personal advisor of Castro .
 Castro knew that relations with the U.S. were necessary, Vallejo said . Castro wanted these relations to be developed, he said .
 There are certain Cuban Government officials, communists, who are strongly opposed, even more than certain people in the United States. However, there is certain Cuban government officials, Communists, who oppose the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 If they rebelled at this time, Cuba would be in chaos . They have no great following in Cuba; but if they rebell against this time it would be chaos .
 The Donovan-Castro meetings were discussed after what McCone called an Executive Committee meeting on April 10 . He believed that Donovan and Castro could work out a plan for a reasonable relationship between the two countries .
 McCone was mistaken, it was a meeting of the full Council, dealing mostly with Laos, after which McCone and the President had a private meeting . McCone said he was mistaken .
 Kennedy expressed great interest in the information in paragraph 2 and raised questions about Castro's future within Cuba, with or without the Soviet presence . In that meeting Kennedy said he was interested in Cuba .
 McCone proposed to send Donovan back to Cuba on April 22 to secure freedom of the remaining prisoners and also keep the channel of communication open . McCone stated that the matter was under study and he proposed sending Donovan back .
 Donovan had two sessions with Castro, one for five hours, the other for fourteen hours . Donovan had a total of 14 hours of meetings with Castro .
 A variety of subjects were covered including the role of Red China in world politics, the Cuban economy, and Cuba's role in Latin America .
 Castro came around to relating it to Castro's plan for developing Cuba, Castro said . Castro said: "In discussing any subject, Castro always related it to his plan to develop Cuba" Castro: "I want to see Cuba develop as a nation, not a country, as a country
 Castro finds the Soviet Union useful, but Cuba under Castro he claims will never become a Soviet satellite . Castro says Cuba will not become a satellite state . Castro: Cuba will never be a satellite .
 Cuban role in Latin America depended upon Cuba's viability rather than the export of subversion, he said . He emphasized that Cuba's role in the region depended upon its viability . He said Cuba's future depends on its survival rather than subversion .
 Scoville, Colonel Ledford and Colonel Steakley were present for Items 1-3 . Mr FitzGerald was present for Item 4 4. 4. 5.
 Cuban Operations Mr FitzGerald expanded orally on the paper of 9 April,/ 1/ giving a summary of the recent results in the agent infiltration program, and outlining proposals for the next month .
 Mr FitzGerald said CIA was in touch with him from time to time . He said that any plan he has to offer for activity against Cuba will be sympathetically received .
 Another more general paper, also dated April 9, entitled ""A General Sabotage and Harassment Program Against Cuba," was sent from the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs to the Special Group .
 The comments from the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, dated 1 1 April,/2/ on the three papers being considered at today's meeting were noted .
 The Group requested that these comments be withdrawn and destroyed for security reasons . The comments have been withdrawn from the site .
 Mr FitzGerald pointed out that the target date had been set before the status of the Donovan negotiations was known .
 No activity of this kind would be allowed to interfere with negotiations at this stage, he said .
 There then ensued a lengthy discussion of the entire question of sabotage . There then proceeded to a lengthy debate of the question of the sabotage .
 The Group agreed that the papers before it were responsive to requests which had been levied on CIA to come up with general and specific proposals . CIA had been told by the U.S. that they should be able to provide more information to the public .
 All members of the Group recognized that a searching examination must be undertaken in the light of all pertinent factors, to determine whether we wish to change the present policy .
 It was agreed that in order to provide a firm basis for judgment, we must get a clearer picture of capabilities, of the prospects of success . The dangers of repercussions and of reprisals, etc., etc. etc. were discussed .
 With respect to external operations to be mounted by exile groups, it was agreed that this sort of activity poses a real dilemma . It was also agreed that external operations posed a 'real dilemma' with the situation .
 The United States is placed in the position of either appearing to be ineffective in controlling the exiles or of bearing the onus of active involvement in the operations . The U.S. is in the middle of the situation .
 McCone expressed great skepticism about the desirability of proceeding with sabotage operations, to include training .
 He also commented on the ineffectiveness of Cuban agents and the fact that they would undoubtedly talk if captured .
 Mr FitzGerald confirmed the second point, but felt that these particular Cubans were perhaps more effective than the usual run . Mr Fitzgerald said that the Cubans may be more effective .
 It was decided that probably Friday, the 19th of April, a presentation should be made to higher authority . All responsible individuals should have an opportunity to express their views, it was decided .
 Message from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev was sent April 11, 1963 . Message was sent to President Kennedy from President of Russia .
 It has been some time since I have written you directly, and I think it may be helpful to have some exchange of views in this private channel . As we have both earlier agreed, it is of great importance that we should try to understand each other clearly, so that we can avoid
 The situation in Cuba is not yet satisfactory or reassuring to those who care for the peace of the Caribbean . The crisis was created when strategic weapons were introduced into Cuba last year .
 The continued presence of Soviet forces in Cuba can never be regarded with equanimity by the people of this Hemisphere . Further withdrawals of such forces can only be helpful, writes the British PM .
 "We on our side have been endeavoring to reduce tension in this area in a number of ways. Meanwhile, we ... have ... endeavored to reduce tensions in this region," says President Vladimir Putin .
 It is for this reason that this peaceful observation must continue, and that any interference with it from Cuba would evoke whatever response was necessary to retain it . Any interference with Cuba would necessarily evoke whatever reaction was necessary, it says .
 We are also aware of the tensions unduly created by recent private attacks on your ships in Caribbean waters . We are taking action to halt those attacks which are in violation of our laws .
 "I am determined to continue with policies which will contribute to peace in the Caribbean," says the minister . "I will continue to continue to work on peace," he says .
 There are other issues and pro-problems before us, but perhaps I have said enough to give you a sense of my own current thinking on these matters . There are many other issues to be resolved before us .
 I should send a senior personal representative to discuss these and other matters informally with you. Let me now also offer the suggestion that it might be helpful if some time in May .
 The object would not be formal negotiations, but a fully frank, informal exchange of views, arranged in such a way as to receive as little attention as possible .
 If this thought is appealing to you, please let me know your views at the most convenient time . If this is appealing, please tell me your views on the subject .
 In closing, I want again to send my warm personal wishes to you and all your family . I want to send your warm personal wish to you, your mother and father .
 "Both you and I have grave responsibilities to our families and to all of mankind," she said . "These are difficult and dangerous times in which we live," she added .
 I assure you of my own determination to work at all times to strengthen world peace . The pressures from those who have a less patient and peaceful outlook are very great, he says .
 The Cottrell Committee met Wednesday afternoon/1/ to discuss a number of items which are to come up at the Special Group meeting . SUBJECT Cuba-Covert Actions .
 Secretary Vance, Sterling Cottrell, Dez FitzGerald, Bob Hurwitch and Joe Califano attended . Secretary Vance Vance was in attendance .
 A number of new intelligence operations were approved with little comment . Black Operations was approved without any comment .
 Dez FitzGerald presented three targets for approval- a railway bridge, some petroleum storage facilities and a molasses storage vessel . Dez gave approval for the targets-a railway bridge and some petroleum facilities .
 During the Committee's discussion and approval of the three targets, a number of points were made . During the meeting, the Committee discussed the targets and approved them .
 "This will meet the President's desire for some noise level and for some action in the immediate future," says President Obama .
 These targets will not be attacked before April 22, if it looks as if the U.S. prisoners will be released on that date . The targets are not expected to be attacked until April 22 .
 Raids from outside may prompt Cuban firings near or at American ships . For example, raids from the outside .
 The Committee split on the question of limpets. Sabotage of Cuban Shipping-The Committee split .
 Secretary Vance was against limpets because of the possibility of sinkings . Secretary Vance said limpets could sink in the water .
 Bob Hurwitch pointed out that there are dangers in attaching limpets in Free World ports . Cott went along with limpets, pointing out that they are not allowed in the UK .
 It could prove very embarrassing to U.S. relations with other governments . This aspect should be considered on a port-by-port basis, says CNN.com .
 Attacks from the Inside-Dez pointed out that, as a general rule, it was difficult to control sabotage from the inside . Attacks from Dez said it was hard to control the inside of the government .
 So far, sabotage has been taboo in Cuba, says Cuban diplomat . Cuba's people inside Cuba have been restrained, he says . "So far, sabotaging is taboo," he adds .
 Once the taboo is lifted, it will be difficult to restrict them to certain targets . They may hit targets we never dreamed of. Once they are lifted, they will be able to shoot at targets they never dream of .
 It would really hurt the Cubans but would be a complicated and difficult job . The job would take about eight months to accomplish . It would be difficult to do and would take eight months .
 Attacks from the Outside-The Committee agreed that these attacks could and should be approved on a project-by-project basis . The Committee also agreed that attacks from the outside-the-committee could be approved .
 The soft targets, which are generally unimportant, will be first because they require the least preparation . Soft targets will be the most important targets in the U.S. history .
 "As time goes on, however, we will be hitting some harder and more important targets," says CNN.com.com . "We will hit some harder targets, but we will also be hitting harder targets"
 A figure of 4,000 can be supported by visual observation, analyses of shipping, refugee and clandestine reports . A figure can be seen from visual observation and analysis of shipping and refugee .
 There is evidence of the recent introduction of some equipment of an undisclosed nature during the last several months . In fact, there is evidence that some equipment has been introduced in recent months .
 Some reports suggest that a continuing, gradual Soviet withdrawal is to be expected and will be completed in about a year . Some reports say that the withdrawal will be gradual .
 All Soviet equipment including SAM sites will have been turned over to the Cubans . At this time all Soviet equipment has been handed over to Cubans.
 This is contradicted by evidences of Soviet intention to stay in Cuba, the author says . The most persuasive is substantial permanent construction of facilities to house Soviet personnel, he says .
 At the present time the Soviets are manning the SAM sites, coastal defense missiles, KOMAR ships, MIG-21 aircraft and maintaining their 4 military encampments of about battalion size .
 A Cuban training program, or Utilization of Cubans for support activities such as camp maintenance, mess hall duty, etc. A Cubans are allowed to participate in the camp maintenance .
 It could be that personnel withdrawn have been support personnel, and that combat personnel remain intact . Under the latter assumption, it could be the support personnel .
 Soviet Cuban relationships remain strained but not as seriously strained as they were last Fall . Soviet Cuban relations with the U.S. have been strained since then .
 He considers that he is not a satellite but he is obviously beholden to the Soviets for economic aid and military assist-ance . The Soviet Union is dependent on him for economic and military aid .
 No hard intelligence which would indicate a change in Castro's attitude toward other Latin American governments, officials say . Castro's basic attitude toward the U.S. has not been changed, they say . The Castro regime has not changed its stance on Latin American nations, officials said .
 Castro's talks with Donovan have been mild in nature, conciliatory and reasonably frank . Castro has been critical of Donovan's handling of the situation in the past .
 Castro realizes he must find a rapprochement with the U.S. if he is to succeed in building a viable Cuba . Vallejo's private statements to Donovan suggest that Castro realizes that he needs to find a way with the United States if he succeeds .
 Castro does not know how to go about this, therefore the subject has not been discussed with Donovan . Donovan has not discussed the subject with Castro, however .
 Gave the President a copy of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] summary of the Donovan discussions/1/ and [a copy of] my memorandum of April 15th on Cuba on Cuba . Gave him a copy .
 I urged that the President not involve himself personally in a public argument with Miro Cardona . President urged that he did not get involved personally in the argument .
 Jose Miro Cardona, President of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, had stated his intention to resign unless he had word that President Kennedy was prepared to discuss the matter with him . Cardona said he would resign unless President Kennedy had clear indication that there was a plan for the liberation of Cuba
 Miro planned to publish a resignation letter denouncing U.S. policy toward Cuba . Miro's resignation letter was published in Cuba . He planned to resign from the post .
 I explained to the President that the Cuban problem must be solved in one of two ways; either the manner outlined above or alternatively, by bringing consistent pressure of every possible nature on Khrushchev to force his withdrawal from Cuba, and then bringing about the downfall of Castro .
 I stated to the President that we were studying both courses of action . "I had not made up my mind concerning the feasibility of either plan," he said .
 The President thought both approaches should be carefully examined and suggested the possibility of pursuing both courses at the same time .
 Donovan channel remains open . Donovan channel will remain open for the rest of the year .
 Donovan has to return to Havana at the end of the week and that I will see him privately prior to his departure . I advised the President that Donovan must return to Cuba . Donovan has been in Havana since May 1 .
 I expressed grave doubts and pointed out the hazards from his standpoint in view of the stand-down of the hit-and-run exile operations, the danger of attribution, etc. etc. I said, "I expressed grave doubt"
 I said this was very difficult and that the initial operations conceived were from the sea . "I said this is very difficult," he said of the project .
 I said a program should be engaged in only if it was an essential building block in an agreed program to remove the Soviets from Cuba and to take care of Castro . I said I thought a program . should be . engaged in . only if . it was . an essential . building block
 Cottrell will be asked to prepare a paper to be ready by the close of business this Thursday, the 18th .
 Mr Smith said Bundy had asked that he discuss with me the handling of the Special Group input . Bundy asked that Mr Smith discuss with him, he said . Mr Smith added that Bundy asked him to discuss the matter with me .
 Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harriman, Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric, Director of Central Intelligence McCone, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Taylor, Attorney General Kennedy, Under Secretary of the Treasury Fowler and Director of USIA Murrow . Special Assistant to the President
 Some of the other Standing Group members have never been exposed to Special Group affairs . Smith says some of the others have been only sporadically exposed to the Special Group .
 We agreed on the desirability of not spreading knowledge of covert operations any wider than absolutely necessary, if we are to preserve the principle of deniability . We agreed to not spread knowledge of operations wider than necessary .
 I suggested that Cottrell be instructed to put the report on covert operations in a separate annex . I urged that this not be distributed in advance of Tuesday's meeting, as the basic paper will be .
 Mr Smith agreed that this could probably be handled by passing the annex out at the meeting and retrieving it at the end of the meeting .
 The United States has conducted discussions with other maritime nations during the past several months about shipping in the Cuban trade . The Free World ships will be removed from Cuba from the Cuban market .
 Liberia, Turkey, Honduras, Honduras and Panama have issued official decrees barring their ships from all trade with Cuba . Panama, Panama and Turkey have also issued decrees banning ships from Cuba .
 West Germany has issued a decree prohibiting ships under its registry from trade between the Soviet Bloc and Cuba . The decree was issued in the wake of the Cold War .
 Greek decree prohibits Greek vessels not currently under charter to the Bloc from carrying cargoes to Cuba . Greek decree provides that Greek vessels will be withdrawn from Cuban trade as present charters expire .
 The Lebanese have assured us of their cooperation and state that they hope to rewrite their shipping laws within three months . The Lebanese government has assured us that they are working with the Lebanese to rewrite the laws .
 HMG has reiterated its position that it does not have a legal basis for pulling its vessels out of the Cuban trade . Repeated approaches to the United Kingdom have not been productive, says HMG .
 HMG has engaged in informal discussions with British shipowners with some effect . HMG says it is working with the British ship owners in the UK .
 Shipowners fear ILA would not load cargoes in U.S. ports if their ships engaged in Cuban trade . Another factor has been the fear of shipowners and operators that their ships will not load in American ports .
 While the number of such ships reached a low point of 12 in January of 1963, it increased to 22 in February and to 28 in March of that year . The number of ships from such ships has since increased to 28 .
 There has not been a corresponding increase in goods brought to Cuba by Free World ships . However, as a part of the increased number of vessels shown for March .
 Preliminary information indicates that the amount of such imports was about the same in March as in January . Preliminary data indicates that such imports were not the same this year's imports .
 United Kingdom 32, Greece 20, Norway, Norway 6, Lebanon 6, Italy 4, Yugoslavia 4, Spain 2, Japan 1, West Germany 1, Denmark 1, Morocco 1 . Greece 2, Italy 1, Spain 1, Japan 2, West German 1, France 1, Norway
 Since January 1, 1963, no Free World ship which has called at Cuban port has subsequently called at a U.S. port . Since that date, the Free World ships have called at the Cuban port .
 Commitments to withdraw vessels from all Cuban trade have been or are in the process of being received from each of Japan, Italy, Denmark and West Germany .
 The Soviet Bloc has thus far readily replaced Free World vessels withdrawn from the Cuban trade, and can presumably do the same for the remaining vessels . Free World ships withdrawn from Cuban trade have been replaced by Soviet-bloc vessels .
 Free World vessels calling at Cuban ports have, in domestic opinion, become a symbol of the willingness of the Free World to cooperate with us with respect to Cuba, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Cuba's relationship with Cuba has been described as one of the worst in the world .
 Replacement of Free World vessels also in some small degree may increase the cost to the Soviet Bloc of maintaining Cuba . Replacement of the vessels may also raise the cost of maintaining the Cuban government .
 The shipping of those two countries to Cuba to Cuba has averaged one or two ships per month . The shipping between Cuba and the U.S. has been slow to reach Cuba .
 It is likely that they will continue their participation in the Cuban trade irrespective of whatever measures we may take short of a naval blockade, it is likely to continue .
 Yugoslav ships are carrying some merchandise financed under an outstanding Export-Import Bank credit . Yugoslav ships also carrying some goods financed under the Export-Imporation Bank credit. Yugoslav ships carry some merchandise .
 Moroccan Government ship has called at Cuban port . Subsequently, a ship of the Moroccan Government line called at a Cuban port.
 Questions of fact are whether a country has ""permitted"" its ships to carry ""economic assistance"" and what cargoes may in fact be "economic assistance" as opposed to normal trade . Questions include whether the ships are allowed to carry economic assistance .
 The political disadvantages of such drastic action are of course obvious . The political disadvantage of such a drastic action is obvious .
 "We have and are continuing to press the countries involved to purge themselves of all actions that could require us to invoke the Act. Nevertheless, we have and . continue to press . ourselves to purge ourselves of all . actions that . could require the . Act .
 Most if not all of the 20 Greek vessels which have called at Cuban ports since January 1 will be withdrawing from the Cuban trade . The Greek Government has taken measures to stop the Greek ships from using Cuban ports .
 Commitments from the lines now being obtained will also assure the withdrawal of at least one of the four Italian ships, the one Japanese ship, one Danish ship, and one West German ship .
 The principal remaining problem is thus the 32 British and six Norwegian ships . The British and Norwegian ships are the only British ships still to be found .
 This could have useful and important domestic and international psychological effects . Apart from the not inconsiderable problem of exacerbation of our relations with Morocco, Yugoslavia and Poland, this could have important psychological effects, says David Cameron .
 The Maritime Administration is now urgently studying shipping patterns in order to arrive at some estimate of its practical effect .
 Preliminary information indicates that its practical effects might be minimal with respect to tankers, which comprise 16 of the 32 British ships engaged in the trade . Tankers comprise 16 British ships, according to preliminary information .
 McCone: "It would not be desirable to take additional public steps during the present stage of Mr Donovan's negotiations for the release of American prisoners"
 We make another approach to the United Kingdom, through their Ambassador here as well as in London, seeking United Kingdom cooperation and pointing out the necessity of our taking further action . Cuba wants a prompt reduction in United Kingdom shipping to Cuba can be achieved .
 At a time subsequently to be determined, request U.S. owned or controlled oil companies to refrain voluntarily, within the Western Hemisphere, from bunkering vessels known to be engaged in the Cuban trade .
 Dean Rusk/3/ /3/Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original . Rusk died at the age of 92 .
 A note on the bottom of this memorandum indicated it was prepared for the April 18 meeting of the Special Group, which deferred consideration of this paper until April 25 . A note also indicated that this paper was prepared to be discussed at a meeting April 18 .
 Producing comprehensive intelligence related to our basic policy objectives, the U.S. State Department says .
 Intensifying covert collection of intelligence within Cuba, especially within the regime, is intensifying . Cuba has been accused of spying on its citizens .
 The use of variety of propaganda media to stimulate passive resistance and . low-risk, simple, sabotage actions by the populace of Cuba . Cuba's use of . variety of . propaganda media .
 The placing of incendiary devices and/or explosives with suitable time delay within the hull or cargo to disable or sink Cuban vessels is a key part of the operation .
 Introducing abrasives or other damaging materials into the propulsion, communication and other systems of the ship to inactivate the ship . Introducing a damaging material into a ship's propulsion system can inactivate it .
 United States policy statements have consistently reiterated the view that the liberation of Cuba is primarily a function of the Cuban people themselves . U.S. policy statements consistently reiterate the view of Cuba's liberation .
 The absence of continued harassment against the regime inside Cuba will consolidate its control . It will indicate the success of Castro in imposing Communism upon the Cuban people .
 The absence of U.S. assistance inside Cuba to those who want to overthrow the Communist regime will deny an important asset, says President Obama . "The absence of United States assistance in Cuba will deny a important asset," says Obama .
 The United States effort to assist the fighters for freedom inside Cuba will involve expense and risk of lives to those Cubans who are trained for this purpose . The U.S. effort to help the fighters will involve a risk and expense of lives, the president says .
 The risk of U.S. involvement through confessions of captured personnel is a continuing one, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The risk of United States involvement through . confessions is continuing one," he says .
 World opinion in the event of such exposure is not likely to be severely damaging to the U.S. position . However, world opinion is unlikely to be as bad as the United States position .
 The annex, April 17, entitled ""Prospects for and Limitations of a Maximum Covert Action Program Against the Castro Communist Regime,"" is not printed . D With respect to and above, the following additional proposals were submitted for consideration .
 The placing of explosive devices with suitable time delays on the outside of ships either in Cuban or non-Cuban ports is prohibited . The placement of explosives on ships in Cuban ports is illegal .
 UDT teams can be ready by June for attack in July on a once monthly basis . Teams can be attacked by June by June and July .
 This measure would place increased strain on Cuban shipping and demoralize Cuban crews . The measure would also place increased pressure on Cuban ships .
 Surface attacks by maritime assets fired on Cuban ships in Cuban waters . Surface attacks were carried out by Cuban naval vessels . Cuban naval ships were attacked by Cuban vessels in the past .
 When the maritime asset cannot reach the target, shore based attacks on shipping in port or passing the offshore keys will be undertaken . The attacks will be carried out when the target cannot be reached .
 Shore based attacks by paramilitary trained Cubans firing on ships with recilless rifles, rocket launchers or 20mm cannon .
 Soviets would probably supply additional hardware to Cubans but caution against too aggressive Cuban response . Soviets probably supply more hardware to Cuba but caution about too aggressive response .
 Repercussions would include charges of U.S. sponsorship, increased Cuban security force activities .
 Soviet reaction likely to be propaganda-political moves and support to Cuban patrol activity but caution to avoid escalation . Russia likely to respond to Cuban patrols, but caution not to escalate .
 Support of Internal Resistance Elements, providing materiel and personnel to permit them to undertake a variety of sabotage and harassment operations . The U.S. government has been involved in the fight against the Taliban .
 The internal elements being supported will attack targets of their own choosing in their own manner, the internal elements of the government are expected to attack targets they choose to attack .
 The materiel will be introduced by maritime infiltration, diplomatic channels and concealment in open mail . It is believed to be introduced via maritime infiltration and diplomatic channels .
 This program could produce major economic damage, lift morale and keep resistance alive . It could also lift morale, keep morale alive, says President Obama .
 This paper presents a covert Harassment/Sabotage program targeted against Cuba . Included are those sabotage plans which have previously been approved as well as new proposals . The paper presents the covert program .
 While this program will cause a certain amount of economic damage, it will in no sense critically injure the economy or cause the overthrow of Castro . The program will not be critical enough to critically injure Cuba's economy or overthrow Castro .
 The situation may delay the consolidation and stabilization of Castro's revolution . It may cause some of his 26 July followers to doubt Castro's ability to create a new Cuba . Castro's 26 July supporters may doubt his ability successfully creating a new state .
 Losses in men and equipment with the attendant adverse publicity must be expected . Losses are expected, but the loss of equipment and equipment is expected to be worse .
 When the policy and guidelines of the overall sabotage program are established, it will be possible progressively to develop up to a limit additional covert assets and support capabilities . The CIA says it has been working with the U.S. government to develop a range of covert assets . The U.K
 To increase the pace of operations, a period of four to six months is required . However, materially to increase operations, it is needed to increase pace of operation, he says .
 Ultimate limiting factors are weather, length of ""dark-of-the-moon"" period each month and appropriate targets . Ultimate limiting factor is weather and length of period of month .
 A source of additional agent personnel is from Cuban personnel trained by the U.S. Military Forces under the recent programs .
 The issue of Cuba was briefly raised at the 512th meeting of the National Security Council, April 20, 1963 .
 He had reports that prisoners were being moved from the Isle of Pines to Havana . The prisoners were reportedly being moved to Havana, Cuba .
 He said we need to have pictures of Soviet convoys, some of which were described in considerable detail by Donovan upon his return from his last visit to Havana . Some of the convoys were described by Donovan in a considerable detail .
 He felt that we could hardly continue to carry out a mild policy in Cuba at the time the Communists are carrying out an aggressive policy in Laos, he said .
 Cuba is expected to release prisoners on April 22 . Flights and other activities against Cuba will be delayed until that's expected .
 The attached papers are circulated as background material for the meeting of the Standing Group now scheduled for Tuesday, April 23, at 5:00m/l/ This meeting will not aim at reaching agreed conclusions, but rather at an initial and wide-ranging discussion of the prospects and alternatives for
 The papers attached are intended mainly for reference, and much of their contents will be familiar . Much of the contents of the papers are familiar .
 Tab 1, which is a White House summary of the problem and of alternative approaches to it, is forwarded from the Office of the Coordinator for Cuban Affairs . Tab 1 and Tab 1 are the White House papers forwarded from Cuba .
 These papers are not fully-up-to-date on certain special aspects of contingency planning . They omit certain covert plans and operations on which there will be oral briefing Tuesday .
 It concluded that Castro was the unchalleged leader of Cuba . The mass of Cubans were resigned to his rule and resistance was weak and disorganized, the report said .
 Soviet withdrawals would continue slowly, but a large number of Soviet technicans would remain in Cuba indefinitely . Soviet withdrawal would be slow, but many of the country's remaining technologists would remain there indefinitely .
 Not printed. Tab 3— , Multilateral Efforts to Isolate Cuba and Combat Castro-Communist Subversion . Tab 4~, Cuban Hemisphere Subversion/3/ /3/Not printed .
 Tab 5— , Economic Restrictions/4/ / 4/ /4/Annex 6 suggested that economic restrictions were working . Tab 5 — , Economic Restraint/4: /4: Annex 6: Economic Restriction was working .
 Free world shipping to Cuba sharply reduced . International civil aviation to Cuba had almost been entirely cut off . Free world trade to Cuba was 20 percent of the 1959 figure . Strategic commodities were blocked from going to Cuba .
 Tab 6-, Exile Problems/5/ Tab 7-Military Contingency Planning/6/ Tab 8-The Cuban Situation in Eighteen Months or Two Years (prepared by State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research/7/ By separate distribution I am also circulating an unclassified compilation
 The annex noted that uncontrolled hit and run raids had been stopped . 50,000 Cuban refugees had been resettled outside the Miami area, leaving 125,000 still in Miami area .
 It is difficult to reach a definitive judgment on whether time is running out for Castro . Castro has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 U.S. President Barack Obama ordered Cuba to prevent a direct military threat to the United States or the Hemisphere from Cuba . Cuba is the only nation that has a right to prevent any direct military threats from Cuba from the island .
 "Currently our level of effort here is limited to quite diplomatic pressure and careful public statement," says White House spokesman .
 Decisions on further action are deferred pending the result of current efforts . Decisions will be made on the outcome of the next round of negotiations .
 "To this end we are ready to exert considerable diplomatic and economic pressure on Western Allies. To this end, we are prepared to exert ... pressure on the Western Allies."
 Counteraction to Cuban/Communist subversion in the Western Hemisphere . Counteraction against Cuban/Cuban subversion . Counteractions against Cuban-American subverted .
 We are developing an extensive program of cooperation with Latin American governments in this field . It is clearly our policy to develop this program energetically.
 It is clear that the maintenance of this surveillance is essential in support of objective 1, above . It is also essential to maintain the surveillance of the United States .
 The possibilities of such action appear limited, but they have not been fully explored . The possibilities are limited but they are not fully explored, says the author .
 It is current policy to develop additional resources for selective action in this field . It is currently .
 Opinions differ as to the probable result of this policy in the absence of major shifts inside Cuba or in Soviet or Cuban behavior . Opinionions differ on whether the policy will succeed in the future .
 At Tab 8 is an informal memorandum from the Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the State Department on this topic .
 This memorandum is to be supplemented soon by a community-wide intelligence assessment . The assessment is expected to be followed by an intelligence assessment soon after .
 The probability is that in the absence of new developments, the policy outlined above will not lead to early major change in Cuba . The likelihood is that Cuba will not change in the way it has been dealt with in the past .
 Any new major Soviet military intrusion or any significant military move from Cuba against the Hemisphere . Possible general action against Cuba in the context of an international crisis originating elsewhere . Interference with United States surveillance .
 Contingency planning for and is limited so far to straight military planning on a wholly hypothetical basis . Contingencies planning is limited to a purely hypothetical basis.
 Planning for is primarily directed toward the immediate objective of insuring continued surveillance by a minimum necessary force . Planning for the immediate . objective is to insure continued surveillance .
 The broader political question is whether these or other contingencies should be regarded as opportunities for deliberately enlarged action aimed at a major political result . This is the case, says David Cameron, the UK's most powerful politician .
 U.S. contingency planning can be based on the premise that we wish to protect and restore the situation existing immediately before the new crisis . This was essentially the purpose of United States policy in the October missile crisis .
 Contingency planning can be developed with the purpose of using a given critical development as a means of changing the situation in ways advantageous to us . Alternatively, contingency planning can also be developed to use a given development to change the situation .
 It is obvious that greater commitments of force and greater risks are inevitable in such alternative planning . It is equally obvious that these greater commitments and risks may not be desirable in any given case .
 The point here is simply that such choices are a necessary element of the choice of responses to any particular contingency . The point is that such decisions are necessary in the face of any contingency .
 Perhaps the Standing Group should give some attention to the question whether wider contingency planning- or at least contingency thinking- is needed .
 A decision to force a non-Communist solution in Cuba by all necessary means is needed . Possible New Initiatives could include a decision forcing the government to take action against the Cuban government .
 Such a decision would imply the development of pressures which would insure gradual escalation of the confrontation in Cuba to whatever point was necessary to produce the overthrow of the present regime . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in Cuba by the West .
 Such a policy would not exclude the use of contingencies as a means for advancing U.S. policy . But it would require that the pace be forced and that pressures be sustained in such a way, at every stage, as to prevent solutions short of overthrow of the regime .
 A program of this kind might or might not be openly avowed at the outset . The program might not necessarily be openly declared at the beginning .
 It might proceed at varying rates of speed and with varying concern from public support here and abroad . The government might proceed with varying speed and concern for public support .
 It seems probable too that this invasion would have to be carried through . Probably its dominant feature would be a willingness to use military force to invade Cuba . The U.S. has a history of using military force against Cuba .
 The U.S. could deliberately adopt a policy of gradually increasing pressure designed to produce more limited results at first . The United States could deliberately increase pressure on Russia to stop the flow of funds .
 Possible objectives are total withdrawal of Soviet military forces, abandonment of subversive training in Cuba, the reopening of the island to peaceful on-site visitation and inspection by non-Communists .
 Such a program again might be developed at varying rates of speed and with varying combinations of political and military pressure . The U.S. might try to develop a similar program again with political or military pressure, the author says .
 It would require a clear willingness to move to the level of a POL blockade, and at a guess such a blockade might in fact have to be established at some point . Probably it would need to be a clear . willingness to . move to a level of . a blockade, such a
 The United States could move in the direction of gradual development of some form of accommodation with Castro . The U.S. could move to a gradual, but gradual, accommodation .
 Faint hints of this possibility appear in Donovan explorations and elsewhere . Donovan is currently working on a series of new books .
 There is always the possibility that Castro or others currently high in the regime might find advantage in a gradual shift away from their present level of dependence on Moscow . Castro or other high-ranking members of the regime could benefit from the shift, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 In strictly economic terms, both the U.S. and Cuba have much to gain from reestablishing relations . The United States and Cuba will benefit from reestablishment of relations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A Titoist Castro is not inconceivable, and a full diplomatic revolution would not be the most extraordinary event in the 20th century . Castro's success would be not an extraordinary event, but it could be a major event .
 Special Group may feel that this possibility also should be explored . The Special Group could also explore the possibility of exploring the possibility .
 In conclusion, it should be noted that the three possibilities sketched above are not wholly exclusive of one another .
 In particular, the process of gradual pressure outlined in could be developed in support of both course and course . It is possible to begin on course without deciding between and c .
 President's weekend reading of April 27 is part of the President's Weekend Reading of the Constitution .
 A National Intelligence Estimate on the Cuban situation and prospects is now scheduled for USIB consideration in May . Cuba a Year Hence/1/ /1/
 "P tentative conclusions" can be drawn on trends in Soviet-Cuban relations and in Soviet intentions respecting Cuba, the authors say .
 The Castro regime and the USSR have overcome for the most part the difficulties in their relations resulting from the October missile crisis . The USSR and Castro regime have managed to devise a common policy aimed primarily at easing tensions over Cuba .
 They probably intend to continue this policy until they are satisfied that Cuba can again be used as a Communist base for forward action without excessive risk . The U.S. is likely to continue its policy until it is satisfied with Cuba's ability to be used again as a communist base .
 The USSR has evidently decided to supply sufficient economic aid to sustain the Cuban economy at about the current level . The USSR will probably train Cubans in the operation of the Soviet military equipment now in Cuba under Soviet control .
 Most of the equipment, except perhaps for the SAM system, will have been turned over to the Cubans . The Soviet military presence in Cuba will probably have been further reduced . It seems likely to us that a year hence most of this equipment will be turned over .
 Such a development would tend to improve considerably the Cuban and the Soviet image in Latin America, though it could not completely offset all the adverse effects of the missile crisis . The Cuban and Soviet image would be improved considerably .
 Castro, perhaps in Soviet persuasion, has toned down his inflammatory appeals for violent revolutions . For the time being, Castro's appeals have been toned back . Castro has been criticized for inciting violent revolutions throughout Latin America .
 There is no indication, however, of a basic change in Castro's determination to promote insurgent movements . Castro has pledged to promote insurgents .
 If present trends continue, this would mean that the USSR did not contemplate an attempt to reintroduce strategic weapons into Cuba . In our view, if present trends . continue, both in the reduction of Soviet forces and the training of Cuban personnel .
 It is true that the risks of detection would be less than those attending the original operation . The risks are less likely to be detected than those who attended the first operation .
 The Soviet knowledge of U.S. intelligence sources and methods would make it possible to adopt improved measures of camouflage and deception . The United States intelligence would be able to avoid providing many of the indicators that United States will be relying upon .
 The Soviets may not altogether rule out an attempt by the Soviets to reintroduce strategic missiles, experts say . The missiles could be used in the Soviet Union, they say .
 A year hence the Castro regime is likely to be more firmly established than ever . A year later, Castro regime will be firmly established in Cuba .
 The mere passage of time tends to favor Castro as Cubans and others become accustomed to the idea that he is here to stay . Castro's regime gains in administrative experience and efficiency .
 The ""year of organization"" will result in the further development of the PURS, Castro's all-purpose political machine . Castro's PURS will continue to be an important part of his political organization .
 The Cuban economy will probably not be much better than it is today, but also probably will not be worse . The country's economy is not likely to be much worse, but it will probably be better .
 The basis of the discussion was a memorandum prepared by Mr Bundy entitled ""A Sketch of the Cuba Alternatives" Mr Bundy prepared a sketch of the Cuban alternatives .
 Secretary McNamara stated that before the group discussed substance, it should consider whether the present policy we are following would produce a major change in Cuba . McNamara: "The present policy ... would produce major change" McNamara said .
 He expressed his firm view that Castro's position over the short term would improve if we took no actions other than those now under way or projected . He expressed a firm view .
 He made clear his belief that the elimination of the Castro regime was a requirement . If others agreed our present policy would not result in its downfall, we should develop a program for approval .
 The program should aim to create such a situation of dissidence within Cuba as to allow the U.S. to use force in support of anti-Castro forces without leading to retaliation by the USSR on the West .
 Mr McCone: Castro's position in Cuba would be stronger a year or two years from now than it is at present . He says information is leading him to believe that Castro will be stronger in Cuba in the coming years .
 He expressed his belief that present policy would not cause a major change in Cuba . He said Russia could provide sufficient aid and technical assistance to permit the Cuban economy to remain about where it is now or slightly improve .
 Assistant Secretary Martin did not fully agree with the views of the Secretary of Defense or Mr McCone with respect to the effect of existing policy on Castro regime .
 He said Congress would never approve the sugar quota for Cuba early enough to avoid a collapse of the Cuban economy cut loose from the USSR and not yet aided by the U.S. Furthermore, he said Castro was the kind of a man who might make promises and not keep them,e
 The possibility of persuading Castro to leave Cuba was not feasible because Castro was a true revolutionary who could not be induced to give up his revolution . Castro was not persuaded to leave the country because he was a revolutionary who couldn't be induced .
 A list of measures we would take following contingencies such as the death of Castro or the shooting down of aU-2 . The list includes measures to deal with contingencies like a U-2 shooting down .
 A program with the objective of overthrowing Castro in eighteen months is to overthrow Castro in 18 months . A program aimed at overthrowing the Castro regime . A plan to overthrow the Castro government is to take place in the next eighteen months .
 A program to cause as much trouble as we can for Communist Cuba during the next eighteen months . A program . to cause . trouble for . Communist Cuba . Cuba .
 Under Secretary Ball stated the view that we should not look at Cuba from the point of view of Cuba alone . Ball said that Cuba should not be seen as a country alone .
 He said the Cuban problem was a part of our relations with the USSR and with our global battle against Communist aggression . He added that the Cuban issue was part of a global struggle against Communism .
 President Obama urged that our policy toward Cuba always be kept in this perspective . He urged that U.S. policy toward the country's Cuba policy be always kept in perspective .
 The withdrawal of Soviet forces from Cuba and the disappearance of the Soviet presence in Cuba was of major importance to us, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "The withdrawal and disappearance of [Soviet] forces was major importance"
 USIA Director Murrow stated that we need a statement of what we would think was an acceptable post-Castro Cuba . Murrow: We need promptly a statement . We need to think about what we think was acceptable .
 Secretary Dillon raised certain questions as to what kind of a Cuba we could live with if it were no longer run by Castro or tied to Moscow . Secretary Dillon: "What kind of the Cuba we can live with would be Cuba?"
 American companies had written off their expropriated sugar properties in Cuba . But the question remained as to who would own these properties in the event Castro and Communism disappeared in Cuba.
 There appeared to be differing views as to whether economic measures we can take would wreck the Cuban economy . The only result would be to raise the cost to the USSR of maintaining Cuba .
 "We need to improve our present course of action by doing some things that we are not now doing," says President Obama .
 Agree on military responses which we should make to contingencies, such as the shooting down of a U-2 plane . Agree that we should respond to U.S. shoot-down of U.2 plane, but disagree on military response .
 Mr. Scoville and Colonel Steakley were present for Items 1-4 . Mr. FitzGerald was present for Item 1-5 . Mr Tweedy was present .
 The DCI said the USIB unanimously reaffirmed yesterday the priority intelligence requirements for low-level coverage of Cuba . Low-Level Reconnaissance, Cuba, is a priority intelligence requirement .
 Bundy added that there is high-level interest in reviewing this situation . Mr Bundy said there is a 'high level interest' in reviewing the situation .
 The Soviets interpreted a resumption of low-level flights as an indication of the U.S. of a harder line toward Cuba, State Department says .
 Ambassador Thompson is very much opposed to such resumption at this time . He feels that this could result in a reduction in the rate of withdrawal of Soviet troops or a Soviet decision to withdraw none at all in the future . Ambassador Thompson says it might affect Soviet policy in Laos in a manner
 "The importance of the Harriman mission with respect to this last proposition was noted. The importance of this mission was noted," the president said .
 Mr Johnson said we should know the results of the Harriman mission in a day or two .
 Mr McCone opened the discussion of this topic by pointing out that the overt and multilateral pressures now being applied to Cuba are useful . On the other hand, while they will slow Castro down they will not hurt him critically, and the interest of our allies in maintaining such pressures will almost
 Any sabotage program can hurt the Castro government, but not lethally; it must be done on a continuing basis . In order to be effective at all, it cannot be subjected to a stop-and-go treatment . Similarly, any sabotage program .
 The DCI went on to say that any such activity is bound to be attributed to the United States . If we are to carry through with it we must be prepared to accept the accompanying noise level .
 A sabotage program will not be entirely beneficial to U.S. interests, he said . The sabotage program could result in Cuban retaliation, he added .
 Mr McCone said he is not in favor of extreme types of sabotage such as complete destruction of crops, contamination of water supplies, etc. Additionally, he said he does not want to see extreme sabotage of crops destroyed .
 The DCI said that the combination of economic and other pressures with sabotage activities might provide a feasible climate for a successful attempt to fragment the Castro organization .
 Mr FitzGerald foresaw the possibility of such fragmentation leading to assumption of power by a military dictatorship, which would probably be friendly to the U.S. He foresaw a possible fragmentation of the country, leading to a military dictator .
 The difficulty of persuading individual Cubans of this type to place their trust in each other, he says . He points out that a major operational obstacle to capitalizing on this situation is the difficulty of convincing individuals to trust each other .
 The U.S. will have to be sympathetic to possible successors to the present government, he says . Such people may have been former Castro supporters, even though some were former supporters .
 Mr FitzGerald touched on the proposed support to selected Cuban exile groups, for autonomous operations, as being one of the key points of the possible new program .
 There is no use in the U.S. trying to deny that it backs such operations, since it will be accused of this in any case . Further, such a posture is not detrimental to United States interests, he says .
 A 'scenario' will have to be worked out how to respond to accusations in this field, he said . He added, however, that a ""scenario"" will have been worked out by the government .
 Mr Bundy questioned a statement in the paper to the effect that covert action which might be used as a pretext for overt military intervention is ruled out . He said covert action was not ruled out but could be used to justify overt action .
 The program is not specifically directed toward the end of providing such a pretext, but that it is not intended to preclude such a situation if it should turn out to be desirable at some time in the future .
 The paper contains a proposal for the placing limpets, carrying suitable delay mechanisms, on the outside of Cuban ships so as to explode at sea .
 Secretary Vance does not particularly like this proposition because of the possibility that the explosions would be attributed to torpedoes, he said . He noted that Secretary Vance . does not like this .
 Gilpatric felt that this risk was acceptable . While recognizing the validity of Mr Vance's argument, he felt it was acceptable to accept this risk .
 The proposition for dealing with selected exile groups is a good one, but the method of dealing with them will have to be more carefully defined . The proposition is good one but it is not clear how to deal with selected groups .
 There is no objection to limpets, subject to further technical studies . There is also an objection to the idea of limpets in the future .
 Surface attacks on Cuban ships do not appear particularly attractive, nor do shore-based attacks of a similar nature . Surface attacks against Cuban ships are not particularly attractive .
 Externally mounted hit-and-run attacks against land targets appear worthwhile, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The operations in this category which can be run in May, will be discussed with higher authority . The operations will be decided on by a higher authority, officials say .
 Operations of this kind will be especially valuable if done in conjunction with other resistance activities . Operations will be particularly valuable if they are combined with resistance activities, officials say .
 Internal resistance should be stimulated, again in conjunction with related operations . Internal resistance must be stimulated again, again, with the help of related operations, the author says .
 Bundy presented the DCI paper/1/ and then explained the opposition which had been expressed to him by McNamara . Bundy then explained that McNamara had expressed the opposition .
 McCone contradicted this statement stating that this matter had been carefully reviewed by USIB . McCone said that on last Wednesday each member of USIB had favored low-level reconnaissance .
 The request had been deferred until the end of the Donovan mission and then deferred once more while Harriman was in Moscow . The request was deferred until after Donovan mission .
 On April 24 the USIB asked again for low-level reconnaissance on 10 priority installations and facilities and expected coverage of 15 more . The USIB also asked again on April 24 to look at 15 more targets .
 The paper, which has not been found, is summarized in McCone's memorandum to the Special Group, April 25; see footnote 1 above above .
 Rusk very briefly reviewed the political consequences as expressed by Johnson in the 5412 meeting,/5/ earlier in the day . Rusk reviewed Johnson's comments in the meeting earlier this morning .
 McNamara asked Rusk for a statement in writing of the political consequences . McNamara: Rusk's actions will have political consequences for his actions .
 McCone put forth a very positive argument to the President, pointing out the areas in Cuba which had gone unsurveyed for as long as 12 days at a time and the incidents in which high-level photography could neither confirm nor deny reports .
 He proposed three rather than six sorties on a trial basis and asked that such a recommendation be made .
 General Carter should review this whole matter and should develop three most desirable targets, including one of the armed camps, he says .
 The President felt that justification should be on the basis of the fact that we did not know about specific locations, construction, or activities .
 He questioned whether we could justify low-levels which would be provocative if we were merely increasing our inventory of intelligence or technical information . He said low-level levels would not be justified if they were merely adding to our inventory or technical info .
 Rusk at one point mentioned that perhaps we should not escalate tensions in Cuba but should wait until there was an indication of escalation by the Soviets and the Cubans, then go with low-levels, he says . Rusk: Perhaps we should wait to see if there is an indication
 McCone reported that this might be too late, that it was possible that the Soviets would, in secrecy, develop some move which might threaten the United States and that we would not detect them . McCone: "It's possible that it might be possible that [the Soviets] develop
 "We could not wait for the Soviet ""escalation"" to take place. Therefore, we could not . wait for . the Soviet "escalation" to occur. Therefore,. we could . not wait to . take place .
 What we have to do is keep the island under surveillance, develop all comprehensive intelligence, so that we would know in advance of any such escalation of ominous move by the Soviets .
 I took the position that the intelligence community felt that they could not depend exclusively on high-level photography and still say with assurance that we knew all there was to know about what was going on in Cuba . The intelligence community wanted to know more about Cuba .
 Miro's resignation and the accompanying withdrawal of most of the CRC component organizations and personalities has converted the CRC into a rump organization of little attraction in the exile community .
 "Tony"" Varona's effort to preserve his personal political machine, established through his control over the years of fifty per cent of the United States -supplied CRC funds . This CRC remnant, which within itself is divided, is divided .
 Varona, who lacks wide support, is actively seeking adhesion from a wide variety of exile leaders including Batista elements . Varona is seeking support from a variety of exiled leaders .
 We doubt unity of exiles under present circumstances is an achievable goal . We doubt that unity of the exiles will be achievable, we say . We hope that unity is possible, but unity is not possible, they say .
 The highly individualistic Cubans, who were really not ""unified"" in the pre-Castro era, are usually not inclined to submerge differences and organize themselves .
 The frustrations of exile life in general and the absence of ""proof that Castro's end is in sight"" in particular combine to aggravate rather than decrease differences . The frustrations of exile life are aggravating rather than decreasing differences .
 Seven exile organizations (some of which are CRC members) receive a total of $103,500 monthly . In addition, seven exile groups (some are members of the CRC) receive $103k monthly .
 The next monthly installment of United States financial assist-ance is due the CRC on May 1 . The next month's installment is due to be released on May 31 .
 Some possibility exists that the CRC may dissolve of its own accord before May 1 . The demise would be virtually certain were U.S. aid withheld .
 If the CRC disappeared, some of its present and many of its former component organizations would require financial assistance . The CRC would require our financial assistance to enable us to accomplish the intelligence, propaganda and other clandestine tasks we have set up .
 Sever our relationship with an unrepresentative exile group, thus avoiding charges of imposing our will on the exile community . Sever your relationship with the unrepresentation of an unrepresented exile group . Severing our relationship will avoid charges that we impose our will upon the exiled community, says Mr
 Expanding the possibility of the eventual emergence of a more widely supported exile leader by enabling exile political forces to operate more freely . Emphasizing the potential of the emergence of an eventual successor to the exiled leader . Empowering the exiled political forces will allow them to operate freely .
 Avoid the possibility of a ""Miro resignation"" recurring at a more inopportune time from the domestic political standpoint . Avoid a repeat of the 'Miro' resignation' recurring at the same time from domestic political .
 "Unencumbered review in depth of what our basic policy toward the exiles should be," she says . Create an opportunity for an unencumbered Review of the policy .
 "We were engaging in further ""persecution"" of the exiles. Incur criticism from some sectors of the exile community and of U.S. public opinion," he said .
 Temporizing with the CRC by provisionally extending its life for another month or so would increase the difficulty of disengaging later . Temporating with the . CRC by . provisionally extended its life would increase . difficulty of . disengaging from the CRC . later would increase difficulty of
 A note at the top of the source text indicates Chase called from the White House to say that this memorandum was ""O.K."" and the decision to call off aid had been made .
 Discontinuance of salaries would be accomplished gracefully, i.e. accompanied by notice and lump sum termination payments . Disconting salaries would have to be followed by notice or lump sum payments .
 Dean Rusk/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that indicates the original was signed by Rusk . Rusk died at the age of 92 .
 U.S. Under Secretary W Averell Harriman raised the President's concern with Cuba . Lapin Viktor Sukhodrev— translator .
 You have laid a dozen Cubas around us, Turkey, Greece, Iran, Norway, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom, Pakistan, and Japan""-to which Gromyko added South Korea. Turkey, . Greece, . Iran, . Norway, . Germany, . Italy,
 Harriman said we had no substantial troops in any of the countries the Chairman mentioned, except Germany and Japan, except Japan and Germany .
 The President is concerned about Soviet troops in Cuba . He had expected Khrushchev would make a significant reduction in Soviet forces .
 Khrushchev claimed they have removed three to five times the number of troops reported in the U.S. press, but would not disclose the exact numbers . He would not reveal exact numbers because he would boast that you have squeezed new concessions from the Russians .
 Harriman said that we had reported the removal of about 4,000 Soviet troops from Cuba since the end of the year . Five times that number was 20,000 and since the Soviets presumably had only 17,000 in Cuba at that time this left us with a figure of minus
 Khrushchev replied he would have to have a special report prepared to know exactly what numbers were involved, and there wasn't time for this now . He replied: "There is not time for that now. There is no time to this now"
 President Kennedy was having a great deal of difficulty keeping the country quiet on the Cuba issue . Harriman said that because Soviet troops remain in Cuba .
 If Khrushchev could correct the President's understanding about the numbers of troops that had been withdrawn, or withdraw more, he was sure the President would cooperate .
 Khrushchev replied that this had become a very complicated and difficult question mostly because there was so much clamor in the United States. The former Soviet Union leader said that the U.S. had become very clamor for the question .
 There is nothing the Soviets can do to satisfy those who are the chief critics of the President on this issue . The Soviets can't be satisfied with those who want to see the U.S. President .
 President would not want to use erroneous figures in confronting his domestic opposition . Harriman said it would be very helpful to him if he could have some more accurate figures .
 Khrushchev replied that this matter affects the sovereignty and pride of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union is not accountable to the United States and cannot appear before the world as constantly conceding to American pressure, he said .
 Critics would only say this proved the need for more pressure on the Soviet Union because only pressure produced results, and that would make the situation worse . While he did not want to complicate life for the President .
 Soviet military personnel were there only temporarily, teaching the Cubans to use the equipment they had received from the Soviet Union, after which they would return . He could state that the Cuban military personnel would return to teach them how to use equipment .
 Harriman asked why the Soviets could not remove all their organized troop units, leaving only the instructors behind . Harrimans asked why they couldn't remove all of their organized troops from the camp .
 Khrushchev replied this was a matter for the Soviets and the Cubans, and they were not accountable to anyone else . The Soviets and Cubans were responsible for their actions, he said .
 Harriman said he hoped Khrushchev understood that organized military units are more difficult problems than instructors . Organized military units more difficult issues than instructors, he said .
 Khrushchev said if the U.S. wants normal relations with the Soviet Union, don't aggravate the issues . Don't ask questions which cause tensions for us, he said. Don't irritate our national pride, he added .
 Even with a million Soviet troops there, Cuba could not be an invasion springboard . Cuba would not be a springboard for a Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 Let the President deal with his own problems at home and keep the lid on the Americans. Let's not be distracted by the Americans, President Obama says . Let's keep your focus on your own problems, says Obama .
 We are ready for friendship, but are prepared to deal with the other alternative . We are prepared for friendship but are not ready for the other option .
 Neither of us wants to start anything over Cuba, but if anything is started, the Soviets have retaliatory strength, says President Obama . "If anything started, it would be a disaster," he says .
 Governor Harriman said Cuba is creating much tension in the whole Caribbean area . If it is not important to the Soviets to have troops in there why don't they take them out, and leave only instructors .
 Khrushchev repeated sharply that that was the business of the Soviets and the Cubans . Khrrushchev said it was not his country's business but that of the Soviet Union and Cubans.
 The Soviets long ago raised the question, in the context of disarmament proposals, of mutual troop withdrawals from all foreign territory . The Soviets have long raised the issue .
 The Soviets will not raise this point; that is strictly between Cuba and the United States . The whole world knows the Americans aren't welcome there and that the Soviet Union supports Castro's position . However, the Soviets won't raise that point .
 The Soviets will not try to interfere in the internal affairs of Cuba and the U.S. in this regard . The Soviet Union will not interfere in Cuba's internal affairs, the president says .
 Khrushchev repeated that ""we really have withdrawn a lot of troops,"" and ""we have not replaced any ... we have withdrawn," he said . The Soviet Union had withdrawn a large number of troops .
 He understood the President's difficulties and believed the President has a very sound understanding of the situation . He said he understood the president's difficulties .
 Recent statements by the President and Secretary Rusk indicate there is in the U.S. a sober appreciation of the situation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Soviets intend to train Cubans as fast as possible in order to make the presence of Soviet instructors unnecessary . This fact will help the Soviets in dealing with the Cubans, the Soviets say . The fact that the Soviets are training Cubans faster will help them deal with them, the
 Harriman points out that, in addition to United States statements, the President has taken many actions which should not be overlooked . Harrimans says that, despite the U.S. statements, it is important to not overlook .
 Khrushchev agreed that the President's actions and his words were very encouraging . The President's words and actions are very encouraging, he said in a letter to the Soviet Union .
 Immediately after the crisis last fall, U.S. policy had been somewhat irritating, but now it seemed reasonable . Now it seemed quite reasonable, the U.N. policy is quite reasonable .
 He believes that the majority of the American people are behind the President in his sober policy and that his opponents have no clear program .
 The Cuban government has made new judgments on the amount of equipment they have, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I notice that there have been a number of new judgments" on the equipment .
 I thought last October the number of troops we planned to have available was rather limited . Success of the operation was dependent upon, in large measure, our two airborne divisions getting in and controlling the two airfields, he said .
 It seems to be that we should strengthen our contingency plans for this operation . It seems that we need to strengthen our plans to deal with the threat of terrorism .
 On April 29, 1963, President Kennedy received a letter from Chairman Khrushchev through a private communication channel . President Kennedy got the letter on April 30, 1963 . Kennedy received the letter via a private communications channel .
 This is understandable if one considers how we passed through a most dangerous crisis in the fall of last year . To a considerable degree this is understandable, but it is understandable to one degree .
 The tension around Cuba decreases too slowly and at times rises anew . It is impossible not to recognize also that tension is decreasing too slowly . But it is also increasing again .
 It is sufficient to make such a comparison in order that things can be seen in proper perspective . It is not only necessary to make the comparison, it is also necessary to see things in a proper perspective in order to be seen properly .
 At our meeting in Vienna we seemed to have agreed to proceed from the fact that the forces of our states were equal . At this time, the United States had agreed to a deal with the EU that would see the EU join forces equal .
 If our forces are equal, then there should also be equal possibilities. Well, then, if our forces were equal, we should also have equal possibilities, he says .
 I can tell you that we have withdrawn several times more people than has been stated in the U.S. press. I can . I can say that we are withdrawing several times as many people as the American press has said. We are withdrawing people from the United States. We have
 How this matter will develop in the future depends on the pace at which the atmosphere in the region of the Caribbean Sea will be normalized . The reasons which occasioned the necessity for assistance to the Cubans by Soviet military specialists and instructors will disappear .
 U.S.-Cuban flights are an "unrestrained intrusion into the air space of a sovereign government," writes CNN's Peter Bergen . The flights violate international norms of international law and the principles of the UN Charter, he says .
 It is natural that no state prizing its sovereignty, no government solicitous of the interest and dignity of its people, can tolerate such flights . It is not the first time a state has flown out of control of its own sovereignty .
 There are no grounds for you to doubt the readiness of the Soviet Union to carry out firmly in the future as well as the agreement which was reached between us .
 Trampling on sovereignty in this way can lead to serious consequences for us if it is not stopped in time . Trampled on sovereignty 'can lead to quite serious consequences if it's not stopped'
 I could find many words with which to characterize these actions, even from a purely humanitarian point of view . I shall not address myself to this in more detail but I could . find many . words to describe these actions . I will not address himself to this .
 We hope they will be sufficiently effective to preclude the possibility of a repetition of armed raids against Cuba . We of course do not underestimate the significance of these measures, we say .
 Agenda for the April 30 Meeting of the Standing Group of the National Security Council Washington, April 29, 1963 . Meeting was held in 1963 .
 I have not been able to make special assignments to individual members of the group in this first week, but I have had helpful discussions with several members . I know that other members have had conversations with each other .
 I hope we can do tomorrow is to fill out the outline which follows of major areas of interest, and to make preliminary decisions as to ways and means of getting forward with the necessary spade work .
 The possible use of contingencies for the . achievement of wider political objectives . The possible . use of . contingencies . for the achievement of . wider political . objectives .
 Greater pressure against the Soviet presence, perhaps by additional OAS resolutions and then naval action, could be used to interrupt all military traffic to Cuba .
 Expanded economic action,/4/ possibly including encouragement of cooperative sabotage on a much larger scale than anything attempted up until now . Possibly including encouraging sabotage on the larger scale .
 Additional gambits are of great interest to higher authority and it is hoped that some may be offered . Within this category additional possible gambits could be offered by higher authority .
 This is a wholly separate kind of undertaking and there seemed to be considerable agreement last week that it was not very promising . But it has been properly pointed out that it could be pursued on a separate track while some of the things proposed above were going on .
 There was general agreement last week that this also is a matter of high importance and that it could be pursued independently of decisions in other categories .
 The first outline of an OAS Resolution about the Soviet military presence . The first outlines of the OAS resolution .
 It is recognized that the diet here is relatively thin, but I think we can usefully spend one more meeting making sure that we have the elements of the problem in proper shape before we go into more detailed work . The diet is "a relatively thin"
 CUBA Under Secretary Harriman reported on his talks with Gromyko and Khrushchev on the subject of Cuba . CUBA reported on the talks .
 The Soviets are using Castro as an exhibit of the success of their Cuban policy . Castro is being used as a show of success of the Cuban policy, says Cuban diplomat .
 They are also seeking to handle him such a way that he will not turn toward the Chinese Communists, they say . They also want him to be handled so that he won't turn toward them .
 Khrushchev does not think that Soviet troops in Cuba are really important . Harriman believes the Russians will go to great lengths to ensure that Castro remains in control of Cuba .
 Soviet economic aid will be continued at a level necessary to ensure a going economy in Cuba . After Cuban troops are trained, Russian troops can be expected to leave, but economic aid is likely to continue .
 The attached copy of Mr Bundy's summary covers the assignments which have been made as a result of the discussion of Cuba . The assignments are based on the assignments made by Mr Bundy .
 There was a discussion of whether the U.S. could destroy Castro's halo by an information program aimed at Cuba and Latin America . There was also a discussion on whether the United States could destroy the halo .
 Under Secretary Ball said Castro was becoming a symbol . Ball said an effort should be made to undermine this symbol . Castro is a symbol, Ball said .
 This is an effective way of attacking Communists who, in his opinion, can take almost anything except ridicule . This is the effective way to attack Communists, he says .
 Secretary McNamara noted that he had initiated a study of how to reduce to a minimum the reaction time of U.S. forces in the event a decision was taken to use force against Cuba was taken .
 Within 90 to one hundred days we would have a capability of destroying all the SAM sites in Cuba with twenty-six missiles, says President Obama .
 The Attorney General commented that the President was hopeful that we could take actions now in the OAS which would permit us in the future to act effectively in the event the Russians or Cubans started shipping large amounts of arms to other Latin American states .
 The purpose would be to prepare now a basis for drastic U.S. action to halt any attempt to introduce a Soviet military presence in another Latin American country . The purpose of this would be preparing now for drastic United States action .
 Pressure against Soviet presence in Cuba will be kept low-key for next month to give Khrushchev an option of carrying out quietly the withdrawal of Russian troops from Cuba .
 The preparation of a study covering the possible defection of Castro was deferred for the present . The study was deferred until the end of the year .
 All that can be done in this connection now is to keep open the line of communication to Castro . Mr Donovan opened the talks with Castro during the negotiations about the United States prisoners .
 Director McCone's interest in this matter prompted the postponement of the discussion of this possible course of action until the return of the Director's return .
 There was recognition of the importance of relating what we now do to what we are planning to do in Cuba . There was also recognition that it was important to relate what we were now doing to the Cuba .
 Secretary McNamara expressed his view that small-scale sabotage over a long period of time would produce no real change in the situation . McNamara: "Sabotage is not an acceptable course of action"
 President's weekend reading, May 1 1, is part of a weekend reading of the Bible .
 Probable Soviet Reaction to Low-level Flights Over Cuba would be affected by a number of factors, such as timing and scope .
 The reaction to a one-shot mission would be far less than that to a sustained series of series . The reaction would be less likely to be as much as that of a series of one-shots .
 If the flights were such that they were widely known in Cuba, the reaction would be stronger than it would in the case of a single mission in an isolated area . Also, if the flights are widely known, they would be more likely to cause a strong reaction in Cuba .
 Soviet reaction would, to some extent, be affected by Castro's reaction, which I should think would be quite strong, particularly as indicated above if knowledge of the flights was widespread . Soviet reaction to the discovery of the flight would be much stronger than Castro's .
 So far as timing is concerned, the present would appear to be an extremely unfavorable time . The present would seem to be a very unfavorable time for the president .
 Low-level flights would put him in a position both to press the Soviets for some radical action such as firing on a U-2 flight, or at least would increase his leverage to get more economic assistance, or to cancel or slow down any intended removal of Soviet troops .
 The Soviet Government is in the process of making a number of important decisions which could be affected by low-level flights . In addition, it would appear that the Soviet government is making important decisions .
 These include determination of Soviet policy on Laos, a general review of U.S. policy toward the United States specifically . Possible negotiations with Chinese Communists over Communist Bloc policy .
 There would appear to be sufficient evidence to believe that Khrushchev has been having a difficult time recently, says author . It is quite possible that he would read into low-level flights an intention on the part of the U.S. to proceed vigorously to bring down Castro, he
 There are important decisions pending on internal affairs which will probably be taken at the meeting of the Central Committee on May twenty-eighth . In addition, there is also an important decision to be taken on internal matters .
 Low-level flights at this time might give the military ammunition to force a change of policy . Khrushchev may be having trouble with his own military, says historian .
 I should think that the next six weeks would be about the worst possible time in which to take this action . Whatever the decision on low-level flights in general, it's not the best time to take action, he says .
 Letter from Acting Director of Central Intelligence Carter to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs . Carter to President's special assistant for national security affairs Washington, May 2, 1963 .
 McCone cabled me this morning stating that he cannot overemphasize the importance of secrecy in this matter . McCone requested that I take all appropriate steps along this line to reflect his personal views on its sensitivity .
 Mr McCone feels that gossip and inevitable leaks with consequent publicity would be most damaging .
 He suggests no active steps be taken on the rapprochement matter at this time . Instead, he urges most limited Washington discussions, and urges limited Washington discussion .
 Castro says Cuba is looking for ways to establish a rapprochement with the U.S. Castro made a number of points in an interview with CNN's John Sutter . Castro said Cuba was looking for a raucity with the United States .
 Cottrell summarized the main points of the interview in a May 2 memorandum to Martin, and Richard Helms prepared a more detailed account in a memorandum to McCone, May 1 . Helms: The interview was conducted by Martin and McCone .
 In view of the foregoing, it is requested that the Lisa Howard report be handled in the most limited and sensitive manner . V. V)
 Marshall S Carter/2/ Lieutenant General, USA /2/Printed from a copy that indicates Carter signed the original .
 There will be an examination of the possible developments in Cuba if Castro were to disappear from the scene . There will also be a discussion of the possibility of Castro's disappearance .
 This analysis will be developed by Mr Sherman Kent and will be available for discussion at the meeting of the Standing Group on May 14th .
 There will be an analysis of the possible use of contingencies for the achievement of wider political objectives . There will also be a discussion of the possibility of using contingencies .
 This analysis will be conducted under the direction of Mr Alexis Johnson and Mr Paul Nitze, and its first results will be available for discussion at the meeting of the Standing Group on May 14th .
 A detailed examination of possible action in the event of interference with surveillance; and a more general assessment of possible use of other contingencies in Cuba or in the waters around Cuba . A detailed discussion of possible actions in Cuba and in the region .
 The Central Intelligence Agency will prepare a general paper on the possible forms of effective interference with the economic life of Cuba by sabotage or other means . The paper will be published by the CIA .
 It is hoped that a report on this study may be available next week for distribution .
 The Department of State will examine the possible use of the sugar market as a means of complicating the life of the Castro regime . The sugar market could be used to complicate life of Castro's regime .
 I have been requested to comment on a suggestion made at the meeting of the Standing Group on April 30/1/ that we try to figure out some way to diminish the Cuban income from the sale of sugar .
 High prices and tight market have prevented Cuba from suffering losses which would normally be expected from the sharp fall off in her production . It was particularly noted that the present high prices and . high market have kept Cuba from . suffering losses .
 I attach an INR memorandum,/2/ a copy of which has already been sent to Mr Bundy, on the sugar situation . Mr Bundy has already sent an INRs memorandum, which is already sent to him .
 The present high prices and tight market represent a real shortage of sugar in the world . High prices and a tight market mean there is a 'real shortage' of sugar, says the government .
 The Soviet Union is not holding sugar off the market— Cuban or otherwise . It's not surprising that sugar is not being held off the Soviet Union .
 There is some evidence that satellites are exporting more than usual . In fact, satellites are sending more data from satellites than they normally do .
 The high price is not the result of Soviet rigging of the market. Therefore the high price of the stock market is not a result of the Soviet rigging . The price of a large amount of gold is not due to a lack of transparency in the market, it says .
 The Department of Agriculture is doing everything it can to increase supplies of sugar in the world and for the United States in the foreseeable future . To keep U.S. prices down, the USDA is trying to keep prices down .
 Even with a good beet crop in Europe this year and a good cane crop in early 1965, the sugar situation will still not return to the surplus and low price condition of a year ago .
 It will take until the end of 1964 with another beet crop, but more probably into 1965 before there is any material change in the situation .
 There is no feasible way in which the Cubans can be deprived of the prices they are now getting for their sugar or of free world markets for a year and a half and possibly two years . I conclude from this that there is no way in . which the . Cubans are deprived
 There was a discussion of a U.S. program and policy toward post-Castro Cuba . There was also a discussion about the United States' policy toward the post-Cuba Cuba .
 An analysis is to be prepared by State, CIA, and USIA covering specific aspects of the Cuban society under Batista, under Castro, and under a post-Castro regime, including actions we would be prepared to take to help in the reconstruction of Cuba .
 There was a recognized need to interest non-governmental institutions such as the Council on Foreign Relations or the Brookings Institution in preparing studies on post-Castro Cuba .
 Goodpaster Special Counsel Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Executive Secretary, National Security Council 336 . Goodpasters is a former Special Counsel for the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 In response to your inquiry, dated 29 April 1963/1/ I wish to assure you that our contingency plans for invasion of Cuba have been and are being maintained up to date .
 A revision of CINCLANT's basic invasion plan for Cuba was reviewed and approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 26 February 1963 . The Joint Chiefs' decision to revise the plan was made in 1963 .
 Intelligence reports received since last October do indicate the assignment of additional materiel to the Cuban armed forces . Intelligence reports have indicated that the weapons are being assigned to the military .
 U.S. forces and equipment and their planned employment reflect the latest information available . Responsible commanders are being kept fully informed of the changing intelligence picture, officials say .
 The order in which U.S. forces and their supporting equipment are committed is being restudied in the light of the estimated increases in Castro's T-34 medium tanks and self-propelled anti-tank guns .
 The most significant change in the basic invasion plan since last October has resulted from our increasing capability to introduce larger numbers of troops and heavy combat equipment into the objective area early in the operation .
 This capability is being achieved by the reactivation of 1 1 LST's, which will materially expedite the delivery of combat forces and equipment . This capability will be achieved by . reactivating of the reactivated LSTs . The reactivation will materialize faster than the . delivery
 In the longer term, the acquisition of additional C-130 aircraft will expedite the delivery of airborne and airlanded forces during the initial assault . The acquisition of more C-129 aircraft is a long-term priority .
 The weight of our early attacks will be increased and the probability of their success further enhanced. Through these measures, we will be able to increase the effectiveness of these early attacks. We will not be surprised if these measures are successful .
 We have used a few members of our staffs in preparation of these papers, but they have not been fully staffed in either State or DOD . The papers do not necessarily represent the views of our respective Departments, we say .
 We make no recommendation with respect to the possible courses of action set forth in these papers, which are presented only in accordance with the desires of the Standing Group to provide a basis for discussion . We also make no recommendations .
 U Alexis Johnson/2/ Paul H Nitze /2/ printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures . Paul Nitze/Alexis Johnson/U Alexis Johnson .
 U.S. aircraft was attacked in Cuba by Cuban rebels . The attack was intended to place pressure on the Castro regime . The Cuban government has been blamed for the attack .
 U-2 flights are currently conducted over Cuba at the rate of approximately two sorties per day . U.2 flights over Cuba currently take place at a rate of about two flights a day .
 Cuban refusal to fulfill Soviet commitment of October 28, 1962, for on-the-ground safeguards against the presence of offensive weapons . These flights have come to be accepted as a U.S. right .
 Alternative methods of carrying on surveillance are available are available, but the quantity of data that could be obtained by these alternative methods is smaller than that obtainable with the U-2 . Alternative methods would not meet the stated requirements, according to the U.2 .
 A prolonged hiatus in high altitude surveillance would be intolerable in view of the continuing Soviet option of reintroduction of MRBMs . The U.S. has not yet decided whether to reintroduce MRBM .
 This need has also become public knowledge as a result of the widespread news coverage and the Secretary of Defense's briefing of the public . There would be substantial political support for the U.S. insistence on maintaining an acknowledged vital right .
 Present intelligence resources give a considerable degree of confidence that Washington would have reliable information on the destruction of a U-2 shortly after the attack .
 There is also a probability that . reliable information would be available with respect to an unsuccessful firing of a SAM on a U-2 . The information would also be available if . a SAM was fired at a U.2 .
 A possibility exists that a U-2 could be attacked by MIG aircraft using air-to-air rockets and special attack techniques . A U.2 could also be attacked using air to-air missiles and special techniques .
 There remains a possibility that a U-2 could disappear under circumstances in which we had no positive information on the cause of its loss . However, there remains the possibility that there remains a possible cause of the loss .
 If the U.S. did institute increasing surveillance by low and medium altitude aircraft, the chances of an incident triggered by the firing would be increased . The United States would be more likely to fire on a reconnaissance overflight .
 The U.S. must balance the opportunity to achieve its long term objective in Cuba, the overthrow of Castro's regime and elimination of Communism from Cuba, with the risks of the US-USSR confrontation and the political acceptability of attaining that objective .
 The exploitation of Cuban provocations is the most feasible means for taking the action necessary . The political and power realities argue against arbitrary and unilateral action without provocation, the author says .
 The political costs of using an incident to press courses of action and reaction leading to the achievement of U.S. objectives in Cuba, possibly including the removal of the Castro regime, have been considered . The political risks of using such an incident have also been considered, the author says .
 We conclude that such costs will be least, and will be acceptable, if initial Cuban provocation is internationally recognized, and a measured pattern of increasing U.S. military reprisal, in reaction to escalating Cuban actions .
 The most appropriate reprisal to destruction of a U.S. reconnaissance aircraft would be either a limited number of SAM sites in the vicinity of the action . or to eliminate all SAMs in the initial attack . Scenario— Phase I – The most effective reprisal would be to destroy
 In the case of an interceptor attack, either the facilities of the nearest (or, if known, known) fighter airfield should be completely taken out . If known, the facilities should be taken out of the airfield .
 At the same time, the United States would initiate a high volume of harassing medium and low level reconnaissance overflights, in addition to maintaining the U-2 coverage . The U.S. would also maintain U.2 coverage, the U.N. says .
 The United States would promptly initiate generation of the necessary invasion force, so that it would be ready as soon as possible, in the event Cuban escalation were to lead to a decision to invade . The U.S. would then initiate generation .
 The United States would inform selected heads of government, NAC, and the OAS governments immediately prior to the reprisal action . The U.S. would initiate promptly consultations with the NAC and OAS groups on possible future measures which might be required-especially a new quarantine .
 The United States would call for prompt consideration of the crisis in the Security Council . The U.S. would vigorously attack Cuba and defend the necessary but limited United States reprisal .
 It is unlikely that the USSR would react to the U.S. Phase I actions by instituting serious counterpressures at Berlin or elsewhere . Unless of course they had shot down the first reconnaissance aircraft, they would use our reaction as a pretext to create a crisis in Berlin .
 If that were the case, we would in any event be faced by a Soviet created crisis . We would be faced with a Soviet-created crisis, he says .
 If this were not a deliberate Soviet action to touch off a crisis, the Soviets would probably be cautious at least while assessing our intentions in Cuba . The Soviet Union would probably have been more cautious about assessing its intentions .
 During this period, Soviet personnel would probably give strict orders to Soviet personnel manning the SAMs and in other positions on Cuba to avoid any reprisal or provocative action . During the period, they would probably be giving strict orders .
 The Cubans would almost certainly initially reject the United States offer . The offer is almost certain to be rejected by the U.S.
 The Soviets and Cubans would exert maximum political and propaganda pressure on the U.S. in the UN and in general . The Soviet-Cuban government would exert political and . propaganda pressure .
 It is possible that the Cubans might shoot down another U.S. aircraft, either through lack of discipline or miscalculation of the consequences . The Cubans may not be prepared for the consequences of the shoot down of another aircraft .
 As a general principle, the most appropriate level of reprisal would seem to be graduated suppression of Cuban air defenses, the author says .
 If the first plane had been destroyed by a SAM and only a few SAMs had been knocked out in the initial reprisal, all SAMs would be destroyed . If a second plane was attacked by a second aircraft were attacked, SAMs were destroyed . The first plane was destroyed by
 If the initial attack had been by a fighter, and the second by a . fighter or a SAM, any remaining SAMs and fighter airfields would be taken out on the second offense . If the . initial attack was by fighter, the . second attack would be by fighter or SAM
 If the second attack were by AAA, the problem would be more complicated but all AAA in the area of the attack could be promptly suppressed, as well as any remaining SAMs . The problem is more complicated if the problem is by AAA .
 In the second round of U.S. initiative, there are two broad alternative courses of action, depending upon whether the enemy reaction had involved military engagement . The alternative course of action would involve military engagement, depending on the situation .
 If the Cubans have made a second military attack in Phase II, the US, in addition to the immediate further military reprisal sketched above, would note that . The US would also note that since the Cuban did not accept our offer of an equitable arrangement to dispense with United
 The United States would either seek OAS authorization, for which a majority but not unanimity could probably be gotten, or would undertake it unilaterally on the basis of its earlier consultations with the OAS and NAC . The U.S. would likely seek approval for the move .
 U.S. justification for quarantine would include stress on Hemispheric need for information on military activities in Cuba . Cuban action demonstrated a determined effort to overthrow the status quo established in 1962 .
 We were compelled by these facts to interdict all direct and indirect military support to the Island until complete assurance of the security of the Hemisphere could be obtained . The situation was not immediately clear, however, and the U.S. was forced to take action against the island .
 The U.S. chose to exercise a restrained course of action which would involve minimum sacrifice by the innocent Cuban people . We could further note that the United States had chosen to exercise . The United States .
 We might publicize our earlier offer, and the reasons why the quarantine was necessary, in leaflets to be dropped over Cuba . We might also publicize the reasons behind the quarantine in leaflets .
 Quarantine might be initiated even in the absence of a second Cuban attack, for example . It could be initiated if there are suspicious signs of new threatening military activity, or if the Cubans or Soviets instituted reprisals elsewhere .
 Once the quarantine was established, "something would have to give," says the minister . "Once the quarantine is established, in due course something would have had to give"
 Castro or other Cuban leaders might decide that there is nothing that the Soviets could or would do to help them . They might decide agreeing to the removal of Russian military men and inspection, in exchange for withdrawal of quarantine and harassing reconnaissance .
 The Soviets would be under conflicting pressures to do something but not to overcommit themselves, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The Soviets would, in the case of a quarantine, be under intense pressure to do what they could do"
 They might risk an incident in challenging the quarantine, which would have to be strictly enforced . The quarantine is expected to be enforced by the government .
 If they did undertake counterpressure on access to Berlin, the existing contingency plans would be put into effect as necessary .
 The United States would have to persevere in maintaining the quarantine until Castro cracked or capitulated, or the deterrent effect of our will to stand up to Soviet pressures would be badly undermined . The U.S. would have had to continue to maintain the quarantine .
 In that case, the United States would support the uprising by whatever means necessary, up to and including invasion, to insure its success . The U.S. would use whatever means it is necessary to ensure the uprising's success .
 If there is no military counteraction to the harassing reconnaissance, the U.S. could undertake various measures designed to stimulate the Cubans to provoke a new incident . The United States could use various measures to provoke the Cuban government .
 The United States might initially intensify its reconnaissance with night flights, ""show-off"" low-level flights flaunting our freedom of action, hoping to stir the Cuban military to action . The U.S. might also intensify its . night flights .
 The United States might extend its actions to large scale leaflet drops, drops of agents, ""CARE""-type packages delivered to known or possible guerrilla areas, and the like .
 This course might stir the Cubans to military action or induce them to agree to the U.S. terms . This course may stir the Cuban people to take action, but it might not be necessary .
 If Cubans did not react, this kind of activity would give them propaganda ammunition . If, however, the Cubans didn't react, it would give the country propaganda ammunition, he says . The U.S. government says it is not concerned about the situation in Cuba .
 Such measures must therefore be gradual, geared to world political reactions . Such measures should be gradual and therefore be aimed at world political reaction .
 The U.S. could use some drone aircraft as "bait,"" flown at low speeds and favorable altitudes for tempting Cuban AAA or aircraft attacks .
 Soviet politico-military counterpressures elsewhere, beyond a vigorous political offensive and propaganda, would not be likely to be likely . The Soviet military would not likely be able to counterpressure the Soviet Union .
 Soviet commitments to Cuba might rise at whatever time the Soviets decided we did not intend to escalate the crisis . Perhaps a few weeks after the invasion force had been readied but not committed, perhaps .
 It is possible that the Soviets might approach us privately with an offer of quiet withdrawal of their military men from Cuba in exchange for our dropping the harassing reconnaissance and our demand for inspection .
 The development of the initial downing of a reconnaissance plane could lead at best to the elimination of Castro, perhaps to the removal of Soviet troops and installation of ground inspection in Cuba . If our initial reprisal had eliminated all the SAMs, we would have greatly increased our future military freedom
 If this course of action were to be pursued, reconnaissance overflights of Cuba, on a scale paralleling present U-2 high altitude flights, should be instituted .
 Authorization should be given for programs to reduce the present eighteen day period required for the generation of invasion forces, by prepositioning some equipment, buildup of sealift, etc., so that the U.S. would be able to support more quickly an uprising on the Island .
 We have considered the question of a fabricated incident . We conclude that it would not be feasible or desirable to contrive a mock Cuban attack on a U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 This plan applies to a genuine attack on a U.S. aircraft over to near Cuba . It would apply to any genuine attack over to Cuba .
 To capitalize on various Cuban provocations by taking reprisals to place pressures on, or to effect the removal of, the Castro regime, the U.S. will take action .
 Any of these cases could provide the basis for increasing U.S. military pressures to eliminate the Castro regime . The Castro regime could be eliminated by the United States .
 Case is the most likely, and also the case most likely to succeed without outside intervention . Case is also the best chance to succeed in the U.S.
 It would draw inspiration and support from nationalistic elements who had become disenchanted by the abject dependence of the regime on the Communist Bloc, isolation within the Hemisphere, deepening of the economic crisis, or a threatened or actual Communist accession .
 Case might take the form of widespread disruptive behavior supported in whole or in part by elements of the militia, or an uprising in one of the mountainous areas which might attract local militia elements . Case might be in response to widespread disruption supported by the militia .
 A ""palace coup"" either by hard-line Communists, or by members of the 26th of July Movement . A ""Palace coup" is either a coup or a coup by the Communist Party . A coup was either by the Communists or by the Nationalist Party .
 Each of these cases has a great danger of involvement by Soviet forces, but presumably the Communist coup is most dangerous from this standpoint . The coup is the most dangerous of all these cases .
 The world is on notice that the United States would tolerate no interference by local Soviet forces in an attempt by the Cuban people to throw off the Castro yoke, it would provide a platform for United States intervention .
 Such a coup might start with the assassination of Castro and a plea to the U.S. to fend off intervention by Soviet forces . Castro's assassination would be followed by a plea for the United States to prevent intervention .
 If both Army and militia arrayed themselves against the putschists, the opportunity for U.S. intervention would be fleeting . Clearly, if both army and militia are arraying themselves, the chance for intervention is fleeting .
 The attitude and actions of Soviet forces would vitally affect the outcome of the battle . The attitude of Soviet troops would be vitally affected by the outcome .
 The most favorable case for persistence of the coup would ensue if both elements of the Cuban forces supported them and the Soviets remained aloof . The case would be favorable if both forces supported the coup and the Soviet-backed regime stayed aloof.
 On the other hand, were the latter to intervene, the basis for forceful U.S. action would be more solid . The U.N. should intervene in Syria .
 Local or general revolts by the Army or militia coupled with attempts to seize the seat of Government or proclaim an alternate regime are possible quite apart from any links to a conspiracy within the regime .
 It is possible that an action within one of these elements might be the catalyst for similar action within the other . An action within these elements could be a catalyst for a similar action .
 A militia revolt opposed by the Cuban Army and the Soviet troops would provide the least time for the U.S. to react while the revolt was still alive . The United States would be most likely to react to the militia revolt while it was alive . A militia uprising opposed by Cuban Army
 It is conceivable, however, that the revolutionists could take to the hills, prolonging resistance and giving us more time to react . It's conceivable that they could prolong the resistance and give us time to respond to the situation .
 A revolt outside the governmental framework could manifest general discontent through the appearance of a number of guerrilla bands operating at widely separated points and supported with food by the peasants .
 A single guerrilla leader, operating in a particularly disaffected province, might expand his operations to the point where the Government was compelled to react massively . Alternatively, a single guerrillas might expand their operations in a particular province, say experts .
 In the atmosphere of present-day Cuba neither of these possibilities is very likely . Suffice it to say, in the atmosphere it is not very likely to happen .
 The Government has an excellent surveillance network, both internally and with respect to the air and sea approaches to the Island . The peasants are unwilling to risk their necks until the Government's chances appear poorer than they now are .
 A flagrant case of Cuban interference and violence in the internal life of another country (such as Venezuela or the Dominican Republic) could provide the basis for OAS sanctions, including a quarantine or perhaps a demand for inspection at Cuban ports and airfields .
 It would be difficult to use such an incident directly as justification for an invasion . The incident would not be directly justified for such an invasion of the country .
 The U.S. could use the resulting tension as justification for a quiet buildup of the invasion force . The United States could then use a new incident in quarantine enforcement, Cuban incursions on Guantanamo, or an uprising as justification .
 The incident itself should be domestic, violent and quickly identified as part of a pattern of Castroist export of revolution which would threaten other Latin American governments . The incident is domestic and violent and should be quickly identified .
 In this manner, the need for a drastic quarantine would be established . The need for such a quarantine is established, says Dr. David Cameron .
 A quarantine should cover POL as well as all arms entering, and arms and ""agents"" leaving, Cuba; it should probably not cover food and medicine . It should also cover all arms and agents leaving Cuba .
 In the long run, a POL blockade should be effective in disrupting Cuba internally, says Cuban diplomat . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the blockade .
 If Castro sought to negotiate an end of it, we should set an unacceptably high price such as unlimited inspection to verify no subversive training being undertaken, no arms shipments in or out (except returns to the USSR), etc. etc. We should set a high price for inspection to
 The United States would have been able to generate United States invasion forces for its support during the blockade . An ""uprising"" in this situation would be similar to any other, except that the United States .
 An incident at Guantanamo, such as a Cuban incursion, could provide an opportunity for protective action . The source of the water supply is off the United States reservation .
 In particular, restoring the source of water and protecting it from further interference would provide a reasonable justification for the U.S. to react with whatever degree of force was deemed necessary .
 The security of the element would justify broadened actions . Assuming the Cubans resisted, the Cuban government would have broadened its response .
 This could come to involve pitched battles, and require United States invasion . U.S. invasion could be a major event in the future .
 Expansion and escalation from an incident at Guantanamo would be fully supported in the United States and by some Allies, but it would have the political disadvantage of stemming from a United States base held against the desires of the incumbent government .
 In general, justification based on protecting U.S. rights would be less suitable than support to a Cuban uprising or strong action after Cuban export of revolution . The United States should support a strong action against the export of Cuban revolution, author says .
 The scenario of events following from an incident might escalate to full-scale US-Cuban combat, it might not . However, it could not be ruled out of the possibility .
 The Cubans might, at once or after some initial skirmishes, break contact with the United States . They might withdraw to allow the U.S. to restore the water supply and even to keep guards outside a military reservation . Cubans may also withdraw to permit the United .
 "It would be very disadvantageous for the United States to appear to be ""picking a fight"" over a broad definition of our base rights. In that case, especially if the Cubans had offered to restore the water supply, the U.S. should not be "picking a
 Castroite hi-jacking of a Latin American vessel; or Cuban naval attacks on or harassment of a U.S. or Latin American ship . Castroite attacks on, or harassment, of a . United States or . Latin American ships .
 The former would not, in itself, seem to provide clear opportunity for reprisals of a direct effective nature . The former seems to provide a clear opportunity to reprisal of the former .
 The latter could be met by attacking the offending Cuban vessels and perhaps counter-harassment of Cuban ships .
 Escalation at sea might lead to United States reprisal against Cuban gunboats in port as well as sea, but unless such action led to shooting down a U.S. plane it is difficult to see how it would justify United States quarantine or invasion .
 If a U.S. attacking aircraft were attacked, we might start the scenario of reprisals against Cuba's air defense . If a United States attacking aircraft was attacked, it might start a scenario of retaliisals .
 An incident at sea could trigger the air defense scenario . Otherwise, incidents at sea do not seem promising, say experts .
 According to a covering memorandum from Sherman Kent to McGeorge Bundy, May 13, while this memorandum was a ""draft"" at Bundy's instruction, it ""represents our best and most careful effort in the time available"
 Developments in Cuba and Possible U.S. Actions in the Event of Castro's Death/1/ /1/ This memorandum is a general analysis of the situation .
 We have not sought to work out in detail in detail Latin American, Western European, or other third party reactions in the various contingencies adverted to .
 In paragraph 13 we consider very generally the problem of Soviet reactions . In paragraph 12, we discuss the Soviet reaction to the situation in Soviet reaction .
 The Soviet Union would react cautiously behind the scenes to influence events if a power struggle developed . Paragraph 13 stated that the Soviet Union's interest in Cuba would not be lessened .
 If the struggle reached open conflict or the U.S. intervened, the Soviet Union would have to act . The Soviet Union has been in touch with the United States since 1979 .
 We believe the odds are that upon Castro's death his brother Raul or some other figure in the regime would, with Soviet backing and help, take over control of Cuba .
 There is a good chance that a power struggle would ensue, but there is a lesser chance that such a struggle would spread into a many-sided conflict . Moscow-oriented Communists lined up on one side and those who are essentially Cuban nationalists on the other .
 In any case the loyalties of the military commanders, now committed to Fidel but probably divided after his death, would significantly influence the outcome .
 Anti-Moscow Cuban nationalists would require extensive U.S. help in order to win, and probably United States military intervention . Anti-Russian nationalists would need extensive United States help to win .
 Mr Alexis Johnson presented a paper he and Mr Nitze had prepared entitled ""Cuban Attacks on Reconnaissance Flights-a Contingency Plan"
 "We should go to the UN immediately after our actions as a plaintiff rather than as a defendant. Therefore, we should . go to [the UN] immediately after [the] actions as . a plaintiff," she said. "I'm not a defendant, I'm a plaintiff,
 We will receive far less support for any of the actions contemplated in the paper than we did last October at the time of the crisis over the Soviet missiles . We are not likely to receive more support for these actions than in October .
 It was agreed that a paragraph would be added explaining the rationale for expanded aerial surveillance .
 Mr Johnson agreed that if the Cubans or the Russians do not react to our actions, we are unable to make them do so . Mr Johnson said if the Russians or Cubans don't react, we cannot make them react .
 There was some discussion as to whether the paragraph on page eight/2/ stated the reaction of the Soviets accurately . There was also some discussion about whether the Soviet reaction was accurately accurate .
 There was also discussion as to whether the Soviets would respond in another area, such as Berlin, if we put into effect a full quarantine of Cuba . The Soviets were also considered to respond in other areas, such a Berlin .
 Mr Sorensen suggested that a paragraph be inserted listing as an alternative a situation in which the U.S. would announce that a state of war existed with Cuba .
 If a state of war were announced in Phase 2, a blockade would become legal . A blockade would also be legal if it was announced in the same phase .
 In connection with aerial surveillance, Mr Bundy referred to the new international law of peaceful observation . Bundy refers to the law of peace observation .
 Mr Ball read part of page five,/4/ commenting that the Soviets would have to respond elsewhere if our actions in Cuba resulted in our killing Soviet soldiers . Mr Ball said that if the U.S. killed Soviet soldiers in Cuba, it would be in retaliation .
 He said Khrushchev had said he would try to bring about termination of our overflights . He said he had been promised to end overflights by the Soviet Union .
 He foresaw a situation in which the Russians might take the overflights case to the UN after withdrawing their forces from Cuba . The Russians might also seek to take the issue to the United Nations .
 A paper was agreed to deal with the contingency of the Russians' attempt to end our U-2 and aerial surveillance flights by measures short of force . It was agreed that a paper would be prepared to deal .
 There was a discussion of the April 24 paper which is the current draft of our contingency plans in the event a U-2 plane is shot down . There was also a discussion about our contingency plan for the U.2 .
 It is being held in the event that the contingency materializes . It will be used by the President in deciding how to retaliate against a shootdown .
 Johnson to Brubeck in the May 15 memorandum . Johnson: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm glad for it"
 Mr Bundy suggested that the threat of Cuba to the U.S. was an appropriate subject for officials to emphasize publicly .
 He referred to the study on post-Castro Cuba, adding that we are not in a position to undertake some of the actions described in the Johnson-Nitze paper .
 On page ten,/7/ the heading ""Conclusions"" was deleted in order to avoid confusion . The heading "Conclusions" was deleted from the book .
 The actions follow this heading are aimed at building up the importance of aerial reconnaissance, thereby serving as a rationale for serious actions taken . The actions were taken following an attempt to prevent us from continuing aerial reconnaissance .
 The paper to be revised to include the state of war suggestion by Mr Sorensen and other suggestions .
 The second paper, entitled ""Certain Cuban Contingencies" was discussed briefly 78/ It consists of a catalog of other contingencies which have not been studied in depth .
 Study of actions to meet possible contingencies was not thought profitable . Study of action to meet potential contingencies 'not thought profitable'
 The military question centers around the necessity of obtaining a tenable presence in Cuba in a very short time after a decision has been made to react to a decision to react .
 The catalog of contingencies reveals that all are either unlikely or unhelpful . "The catalog of . contingencies" reveals that . all of these contingencies is either unlikely, or unhelping, or unlikely .
 Even the contingency of a so-called Hungarian situation, namely, Russians attacking Cubans, is highly unlikely . The situation is unlikely to happen in Hungary, even if it happens in the country .
 Our statement that we would not permit such a situation to develop in Cuba is a good noise but deals with a highly unlikely contingency . The Cuban government has said it would not allow a 'situation' to develop .
 There was a discussion of the sugar paper presented by the State Department . The sugar paper was presented by State Department officials .
 Russians are financing their aid to Cuba by means of buying Cuban sugar cheaply and selling it at the much higher world market price . He said this was an area where action could be taken to prevent this .
 It was agreed that Secretary Freeman be asked to produce a study of the current situation with particular reference to the effect of the very high sugar price on the future Cuban economy .
 The paper produced by Sherman Kent of CIA entitled ""Developments in Cuba and Possible U.S. Actions in the Event of Castro's Death,'71 1/ was not discussed because of lack of time .
 Copies sent to all members of the Standing Group of the National Security Council . Copies of the document were sent to the standing group of members .
 The current situation in the world market for sugar is a matter of considerable concern to the Standing Group of the National Security Council . The future of the world sugar market is a major concern .
 The unusually high price of sugar is significant both in relation to the economic prospects of Cuba and in its relation to restrictions on the production of sugar in free countries, and not least in the U.S. It is significant in relation with Cuba's economic prospects .
 It is requested that you take the lead in a study of the current situation and of alternative courses of action that might best serve the economic interests of the United States and of other free countries . The United States has an interest in preventing any long continuation of unjustifiably high prices for Cuban
 It is hoped that a report might be available for distribution not later than Monday, May 27/1// and that you might be willing to join with the Standing Group in a discussion of this matter on Tuesday, May 28, probably at 5:00 m. m.
 Both the Department of State and the Central Intelligence Agency have expressed their interest in this study and their readiness to cooperate . I assume that you will draw on other agencies of the government in any way you wish, Mr President Obama says .
 Myer Feldman is being informed of the Standing Group's interest in the problem . The White House is ensuring that Feldman is informed .
 Lundahl displayed the relative photography of high and low-level from previous missions . Lundahl's photo was taken by the crew of the U.S. Navy's Air Force One. Lundahl was a member of the crew .
 McCone stated that high-level photography gave no evidence of whether people were at a base . McCone: High-level photos gave no . evidence of people at a . base . He said that high level photography gave . no evidence that people were there .
 Intelligence community does not know whether the four military bases are fully occupied, partially occupied, or not occupied at all . He said the intelligence community did not know if the four bases were fully occupied .
 Low-level photography might (but this is not absolutely sure) throw some light on this question .
 A low-level flight during Castro's visit in Moscow would exacerbate relations with Castro, Ambassador Thompson said . Ambassador Thompson pointed out that a low level flight during the visit would enhance the prospect of Castro and Khrushchev agreeing to some .
 NRO and Colonel Steakley should develop three priority missions, following the established groundrules, to cover the most important COMOR targets . NRO should develop the three missions .
 This memorandum was briefly discussed at the 6th meeting of the Standing Group, May 21 . The memorandum was briefly discussed at a meeting held on May 21.
 The Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, acting as Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee on Cuba, is responsible for the coordination of day-to-day actions . The coordinator of Cuban affairs is the Coordinator of Cuba Affairs .
 The Standing Group is responsible for the development of contingency plans and the assessment of long-range policy objectives .
 Special Group is responsible for covert activities, with appropriate liaison to the other two committees . The Special Group has been tasked with covert activities in the US .
 The meeting this afternoon will be devoted to a number of special problems on Cuba . I hope we may have a few minutes at the end to take a reading on the general position as it appears to be developing .
 We will turn to the problem of sugar as presented in the papers of the Department of Agriculture . For this part of the discussion, Under Secretary Sundquist will be present for Secretary Freeman .
 Agriculture submitted another more definitive paper without any indication of authorship . Agriculture submitted the paper on May 24 . On May 24 Agriculture submitted a paper without no indication of authorhip .
 We should briefly discuss possible U.S. actions in the event of Castro's death . We should discuss a paper on possible United States actions .
 There are two highly sensitive CIA papers which Mr McCone has requested that we hold for distribution at the meeting . The papers will be distributed at a meeting of the Joint Chiefs Chiefs Chiefs .
 List of possible actions under consideration at CIA and with the specific problem of Cuba's oil supplies . They deal with a list of possible action under consideration .
 "My own preliminary conclusions are not optimistic, but that's not an excuse for avoiding the issue," he says . "I'm not optimistic. I'm optimistic. That's not a reason for avoiding it," he adds .
 The discussion of the attached sugar paper/1/ emphasized the necessity of increasing domestic and world sugar production . The discussion was based on the need to increase domestic and global sugar production.
 Deputy Under Secretary of Agriculture Sundquist was asked to develop for consideration a program of action to force down the world sugar price . Sundquist has been asked for consideration of a proposal to force the price of sugar down .
 The Standing Group wants to deny high sugar prices to the Castro government . The interest of the Standing Group in this subject is a desire to deny .
 According to Bundy's May 28 record of action, the Department of Agriculture would develop for consideration a U.S. program to reduce substantially the price of sugar on the world market . Bundy says the program would be developed for consideration .
 The program should outline measures to be taken, their estimated costs, and take into account U.S. balance of payments consequences . It should also take account the consequences to friendly sugar-producing countries .
 The Department of State, CIA, and IAD would make available to the Department of Agriculture experts to assist in the study . The study would be conducted by the USDA and the CIA . The State Department would also make an offer to the CIA, IAD experts .
 He said he was coming to believe that we could not say that by a date certain we could overthrow Castro Castro . He said we couldn't say by a certain date certain, he said .
 "Of the various contingencies which we might exploit, none were controllable by us," he said . "None were controlled by us. Of the various contingencyencies which . might exploit," he added. "None was controlliable by us."
 It is possible that changes in the Castro government cannot be brought about until Soviet troops are out of Cuba . The Cuban government is unlikely to change until Soviet forces leave Cuba .
 The level of danger is now equal to that of last October, the author says . Nuclear confrontation with the Soviets is not feasible, he says .
 He suggested that at the next Standing Group meeting the comments he had made should be discussed .
 Mr McCone argued for courses of action which would increase economic hardship in Cuba . He said it would increase hardship in the country .
 Such actions, supplemented by sabotage meas-ures, would create a situation in Cuba in which it would be possible to subvert military leaders to the point of their acting to overthrow Castro . Such actions would create an opportunity for the Cuban military to sabotage Castro's regime, he says .
 He acknowledged that any sabotage measures taken in Cuba would create a very high noise level . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Secretary McNamara repeated his view that sabotage measures would not be conclusive . McNamara suggested an examination of those economic pressures which could upset Castro .
 Mr FitzGerald summarized a paper containing a list of all covert actions which could be taken against Castro Cuba .
 The first would be to over-react to some action taken by Castro or made to appear to have been taken by him . Castro's actions would be made to make it appear as though he had taken it by him, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 A Cuban attack on Guantanamo, even one inspired by us, might create a situation which we could exploit and thus justify courses of action adequate to overthrow Castro . For example, a Cuban attack against Guantanamo might create an opportunity for us to exploit .
 Castro's visit to Moscow was inspired by a Russian desire to forestall any effort by the U.S. to negotiate with Castro . Mr McCone said Castro's trip to Moscow inspired by Russia's desire to prevent any effort .
 Khrushchev invited Castro to Moscow in order to prove success of Russian policy toward Cuba . Under Secretary Harriman flatly disagreed, saying that the invitation was meant to refute Chinese accusations that Khruschev's ""softness"" toward the United States had produced no returns .
 There followed a discussion as to where we thought Cuba would be five years from now . Cuba's future is likely to be in the shape of Cuba five years later, says President Obama .
 Secretary McNamara indicated his belief that the Russians would and could make Cuba a showcase for Communism in the Western Hemisphere . McNamara said he believed the Russians could make the country a showpiece for Communism .
 Under Secretary Harriman doubted they would try to try to do this and stated that they could not, even if they tried . Under Secretary Harriman doubt they would .
 Attorney General entered the meeting in the middle of Mr FitzGerald's briefing . He said the U.S. must do something against Castro even though we do not believe our actions would bring him down .
 Bundy acknowledged that we can give an impression of busyness in Cuba . Bundy said we can make life difficult for Castro . Bundy: 'We can give the impression of a busyness'
 Mr McCone said that economic measures, such as restriction of trade, were wasting assets because of the increasing reluctance of our allies to act with us . He said that measures such as restrictions on trade are wasting assets .
 Mr McCone repeated his earlier proposal of sabotage and subversion of the Cuban military . In response to a question by the Attorney General as to what he recommended should be done, he said .
 Bundy said the best we could do was to decide now what actions we would take against Castro . Bundy said that the measures practical for us to undertake will not result in his overthrow . Bundy summarized by saying that the best .
 Draft paper, prepared by the Cuban Coordinator, on the subject of U.S. policy towards exile unity .
 It is being circulated to Coordinating Committee members for comments and clearance . It is currently being circulated .
 The Coordinator recommends that the United States follow a ""hands-off" policy towards exile efforts to achieve unity .
 Judging from the tenor of the last Coordinating Committee meeting, I suspect that the draft will be approved with few substantive changes . The draft of the draft is expected to be approved soon, with little substantive changes, he says .
 It was made on May 22 before the Senate Subcommittee on Refugees and Escapees . It is attached to a May 28 memorandum from Chase to Bundy, on U.S. policy toward exile unity .
 United States Position on Efforts by Cuban Exiles to Achieve Unity Problem . To determine the position of the Government with respect to efforts by Cuban exiles in the United States to achieve unity .
 Miro Cardona's resignation as head of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, the withdrawal of United States support for the Council, and its consequent decline-a vague, confused and still embryonic movement toward ""unity"" has taken place in the Cuban exile community .
 Recent discussions by these groups with U.S. nationals promising large-scale financial support appear to have had no results . Recent discussions with United States nationals .
 Group calls for the liberation of Cuba and the extirpation of Communism . Calls for the return to the 1940 Constitution .
 Rightist in makeup, heavily weighted on the side of discredited politicians, it is unlikely to have much support within Cuba . It is likely to have little success within Cuba, but it is heavily weighted towards discredited politicians .
 Jose Bosch is forming a committee to organize a plebiscite to elect a single leader . Bosch says he wants to lead a single party in a single election .
 He has formed a unity committee and claims the personal support of Attorney General Kennedy . Mr Kennedy claims he has formed the unity committee .
 Student sectors of eleven organizations are reported to have reached a working agreement . Student sectors have reportedly reached an agreement to work with each other .
 An association of Brigade veterans, formed in April and claiming a membership of 900, is primarily a fraternal organization . Some leaders appear to have hopes that the group might form a nucleus for unity of all exiles .
 Of course, we believe that in principle a sound and broadly representative unity which reflects real identity of views is desirable . We believe in principle that a well-representation is desirable, but we are not satisfied with this .
 This, however, must come from within the Cuban community if it is to have vitality . This is needed for the future of Cuba, says the Cuban president .
 It is desirable that a point implicit in the foregoing statement be made explicit, that is the requirement that unity reflect the basic desires of the people within Cuba . Cuba's unity reflects the basic wishes of the Cuban people, the Cuban government says .
 It is unlikely that the exiles will be able to achieve a unity which meets the criteria set out in the Martin statement . D. D. Martin says it is unlikely they can achieve the criteria .
 The ability of a united exile organization to reflect, to any meaningful degree, the attitudes and aspirations of those within Cuba would be minimal . Moreover, the ability of any united exile group to reflect Cuba's aspirations would also be minimal.
 Through judicious use of our resources, we might be able to force or induce unity among all or the principal democratic groups from right to left . We might also force unity among the main democratic groups .
 Such a movement or organization would have to be of the least-common-denominator type . Such a group would have been the least common-denomination type .
 It would be recognized as an artificial creation of ours, although it might have some favorable effect on domestic public opinion . It would generally be recognized .
 Our interference would probably be resented by many of the best exile elements, would deprive any unity movement of spontaneity and would commit us to continuing support of the movement or organization, and probably be suspect within Cuba, says the author .
 "Unity in itself does not significantly contribute to the achievement of our present objectives in Cuba," says the Cuban government .
 A continuation of the present situation in which there is no pre-eminent central organization would be easier and more effective from an operational standpoint . In fact, it is quite possible that a continuation of this situation would be more effective than a replacement .
 By judicious use of our resources, we probably could thwart movements toward unity . By using our resources we could thwart movement toward unity, we could do so much more .
 Our interference in this sense would be strongly resented and would be widely interpreted as a demonstration that we are ""giving up" on the Cuban question . Our interference would be highly resented .
 It would be very difficult to explain, particularly to domestic public opinion, since ""unity"" on its face is attractive . "Unity" is attractive, especially in the face of public opinion .
 The prospects for a spontaneous, effective, and meaningful unity are hardly good . In any case, the prospects for an effective unity in the U.S. are not good .
 If we were to remain as aloof as a decent public posture allows, the chances are considerably better than even that unity efforts would fail . If you were to stay aloof, chances would be better for unity efforts to fail, he says .
 There is an outside possibility, however, that a unified organization or movement meeting our standards would emerge . There is also a possibility that there would be a unified movement meeting these standards .
 If it did, it would have the strength endowed by the free, undistorted , competitive play of political currents, and it would not carry the taint of United States sponsorship . The U.S. has the strength of the world's political currents .
 A ""hands-off" policy incurs the risks of permitting the possibly embarrassing intensification of division among the exiles, of sacrificing some sound but poorly financed groups to the necessitudes of exile politics in which less sound but better-financed elements might become dominant .
 In the last case, the fact that we had not participated in the formation of the movement would give us maximum flexibility, he says . In the first case, he said: "In the last . case, we would have had maximum flexibility"
 The statement of position made by Assistant Secretary Martin is a good expression of this policy, provided it is expanded by a reference to the requirement that unity reflect the basic desires of the people within Cuba, the U.S. State Department says .
 This, however, must come from within the Cuban community and be consistent with the desires of the people within Cuba if it is to have vitality . The Cuban community must also be consistent in its desire to have a vibrant future .
 This paper was to be submitted to the NSC Standing Group on June 11 . According to a covering memorandum from Smith to Bundy, June 10, this paper was . This paper has been submitted by the National Security Council .
 The next meeting of the Standing Group will be held on June 18, not June 11, the next meeting will be June 18 .
 Bundy's record of action of the June 18 meeting indicated that the group discussed this paper and approved it for final decision by the President . Bundy's report of action indicated that this paper was discussed and approved by the group of members .
 Proposed Covert Policy and Integrated Program of Action towards Cuba I Introduction . Proposed policy and integrated program of action towards Cuba .
 Submitted herewith is a covert program for Cuba within CIA's capabilities . CIA's Cuba program is a program that is within CIA capabilities .
 Some parts of the program have already been approved and are being implemented . The program is being implemented in the U.S. State Department .
 The total cumulative impact of the courses of action set forth in this program is dependent upon the simultaneous coordinated execution of the individual course of action . Being closely inter-related, the total impact is dependent on the coordinated execution .
 This program is based on the assumption that current U.S. policy does not contemplate outright military intervention in Cuba or a provocation which can be used as a pretext for an invasion of Cuba by United States military forces . This program was based on assumptions that current .
 The ultimate objective of this policy would be to encourage dissident elements in the military and other power centers of the regime to bring about the eventual liquidation of the Castro/Communist entourage and elimination of the Soviet presence from Cuba .
 The effect of a program of maximum pressure is unpredictable, it is suggested that a sustained intensive effort undertaken now to prevent the consolidation of the Castro/Communist regime may present the United States with opportunities and options not now foreseeable .
 The consequences of a policy of allowing Castro to "stew in his own juice" are foreseeable, but foreseeable .
 According to current estimates, barring Castro's death or a decisive change in the United States posture or Soviet policy towards Cuba, the Castro regime is likely to be more firmly established a year hence, despite possible economic setbacks .
 The mere passage of time tends to favor Castro as the population and elite groups in Cuba become accustomed to the idea that he is here to stay . Castro's regime gains in administrative experience and the security organs become more efficient .
 The existence of an organized party apparatus as well as a stable government machinery could reduce the indispensability of Castro's personal leadership . Over the longer run, the existence of a stable party apparatus could reduce Castro's power, he says .
 If left to chance, the U.S. must accept for the indefinite future a Communist regime in Cuba . Cuba is closely tied to and a significant component of the Soviet world power structure .
 A Covert collection of intelligence, both for U.S. strategic requirements as well as for operational requirements, the U.N. says .
 Propaganda actions to stimulate low-risk simple sabotage and other forms of active and passive resistance . B Propaganda . Actions to stimulate  sabotage .
 C. Exploitation and stimulation of disaffection in the Cuban military and other power centers . C. C. Ex-Cuban president: "Exploitation is a form of exploitation of power centers"
 F Support of autonomous anti-Castro Cuban groups to supplement and assist in the execution of the above courses of action . F. F. Support of anti-Cuba Cuban groups . F .
 A vital feature of the program to exert maximum pressure on the Castro/Communist regime is the dependence of the impact of each course of action on the simultaneous and effective execution of the other courses of action . A vital part of the . program is the . dependence of each . course of
 Intelligence information is needed to permit the planning and mounting of operations against economic denial and sabotage targets . Thus, intelligence information must be needed to enable the planning of the planning .
 Covert propaganda actions are designed to produce a psychological climate in Cuba conducive to the accomplishment of the other courses of action in the integrated covert program . The U.S. has been conducting covert operations in Cuba since 1961 .
 Only after the effects of economic denial and sabotage actions are deeply felt by the populace and the elite groups can one hope to convert disaffection in the armed forces and other power centers of the regime into militant revolt .
 It is also at this point where CIA-controlled and autonomous activist elements in the Cuban exile community can begin to assume genuine resistance proportions . It is not the first time the CIA controlled and autonomous elements in exile community have taken up the issue .
 It is reasonable to expect a considerable increase in the volume and quality of the intelligence product on the basis of which additional and increasingly more effective operations can be mounted .
 Unless all the components of this program are executed in tandem, the individual courses of action are almost certain to be of marginal value, even in terms of achieving relatively limited policy objectives . Unless all of the components are executed, the impact of the program will be marginal .
 This is clearly a cause where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts . This is the case of the whole being greater than ever before, says the BBC .
 Focus is being given to increasing the volume and quality of intelligence needed for planning and mounting the operations contemplated in the integrated program described in this paper . Focus should be on defections and penetrations and for economic denial and sabotage actions .
 CIA-controlled radio programs and other propaganda media directed at Cuba encourage low-risk simple sabotage and other forms of active and passive resistance . In accordance with a previously approved psychological program in support of U.S. policy on Cuba, the CIA encouraged sabotage .
 These media also seek to stimulate and exacerbate tensions within the regime and between Cuba and the Soviet Bloc, taking advantage of Sino-Soviet tensions .
 All of these propaganda operations are calculated to create a psychological atmosphere within Cuba which will facilitate the accomplishment of the other courses of action within the integrated covert action program .
 We are undertaking an effort to identify, seek out and establish channels of communication with disaffected and potentially dissident non-Communist elements in the power centers of the regime, particularly in the armed forces .
 The objective is to promote the fragmentation of the Cuban regime and possibly lead to an internal coup which would dislodge Castro and his entourage . The aim is to make it possible to eliminate the Cuban Communists from positions of power and force the withdrawal of the Soviet military presence .
 Official U.S. economic sanctions in conjunction with covert economic denial operations (such as denial of ) is causing a marked adverse effect on the Cuban economy . Overt official United States economic sanctions are causing an adverse effect to Cuba's economy .
 For maximum impact on the Cuban economy this effort must be coordinated with sabotage operations . The Cuban government must also coordinate sabotage operations, says Cuban diplomat . The U.S. government says it is targeting the Cuban government in Cuba .
 We propose to continue and intensify economic denial operations which would be greatly enhanced by an inter-agency committee with a charter enabling it to call upon member agencies for rapid action .
 Sabotage in this program is both an economic weapon and a stimulus to resistance, says John Avlon . "Sabotage" is both economic and political weapon, he says .
 As an economic weapon, it is a supplement to and therefore must be coordinated with the economic denial effort . The U.S. must also coordinate with the denial effort, he says .
 As a stimulus to resistance, there must be visible and dramatic evidence of sabotage to serve as a symbol of growing popular defiance of the Castro regime . The Castro regime must be seen as a stimulus for growing resistance .
 Operations will be conducted either by externally held assets now available or by existing internal assets or those to be developed . These operations will be carried out by external assets or by internal assets .
 Assets trained and controlled by CIA will be used as will selected autonomous exile groups . The CIA will use assets trained by CIA to train and control exiled groups .
 Initially, the emphasis will be on the use of externally held assets with a shift to internal assets as soon as operationally feasible . The company will then shift to internally held assets .
 Externally mounted hit-and-run attacks against appropriately selected targets . Externally mountable attacks against . appropriately selected . targets .
 It must be recognized that no single act of sabotage by itself can materially affect the economy or stimulate significant resistance . "No single act, by itself, can materially impact the economy," says President Obama .
 A well-planned series of sabotage efforts, properly executed, would in time produce the effect we seek . However, it is our opinion that it is possible that a well planned sabotage efforts would produce the desired effect we want .
 None of these expected consequences should cause us to change our course if the program as outlined can be expected to be successful . The program will not be changed if it is successful .
 Annex A is an elaboration of a proposed sabotage and harassment program against Cuba . Annex A includes a proposal for a possible sabotage program against the country .
 In the past, CIA has utilized only fully controlled and disciplined agent assets as a safeguard against unilateral and irresponsible action by Cuban exiles intent upon the liberation of their country . CIA has used fully controlled, disciplined agents in the past .
 If sabotage and resistance activities are to be undertaken on a larger scale, it will be necessary to accept the risks involved in utilizing autonomous Cuban exile groups and individuals who will not necessarily be responsive to our guidance . The risks involved are the risks of using autonomous exile groups .
 It is the keystone of autonomous operations that they will be executed exclusively by Cuban nationals . The overthrow of the Castro/Communist regime must be accomplished by Cubans, both inside and outside Cuba acting in consonance .
 If this cost in lives becomes unacceptable to the United States conscience, autonomous operations can be effectively halted by the withdrawal of U.S. support . Once halted, it cannot be resumed, says President Obama .
 All autonomous operations will be mounted outside the U.S. territory of the United States . All operations will have to be conducted outside of the country's borders .
 Before entering into an operational relationship with a group, the U.S. representative will make it clear that his Government has no intention of intervening militarily, except to . counter intervention by the Soviets .
 An experienced CIA officer would be assigned to work with the group in a liaison capacity . The group would be working with the CIA .
 He would provide general advice as requested as requested . He would also provide funds and material support .
 Standing Group requested to approve courses of action outlined in paragraph 6 E and F within terms of reference and rules of engagement . Standing Group is requested to OK covert action program .
 Disruption of any of the existing power grids which might be effected by damage to or destruction of the generating facilities or of the critical sub-stations in the distribution network, would significantly weaken the existing economic and social structure, particularly in view of the fact that in many areas the power
 Smaller acts of sabotage/harassment by the populace such as throwing chains over high tension lines to short them out, would also exacerbate the current power shortage . The cumulative effect of all such actions could cause a prolonged breakdown of the power system as there is already a shortage of spare parts
 Damage to or destruction of POL production and/or storage facilities would seriously affect almost all aspects of the Cuban economy . Damage to the Cuban oil and lubricant industry would also seriously affect the economy .
 The electric power industry depends almost entirely upon POL as fuel for the generating plants . The sugar industry depends upon POL powered processing and transportation facilities as does all intra-province transportation . POL is used in almost all of Canada's electricity and sugar production .
 Production and storage facilities are susceptible to external attacks by heavy weapons or by more subtle methods . If internal assets having an appropriate degree of accessibility can be developed, they could be developed .
 The loss of refining facilities could be offset by increased Bloc shipments of refined products . Such a shift would require a period of readjustment during which there would be a heavy strain on the Cuban economy .
 An additional burden on the Bloc refining capacity would also exist until Cuba's refining capacity is restored . The Bloc refineries would also be burdened by Cuba's refineries .
 Damage to or destruction of railway and/or highway rolling stock or the destruction of key bridges would lead to breakdowns in regional economics . Regional economies dependent on the distribution of imported products are dependent on imports .
 The processing and export of the vitally important sugar crop is also dependent on transportation . The processing of the sugar crop and export is also entirely dependent on transport .
 It is not anticipated that we could achieve that degree of disruption which would cause a collapse of the economy or social structure, but even minor disruption will adversely affect the standard of living and output of the . economy, both of which are key factors in the stability of the regime .
 The type of operations envisioned in this category would range from fairly sophisticated attacks by external or internal assets against the rolling stock, key bridges and repair facilities . Low risk acts by the populace such as the derailing of rail transportation or placing tire puncturing material on highways .
 The Cuban economy primarily depends on imports for indigenous consumption . While sugar crop is by far the most important item in Cuban exports, there are still other facilities such as the nickel complex at Nicaro, cement plants, distilleries, and cement plants .
 These targets are particularly susceptible to attack by external or internal assets in that due to their profusion and their relatively low strategic importance they are not well guarded or otherwise secured against attack .
 The cost or effort required if additional burdens were placed on Bloc support . The cost of the Bloc is unknown . The Bloc will not be able to afford additional burdens .
 The estimate was submitted to the United States Intelligence Board by the Central Intelligence Agency on June 14 . According to covering sheets this estimate was sent to the U.S. Intelligence Board .
 The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the National Security Agency participated in its preparation .
 All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred with it with the exception of the representative of the Atomic Energy Commission who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside his jurisdiction .
 This NIE superseded NIE 85-2-62, ""The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,"" August 1, 1962, and SNIE-85-3-62 September 19, 1962 . The NIE was superseded by SNIE 85 3-62 and 85
 After a period marked by bitterness on Castro's part and by restraint on the part of the Soviets, the two parties now appear to have agreed to emphasize the consolidation of the Castro regime . The two parties appear to be agreeing to emphasize consolidating Castro's regime .
 It is unlikely that internal political opposition or economic difficulties will cause the regime to collapse . The regime is unlikely to collapse, despite internal political and economic difficulties .
 All our evidence points to the complete political predominance of Fidel, says historian . His charismatic appeal continues to be the most important factor in the Cuban revolution, he says .
 Dependence on the person of Castro is, however, a major vulnerability of the Castro regime . Dependence is a 'major vulnerability' of Castro's regime, but it is not dependent on his person .
 Without leadership and goals, no opposition force will be able to challenge Castro . Castro's regime would have to be revolutionary and reformist to appeal to a majority of Cubans, he says .
 His death could result in one form of disorder or another ranging from power struggles within the regime's leadership to open civil war . But his death could lead to chaos or even civil war in Syria .
 Any successor is likely to be more dependent upon the Soviets than Castro has been . Any successor will lack Castro's ability to command the loyalty of substantial numbers of Cubans .
 Even under the most favorable circumstances, any opposition would have to have the support of a large part of the military before it could hope to overthrow the Communist regime . Furthermore, even if the opposition were successful, they would need to have to take account of the presence of Soviet troops .
 On balance, we estimate that there has been little or no reduction in overall military capabilities in Cuba since the end of the missile crisis . C. C
 The Soviet military picture in Cuba is in transition with a scaling down of their forces becoming apparent . The Cuban military picture is in a transition .
 The total Soviet military strength in Cuba is now estimated to be about 12,000 to 13,000, but we cannot exclude the possibility that there could be several thousand more . Total Soviet military power in Cuba estimated at around 12,500 .
 This is not to say that all Soviet military personnel will be withdrawn from Cuba . It is highly likely that the Soviets will maintain a significant presence there .
 With respect to the surface-to-air missile system, we doubt that the Soviets have specified an exact date for transfer of operational control or would carry out such an agreement if subsequent developments produced new dangers . D
 We believe that the Soviet Government remains acutely aware of the risks involved . The Soviet Government is aware that it is aware of risks involved in the project .
 The capabilities of the Cuban Armed Forces have been augmented by increased training, new equipment, and some reorganization . E. E. C.E. has increased training and new equipment in Cuba .
 The Cuban ground forces are probably well able to control internal resistance and to repel small-scale external attacks . The Cuban government is well-armed and well-prepared to defend itself .
 Only a relatively small proportion of the Cuban military establishment would be likely to carry on prolonged operations of this type . In the event of a U.S. invasion, they would have to revert fairly quickly to static defense or guerrilla operations .
 In our view, it is unlikely that the USSR contemplates an attempt to reintroduce strategic missiles into Cuba. F. F
 Greatly enhanced Soviet knowledge of U.S. intelligence sources and methods with respect to Cuba would make it possible to adopt improved measures of concealment and deception .
 In such cases they would almost certainly recognize the great risk of U.S. counteraction . In such a case, they would probably recognize the risk of United States countering .
 Khrushchev-Castro communique/1/ held up Cuba as an example for the rest of Latin America, but without endorsing Castro's earlier general incitement to revolution throughout the area . G
 The Soviets and Cubans will be careful not to engage in flagrant or gross actions which would invite U.S. reprisals or countermeasures . We believe that during the next phase they will be seeking to avoid a crisis with the US .
 In general, we believe that situations are unlikely to develop in which Castro could intervene with substantial force without rendering himself vulnerable to U.S. or OAS counteraction .
 While the Soviets and Cubans have probably resolved their more immediate problems, we foresee varying degrees of friction in their future relations, particularly over the long run .
 Castro appears to insist on a unique position in the Bloc without submitting to the discipline and control imposed on Soviet Satellites . They probably have not reached a fundamental reconciliation of their appraisals of the situation .
 Castro has taken a long step toward the Soviet side in the Sino-Soviet controversy . Nevertheless, Castro has been taken to the Soviet-Sino side .
 Castro has received a strong boost to his ego, assurances of continued economic support . Cuba's special importance as an example of what the revolutionary struggle can achieve in Latin America, he says .
 Overall, Soviet and Cuban fortunes have been bound more closely together . Their respective freedoms of action have been somewhat narrowed .
 The program as recommended by the Standing Group of the NSC/1/ was presented briefly to Higher Authority who showed a particular interest in proposed external sabotage operations . McKee I .
 He was shown charts indicating typical targets for this program and discussion of the advantages and disadvantages ensued . He discussed the advantages of the program and disadvantages .
 It was well recognized that there would be failures and a considerable noise level, Bundy said . Bundy described the integrated nature of the program presented .
 Mr Harriman stated that the program would be ""reviewed weekly"" by the Special Group . The Special Group will review the program every week .
 Higher Authority asked how soon we could get into action with the external sabotage program and was told that we should be able to conduct our first operation in the dark-of-the-moon period in July .
 Higher Authority said that we should move ahead with the program ""this summer"" It is believed that Bundy will be able to convince him that this is not a sufficiently long trial period to demonstrate what the program can do .
 Assistant Secretary Martin sent this paper to U. Alexis Johnson on June 20 . According to a covering memorandum, assistant secretary Martin sent the paper to Johnson .
 The cardinal point of Castro's foreign policy until the missile crisis was to bind Cuba tightly to the USSR as a means of ensuring the regime's survival in the shadow of U.S. power . The proposition is that as Cuba goes so goes world communism, communism goes, Cuba goes .
 Soviet refusal to run quarantine and withdrawal of missiles shook the foundation of Cuban foreign policy . Soviet refusal of quarantine shook foundation of Cuba's foreign policy.
 Castro has indicated, sometimes vaguely, sometimes clearly, that he is interested in an accommodation with the U.S. Since the missile crisis, Castro has hinted at an accommodation . Castro has expressed interest in a possible accommodation between Cuba and the United States .
 His immediate disillusion over the Soviet missile crisis probably prompted him to grope for a policy which would diminish his depend-ence upon the Soviet Union, lessen his ties with the communist world .
 In casting about for some sort of new alignment, he may possibly have envisioned Cuba's emergence as a neutralist state . He may have envisioned the emergence of Cuba as an independent state . Cuba is now a neutral state .
 Castro may have been prepared to move further from the Bloc than the USSR would have liked . Despite its general urging that Castro seek ways to reduce tensions, the USSR did not want him to go further . Castro was acting essentially in his own interest and may have moved further away .
 Castro's Moscow visit re-cemented Cuban-Soviet relations, at least for some time . Castro's visit to Moscow re-opened Cuba's relations with the Soviet Union .
 Castro left no doubt that he accepted Khrushchev's leadership of a communist world that included Cuba . Castro flatly rejected the possibility that he might stray from the communist world .
 Whatever possibility may have existed immediately after the missile crisis that Castro might in fact adopt an independent and more neutralist policy has probably vanished under present circumstances . The possibility of a more independent and neutralist stance has vanished under current circumstances .
 Castro's comments have not made clear what he envisages as the terms of such an action . Castro has not said what he wants to do with the situation .
 He has implied that his subversive activities in Latin America would be no problem . But largely by denying that he is currently engaged in anything of the sort, he denies it .
 President Obama has made clear that nothing can change the fact that his regime is Communist and must continue to have the closest of political ties to the Soviet Union . Nothing can change that, he says, but he will continue to be a Communist .
 There have been indications from Soviet sources that Soviet military presence in Cuba could be removed if that is an obstacle . Soviet sources say that Soviet presence could also be removed from Cuba if that's an issue .
 Castro: "We need a settlement more than he does and therefore we should offer the concessions" The general tone of Castro's discussion of this subject in his TV broadcast on his return from Moscow is that we need to offer concessions, he says .
 In this connection he again mentions the abandonment of Guantanamo as one of the conditions he would affix to a reconciliation . In this case, he says he would like to see Guantanamo abandoned .
 Castro and the Soviets in seeking some kind of accommodation are both economic and political reasons . Castro and Soviets are both likely to be seeking an accommodation . Castro's motives are likely to include economic, political motives .
 Castro's economy is not doing well, and he needs trade with the U.S. He needs trade both as a market for sugar and source of supply for spare parts and equipment generally . Castro: Trade with the United States is important for the Cuban economy .
 He may even hope to get some United States technical aid to supplement that from the bloc with which he seems to have considerable dissatisfaction with .
 The Soviets probably wish to get some relaxation of the burden they are now carrying to keep the economy going at all . The Soviet Union is now carrying a huge burden to keep it going .
 It would certainly cost them nothing not to have to buy Cuban sugar whatever the price, it would cost nothing to buy it from Cuba .
 Castro retains interest in such an accommodation in order to have more maneuverability vis-a-vis the Soviets . It may also be also that Castro retains some interest in a such an arrangement .
 An independent egoist such as Castro must find his dependence on the Soviets galling . From a long-term standpoint, as well as in the incidents at the time of the missile crisis, Castro found himself dependent on the Soviet Union . Castro's dependence for the Soviets was galling,
 Castro and the Soviets may also feel that there will be a better opportunity to make Cuba more nearly a showcase of communism in the hemisphere rather than a glaring example of economic failure . From a longer-term standpoint, there will also be an opportunity for an accommodation with the United States .
 Successful accommodation would be played as ""victory over the United States,"" would significantly advance both the Soviets and Castro toward their long range goals in the hemisphere . Not only would economic benefits accrue but the respectability and prestige that Castro would derive from successful accommodation .
 Support for the regime from within Cuba might well become wider and more active with an effect on economic prosperity as well as political attitudes . Support for Cuba's regime could become wider, more active in Cuba .
 Stop giving support to Cubans who are attempting to overthrow the regime . Stop giving aid to those who are trying to overthrow regime .
 Take legislative action, and executive action in consultation with Congress, permitting trade with Cuba on a basis as extensive as the Soviet bloc . Take a similar approach to the Soviet-era Soviet bloc. Take a legislative action .
 Cuba may seek to remove the strictures against Cuba and her activities in the hemisphere adopted in the InterAmerican System . Cuba may also accept Cuba back into the OAS and its subordinate bodies .
 Send back Soviet personnel except for training missions in connection with Soviet military assistance programs of a type similar to those which accompany U.S. military aid programs . Send back personnel only for training .
 Agree that Cuban armed forces will not be used outside of Cuba except in accordance with decisions of the InterAmerican System . Agree to not use Cuban forces outside Cuba except for those of the U.S.
 Agree that the Soviets will not be permitted to use Cuba as a base for armed action . Agree also that they should not be allowed to use the island as a military base .
 Negotiate an agreement for some compensation for some seized properties, presumably tied to the level of export earnings from sales of sugar to the U.S. The agreement is expected to be tied to export earnings .
 It would be an agreement with Castro and in no general sense with the regime as a whole or the people as a part of the people, says Mr. Castro . The agreement would be a deal with Castro but not with the people or the regime .
 "Even with his continuation, his word has too frequently been demonstrated as worthless to give us much long-term assurance of quiet in the Caribbean," he says . Even with his continued, "even with his . continuation"
 Without the political break with Moscow a precedent would be established for other communist regimes in the hemisphere . The whole effort to keep them out of this area and to establish its special status would fall to the ground. Without the break, the whole effort would be kept in place .
 Since subversive activities in Latin America are to a very considerable extent covert anyway, there would be no effective means of ensuring that Castro had kept his word . The Castro regime would not have been able to keep his word anyway, anyway .
 It would be all too simple for activities which he has been conducting to be shifted in large part to other bloc countries, who are already extensively engaged .
 Approval of a communist regime would be a great encouragement to native communists in Latin America and would increase their power . Approval would encourage native communists to take advantage of the situation in the region .
 With the threat perhaps increased or at least substantially unchanged, there would inevitably be a major relaxation of anti-communist effort on the part of the Latin American countries since there has been so much focus on the threat of Cuba .
 It is exceedingly difficult to envisage this as a two stage operation with the second stage the elimination of communism or Castro or Castro . The second stage of the operation is to eliminate the communist or Castro, it is said .
 Any such compromise would enormously strengthen him with the Cuban people, he says . It would make the regime less dependent on him personally than it has been .
 A communist regime in Cuba would be even more securely entrenched than it is now, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba's communist regime would have been even more secure in Cuba, he says .
 An essential component of the economic aspects is legislative action by the U.S. Congress . Congress is needed to pass legislation on the issue . Congress must also take action to address the problem .
 This must take place before Castro limits his present dependence and close relations with the Soviet bloc . Castro must limit his current dependence on the Soviet Union to limit his relationship with the West .
 Castro maintains his full present relationship with the bloc . It is probably not feasible at any time, but particularly under these circumstances, to secure Congressional assent to the measures .
 The sugar legislation will be made particularly difficult by the need to deprive other friendly countries of sugar quotas and to assign a sugar quota before adequate assurances have been secured with respect to compensation for United States sugar property owners .
 Any such settlement will cause serious problems of order within the U.S. so far as a couple hundred thousand Cuban exiles are concerned . The settlement would be a major problem within the United States .
 All parties of the right in Latin America will denounce the U.S. for surrendering to communist pressure . They, and all parties in Latin American, will denounce Obama's decision to step back Cuba .
 "Our posture in Latin America would be seriously prejudiced in important circles heretofore friendly to us," he said . "We would be very prejudiced"
 The U.S. attitude toward communism and expropriation which such an accommodation would reflect would reflect and the encouragement to subversion in Latin America from this acceptance of a communist regime will completely dry up investment there as well as encourage capital flight .
 The success of the Alliance for Progress will become clearly impossible . The success will be clearly impossible, says the president of Britain's Labour Party .
 The undersigned briefed the Secretary concerning the components and rationale of the program . It is not the first time the U.S. government has been involved in the program.
 Every trace of United States involvement in the program possible would be concealed . The operations would be based outside of the United States . The U.S. would not be involved in any of the operations .
 It was also pointed out that the concept of autonomous groups is open-ended . The purpose is to develop resistance capabilities inside Cuba, it was said . It was said that the autonomous groups are open ended .
 "Any exile group having capabilities in the field of resistance could be included and supported," he said . Any exile group with capabilities in field of resistence could be supported, he added .
 For instance, Manolo Ray and his JURE will be offered financial support within the next day . The JURE has been given financial support .
 The Secretary stressed the need to document and publicize Castro's subversive and terrorist operations in Latin America . The Secretary of State said raids against Cuba should be launched in the guise of retaliation .
 It was pointed out that autonomous operations are particularly well designed to fit into this concept . Autonomous operations are designed to be self-controlled and autonomous .
 There ensued a discussion of sabotage and harassment operations and their place within the program . There ensued discussion of the program's place in the U.S. program .
 It was stated that the hit and run operations, whether staged by autonomous groups or unilaterally by the Agency, are primarily designed to encourage resistance within Cuba . Cuba must bear the main burden of coordinated and extensive sabotage .
 The frequency of hit and run operations would be two to three per month with a probable average of two per month . Commencing in midJuly, the frequency of run-and-run operations is expected to be two-to-three per month.
 The Secretary noted that the midJuly date for the commencement of these operations would coincide with Governor Harriman's presence in Moscow . The Secretary of State John Kerry said that the start of the operations will coincide with the governor's visit to Moscow .
 Mr McCone stated that the program should be considered as an integrated and continuing thing which could not be put on a stop and go basis if it could be expected to achieve its goal .
 He stated that the Special Group would have the program under continuous review but would recognize the need to permit the program to flow forward as planned . The Special Group will not require each operation to be justified in political and economic terms .
 Governor Harriman said that it was obvious that the Soviets have put their prestige on the line in Cuba . The Soviets will undoubtedly deliver aid, both military and economic, on any scale deemed necessary .
 Governor Harriman said that this aspect of the matter should be kept under continuous scrutiny with the realization that these Soviet efforts may well affect the present program one way or the other . The governor said that .
 Secretary pointed to certain signs of trouble in the Berlin area early next Fall . The Secretary of State said there could be trouble in Berlin next fall .
 He said that this should be watched carefully as again Soviet actions in Berlin might influence and be influenced by the program under discussion . He added that this could be watched closely .
 The Secretary replied that he did but that the only portion of it which gave him concern was the hit and run operations .
 He underlined the desirability of having these tied in some manner to retaliation against Castro's actions in Latin America .
 The Secretary asked for views concerning the prospects of Castro's reconciliation with the U.S. and his Latin American neighbors . The Secretary of State Hillary Clinton asked Castro's views .
 Castro's statements since his return from Moscow had appeared to be conciliatory, he said . He mentioned that Castro's . statements since . his . return from . Moscow appeared to have appeared conciliated, he added . Castro's. statements since return from Russia had appeared on the whole
 Mr McCone said he had read these statements of Castro's as meaning that Castro was even more firmly tied to the Soviet Union . Any reconciliation with the U.S. would have to be on Castro's and the Soviet Soviet Union's terms .
 Any rapprochement with Castro with Soviet troops in Cuba would not be acceptable to the U.S., he said . He said it would make Castro respectable in the eyes of Latin America without reducing Castro's ambitions and pressures .
 It was agreed however that we should continue to probe wherever possible to find out what Castro really has on his mind . Castro and Castro have been in touch with each other for years .
 The Swiss Ambassador to Cuba should be debriefed in detail, Donovan should be encouraged to return to Cuba if invited . Donovan should also be allowed to return if invited to Cuba, Donovan says .
 Meeting with Secretary Rusk on June 21, 1963 . Meeting with Gov. Rusk re Cuba in Cuba .
 Details of the meeting are summarized in Mr FitzGerald's memorandum,/ 1/ which is complete . Details of meeting were summarized in the memorandum .
 Secretary Rusk is not enthusiastically behind the CIA program, says CNN's John Sutter . Rusk says he has the impression that Rusk does not support the CIA .
 He seems to feel that there is some opportunity of a rapprochement with Castro . The FitzGerald memorandum referred to in the FitzGerrard memorandum . Castro is Castro's leader .
 I insisted on the meeting with Rusk because I sensed his reservations and, although he approved the program, it was obvious he did so reluctantly . I think the first evidence of ""noise"" will call for reconsideration .
 This is a subject that I have discussed with him on several occasions in the past . This is not the first time I have spoken to him about this topic .
 Mr Rusk offers no explanation for his attitude but it has prevailed for a long time . He offers no reason for his behaviour, which has prevailed in the past .
 I made it abundantly clear during the meeting, and privately to Secretary Rusk afterwards, that I felt a rapprochement out of the question in view of the relationship between Castro and Khrushchev resulting from Castro's trip . I made the comments in the meeting .
 I felt nothing could be done until some event occurred which would impair this relationship . Therefore I felt . nothing could have been done until . some event . would impair . this relationship, he said . Therefore nothing was done until an event occurred .
 Castro disavowed any ideas of exporting his revolution; that he broke his Moscow tie and expelled the Soviets from Cuba together with such equipment as they chose to take with them . He opened up his country for free access and travel by Americans .
 Ball had telephone conversations with McCone, Kaysen, McNamara, and Martin on June 25 on the question of the Cuban note and U-2 reconnaissance . Ball had conversations with the U.S. team on the issue of Cuban note .
 On June 22, GOC requested Swiss Embassy Habana notify USG urgently that GOC did not intend publicize note in order to avoid increasing existing tensions . GOC protested precisely because fact which motivated note increases tension .
 On three occasions from June 19 through June 24 MIG 21s have engaged in zoom climbs that have brought them in general proximity of U-2s . This note must be read against fact that on three times from June . Three times this month, the U.2s were in
 As previously decided, there will be no low-level flights before President's return . President's plane will not be flown into the country on Saturday .
 Cuban aircraft within 40 miles of U-2 and at altitude in excess 40,000 feet will be aborts . High-level flights will continue under existing procedures which call for aborts when Cuban aircraft are in contact with U.2 .
 "We believe this provides proper margin of safety to justify continued flights even under special conditions when President out of country. Taking into account need for current intelligence, we believe this . We believe this is . necessary for continued flights," says Air Canada .
 This telegram was apparently also sent as White House telegram CAP 63345 to Ireland . The telegram is apparently also also sent to Ireland by the White House .
 Since references to action against overflights surrounded by protests against exile activities even though purpose note clearly was to get across message on overflights . Since reference was made, there was unusual lapse time between June 10 and June 10 incident in which two Cuban coast guard personnel captured and another killed and another
 Only prior reference to June 10 incident which would normally have resulted swift stiff protest occurred June 19 in Castro speech at Cardenas when incident mentioned only in passing . Castro mentioned incident in passing in speech at cardenas .
 "General tone of note restrained and appears designed to be unprovocative" "Unprovocative," says author of the book .
 Tensions between Cubans and Soviet Union indicate GOC proceeding cautiously . Tension between Castro and Soviets indicates concern over overflights continuing .
 Fact that Cubans went unusual length stress intention give no publicity suggests they may be anxious avoid locking themselves or us in . Fact that Cuban President Obama gave no press conference suggests they are anxious to avoid locked themselves or anyone else .
 They may look upon note as at minimum probe our determination on overflights . They may probe our determined determination on overflights. They may also probe our decision to launch overflights. We hope they will be able to find out more .
 Differences in language between reference to low-level flights and reference to flights at any altitude indicate harder line on former than latter which can be accounted for by Soviet control SAM's .
 Note that reference to overflights at any altitude significantly refers to taking steps ""in order to be ready"" and refrains from flat commitment they will fire . Note that term refers to "taking steps" in order "to be ready"
 Department regards note as cautiously and unprovocatively worded and carefully handled warning against overflights . It affords Cubans flexibility with respect actual response they might make at least to high level flights .
 Desmond FitzGerald reviewed developments and actions of the past three weeks since approval of the integrated action program for Cuba . Desmond Fitz-Gerald reports on progress report on integrated action plan toward Cuba .
 Mr Harriman called attention to the relation of action in Cuba to his mission to Moscow . He hoped to be out of Moscow by the 25th or 26th of July .
 He appeared anxious to avoid giving the Russians an opportunity to raise with him our Cuban policy on the basis of actions which had taken place during the time he was there .
 It was agreed that the next meeting would be a discussion of the State/USIA paper containing a draft statement of what we hoped to see develop in a post-Castro Cuba post .
 There was a discussion as to how to handle press inquiries about developments in Cuba such as raids from outside Cuba and sabotage actions within Cuba .
 The paper compared the Batista and Castro regimes in terms of their ability to respond effectively to the needs and aspirations of various parts of the Cuban population .
 The paper also weighed the promises of the Castro regime before and upon its attainment of power against its performance .
 The CIA reviewed the paper, and its suggestions were incorporated into the final version . The CIA said the paper was reviewed by the CIA and the CIA .
 The paper gave Castro some credit for reforms in such areas as health care, housing, education, lowering rents, honest administration, and racial equality . But noted that other areas like civil liberties, economic diversification, new investment, and independence from foreign influences were worse than Batista's .
 It could be issued at any time; a possible occasion would be the Alliance for Progress Commemorative Ceremony in Washington on August 17 .
 INR paper examines group attitudes in Cuba toward Batista and Castro Regimes . It seeks to assess performance in certain key sectors during the Batista period as well as against Castro's promise and performance .
 Deputy Under Secretary of State Alexis Johnson introduced the three papers which were circulated to the group under his memorandum of July 13th . Any Presidential statement on Cuba would have an impact on the Harriman negotiations in Moscow .
 If it's decided to issue a statement, consideration will be given to making it on August 17th, which is the anniversary of the Alliance for Progress . If it is decided to make it, it will be made on the date of the anniversary .
 His view was that this prediction was too strong and gave a false impression that there would soon be a free Cuba . His view, shared by Mr Johnson and Mr Martin, was that the prediction was false .
 General Goodpaster noted that in both papers it appeared that we were saying that Castro was sincere at the time he made promises to the Cuban people prior to his coming to power . The Cuban president was elected to Cuba in 1961 .
 He doubted that we should indicate that we believed that his promises were genuine . He said we should not indicate we believed in his promises that he had genuine .
 Changes to reflect Castro's promises as being assertions without appearing to give him the benefit of saying that his promises were genuine . It was agreed that changes would be made to reflect that .
 Attorney General asked what effect the Harriman talks would have on the timing and content of the statement on Cuba . The Attorney General said the talks would not affect the timing .
 Mr Bundy replied by saying that Harriman had asked that there be no loud noises about Cuba during the time he was in Moscow . Bundy: Harrimans asked that no loud sounds be made during his visit to Moscow .
 The State Department has given Secretary Rusk a paper covering suggestions to negotiate with Castro . Mr Martin said that the State Department had given the State Dept. a paper .
 He said a number of proposals had been made which involve negotiation with Castro . He said the proposals would involve negotiations with Castro Castro .
 Two Congressmen had asked whether or not we should find out if Castro was ready to make a deal with us . Castro was a member of the Castro-led Cuban government in the 1960s .
 One Congressman volunteered to go to Havana to talk to Castro along these lines . One Congressman said he would go to Cuba to meet with Castro .
 Mr McGeorge Bundy suggested that the group should look at the negotiation paper . Mr Bundy said that the negotiations paper should be discussed .
 A decision on a proposed Presidential statement on Cuba would be deferred . In the meantime, a proposed statement would be delayed . A decision will be made on Cuba's Cuba policy .
 Bundy said that things would have to get rougher for Castro before he would consider any deal with us which we could accept . Bundy said he felt that things had to get much roughers for Castro to have a deal .
 Castro Castro is a former leader of Cuba . Castro was assassinated in 1961 . Castro's assassination was the first of a series of human rights violations in the United States . Castro has been accused of being a terrorist .
 State Department recommendations covering suggestions that Cuba shipping orders be made more restrictive will be coming to the White House tomorrow .
 No sharpening of the existing orders would reduce the amount of free world shipping to Cuba, Johnson says .
 He concluded that the only way to reduce free world shipping would be to make the orders apply to the flag of the ship rather than the ownership of the vessel .
 Unless we did this, which would result in our banning British ships such as the Queen Mary, the problem was not within our control . Unless we do this, it would be Britain's only solution to the problem, it will not be solved .
 If we acted against the Yugoslavs and the Poles we would hurt relations with them and gain little in terms of reducing trade with Cuba . If we act against the . Yugoslavs or Poles would hurt our relations with . them, we would . gain little . in terms . of reducing .
 In order to stop that ship, we would have to be ready to prevent forty-six Yugoslav ships coming to the U.S. monthly . The United States is ready to stop the Yugoslav ships from arriving monthly .
 General Goodpaster referred to the INR paper on the Cuban balance sheet . He asked whether the economic estimates contained in it meant that we believed the Cuban economy was as far down as it would go .
 Mr McCone acknowledged that he did not know whether the economic predictions in the balance sheet paper were consistent with those in the latest National Intelligence Estimate .
 Some believed that it would not get worse and would gradually improve in view of the massive Soviet aid now going to Cuba . Some believed it would continue to improve .
 He was not persuaded that the Russians could organize the Cuban economy in a way which would result in a very great improvement, he said .
 He was not prepared to say that the Cuban economy had reached the bottom, adding that there was a possibility that the situation would get worse than it now is .
 Deputy Under Secretary of Agriculture Sundquist prepared a contingent plan to reduce price of sugar . Sundquist said he had been asked to prepare for the contingent plan .
 Mr McCone thought that nature was doing pretty well in solving the sugar shortage . The sugar shortage has caused a shortage of sugar in recent years .
 He personally opposed increasing the domestic quota and favored borrowing from existing quotas . He opposed increasing domestic quotas .
 Mr Sundquist said that very shortly we would have an over-supply of sugar facing us . He said very shortly there would be an over supply of sugar .
 He opposed the plan he presented because it would cause more problems than it would be worth, i.e. approximately $22 million annually to Cuba . The plan would cost the U.S. government approximately $23 million annually .
 The group agreed that the plan should not be undertaken, but that we should adopt a policy of watchful waiting . The plan was agreed by the group of scientists .
 There was a discussion of the wide-spread press reports that the United States was backing Cuban exiles who are planning raids against Cuba from Central American States .
 Attorney General was headed ""Backstage with Bobby" and referred to his conversations with persons involved in planning the Cuban raids . One news article shown the Attorney General . was headed "Backstage"
 Attorney General suggested that we could float other rumors so that in the welter of press reports no one would know the true facts . In the discussion as to how to deal with the press reports, the attorney general suggested that the Attorney General .
 Mr McCone agreed that it would be possible to confuse the situation in this manner . The BBC asked him to clarify the situation .
 McGeorge Bundy mentioned to the President's interest in a declaration or doctrine which would put the Russians and the Latin Americans on notice that the U.S. would not accept a second Castro in this hemisphere .
 Bundy said some work on this declaration had been done, that the President had it very much in mind . Bundy suggested that the State Department continue its work on a draft declaration . Bundy: Some work had already been done on a declaration .
 Bundy noted that the President would not make a statement on Cuba on July 26 . Bundy said that the content of the statement would be reexamined after consideration of the Department of State paper on negotiations with Castro . Bundy also said that further consideration would be given to a possible statement on
 Second, Bundy noted that tightening existing restrictions on free world shipping would only be effective if restrictions were revised so that they affected the country whose flag the ship was flying rather than the country of ownership .
 Agriculture's contingent plan for increasing world production of sugar would not be acted upon because of the drop in sugar prices from previous actions . Bundy noted that Agriculture's plan for increased sugar production will not go ahead . Bundy also noted that the contingent plan would not go forward .
 Recent talks between ex-President Luis Somoza and Manuel Artime, prominent exile leader, may have resulted in modifications . The talks may have been held between the two sides .
 Somoza's thinking on the subject of Cuba is oriented toward commando raids, guerilla warfare and sabotage of mounting scope and intensity, culminating in a general uprising . Inconclusive secondhand reports would seem to suggest .
 The brothers Somoza, especially Anastacio who is director of the National Guard, have taken into consideration the prospect of exposure to a serious military threat if Nicaragua lends herself as a base for aggressive acts against Cuba .
 Reportedly Luis Somoza has stated that in the event that Cuba takes retaliatory action against Nicaragua, the United States would be forced to come to the aid of Nicaragua and thereby a confrontation would be achieved .
 It remains to be seen whether the Somoza concept can be sufficiently refined to accommodate and keep out of the limelight of public curiosity . The project is essentially designed to rebuild an indigenous resistance movement inside Cuba .
 There is some question whether the Somozas could adjust to the essential characteristics of such a program representing a long-term effort that can only prosper in conspiratorial tranquility .
 We consider that most if not all of the exile plans which have been discussed with Luis Somoza will probably come to naught in typical exile fashion . Most of the exiled plans which were discussed with the former president are likely to come to nothing .
 Artime to forego raids and externally based sabotage actions and concentrate on resistance within Cuba, says Cuban President Castro Castro Castro .
 Artime to shift to the use of the more limited facilities Costa Rica has to offer . While leaving elements of his operational mechanism in Nicaragua and not breaking with Luis Somoza, Artime will not break with the former president .
 Ex-Ambassador Whelan considered to enjoy the trust of the Somoza brothers, could be asked to help in tempering their zeal . If additional pressures be needed, it should be remembered that exAmbassador is considered to .
 The ""green light" to run anti-Castro raider and resistance operations obtained in Washington discussions with President Kennedy and the Attorney General . The ""Green light" was obtained by President Kennedy .
 Asked by President Kennedy and the Attorney General to take four Brigade leaders to Nicaragua . Asked by president Kennedy and attorney general to take 4 Brigade leaders .
 Appointed by President Kennedy to represent him in dealings with the five Central American presidents who were interested in overthrowing Castro . Served as a representative for President Kennedy .
 This memorandum was undated and unsigned, but it was attached to an August 20 memorandum from Califano to Gilpatric . The Deputy Secretary recommended that the Deputy Secretary send it to the President . The memo is undated, unsigned .
 On August 26 Bundy sent Gilpatric a memorandum indicating that the President had signed this memorandum on August 22 . Bundy sent the memo back to the White House on August 26 . Bundy said the President signed the memo on August 23 .
 The President asked Gilpatric to undertake the Top Secret and Sensitive distribution of this addition to rules of engagement . The President has been asked to make the announcement .
 Rules of Engagement were promulgated on 28 February 1963 . They prohibit United States forces from penetrating Cuban territory in pursuit of Cuban forces involved . U.S. forces were not allowed to penetrate Cuban territory .
 Overflight of Cuban territory while en route to the scene of attack is not included in the authorized military options for responding to an attack by Cuba on U.S. aircraft or ships operating outside Cuban territory .
 Incidents of Cuban attack on U.S. forces operating outside Cuban territory are considered most likely . Incidents would involve aircraft engaged in reconnaissance efforts, but also could involve United States shipping .
 The en route time for U.S. fighter support can be reduced by 10 to 30 minutes, with a comparable increase in time for action at the scene, by routing over Cuban territory .
 This quicker en route reaction time could be the difference between providing an effective defense for U.S. interests and arriving late for action .
 Draft statement of policy would authorize overflight of Cuban territory in certain instances, and under certain conditions, has been prepared and is attached . U.S. forces on the scene with least possible delay would be in the best national interests .
 The draft policy has been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff . It delineates the individuals in the military chain of command authorized to approve overflights of Cuban territory .
 Overflight of Cuba by fighter aircraft is authorized subject to the following: It must be established that the United States aircraft/ship is being attacked, or lives of United States personnel are endangered .
 Engagement will not be undertaken during the overflight except for self-defense against aircraft attack . Engagement won't be undertaken in overflight during overflight .
 From the time of arrival at the scene, current rules of engagement will pertain, with return to home or diversion airfield via air space over international waters, if practicable . If practicable, return to the airfield will be diverted to international waters .
 The most expeditious means possible will be used to inform highest national authorities that overflight of Cuba has been directed, the government has said .
 Decision to overfly Cuban territory may be delegated to but not below the level of Commander Naval Base, Key West and Commander Naval . Base, Guantanamo, Guantanamo . Decision may also be delegated .
 The White House approved the bill on August 28 and in Thompson's office on August 29 . Drafted by Thompson, the bill was approved by the White House and approved by Thompson . The bill is expected to be signed by the next president .
 The discussion was held at the White House and lasted from 11 to 11:53m. The discussion lasted between 11 and 11.53m .
 The President then referred to Cuba, and said that apparently the Soviets had withdrawn many of their troops . We did not know how many were there now .
 Dobrynin said that Khrushchev had recently stated that all combat units had been withdrawn from Cuba . All combat units were withdrawn from the country, he said .
 President asked what would happen over the next six months with the Soviets . The President asked the President what the President would do with the Soviet Union . President George W. Bush said it would be 'a matter of weeks'
 Dobrynin said that he had no instructions to say anything on this point, but his strong impression was that when the Soviet instructors there had finished their jobs, they would leave . Dobrynins said he had a strong impression that the instructors would leave when they finish their jobs .
 Khrushchev's intention to go to Cuba toward the end of the year, Dobrynin said . No exact date had been set for the visit . Dobrynins said it was intended to visit Cuba toward end of year .
 He inquired whether the President intended to go to the United Nations General Assembly and make a speech there . He asked whether he intended to speak at the U.N. General Assembly .
 Dobrynin said Khrushchev definitely did not plan to go to the opening of the U.N. General Assembly . Some thought that he might appear in connection with his trip to Cuba . Dobrynkinin said there had been some thought that . might appear .
 President said he was sure Mr Khrushchev was aware of the sensitivities involved in his visiting Cuba . The President said: "I'm sure Mr. Khrushchevitch was aware that it was a very sensitive issue"
 This was Mr Khrushchev's affair, but he wanted him to know of these sensitivities . This was his affair, he wanted to know, but it was not his affair .
 Swiss Ambassador in Habana negotiating on Cuban efforts to take over Embassy building . U.S. Embassy delayed replying to Cuban note of June 24 on overflights .
 In order to keep the record clear, we feel a reply should now be made . However, in order to make the point clear, it should be made. However, it is not the first time we have received a reply .
 The Cubans have thus far taken no action to follow up on threats made in that note on overflights . As you know, the Cubans are not following up on those threats .
 Secretary Rusk feels that our reply should be non-polemical and not of a nature that would encourage the Cubans to feel it necessary to respond in strong verbal terms and possibly match their actions to their words . Rusk: "We feel that our response should not be of
 The attached draft, upon which I would appreciate your comments, has therefore been drawn along these lines . The attached drafts of this article will be drawn along with the comments of others .
 In referring to the ""publicly expressed position"" of the USG in the attached note, we . particularly have in mind Secretary Rusk's statements of March 12 and April 13, 1963/2/ .
 Bundy sent Johnson a memorandum stating that he had shown the President the draft reply to the Cuban note . Bundy sent the President a memorandum on August 26 . Bundy also sent a memorandum showing Johnson a draft reply .
 Bundy suggested when passing the note to the Czechoslovaks, the U.S. should call to their attention the public statements by the President on the importance of surveillance . Bundy suggested that the United States should call their . attention to the President's public statements . on the . importance of
 Cuban gunners have orders to fire at any foreign war plane that makes low-altitude flights over Cuban territory . The Government of Cuba is stepping up its defense preparations in order to be ready to intercept and shoot down any war plane .
 The Government of the United States wishes again to call the attention of the Government of Cuba to the well-known, publicly expressed position of the U.S. on this question .
 The position of the Government of the United States on this matter has not changed, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 USUN recommends that, in view of the Department's press disclaimer last week,/2/ we wait for UN reaction before deciding whether or not to reply to the note . USUN: "We wait for the UN reaction"
 Cubans circulate note protesting U.S. blocking controls in UN . Bill Bowdler says it's standard procedure for Cubans to circulate this sort of note in the UN .
 State agrees with USUN's decision to wait for UN reaction before deciding whether or not to reply to the note . U.S. State agrees to wait until UN reaction is received before responding .
 The Cuban Permanent Representative sent the note to the United Nations on August 20, where it was received on August 23 . The note was sent to the U.N. on August 21 .
 A copy of the airgram was sent to the Department of State in airgram A-257, August 28 . A copy was sent in August 28.
 Ambassador Dobrynin said he had a personal message for the President, and he considered it so confidential, that he had not had it typed . He would read from his handwritten notes .
 The Soviet Government considered that things had recently taken a turn for the better in the international situation and in relations between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 With the signing of the Test Ban Treaty, there had developed a relaxation of tension . The prerequisite for the settlement of other questions had been established, he said .
 The Soviet Union took satisfaction from the willingness of the U.S. to look for the solution of other international problems, the Soviet Union says .
 If both countries were determined to accomplish this, it was important that nothing be done contrary to this intention . Nothing should be done against the intention of both countries, the British PM said .
 The Soviets wished to tell the President, frankly, what was of concern to them, he said . The Soviets wanted to tell him what they were concerned about .
 There were certain facts which did not fit in with the situation and these were the provocative actions against Cuba, which had increased in recent weeks . The Cuban government has been accused of 'provocative actions'
 Unknown planes had shelled industrial establishments and there had been landings of saboteurs on the Cuban coast, it has been claimed . Unknown planes shelled factories and industrial establishments .
 These actions had been intensified after the conclusion of the nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
 It had been stated that the U.S. had nothing to do with these actions, but no one could believe this . The United States had not been involved in these actions .
 When the U.S. took a position against the attacks on Soviet ships in Cuban waters, these attacks had stopped . When the United States took a stance, the attacks were stopped .
 This action was understood by the Soviet Union as a measure showing the good intentions of the United States. This action had been understood by . The Soviet Union believed it was a sign of good intentions by the U.S.
 If such attacks continued-and they could only be taken from the United States proper or from countries allied with the U.S. and with the knowledge and connivance of the United. States . This could only lead to a new crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Both sides had expressed their satisfaction over the elimination of the last crisis . The last crisis had been resolved after each side had undertaken certain commitments . Both sides were satisfied that the crisis was eliminated .
 They believed that for the future of our relations, it was important that . effective measures be taken to stop the piratic attacks against Cuba .
 The Soviet Union had undertaken certain commitments in respect to the protection of the independence of Cuba which were aimed exclusively at preventing Cuba from becoming a victim of aggression . Cuba would certainly fulfill its commitments if aggression were unleashed against Cuba, the Soviet Union said .
 Khrushchev: The effect of the activation lately of provocative actions against Cuba has been on Cuba's Cuba . He says the U.S. has been taking provocative steps against Cuba . The Soviet Union has been engaged in Cuba for decades .
 He said he realized that I had mentioned this in a private way, and he had so informed his Government . He said: "He realized that he had mentioned it in private way and he informed his government"
 President Obama has told him how deeply the Cuban problem is felt in the United States, he said .
 He said his Government understood that these remarks were prompted by good intentions .
 He said that when one side expressed concern about speeches that had not yet been made, how should one regard speeches that were being made, particularly in connection with the Test Ban Treaty . He said, however, that if one side was concerned about speeches not yet made, it should be made
 Khrushchev wished to convey to President that he did not have in mind to speak on subjects that do not arise from the situation, but this depended not only on the Soviet Union, but on the United States, he said .
 If provocations against Cuba continued, Mr Khrushchev would be put in such a position that he would be compelled to react . Mr Khruschev would react if provocations continued, he says .
 The Soviet Union believed that if there were a real desire to improve relations, there was a wide field for action . It was hoped that the Soviet Union would be able to help improve relations .
 If there is such a desire, it would have complete understanding and support on the part of the Soviet Union . If there were any desire, such a request would have been supported by the former Soviet Union, he says .
 In this case, it is only the Cubans, as the President himself had said, who should decide how Cubans are to lead their lives . The President himself has said that Cubans should lead their own lives .
 If the principle of noninterference were violated in Cuba, a situation would arise where both the Soviet Union and the United States would be driven to extreme poles . The U.S. would be driving itself to extreme levels in Cuba .
 It was the conviction of Mr Khrushchev and the Soviet Union that we should make every effort to avoid such a development in the interests of our countries and of peace .
 Ambassador Dobrynin asked if he meant that the Chairman had decided to speak at the General Assembly . He said he was not sure if he had chosen to speak to the UN .
 Dobrynin said he had no information other than the fact that before leaving Moscow to return to the United States he had asked the Chairman what his plans were . He said he did not know what the Chairman of the Russian Federation said .
 Dobrynin said he understood that U Thant had suggested to the Chairman that he visit the U.N. He said he understands that he should visit the United Nations .
 Ambassador Dobrynin asked if it were true, as indicated in the paper this morning, that the President would address the General Assembly . He said it was not true, but that he would be addressing the United States .
 I said this had not yet been decided and probably would not be before the end of the week . I said it was likely this week that the decision would be made before end of week .
 President may be interested in stopping free-lance exile raids which originate from outside the U.S. I find the case for stopping raids from the United States vaguely convincing because of the possibility of Russian reaction to our direct involvement is greater .
 I find less convincing the case for trying to stop raids which originate from outside the United States . Here are a few thoughts I jotted down, admittedly in a hurry .
 Arguments in favor of trying to stop Raids Originating from outside the United States . 1.2 million Americans are believed to be in the U.S. illegally .
 As they become more expert, they may start to hit something worthwhile . Pretty soon, as they become experts, they will be able to make a difference .
 There is a fair chance that these raids hurt Castro more than we think . Castro seems to be screaming louder than necessary if the raids don't hurt him at all . Castro is screaming louder if he is hurt more than necessary .
 At the least, intelligence reports indicate that the raids cause a considerable amount of activity in the Cuban armed forces-and this is undoubtedly not inexpensive . 3.1/2 lines of source text not declassified .
 I keep thinking of my own reaction (and I am a red-blooded American) if I were working in a sugar mill and the mill down the road were attacked . I'm not sure what my reaction would have been if I had been attacked in the same way .
 Absentence in Cuba is already a serious problem, but could be made more serious . Absentence is already an already serious problem in Cuba .
 If our opposition to the raids becomes known we run into a number of problems, we will be at risk of losing control of the country's resources . We will have to deal with the problem if our opposition becomes known .
 "We may get another cooling-down period in which it will be very tough to get cooperation in our isolation policy," he says . Second, reaction of activists in Latin America; among other things, he says, may get a cooling down period .
 If our opposition is known and we are successful in stopping the raids, substance will be lent to the Soviet/Cuban belief that we can control all the activities in the Caribbean . It will be a boost to the view that we are able to control all of the activities we want to
 The Soviets and the Cubans will certainly raise the noise level when some U.S. sponsored attacks really hurt them, says President Obama . "The history of such operations clearly indicates that we control them," he says .
 "I personally think we should be very careful about the way we handle this problem," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We should be careful," he says .
 As it stands now, we should seriously consider the desirability of taking the public position that we have already made our position clear with respect to attacks originating from the U.S., that we intend to enforce this policy . While we sometimes doubt the effectiveness of attacks originating in third countries
 The Russians seem to have no control over Communists in Laos, Vietnam, Venezuela, Bolivia, Bolivia and Colombia, etc. In this regard we might note that the Russians seem . to have . no control of Communists in . Laos, . Vietnam, . Venezuela, . Bolivia, Colombia,
 These people, like the anti-Castro forces, seem intent on overturning established governments . These people are determined to overturn established governments, like those of Cuba, Cuba .
 Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobrynin, USSR Llewellyn E Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, made the oral statement which is attached hereto .
 He asked if this meant that we knew where these flights were coming from . He asked whether it was possible to find out where the flights are coming from.
 Ambassador said he hoped that Mr Khrushchev's motives in raising this question were understood . Ambassador hoped that he hoped he could be understood .
 Chairman said it was to our mutual interest to reduce tension in the Caribbean and avoid a crisis over the Cuban problem . He said that the Chairman believed it . believed it was . to reduce tensions in the . Caribbean .
 I said I was sure that the President did understand, and thought that our position was clear from the statement which I had just made to him. I said that I thought that was clear, and that I had made the statement .
 President wished Mr Khrushchev to know that he shares his view that the signing of the Test Ban Treaty and the recent exchange of views with the Soviet Government is encouraging . President hopes it will be possible to proceed to the solution of other problems .
 The President is hopeful that the Test Ban Treaty will be approved by the United States Senate in the course of next week . The President hopes that the Senate will approve the treaty .
 With respect to the Cuban situation, the President also agrees that the emergence of a new crisis would be in the interest neither of the Soviet Union nor of the United States . The U.S. will faithfully carry out its commitments, he says .
 With respect to any air attacks on Cuba, the U.S. was not involved in any way in such attacks, it can be stated categorically . The United States has been making every effort to prevent them, he says .
 It is possible, but not likely, that a light private aircraft could take off from one of the large number of private fields in the southeastern portion of the United States. It is not likely that a private aircraft would take off in the area .
 'No such illegal flights have been detected by the means available to us. No such illegal flight has been detected,' says airline spokesman .
 President has directed that the measures already taken be reviewed to see what further steps could be taken . The President has also directed that further steps be taken in the country .
 The March 30, 1963 declaration by the Departments of State and Justice concerning hit and run attacks by Cuban exile groups against targets in Cuba . The law enforcement agencies are taking vigorous measures .
 Apparently it is assumed that the U.S. exercises control over the policies and actions of the other sovereign, independent states of this Hemisphere .
 This assumption betrays a fundamental misunderstanding of the relationship between the U.S. and the other American Republics . This assumption is based on a misunderstanding of America's relationship with the other nations .
 The history of inter-American relations makes abundantly clear that the American Governments will not tolerate interference with their foreign or domestic affairs . The U.S. government has never been involved in any of its foreign affairs .
 The states of this Hemisphere jealously defend the principle of juridical equality of states . They reject any insinuation that difference of size and power in any way modifies this .
 The United States could consult with any government in this Hemisphere from whose territory we have information indicating that flights were originating against Cuba . Such consultation would be complicated by the increasing sense of outrage among the governments of this Hemisphere about Cuba's deliberate stimulation and support of subversive activities throughout the Hemisphere .
 This is not simply a matter of speeches or words by Castro, as has sometimes been indicated . Castro is not alone, as it has sometimes indicated, but this is not the case, it is the case .
 Cuban-trained Peruvians captured on May 14 and 15, 1963, at Puerto Maldonado as they attempted clandestinely to enter Peru from Bolivia . b) The Cuban Government is furnishing funds to revolutionary groups seeking the overthrow of governments by force and violence .
 The Cuban leaders continue to exhort revolutionaries in Latin American countries to resort to sabotage, terrorism and guerrilla action . They were carrying over $30,000 which they confessed had been given them by Chinese and Cuban sources . They confessed to having been given the money by Cuban and Chinese sources .
 Premier Castro called on activists in Venezuela and other countries to ""open the breach" and begin fighting . Castro returned to this theme in his July twenty-sixth address .
 Major Ernesto Guevara, in an article published in the September issue of Cuba Socialista, strongly advocates guerrilla warfare as the surest road to power in Latin America . The article was published by Cuba Socialist, Cuba Socialists .
 Information available to us shows a direct connection between terroristic activities in Venezuela and the Castro regime . The Castro regime is behind the rise of terroristic activity in Venezuela, the U.N. says .
 The Cuban Government recently embarked on a most risky venture of direct violation of the territory and territorial waters of another country in this Hemisphere using units of its armed forces . The Cuban government is guilty of such aggression against other American Republics by promoting these and other activities .
 Cuban helicopter and two patrol boats forcibly removed from Cay Anguila, one of the islands of the Bahamas group, on August 14, 1963 . The Soviet Union had furnished the Cuban helicopter, two patrol ships and two boats . The Cuban military removed the island from the island .
 This incident led to a vigorous protest by the British Government on August 21, 1963, requesting an apology and return of the persons taken prisoners . The incident was the first time the British government had taken prisoners.
 Castro regime is to blame for the difficulties in the Caribbean area, says CNN's John Sutter . Castro regime's behavior to blame, he says, not the United States, but the behavior of the Castro regime .
 In August 1963, he joined the United States Mission to the United Nations as an adviser . He joined the U.S. Mission to U.N. in August 1963 .
 This memorandum proposes a course of action which, if successful, could remove the Cuban issue from the 1964 campaign . If successful, it would remove the issue of Cuba from the campaign .
 It does not propose offering Castro a ""deal""~which could be more dangerous politically than doing nothing . The Castro government does not offer a deal with the Castro government .
 It does propose a discreet inquiry into the possibility of neutralizing Cuba on our terms, it says . It does not propose to neutralize Cuba on its terms .
 This memorandum is also based on the assumption that our present policy of isolating Cuba economically and politically will not overthrow the Castro regime in time to keep Cuba out of the 1964 campaign .
 So long as he receives Soviet aid and keeps his power base among the peasantry, his position seems secure . So long . He received Soviet aid from the Soviet Union .
 It aggravates Castro's antiAmericanism and his desire to cause us trouble and embarrassment . Castro's "antiAmericanism" aggravates his anti-U.S. anti-Americanism .
 In the eyes of a world largely made up of small countries, it freezes us in the unattractive posture of a big country trying to bully a small country, it is said . In the world, this is not an attractive posture, it's an unattractive position .
 There is reason to believe that Castro is unhappy about his present dependence on the Soviet bloc . He would like to establish some official contact with the United States and go to some length to obtain normalization of relations with us .
 We have something to gain and nothing to lose by finding out whether Castro does want to talk . Castro has not yet responded to calls for a visit to Cuba . Castro is expected to make concessions if he wants to talk with the West .
 The most propitious time and place to find out would be at the United Nations during the present General Assembly .
 As a former journalist who spent considerable time with Castro in 1959, 1 could arrange a casual meeting with the Cuban Delegate, Dr. Dr. Castro .
 Castro stressed his desire to be friends with the U.S. in his last talk, at which he said he would be curious to know how he feels today . Castro: "As a journalist, I would be interested to know today how he felt today"
 If Castro is ready to talk, this should provide sufficient reason for Lechuga to come back to him with an invitation, he says . Castro's comments should be enough to invite Lechugas back, he writes .
 It would be understood that I would be going as an individual but would of course report to the President before and after the visit . The President would be expected to be in the UK for a visit .
 Castro did not like my final article in 1959, but we got along well . Castro remembers me as someone he could talk to frankly, says historian .
 I have had considerable experience in the past seventeen years talking with Communist and neutralist leaders on both sides of the iron curtain . I have also had experience in talking with Communists and neutralists .
 "I have enough rank to satisfy Castro that this would be a serious conversation," Castro says . Castro: "This would be the first time I've had a serious discussion with him"
 At the same time, I am not so well-known that my departure, arrival or return would be noticed . "I am not as well known as I am so well known that I would not be noticed," he says .
 "I would simply sound him out as to whether he would be willing to take the three steps listed in paragraph three, and on what terms," he says .
 I would report to the President and the decision to pursue negotiations or not could then be taken. I would then be able to make a decision on whether to pursue talks .
 For their part, the Cubans would not want it known they had solicited a meeting with the U.S. State Department officials .
 On our side, it is of course important that the fewest possible people know of it, says the author of the book .
 "We are always ready to listen to an offer that could advance U.S. interests," Obama says . "But in any case we are on firm ground so long as the invitation comes from the Cubans," he says .
 "For the moment, all I would like is the authority to make contact with Lechuga," says the Spanish president . "I would like to be able to talk to Lechug, but that's not possible for the moment," he says .
 William Attwood/1/ /1/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . William Attwattwood .
 Mr Desmond FitzGerald of CIA reviewed the situation in Cuba, emphasizing that a swing of the pendulum was taking place . Cuba is a place for Cuba to be seen as a place to be, he said .
 The Cuban crisis may be on the way to being solved, but don't overreact . Castro's troubles may be overblown, but it's not a sign that the crisis will be solved .
 The Defense Department agreed to review the feasibility of monitoring planes flying out of Cuba suspected of carrying arms to other Latin American countries . The U.S. government has agreed to monitor planes flying from Cuba .
 A proposed Presidential statement on Cuba, originally suggested by USIA but not yet been made, will be looked at again with a view to recommending to the President that he comment on the future Cuba in a forthcoming speech . A proposed statement has not been made yet .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended sabotage actions . General Goodpaster asked whether the Agency had considered the two covert actions which the Joint Chiefs had suggested, i.e. dropping U.S. arms into Cuba .
 Mr FitzGerald replied that CIA had never gotten the Joint Chiefs' suggestions . CIA never gets Joint Chiefs suggestions, he said .
 Attorney General expressed some concern about whether suggested Cuban actions were being followed up . Attorney General expresses concern over whether suggested actions are being followed-up .
 It was agreed that this exercise had been completed and that there was nothing further to be done on this item . Sugar price program--
 Economic warfare group--Gerald urged establishment of a proposed economic warfare group which would coordinate all economic warfare measures taken against Cuba .
 A draft policy paper on Brazil was circulated to the group but not discussed . Brazil is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Latin American Policy Committee is scheduled to deal with the paper on Thursday . The Latin American policy committee will meet on Thursday to discuss it .
 This memorandum, drafted by Judd and approved in the White House, was part 5 of 6 separate memoranda of conversation . Judd: This memorandum was part of a larger group of memoranda approved in October .
 British ships were in the lead followed by Greek ships . The President showed Lord Home and the British Ambassador the latest figures on free world shipping .
 The number of Greek ships could be expected to decline drastically as a result of the Greek Decree recently issued . Greek ships are expected to be fewer than ever .
 "He was constantly being asked why he didn't speak to our Allies, and why they did not cooperate with us," he said . He was constantly asking why he hadn't spoken to them .
 Lord Home asked Lord Home if the British Government could not do something about the situation . Lord Home said Lord Home would not be able to do anything about the issue .
 A number of ships were registered in Hong Kong and it was almost impossible to do anything with them . Also, a number of the ships were . registered in . Hong Kong . It is almost impossible for anyone to do with the ships .
 Charter rates on ships on the Cuban trade had gone up, making the trade more attractive . As a result of U.S. measures, charter rates on Cuban ships have gone up .
 The President said that there must be some way that the British could get at this problem . Lord Home again said that he would see what could be done .
 Lord Home mentioned that the UK was negotiating with Cuba for the sale of some buses . In passing, Lord Home said that the government is negotiating with the Cuban government .
 Appraisal of Bloc and FreeWorld Shipping to Cuba, Soviet Forces Remaining in Cuba, and the State of Cuban Economy as Compared to a Year ago . 1.1.2.1 .
 Three appraisals were prepared in response to an oral request from the Military Aide to the President . The oral request was made on October 4 .
 The three attached appraisals were a review of shipping to Cuba over the past year, an estimate of Soviet personnel remaining in Cuba, and an estimated of economic conditions in Cuba as compared to last year .
 Total shipping averaged 48. dry cargo and 19. tanker arrivals per month during the past year . During the first nine months of 1962, total shipping averaged 90.dry cargo and 25 tanker arrivals during the first 9 months .
 No significant decline in Soviet Bloc shipping is noted, attributable to the fact that in the preceding period Bloc ships were carrying large quantities of military materiel . During this year they have carried primarily foodstuff and industrial equipment in order to make up for the significant drop in Free-World
 Total Soviet military strength in Cuba is now estimated to be between 5,000 and 8,000-representing a reduction to date of at least two-thirds of the number originally estimated to have been on the island during the crisis .
 Most of those remaining are advisors and technicians engaged in training Cuban personnel in the operation of Soviet weapons . They supervise the use and maintenance of Soviet equipment turned over to the Cubans .
 The appraisal of the economic situation cites a continuing decline in Cuban production-on the order of 5 to 7 per cent, with 20 per cent decline in sugar harvest and with living conditions continuing to deteriorate .
 So far, however, the continued economic decline has not adversely affected the Cuban military establishment . So far it has not affected the military establishment, though .
 Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by the White House on October 21 and by S on October 16 . White House approved the draft of the bill .
 This memorandum was one of eleven covering a conversation that lasted until 6:10m . This memorandum is one of 11 covering the conversation that last until 6.10m.
 U.S.-Soviet relations in general as well as the other memoranda of this conversation, see volume V, volume V . USSR Foreign Minister Gromyko recalled Khrushchev's remark about Soviet personnel in Cuba .
 President was informed about what had been done in Cuba so far, there was no need to repeat that now . President was also informed about this matter, he said .
 The Soviet Government was acting in Cuba on the basis of the understanding the President and Mr Khrushchev had reached in their correspondence . The Soviet government was acting .
 President asked how many Soviet military specialists would remain in Cuba in, say, six months . President asked if Soviet military experts would remain with Cuba in six months.
 The USSR had in Cuba only military specialists with a limited mission, he said . He preferred not to speak in terms of dates but he wished to ask the President to understand that .
 The President said it would be helpful if Khrushchev were to consider making a statement to that effect .
 He suggested that the President take into account the difficulty of mentioning specific dates . However, he suggested that he take account of the difficulties of mentioning dates .
 Khrushchev did not mention any dates, this did not mean that specialists would stay forever . So if Mr Khrushvic did not say dates, it did mean specialists would remain forever .
 The President said this might be so, but perhaps Mr Khrushchev could make such a statement to one of the visiting newsmen in terms of an accomplished fact . The President . said this may be so . Perhaps Mr Khushchev could . make such . a statement .
 Mr Gromyko said he did not think there was any need to remind the President that Cuba was being subjected to constant pressure and provocation on the part of some forces .
 The President probably knew better than he, Gromyko, who those forces were . The forces were behind the scenes in the White House .
 President said we believed we had stopped harassment by planes and had given warning . But perhaps if someone close enough he could still fly in and drop a bomb, he said .
 In any event, he did not see any benefit to the United States from harassment . "I don't think it would be good for the U.S.," he said .
 Mr Gromyko commented that those air raids must have been originating somewhere . Mr Gromko said that the raids must be originating somewhere.
 If they originated outside the US, they could be stopped too, because the USSR had a high opinion of U.S. influence in Latin America . If they started out of the United States, they would be stopped .
 The President said we were not sure that the planes came from Latin America . President said it was not known if the planes were Latin American .
 Of two recent flights over Cuba, one has perhaps come from Central America, and some plane may have come even from Florida .
 "We tried to stop the planes, but there were many fields in Florida, light planes were used and it was very difficult to keep them under control," the pilot says .
 The Secretary recalled his remarks to Mr Gromyko about activities in the other direction, noting this made it more difficult for us to deal with this situation .
 Mr Gromyko asserted that the USSR had no information about such activities . He said the USSR did not have any information about the activities .
 If the U.S. regarded speeches by Castro or other Cuban leaders as subversive, then Soviet speeches about capitalism and United States speeches about communism were also subversive . If the United States regarded Castro's speeches as subverted, it would have been the same .
 The USSR had no information about any subversive activities from Cuba . In any event, the USSR had . no . information about . any subversive activity from Cuba.
 The Secretary asked whether Mr Gromyko thought Cuba had said its last word regarding the signing of the Test Ban Treaty . The Secretary of State said Cuba had signed the treaty .
 Mr Gromyko said the U.S. was familiar with the Cuban position on this matter .
 The USSR believed that this question was under consideration by Cuba, the Soviet Union believed . As he had told the Secretary earlier, the USSR believed it would consider it .
 The President commented that the Cubans might not like our policy; we did not like Cuban policy, but we wanted Cubans to sign . The President said that the Cuban government might not be happy with our policy .
 Mr Gromyko said the USSR had no information which would confirm such a supposition .
 The USSR gave credence to the Cuban statement that it was the U.S. policy which was the reason for their present stand . The USSR said it was not the United States policy .
 Lechuga expressed interest and suggested that someone from our side should go down to Cuba to talk with Castro . He suggested that a Cuban official should go to Cuba and meet Castro . The Cuban president has expressed interest in the visit .
 Attwood concludes that the ball is in Cuban hands and the door is ajar . Attwood concluded that the Cuban government is in control of the situation in Cuba .
 White House has been told Castro would like to have a talk designed to bring about some kind of ""arrangement"" with the United States . William Attwood, currently on the staff of Mr Stevenson at the United Nations, might be a likely candidate for this initial talk .
 Attwood has a fairly friendly relationship with Castro based on previous acquaintance . Attwood also has a good relationship with the Castro family .
 It was thought inadvisable to allow Mr Attwood to get in touch with Castro while on UN staff .
 The suggestion was made that he might be removed from his official UN status and then go to Cuba for the ostensible purpose of writing an article for Look magazine .
 Castro might want a detente with the United States. In this way it might be learned how badly he might want it . Castro might be interested in detente, Castro says .
 It was suggested by Mr Helms that it might be profitable to ""war game"" this problem and look at it from all possible angles before making any contacts .
 Rene Vallejo Ortiz, Castro's aide and personal physician, might be flown to Mexico with Castro's proposals . Ortiz could discuss them with the U.S. Ambassador in Mexico City . Ortiz is Castro's personal physician . Ortiz has been a longtime ally of the Cuban leader .
 The Attorney General emphasized that as a prelude to all this the United States must require some fundamental steps such as the end of subversion in Latin America and removing Soviet troops in Cuba before any serious discussion can take place .
 Mr McCone stated that it might be possible to use again Mr James Donovan who is known to have excellent relationships with Dr. James Donovan . Dr. Donovan is currently being treated at a hospital in New York .
 Vallejo might be flown to the UN for such talks or better still Donovan could go to Cuba . Donovan could also go to the United States for talks with the Cuban government .
 It was decided by the Special Group members not to try to reach a firm decision at this time but to study the problem for several days and attack it again . The Special Group decided not to decide whether to attack the problem again .
 Paul Eckel/1/ /1/Printed from a copy that indicates Eckel signed the original . Eckel died at the age of 92 .
 U.S. Ambassador to Havana met Seydou Diallo, the Guinea Ambassador to Cuba . Diallo is a former U.N. diplomat who served in Guinea .
 Castro was isolated from contact with neutralist diplomats by his ""Communist entourage" because it was known he was unhappy with Cuba's satellite status and looking for a way out . He went out of his way to tell me that Castro was isolate from contact by his .Communist .
 Diallo had finally been able to see Castro alone once and was convinced he was personally receptive to changing course and getting Cuba on the road to non-alignment . Diallo: "He, Diallo, had finally seen Castro alone ... once and had convinced him he was receptive to
 Diallo added that exile raids were an obstacle since they strengthened the hand of the hard-liners both with Castro and the public . Diallo said exile raids are an obstacle to the Cuban government .
 In the first week of September, I also read ABC correspondent, Lisa Howard's article, ""Castro's Overture"",/l/ based on her conversation with Castro last April .
 Castro's expressed desire for reaching an accommodation with the U.S. This article stressed Castro's willingness to make substantial concessions to this end . Castro has expressed his desire to reach an accommodation .
 Ambassador Diallo said there was a rift between Castro and the Guevara-HartAlveida group on the question of Cuba's future course . On September 12, 1 talked with Miss Howard, whom I have known for some years, about the rift . She echoed Ambassador Di
 On September 12, 1 discussed this with Under Secretary Harriman in Washington, DC .
 On September 18, 1 wrote a memorandum based on these talks and on corroborating information I had heard in Conakry, Guinea .
 Ambassador Stevenson indicated he might discuss the matter with the President . Ambassador Stevenson felt the matter was worth exploring quietly .
 He suggested I also discuss it with the Attorney-General because of the political implications of the Cuban issue, he said .
 On September 20, 1 made an appointment with the Attorney-General in Washington, D.C. 1 made it to Washington to meet with the attorney-General .
 Dr. Stevenson obtained the President's approval for me to make discreet contact with Dr. Stevenson . Meanwhile, Stevenson obtained approval for him to make contact with the President .
 She has been on good terms with Lechuga since her visit with Castro . She invited him for a drink to met some friends who had also been to Cuba .
 In the course of our conversation, 1 mentioned having read Miss Howard's article . 1 said he had spoken with Castro in 1959 . 1 spoke to Castro about his talks with Castro .
 Lechuga hinted that Castro was indeed in a mood to talk, especially with someone he had met before . Castro was in the mood to meet someone he met before, Lechug said . Castro is believed to be in the midst of a political crisis .
 He thought there was a good chance that I might be invited to Cuba if I wished to resume our 1959 talk . He said he hoped to resume his 1959 talk with the Cuban government .
 I told him that in my present position, I would need official authorization to make such a trip, and did not know if it would be forthcoming . He said he would need to travel to the U.S. to get official authorization .
 I said an exchange of views might well be useful and that I would find out and let him know . However, I said he might well have been useful . I said I would be happy to find out what he said .
 On September 24, 1 saw the Attorney-General in Washington, gave him my September 18 memo, and reported his meeting with Lechuga . 1 saw him in Washington and gave him his memo .
 He said he would pass the memo on to Mr McGeorge Bundy; meanwhile, he thought that it would be difficult for me to visit Cuba without it being known and risking the accusation that we were trying to make a deal with Castro .
 He wondered if it might be possible to meet Castro-if that's what he wanted— in another country, such as Mexico, or at the U.N. or the United Nations . He wonders if it's possible to . meet Castro in Mexico, such a . country, or
 He agreed it would be useful to maintain contact with Lechuga . Meanwhile, he agreed to keep contact with the Japanese government .
 On September 27, 1 ran into Lechuga at the United Nations, where he was doing a television interview in the lobby with Miss Howard .
 I told him that accepting an invitation to go to Cuba would be difficult under present circumstances, especially in view of my official status, he said . He said he felt it was difficult to accept invitation to Cuba under current circumstances .
 If Castro or a personal emissary had something to tell us, we were prepared to meet him and listen wherever else would be conven-ient . I added, however, that if Castro or an official had something important to say, we would meet him .
 Stevenson suggested that if Castro wanted peace with his neighbors, he need only do three things-stop being a Soviet stooge, stop trying to subvert other nations, and start carrying out the promises of his revolution regarding constitutional rights .
 Doxiades was a noted Greek architect and town-planner . He had just returned from an architects' congress in Havana, Cuba, where he had talked alone to Castro and Guevara .
 Castro was convinced Castro would welcome normalization of relations with the U.S. if he could do so without losing too much face . He sought me out, as a government official, to say he was convinced he would welcome a normalization .
 He also said that Guevara and the other communists were opposed to any deal, and regarded Castro as dangerously unreliable . He said they would get rid of Castro if they thought they could carry on without him .
 On October 20, Miss Howard asked me if she might call Major Rene Vallejo, the Cuban surgeon who is also Castro's current right-hand man and confidant . Major Valleho is a Cuban surgeon and Castro's close friend and confidante .
 She said Vallejo helped her see Castro and made it plain to her he opposed the Guevara group . She said she was told he opposed Castro's opposition to the group .
 The pair became friends and have talked on the phone several times since the interview . They became friends after the interview and have since become friends .
 Miss Howard thought any message from Lechuga would not get past the foreign office . She wanted to make certain, through Vallejo, that Castro knew there was a U.S. official available if he wanted to talk .
 I told her to go ahead, so long as she referred to my talk with Lechuga and made it quite plain we were not soliciting a meeting . We were only expressing our willingness to listen to anything they had to say, she said .
 On October 21, Gordon Chase called me from the White House in connection with my September 18 memo . "Gordon Chase" called me on October 21 to discuss the memo, which was published in September .
 She was out of town; he left word with the maid that he would call again . He left word for her that he'd call again, but she was out .
 On October 28, 1 ran into Lechuga in the United Nations Delegates Lounge .
 He hoped he hoped he and I might have informal chats from time to time . But he said he hoped they might have some informal chats . He said: "I'm not sure if we'll ever meet again."
 Castro assured her Castro still felt as he did in April about improving relations with us . He assured her, in response to her question, that Castro still feels as he does in April . Castro said in April he still felt in April that he wanted to improve relations with the U.S
 Vallejo said it was impossible for Castro to leave the country at the present time . As to his going to the U.N. or elsewhere for such a talk, he would not be able to go there .
 He said he would relay her message to Castro, and would call her back soon . Castro said he will relay the message to the Castro .
 Castro would very much like to talk to the U.S. official anytime, Castro said . Castro said he appreciated the importance of discretion to all concerned . Castro would like to speak to the United States .
 Castro would be willing to send a plane to Mexico to pick up the official and fly him to a private airport near Veradero where Castro would talk to him alone . Castro would then send him to the private airport where he could talk to the official alone .
 Havana airport would be no risk of identification at Havana airport . In this way, the government would not be able to identify the passengers . Havana airport is Havana's largest airport .
 Miss Howard said she doubted if a U.S. official could come to Cuba but perhaps he, Vallejo, could come and see the official at the United Nations or in Mexico, she said .
 Castro wanted to do the talking himself but did not completely rule out this situation if there was no other way of engaging a dialogue . Vallejo replied that Castro wanted the talks himself .
 It was agreed Miss Howard would relay the invitation to me and call Vallejo back as soon as possible with our reply . Miss Howard was agreed to relay the invite to me .
 Miss Howard got the impression that Lechuga's previous message to Havana had not reached Vallejo or Castro . Miss Howard said she was concerned that the message had not been heard . She said the message was likely to have not been received by the Cuban government .
 On November 1, Miss Howard reported the Vallejo call to me and I repeated it to Chase on November 4 . On November 4, Chase reported the call to Miss Howard .
 On November 5, 1 met with Bundy and Chase at the White House and informed them of the foregoing . Bundy and . Chase . Bundy . Chase. Bundy .
 Meeting on Policy Relating to Cuba— 10:30m.— 12 Nov 63 in attendance . The President, Secty. President and Secretary of State Secretary to Cuba .
 The internal security forces and apparatus are effective and show evidence of increasing efficiency, the government says . The security forces are effective, the Government says .
 The economy is bad and is deteriorating, causing increasing hardships to the civilian population . The country's economy is currently in a state of crisis .
 No organized Soviet units appear in Cuba although they apparently provide principal manning for the SAMs . The SAMs are thought to be the main source of Cuba's SAM weapons .
 There are recent evidences of considerable rotation with between 1,000 and 2,000 new arrivals, but in balance there is a decrease . There is also a decrease in the number of new arrivals in the country .
 Training of Cubans continues on all Soviet equipment including the SAMs . Training of Cuban citizens continues on Soviet equipment .
 It is not clear whether the SAMs will be turned over to full Cuban control . However, it is clear the Cubans will supply the majority of the operating personnel .
 Only equipment withdrawn has been the advanced C-band radar for SAMs and communication equipment . The only equipment withdrawn is the advanced radar for the SAMs .
 There have been some recent new arrivals of military equipment, particularly between 25 and 50 tanks . There have also been a number of recent arrivals of equipment .
 McCone then stated that the program which had been followed for the last several months, having been approved about the first of June, was integrated and interdependent one part on the other and therefore should be considered a comprehensive program .
 FitzGerald then made a presentation on the six-point integrated program against Cuba . The program included covert collection of intelligence, propaganda actions to stimulate low-level sabotage and passive resistance .
 FitzGerald's presentation is described in detail in a memorandum for the record of this meeting by Bruce B Cheever, November 14 . Fitzgerald presented a presentation in detail .
 McCone stated that no one event will particularly affect the economy . McCone said sabotage will not be particularly affected by the events in the country .
 A continuous program will have its effects on the economy, it will encourage internal sabotage by dissident people within Cuba, it says . However, it is likely to have its negative effects on Cuba's economy, the Cuban government says .
 The President raised the question of the sabotage program; whether it was worthwhile and whether it would accomplish our purpose . The President then raised the . question of whether the . sabotage program was worthwhile or not .
 Secretary Rusk then spoke at considerable length, the thrust of his remarks being opposed to sabotage . Rusk: "Secretary Rusk's remarks were not intended to sabotage"
 He stated we should concentrate on obtaining information as to what Castro is doing with respect to other countries . Castro is sending arms to Latin American countries, he said .
 Rusk said we must replace Castro; we must accomplish a reduction in Soviet troops, however sabotage might result in an increase in troops . Rusk also said that we must reduce the number of Soviet troops in Cuba .
 Rusk had no problem with infiltration of black teams, he says . Internal sabotage gave him no problem and the more of this, the better, he adds .
 He opposed the hit-and-run sabotage tactics as being unproductive . However, he said he indicated a connection between our sabotage activities and the autobahn problem . He also indicated that sabotage activities could be linked to the problem .
 McCone observed that infiltration was difficult, but internal sabotage was extremely difficult to stimulate . He observed that external hit-and-run sabotage had the effect of automatically stimulating internal sabotage .
 McNamara could see no connection between the Cuban operations and the Berlin autobahn incidents . McNamara: "No connection" was made between the two incidents .
 He saw many advantages to going ahead which he advocated but ordered a careful watch . He said many advantages were possible, but he saw many more to come .
 The President asked questions concerning the immediate operations, and the next one on the schedule was approved . The next one is approved .
 McCone said that once Artime was in business, we might expect some events to take place which were not exactly to our liking . McCone emphasized that to a very considerable extent these are uncontrollable .
 A meeting was held this morning with higher authority on the subject of Cuban operations . A meeting of higher authority was held in Cuba .
 Mr Rusk, Mr McNamara, Mr . McNamara and Mr . Bundy, Mr McCone, Mr. Johnson, Mr Gilpatric, Mr Vance, General Taylor, General . Taylor, Mr Helms, Mr FitzGerald, and Mr. Cheever, among others
 He has developed a system of informers which is becoming increasingly effective . He says he has developed an 'informational system' which is 'increasingly effective'
 The economic situation is deteriorating largely because of the enforcement of economic sanctions, and Hurricane ""Flora"" although its damage was not as great as originally thought . The economic crisis is largely due to enforcement of sanctions .
 The Soviets appear to be continuing the gradual withdrawal of personnel from Cuba . Recently 1,000-2,000 troops have come in .
 There now seems to be a kind of 'Soviet MAAG' program . It is concerned mainly with training Cubans in all types of military activity .
 There has been some removal of some of the more sophisticated types of electronic equipment . There has also been some removed from the most sophisticated type of equipment .
 Covert Collection, Propaganda, Economic Denial, Disaffections in the Military, Sabotage and Harassment, and Support of Autonomous Anti-Castro Groups . Covert collection, Propagaganda, economic Denial and Economic Denials .
 There is still, understandably, a fairly heavy concentration of agents in the Havana area . There is encouraging improvement in the geographical spread of these agents .
 A question has been raised as to how many agents in all of these activities have been lost . A question was raised about the number of agents lost in these activities .
 Mr FitzGerald said that in the neighborhood of 25 had been either captured or killed in the past year . He said that 25 people had been killed or captured in that year .
 The reasons for these casualty figures are the increasing effectiveness of Castro's internal security forces and discovery brought about when agents try to obtain food . The increase in casualties is due to the increase in the number of deaths .
 No matter how good documentation, outsider in a community is viewed with suspicion . Outsiders in communities are often seen with suspicion, even if they're in a minority .
 CIA's activities are the mailing of leaflets and radio broadcasts . CIA is involved in the mailing and broadcasting of leaflets . CIA has been involved in radio broadcasts and leaflets mailing .
 The programs appeal to people in a wide variety of jobs and professions . The programs are available for free in the summer .
 There is some jamming but it is spasmodic and generally confined to Havana . Havana has a reputation for jamming, but it's not always jamming . Havana is known to be a great city of music .
 U.S. economic denial program is contributing to Cuba's declining economy, FitzGerald says . Cuba's economy is declining, he says .
 Mentioned that the economic denial program would be more effective if the Canadians were willing to cooperate . Mention was made that the Canadian government is willing to work with the United States .
 Up to now they have not gone along with U.S. efforts, and they are supplying many items essential to Cuban economy . The United States has not been willing to go along with United States efforts to get Cuba to comply .
 The UK and Spain are continuing to deal in certain types of goods required by the Cubans . The Cubans are still not allowed to leave the country .
 Commodities going into Cuba in 1962 from the free world reached $101 million . The Cuban government spent $100 million on Cuban imports in 1962 .
 There are indications that some leaders would like to break with the regime but lack courage and opportunity . While the military is loyal to Castro as has been noted there has been no indication that this will happen .
 Out of this figure there are some 45 which look interesting from CIA's operational viewpoint . The CIA says the list of 45 looks interesting from an operational perspective .
 Mr FitzGerald reported that CIA is in touch with three persons who are in the military or who have highly placed contacts in such circles . CIA is also said to have contacts with three people in military .
 The aim is to use these three individuals to establish contact with military personnel inside Cuba . The aim of the mission is to contact the military personnel in Cuba .
 The principal aim is to get military leaders who have become disenchenchanted with the Castro regime to dare to talk and plot Castro's downfall with each other . Castro's regime has been in power for decades .
 FitzGerald mentioned four successful sabotage operations against a power plant, oil storage facilities, a sawmill, and an underwater demolition operation against a floating crane in one of Cuba's harbors .
 It is believed that the publication of these successful sabotage activities in the Cuban press has tended to raise appreciably the morale of the people . It is thought that these . publication of . these successful . sabotage activities . in the . Cuban press is believed to have raised appreciably . the morale
 Such sabotage continues to keep pressure on Castro regime and adds to the growing economic problems facing the country . Also, such sabotage keeps pressure on the Castro regime, adds to growing economic .
 Mr FitzGerald replied that they would operate from outside U.S. territory .
 He mentioned two bases of the Artime group, one in Costa Rica and the other in Nicaragua .
 It is hoped that the autonomous group under Manolo Ray would soon get itself established in a working base, possibly Costa Rica . Also hoped that it would soon establish an autonomous base in the country .
 Mr FitzGerald said that much could be accomplished by these autonomous groups once they become operational . He added that much more could be achieved by autonomous groups .
 Mr FitzGerald replied that we were looking for a reaffirmation of the program as presented, including sabotage and harassment . Mr Fitzgerald replied: “We are looking for the program ... including sabotage, harassment and harassment"
 When asked what was planned in sabotage for the immediate future, he said that destruction operations should be carried out against a large oil refinery and storage facilities, a large electric plant, sugar refineries, railroad bridges, harbor facilities, and underwater demolition .
 The question was also raised as to whether an air strike would be effective on some of these principal targets . The air strike is also being considered as an option in the future .
 The consensus was that CIA should proceed with its planning for this type of activity looking toward January . CIA said it would proceed with the planning for the activity in January .
 The State Department raised questions with respect to sabotage activities in Cuba . State Department raises questions about Cuba's sabotage activities .
 The thought was advanced that there may be a relationship between such hit and run attacks on Cuba and the delay of U.S. convoys en route to Berlin . The attacks may be linked to the delays of convoys to Cuba .
 A further question was posed as to the over-all importance to the United States of sabotage operations . It was thought that the hit and run type effort might in fact invoke loss of support inside Cuba and may even result in bringing more Soviet troops back into Cuba .
 Somehow the United States must pin responsibility for these activities on Castro . Somehow the U.S. needs to pin responsibility on Castro, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.S. must be ready to retaliate when it can be fairly well established that Castro is attempting with arms, money and men to foment Communist uprisings in any Latin American country . The United States in fact must be prepared to retaliate against Castro .
 CIA should concentrate on trying to catch Castro red-handed delivering arms to Communist groups in Latin American countries . CIA, Department of Defense should try to catch him red-hand delivering arms .
 It was determined that during the next 90 days from this date an attempt would be made by means of air patrols and surface ships to identify ships carrying arms .
 Conversations are to be initiated by the Secretary of the Navy with CIA with CIA to map out a three-month operation against Cuban shipping .
 Colombian and Venezuelan governments should join with U.S. in developing joint patrol to identify ships carrying weapons from Cuba destined for revolutionary groups in Latin American countries .
 I talked this afternoon with William Attwood and told him that at the President's instruction I was conveying this message orally and not by cable . I told him I'm conveying the message orally, not via cable, not by phone .
 President hoped he would get in touch with Vallejo to report that it did not seem practicable to us at this stage to send an American official to Cuba . Attwood would be glad to see him and to listen to any messages he might bring from Castro, he said .
 Reversals of these policies may not be sufficient to produce a change in the policy of the U.S., but they are certainly necessary . Without an indication of readiness to move in these directions, it is hard for us to see what could be accomplished by a visit to Cuba,
 I left it to Attwood how much of this he would convey in the initial message to Vallejo . I also gave him discretion as to how this message was to be transmitted, with the proviso that it must be clear at all times that we were not supplicants in
 Attwood indicated to me that he expected Lisa Howard to telephone Vallejo and then probably get on the line himself to handle the conversation . Attwood said he expected Howard to call Vallejano and then get on to the phone himself to talk .
 My own thinking on this one, vis-a-vis the events of November 22, is still very fluid; but here it is . My own thoughts on the November 22 events are still fluid, but here they are .
 The events of November 22 would appear to make accommodation with Castro an even more doubtful issue than it was .
 President Kennedy could have accommodated with Castro and gotten away with it with a minimum of domestic heat, I'm not sure about President Johnson . While I think that President Kennedy . could have . accommodated . with Castro, he says .
 Lee Oswald has been heralded as a pro-Castro type may make rapprochement with Cuba more difficult . The fact that Lee Oswald was heralded by the Cuban government may make it more difficult for Cuba .
 If one concludes that the prospects for accommodation with Castro are much dimmer than they were before November 22, then Bill Attwood's present effort loses much of its meaning .
 We would appear to have three alternative courses of action in handling the present status of the Attwood-Lechuga tie-line . We would rather rather have an alternative course of action to deal with the issue .
 Attwood should tell Lechuga that in view of recent events, he is not now prepared to talk about an agenda with Lechug . We can tell Attwood that if Lechugu calls he should tell him that if he calls, Attwood would not now be prepared to
 If Lechuga does not call over the next couple weeks (the Cubans may feel that November 22 has stopped all bets), he should take the initiative . Despite recent events, we are still prepared to hear what is on Castro's mind .
 We can tell Attwood that if Lechuga calls about setting up an appointment between Attwood and Lechug, that Attwood should schedule such a meeting for a few days later and call us immediately . Attwood: "We can tell him if he wants to set up such
 If Lechuga does not call him, Attwood should take no initiative until and if he hears from us . Attwood is not expected to take any initiative until he hears of us, he says .
 November 22 events probably make accommodation an even tougher issue for President Johnson than it was for President Kennedy . Attwood-Lechuga talk still seems worthwhile from our point of view— if the Cubans initiate it .
 We have little or nothing to lose and there will be some benefits . At a minimum, we should get a valuable reading as to what Castro regards as negotiable . We should get to know how he views the effect of November 22 on Cuban/US relations .
 If the Cubans, who have the ball, feel that all bets are off, we should take no initiative until we have thought the problem through carefully . At the same time, if the Cuban government feel that they have the . ball, they should not take any initiative until they have
 If we decide that course 3 is the right one, the sooner we call Attwood, the better . The sooner we decide whether Attwood should be called is the better, the more .
 Lechuga and Stevenson could approach Castro to assure him that we feel the same way . Castro has a history of speaking out against Castro's policies .
 An unsolicited chronology from Bill Attwood which describes the activities of the CubaAttwood tie-line from November 1 1 to the present . Attached is an unsolicited . chronology of the activities . of the . activities . from November . 1 to November 1 .
 The memo was dispatched on November 22, but because of the recent events, did not reach us until today . Apparently, the memo was sent on Nov. 22, and did not arrive until today. It was dispatched November 22 .
 On November 1 1, Vallejo called Miss Howard again to reiterate their appreciation of the need for security and to say that Castro would go along with any arrangements we might want to make .
 Cuban plane could come to Key West and pick up emissary . Alternatively they would agree to have him come in a U.S. plane which could land at one of several ""secret airfields"" near Havana .
 Castro said only Castro and himself would be present at the talks and that no one else-he specifically mentioned Guevarawould be involved . Castro emphasized that only Castro would be there .
 Vallejo also reiterated Castro's desire for this talk and hoped to hear our answer soon . Castro also reiterated his desire to speak to the media .
 Bundy suggested I transmit our decision to Vallejo, stressing the fact that, since we are responding to their invitation, we are not soliciting a meeting, we would like to know more about what is on Castro's mind . Bundy suggested that he transmit the decision to the Valle
 On November 13, 1 went to Miss Howard's apartment and called Vallejo at home . Miss Howard was found dead at her apartment .
 She gave him a message-that we would want to talk to him here at the U.N. before accepting an invitation to go to Cuba, she said .
 She said that, if he wished to confirm or discuss this further with the United States official, he could call him at home on the evening of November 18 . She said he could also call him to discuss the matter further .
 He did not exclude the possibility of his coming to the U.N. and said he would discuss it with Castro . Meanwhile, he did not say he would come to the United Nations . Castro said he will discuss the possibility with Obama .
 On November 18, Miss Howard reached Vallejo at home at home and passed the phone to me . She called the author of this week's column .
 I told him Miss Howard had kept me informed of her talks with him, he said . I assumed he knew of our interest in hearing what Castro had in mind, he added .
 Vallejo said he did, and reiterated the invitation to Cuba, stressing the fact that security could be guaranteed in Cuba .
 President Castro said he would send instructions to Lechuga to propose and discuss with me ""an agenda"" for a later meeting with Castro . If that's how we felt, he said that if that was how it felt, Castro said .
 Vallejo's manner was extremely cordial and he called me ""Sir" throughout the conversation . Valleho's manner of conduct was cordial, he called himself "Sir"
 Approved by the White House on December 2 and by Thompson on November 27 . Approved December 2 by Thompson and approved by Thompson, Thompson .
 The President noted that the Cuban problem was a very serious one with our people . The President then said that the United States was not planning to invade Cuba .
 He hoped that as days came and went we would be able to find a solution there which would make it possible to lead our peoples towards peace and understanding .
 Actions already taken had gone part of the way and some lessening of tension had taken place . Action had already taken part in the process of removing tension .
 "If there was any indication that we could in some way bring about better understanding and better relations we would go our part of the way. We had a number of problems at home which were quite troublesome," he said .
 We were dedicated to our system and intended to preserve it, but this did not mean that we wanted it to dominate or enslave any other people . We were committed to preserving our system, but not enslaving others .
 Mikoyan said he was happy to hear these words uttered by the new President of the United States . Mr Mikoyans said he is happy to have heard the words .
 The President's desire to live in peace and friendship with the USSR and with other nations was in full accord with the views of the Soviet Union . President's wish to live peace with USSR was in accord with Soviet views .
 The President stated that there would be no change in the Kennedy policy . The President said there would not be any changes in the policy .
 Congress had shown evidences of approving negotiations and exchanges of views between President Kennedy and Mr Khrushchev . We were very happy that Congress showed evidence of approving . President Kennedy was very happy with the passage of the bill .
 This had offered us real encouragement not only in their attitude but also in our people's attitude . This had been offered us a real encouragement," says the minister of statesman .
 Our constant purpose, each day, would be to seek to travel the road of peace and find solutions to many problems, he says .
 The President continued that as an immediate comment he wished to say that the problem which was the biggest with our people was the result of the Castro-promoted subversion . The President said that as well as the problem, the problem was the . problem which is the . biggest with .
 He hoped that in future both sides would find that they had moved further to peace and had made gains greater than even those made by Mr Khrushchev .
 President's remark concerning Cuban subversive activities was not mentioned . However, there was only one point he wished to comment on, namely the remark .
 He said he could not understand how a small nation like Cuba could subvert anyone, let alone a big power . He said it was not easy to understand how Cuba subverted anyone .
 Cuba was being subverted by a number of well-financed organizations, he says . Cuba's small Cuba was subverted, he writes . Cuba was under attack by well-funded groups, he adds .
 The Soviet Union believed that all subversive activities should be ended everywhere . The USSR believed all subversive activity should be eradicated everywhere .
 Castro told Castro that he wanted good relations with the United States . Castro told him that he wants good relations between the U.S. and Cuba .
 Castro had voiced deep regret about President Kennedy's death . Castro had shown himself as a great humanitarian as he had voiced regret about the death of Kennedy .
 Mikoyan asked the President not to accept the allegations which were sometimes mentioned in the press . He wished to ask the President to not accept these allegations .
 He wanted the President to believe him that good relations with Cuba were in the interest of the U.S. He said the President wanted to believe .
 The President responded that his intention had been simply to give an evaluation of the feelings of our people and of what gave them problems . The President said his intention was simply to assess the feelings and of the people .
 President Obama said he had spoken sincerely and earnestly about U.S. intentions with respect to Cuba . He said he spoke sincerely about the United States intentions .
 We believed that there was no justification for Cuba to invade others by subversion or otherwise . We had no plans for invasion, and we believed that . There were no grounds for invasion .
 The President reiterated that what he was seeking now was merely to give Mr Mikoyan an evaluation . He expressed the hope that better understanding could flow from this .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone met with President Lyndon Johnson at Johnson's residence for 30 minutes .
 He asked how effective the economic denial program was and how we planned to dispose of Castro . Castro asked about how effective it was, and how it would be disposed of him . He asked if it was effective, and if we would dispose him .
 He said he did not wish any repetition of any fiasco of 1961 . But he felt that the Cuban situation was one that we could not live with and we had to evolve more aggressive policies, he said .
 Bundy advised that a policy meeting was scheduled for Monday, time not set, to discuss Cuban policy . Bundy said a meeting is scheduled to be held on Monday, but time is not set .
 I pointed out to the President the statements of President Kennedy on September 5th, September 13th, and November 20th, 1962 . Then I showed the evidence that proved absolutely that arms had been imported into Venezuela from Cuba .
 I stated that most positive efforts should be made immediately to secure complete OAS agreement on a course of action which would involve a series of steps ranging from economic denial through blockade and even to possible invasion, but that it must be OAS action, otherwise it would involve confrontation with Khrush
 I stated that if the action was a Hemispheric action I didn't see that the USSR could do much about it . The USSR could not do so much about the action, according to the author . The author also stated that he did not see the USSR be able to do much
 McCone reviewed the Cuban overflight program and advised the President of the USIB on the extent of the flights were being carried on .
 President Kennedy's statements in 1963 dealt with the danger of Cuban subversion to the Western hemisphere . The statements by President Kennedy of September 4, September 13, and November 20, 1963, all dealt in part with the threat of subversion .
 Last week, Lechuga told Lisa Howard that Castro authorized him to have a discussion with Attwood . Castro has a letter authorizing him to meet Attwood to discuss the matter .
 Bill mentioned that Miss Howard had told him that Lechuga had received the above mentioned letter . Miss Howard told Bill that she had received a letter from Lechugugu .
 From this point on, there was no further need to use Lisa Howard as an intermediary . They also agreed, that from this point, there would be no further use of Lisa Howard .
 Bill doesn't know whether Castro wrote the letter before or after the death of President Kennedy . Bill says it's not known whether the letter was written after Kennedy's death .
 In any event, Lechuga has apparently received no stop-order since the assassination . The country's president has been assassinated .
 One might assume, therefore, that the assassination has not changed Castro's mind about talking to the U.S. 4. 4 .
 Bill thinks that we have nothing to lose in listening to what Castro has to say . There is no commitment on our side, he says, and there's no commitment to our side .
 I am also dying to know what's in the letter and two weeks ago I would not have hesitated . Two weeks ago, I wouldn't have hesitated to send the letter, but now I'm dying for answers .
 At 6m. on December 2, 1963, Secretary of State Rusk met with President Johnson to discuss Cuba . Secretary Rusk and President Johnson met at 6:30 p.m. in Washington .
 Also attending were Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Director of Central Intelligence McCone, and Director of the U.S. Information Agency Donald Wilson .
 Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin prepared a paper setting forth talking points for Secretary Rusk, December 2 . The paper was written by Edwin Martin, who apparently attended the meeting .
 According to a memorandum from Gordon Chase to McGeorge Bundy, Bundy asked Chase to produce a ""Cuban monograph"" for the meeting . Bundy asked him to produce the monograph for a meeting with Bundy .
 Chase admitted to Bundy, ""I do not yet have a real feel as to how much the President knows about Cuba,"" and he was not sure his paper would meet Bundy's needs . Chase suggested Bundy was free to do with it what he thought best .
 Chase was slated to be the notetaker at the meeting, but in light of President Johnson's inclination to ""abhor a crowd,"" Chase volunteered to drop out of the meeting .
 If Chase did not attend, there may have been no notetaker and thus no record of the meeting . Chase may not have been present .
 Bill Attwood's Activities are the next step in the story of this week's interview with CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In the event we are going to move soon on this one , for a starter, here are some rough guidelines which you may want to consider .
 The new Administration has not yet had an opportunity to examine the Cuban question in detail .
 President Obama says he's authorized to hear Castro's thoughts . Castro: "What Castro says may have a bearing on the new Administration's assessment of the Cuban situation"
 You can rest assured that the information will be passed on to the proper people. Rest assured that you will be able to get the information .
 We should emphasize to Bill that the meeting must be held with complete discretion . If news of the meeting leaks out, Bill should be in a position to issue a foolproof denial .
 Lisa Howard is now out of the picture, says CNN.com . "We are glad that Lisa Howard has now left the picture," she says .
 She should be given no intimation that further U.S. /Cuban contact is taking place, she says .
 Bill may tend to convey a spirit of accommodation, which, when reported, could relieve Castro of an increased anxiety which the assassination of President Kennedy seems to have produced and which is in our interest to maintain .
 We should stress to Bill that he must convey the sense of an interested but non-committal listener, completely confident of his position . Therefore, we should stress . Bill must convey a sense of interest but not a commitment to his position, he says .
 We intend to maintain, and whenever possible, to increase our pressure against you until you fall . We are pretty certain that we will be successful. We intend .
 You can forget about getting 'another Cuba' in the Hemisphere . Moreover, you can forget that you can't get another Cuba in the hemisphere .
 'Another Cuba' is simply not going to happen. We have learned our lesson and 'another Cuba' will not happen. "Another Cuba" will simply not go to happen," says President Obama .
 We are not intent on having your head per se; neither do we relish the suffering of the Cuban people . We do not want to have your head, nor do we want to relish your suffering, Cuban people. We want to make sure they don't have their heads .
 "You know our central concerns-the Soviet connection and the subversion. You know our . central concerns," he said . "You can't say anything about the Soviet connection or subversion"
 If you feel you are in a position to allay these concerns, we can probably work out a way to live amicably together and to build a prosperous Cuba . Cuba. Cuba .
 An Ed Martin type who doesn't believe in the possibility of accommodation would not lend the right flavor to the meeting either . On the other hand, an Ed Martin-type who, in his bones, probably does not think in the hope of accommodation .
 Given the choice between the two types, I would pick the believer, Bill, and arm him with a good, stiff brainwashing and education in Cuban affairs before he meets with Lechuga .
 Cuba Meeting Next Tuesday, December 10, 1963 1. 1 spoke to John Crimmins at some length about preparations for the meeting next week .
 There will be a brief discussion giving the advantages and disadvantages of each of these courses of action, along with State's recommendation in favor or against . There will also be a discussion about each course of action .
 The second paper on unilateral and bilateral action was withdrawn from consideration by the Standing Group by Secretary Rusk for further consideration in State . The paper was withdrawn by Chase to Bundy .
 The Group placed emphasis on measures designed to harass Cuba and restrict arms shipments to Latin America . The Group said measures were aimed at harassing Cuba and restricting arms shipments .
 On December 13, 1963, the Standing Group of the National Security Council met to discuss Cuba . The meeting took place in Cuba in 1963 .
 Standing Group did approve certain actions recommended in the two papers . Standing Group approved certain actions .
 The Group gave authorization to CIA to develop the capacity to conduct air attacks against selective Cuban targets by autonomous exile groups . The Group also gave the CIA permission to use air strikes against Cuban targets .
 Assets were to be in place within 90 days, but this did not constitute authority to conduct raids . Assets were supposed to be placed in place in 90 days .
 A general consensus favored endorsement of intensification of the current program of exile raids on Cuba . A general . consensus favored endorsing of intensifying of the . current . program of . exile raids .
 Department of State action against Free World shipping to Cuba was also approved . Intensified Department Of State action also approved against shipping to the island .
 Standing Group was not able to consider all the actions recommended in the two papers . Further decisions were delayed until a December 19 meeting with President Johnson .
 The President reacted to the attached memorandum of December 9 from Mr Attwood by asking Mr Moyers what instructions had been given to Attwood . Moyers also asked what instructions were given by Attwood, the President said .
 Mr Moyers said consideration of using Attwood in negotiations with representatives of Castro had been under review almost weekly . Attwood's use of Attwood has been reviewed almost weekly since December 9 .
 USSR-Cuba trade agreement and renewed Russian pledge to aid Cuba by all means if an invasion should be launched,/l/ any contact between Attwood and Castro representatives should be avoided . Russia has pledged to aid the Cuban government if an attack is launched .
 I said that a no-contact-now policy reflected the current situation . It did not forestall use of Attwood at a later date if a decision was made to do so .
 The trade agreement for long-term purchases by the Soviet Union of Cuban sugar was signed by Castro and Khrushchev on January 21, 1964, but apparently was announced earlier .
 Attwood told Chase there was no pressure to reply as the situation has changed since President Kennedy's assassination . Attwood said: "Lechuga, and the Cubans in general, probably feel that the situation in Cuba has changed"
 President Kennedy authorized me to establish a discreet contact with the Cuban UN representative to verify reports that Castro-if not his Communist advisers- was prepared to go quite far in meeting our terms for normalizing relations .
 McGeorge Bundy has a chronological account of what this initial contact led to during October and November . Bundy talks about the first contact between the U.S. and North Korea . Bundy: "It's a good start to a good time for the first time I've been in contact with
 "We never indicated to the Cubans that we wanted to make a deal but only that we were prepared to listen," says President Obama . "We were not prepared to negotiate. We never indicated that we want to negotiate," says Obama .
 On October 31, Castro invited me to meet him in Cuba and guaranteed both discretion and security . Finally, on Oct. 31, he invited me on October 31 . "I'm going to meet Castro in Cuba," he said. "I'll be able to talk to him. He
 We replied that we would prefer preliminary discussions here at the United Nations to make sure there was something worth talking about . We replied: "We replied that it would be better to have preliminary discussions at the UN"
 On November 18, Castro's right-hand man, Rene Vallejo, informed me by telephone that instructions were being sent to the Cuban Representative, Dr. Dr. Josef Marquez . Dr. Marquez says instructions were sent to Dr. Castro .
 Lechuga said that in view of the President's death he did not know whether we still wished to have such a talk . He said that he didn't know whether he still wanted to have the talk .
 I reported this to Gordon Chase in Bundy 's office and am now waiting for further instructions . I then reported this . I am now . reporting this to . Gordon Chase . Bundy .
 The Castro family is hoping to find out what is on Castro's mind and what he wants to talk about . Castro is expected to speak at the end of the week .
 The primary purpose of the meeting was to brief the President in depth about some of the basic Cuban issues . The meeting was intended to brief him about some basic issues .
 /l/ /1/Chase is apparently referring to a long draft memorandum for the President, prepared by McGeorge Bundy on December 15 . Essentially, the discussion described where we have been since January, 1963 .
 Mr FitzGerald described covert intelligence activities directed against Castro's regime . He described the numbers, characteristics, and geographic spread of CIA assets .
 Mr FitzGerald described CIA-controlled radio programs and other propaganda media directed at Cuba which have been used to encourage low risk, simple sabotage and other forms of resistance .
 He noted the recent increase of spontaneous anti-regime propaganda inside Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticized for its crackdown on dissidents .
 Mr FitzGerald said that CIA has worked with State and other agencies to deny to Cuba commodities from the Free World which are critical to the economy . He added that CIA and State have worked to deny commodities to Cuba .
 Equipment vitally needed in Cuba, some of United States origin, reaches the island via Canada and Great Britain .
 The group agreed that this is not an easy problem; Mr Ball said that our allies have always been reluctant to interfere with private traders .
 "There are still things we can do. Nevertheless, it was also agreed that we should intensify our efforts," she said . "There is still things to do," she added .
 New amendment to Foreign Assistance Authorization Act can be used to reinforce our economic denial program, he says .
 The President directed that the agencies prepare a detailed memorandum (including the names of companies and commodities involved in Free World trade with Cuba) which, inter alia, will be useful for his forthcoming talks with Prime Ministers Home and Pearson .
 FitzGerald spoke about CIA's program to identify, seek out, and establish contact with potentially dissident non-Communist elements in the power centers of the regime with a view to stimulating an internal coup .
 A popular uprising in Cuba is unlikely, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Castro is capable of controlling such an uprising, he says . Sutter: Castro is likely to be able to control an uprising .
 "We are trying to penetrate the Cuban regime's power structure," says Cuban president . "Instead of penetrating the regime, we are trying ... to penetrate it," he says .
 "On the one hand, we have been able to make an important penetration in the Cuban army," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We have made a significant progress in Cuba"
 Dissident elements, while willing to act together, are not yet willing to do so together . On the other hand, the dissident elements are not ready to act, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Castro has been successful, in the past, in penetrating dissident groups . They simply don't trust each other, mainly because Castro has had success in penetrating dissidents groups .
 President asked whether there was any significant insurgency within Cuba . President asked if there were any significant insurgents in Cuba . Cuba has been hit by a series of terrorist incidents in recent years .
 FitzGerald said there is no national movement on which we can build . He said there are some but that there are no national movements on which they can be built .
 Mr Bundy noted that the insurgents generally seem to suffer heavy losses at Castro's hands . Mr Bundy said the insurgents seem to have suffered heavy losses .
 CIA directed four small scale, externally mounted sabotage operations for the purpose of stimulating resist-ance and hurting Cuba economically . Mr FitzGerald said that CIA has directed four . small scale . scale-scale operations .
 Discussion then focussed on a proposed attack on a major target-the Matanzas power plant . The discussion then focused on a possible attack on the power plant in the country .
 Mr FitzGerald noted that this would have a significant favorable impact, psychologically as well as economically . The dissidents would view the attack as evidence that the Johnson Administration is not giving up the fight for Cuba .
 If the raiders get caught, they will undoubtedly admit their CIA connection . Second, if they get caught they will probably admit their connection to the CIA .
 Third, such an attack will be highly visible and will have a high noise-level . Third, the attack would be very visible and have a very high noise level .
 Bundy said that we might want to lie low for now so that Castro, presently under a strain because of the arms cache discovery, will not be able to shift the accusing finger in our direction . In this regard, Mr Bundy said we might . lie low . Bundy said .
 Fourth, Mr Ball said that it might slow up the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Cuba .
 Ambassador Thompson said that the timing seemed bad- the Soviets now appeared to be in a situation where they may be thinking of cutting back aid to Cuba .
 President Johnson's first acts of President Johnson were his first acts in office . President Johnson was assassinated in June 1964 .
 An attack on a big Cuban target could give Castro important leverage in his negotiations for more Soviet aid . Castro could use the attack to gain leverage in talks with the Soviet Union .
 General Wheeler thought that, to improve the chance of success, we might want to try to hit the Matanzas power plant from the air . There have already been some free-lance raids over Cuba .
 Alexis Johnson points out that an air strike might cause retaliation against one of our U-2 flights . Alexis Johnson pointed out that such a strike might have caused retaliation against U.2 flight .
 Secretary Vance indicated that he was in favor of an attack on Matanzas . Vance indicated in a press conference that he would attack the island nation . Vance said he would like to attack the city .
 There will be no air or ground attack on the Matanzas power plant at this time, primarily because of its high probability of failure and because of the Soviet dimension . It was decided that there will be . no air . or ground . attack .
 It was agreed, in principle, that low-risk sabotage efforts could go forward along with the planning necessary to develop an air strike capability 73/ /3/
 Both indicated that it was President Johnson who made this decision . They both indicated that President Johnson made the decision .
 Two autonomous Cuban exile groups will be operating from outside the United States . One group, headed by Manuel Artime, will start operating out of Costa Rica and Nicaragua in February . The other is headed by Manolo Ray who is somewhat to the left of Artime .
 Both groups will conduct externally mounted raids on Cuba, and will send teams inside Cuba to conduct internal sabotage and to establish contact with dissidents . Both of these groups will carry out externally mounted missions on Cuba .
 Mr FitzGerald added that there are some disadvantages in these operations . The groups aren't trained by CIA and operate outside of CIA control .
 U.S. will have little trouble denying United States association with these groups, officials say . But there are advantages too- they operate from outside United States territory, they say .
 We cannot expect too much effect from their raids, says Bundy and FitzGerald . These groups operate a long distance from the target, they say .
 Mr Bundy gave a quick briefing on some other aspects of the current Cuban situation . Bundy also gave a brief briefing on the situation in Cuba .
 The notes summarized Soviet withdrawals, analyzed remaining Soviet forces in Cuba, assessed the Cuban military as fully capable of deterring internal dissidence and exile raids . The notes concluded that despite economic problems Castro was very much in control .
 The camera is our best inspector and, so far, we know, there are no offensive missiles now in Cuba . So far, as far as this is the best inspector of the camera .
 Mr Bundy added that we are concerned about the transfer of SAM control to the Cubans in about mid-1964 .
 The general consensus was that the big withdrawals are over and that, from here on, the withdrawals will proceed more slowly . As for the Soviet troops, the general consensus of the group was that they will withdraw slowly .
 The key to the problem is to build up the will and capabilities of the Latin American countries to counter the threat, says President Obama . The key is building up the capacity of Latin American nations to fight back .
 The Cuban government is trying to control travel between Latin America and Cuba . Cuba is a key part of the U.S. relationship with the Latin American community .
 Mr Bundy described briefly the very tenuous, sensitive, and marginal contacts we have established with Castro himself . Bundy described the tenuous and sensitive contacts he has with Castro .
 Bundy described several unilateral and bilateral courses of action we can take in the future to make life difficult for Castro . Bundy: "We can take a number of bilateral and unilateral steps" Bundy: 'We can do anything we want to'
 Air attacks, unleashing of exiles, and low level flights are aggressive-type acts which have distinct advantages but which are similar in that they all tend to raise the noise-level . Air attacks and low-level flights are similar but have different advantages .
 Low level flights would provide us with more intelligence and would irritate and harass Castro . Low-level flights would also irritate Castro, says Julian Zelizer .
 Mr Bundy said that we can take further unilateral shipping measures-e.g. close ports and deny U.S. -financed commodities to lines engaged in Free World shipping to Cuba . Mr Bundy also said we can close ports, deny United States .
 He noted that bilateral measures are more effective in reducing Free World shipping to Cuba . He noted, however, that we have found through past experience that .
 We should recognize that the Soviets are capable of handling all Cuba's shipping needs even if we are able to eliminate Free World shipping to Cuba .
 Bundy said that the President could make a public statement in the near future, taking a more vigorous line than we have in the past . Bundy said he could take a 'more vigorous line'
 President Kennedy made two points about Cuba in a November 18 speech . The first was designed to encourage anti-Castro elements within Cuba to revolt, the second was to indicate that we would not permit another Cuba in the Hemisphere .
 There are possibilities of increasing our pressures against Free World trade to Cuba . Bilaterally there are . possibilities of . increasing . pressures against . Free World Trade to Cuba to be increased .
 At this point the President left the room and there was a brief discussion about the exiles in Florida . At this time the President was speaking to the Florida exiles, but then left .
 It is true that the exiles feel that the pressure for their resettlement is intense . It is also true that they feel that they are being pressured to relocate .
 Mr Bundy introduced the subject of the discovery in Venezuela of the Cuban arms cache to the President .
 Mr Helms gave a graphic presentation of the link between the arms cache and a plot to upset the elections in Caracas . He said the weapons cache was linked to an attempt to disrupt elections in Venezuela .
 Mr Martin explained the status of the OAS investigation of the arms cache . Mr Martin said the investigation is ongoing .
 The arms cache is believed to be linked to a plot to subvert Venezuela . Hopefully, it will be able to tie the arms cache into a general plot . Venezuela is a major threat to the West .
 Mr Bundy described the types of action we can hope to get in the OAS as a result of the discovery of the arms cache .
 The most interesting is the surveillance action where we have essentially two basic choices— we may want to push for a system which involves search and seizure of Cuban vessels on the high seas . This implies the possible use of force .
 We can push for a system involving the search and seizure of Cuban vessels in territorial waters . This evades the issue of force . Or we can push to a system that involves the seizure and search of vessels .
 It is still too early to know how far the Latin Americans will go in support of force against Castro, Bundy says .
 Mr Bundy brought up the issue of lifting travel restrictions on Americans who wish to go to Cuba . Mr Bundy said travel restrictions should be lifted on Americans wanting to visit Cuba .
 Mr Ball noted that a great number of students want to go down to Cuba during the Christmas holidays . Justice Department recommends that we lift travel restrictions .
 If we don't, we will probably be obliged to put many of the students in jail when they return, he says . This will be embarrassing, he adds . "If we don’t, we’ll probably be forced to put them in jail," he says.
 The State Department is tentatively opposed to lifting the travel restrictions because of the effect it will have on Latin American countries . Mr Ball added that the State Department will not lift the restrictions .
 We have been trying to get the Latin Americans to impose restrictions on travel to Cuba . If we lift our own restrictions, our position will be considerably weakened, he says .
 Ball said he would be meeting with the Attorney General later in the day to talk about the subject . Mr Ball said that he would meet with Mr Ball to discuss the matter .
 Tentatively, the President indicated that he favored maintaining the travel restrictions and a policy of selective prosecution . Tentatively he indicated he favors maintaining travel restrictions .
 The Secretary of State, Secretary of Commerce and Director of Central Intelligence are at the center of the Cuba-Economic Denial Program . The Director of Intelligence is at the heart of the program .
 At his meeting on Cuba on December 19, 1963/1/ the President stated his deep concern with the extent of Free World trade with Cuba, and his desire for a detailed memorandum on the subject .
 State requested to coordinate with Commerce and CIA and prepare a memorandum . The memo includes, but not necessarily restricted to, the following information .
 The extent of the trade between the Free World and Cuba is shown . The value of trade and the countries involved are shown in the chart .
 The commodities involved in Free World trade with Cuba . Pay special attention to items which are critical to the Cuban economy .
 The names and addresses of the principal firms which are directly or indirectly involved with the shipment of commodities to Cuba are shown .
 Steps have been taken with foreign governments and private companies to stop trade with Cuba, including the responses of such governments .
 On December 27, 1963, Director of Central Intelligence McCone met with President Johnson at his Texas ranch .
 McCone responded that was very much in line with his thinking and he was prepared to do anything the President desired . McCone: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do, but I'm prepared to help the President"
 McCone and Johnson then discussed specific items, one of which was Cuba . McCone, Johnson and Johnson also discussed specific topics .
 There had been a substantial turnover in recent months and the probability was that a few hundred-and not more than a hundred— Soviets had departed . The probability was not that many of the Soviets would have departed .
 Cuban SAM trainees had been deployed at SAM sites, says author . There was a possibility that autonomous Cuban control of the SAM sites would present us with a very difficult situation, he says .
 President asked what could be done if the Cubans decided to use the SAMs against our U-2's . The President then asked what he could do .
 The President remarked that this would then mean war, the President remarked . I responded that certainly the destruction of the SAM sites would mean war . I said the degree of escalation could not be determined in advance .
 I stated that this was the most ominous situation that confronted us in Cuba in the immediate future. I said it was the 'most ominous situation' in Cuba's immediate future .