 This is Ayesha Younas' weekly Asalam u alaikum . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Asalamu .
 I have come up with a revised edition of the IR Notes that first came out on 11/5/2015 . The IR Notes are a revised version of this week's IR Notes .
 Pakistan has become quite famous all across Pakistan, so I just thought I'd come up with another treat for you guys . They became quite famous in Pakistan, and they became quite popular all over Pakistan .
 I have been working a lot on International Relations since then . Thought of updating the Notes for the general CSS Apirants .
 The reason behind such drastic result of IR in 2017 had largely been lack of writing practice and lack of development of an analytical mindset .
 Candidates remain at Level 1, where they hardly know the knowledge base . Most of the Candidates are at Level 2: Conceptual Clarity Level 3: Application Level 4: Analysis .
 Candidates need to be able to differentiate between National interest and National Power for instance . The candidates need to have a conceptual claritye.
 Under conceptual clarity they need to be able to explain every concept in simple words and need to have its characteristics on their fingertips . Secondly, under conceptual clarity, they must be able .
 The candidate is able to apply the knowledge along with clearly defined concepts to real life situations, current events, and or historical traditions . Then is the Application Level 3, in this level, the candidate is . able to . apply the . knowledge . to real-life situations, . current
 They need to explain the concept with the help of examples, statistics and figures . They must also use examples and figures to explain their concepts .
 The highest numbers are gained by those who have an analytical approach to the game . However, the highest numbers of those gained are those who are not analytical .
 Those with analytical approach need to be able to explain the concepts/theories/etc., apply them to current events and dig deeper . Those with an analytical approach must be able apply these concepts to the current events .
 The raising of questions leads you to an analytical approach where you are able to develop strong arguments along with its justification . In this article, we highlight the importance of raising questions to be able to answer them .
 You need to understand this and practice past papers with a Level 4 Approach . Practice past papers using the Level 4 approach .
 Only reading or attending lectures is not going to prepare you for CSS as you final destination is a written exam . CSS is not just a written test so make sure you are prepared accordingly. CSS is an exam that you must prepare for .
 Ayesha Younas C\»^C Syllabus Division divides syllabus into FIVE Areas . CSS Writing Club is a project of CSS writing club .
 Concepts The Definition and Scope of International Relations The Nation-State System Evolution of International Society Conceptualization of security in the Twenty-First century Power. Concepts The definition and scope of international relations The Nation State System. Concepts
 Strategic Culture: Determinants, Decision Making and Analysis . Sovereignty and National Interest: Diplomacy International Law Nationalism Internationalism* Globalization War: Causation of War, Total War, Limited War, Asymmetric Warfare, Civil War, Guerilla Warfare Terrorism Terrorism:
 Theories of Imperialism, Dependence and Interdependence discourse discourse discourse A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas .
 Theories and Approaches Realism and Neo-realism Realism/Liberalism Idealism and Liberalism are realistic approaches . The Scientific Revolution-Behavioral Approach, System Approach* Post-modernism, Critical Theory, Feminism, Constructivism* 3. Theories
 Russian Revolution, Fascism, League of Nations, Second World War Cold War: Decolonization in Asia and Africa, Rise of U.S. and Soviet Union . Rise of Cold War Post Cold War, Clash of Civilizations, Terrorism, Globalization, Unipolarity and Revival
 Foreign Policy of Selected Countries USA, UK, EU Russia, China, India, Pakistan 5. 5.
 Indus Water Treaty, Composite Dialogue; Sir Creek & Siachen border . Indus water Treaty, composite Dialogue, Sir Creek and Sir Creek border . Sir Creek is located on the border with the Indus border .
 i. Analytical overview of peace processes between/among the states of South Asia especially between India and Pakistan . ii. An analysis of the peace process in South Asia . i. Analysis of peace process between India, Pakistan and the other states .
 Cold war theatre; Soviet Invasion and Mujahedeen; Geneva Accord; 9/11; Operation Enduring Freedom . Post Cold War situation—Rise of Taliban, AL-Qeada & 9-11 . Operation Endures Freedom; Operation Operation Endure Freedom .
 International Economic and Trade linkages are being used as pressure tactics in inter-State Relations . Discuss its scope and importance of the study of International Relations .
 The modern states act and behave as member of the international community . The modern state of the world acts and behaves as a member of international community. It is not the first time a state has acted as an international community member .
 Relations between sovereign states of the world is becoming one of the most important aspects of contemporary life . Relations between the sovereign states is becoming an important aspect of modern life . The relations between sovereign nations are becoming an increasingly important part of life .
 Explain the importance of International Relations in the Nuclear age . -Define International Relations. Explain the important role of international relations in the nuclear age .
 Discuss the development of the study of International Relations and define its core influential factors . Identify and explain its continuously changing and expanding nature and subject matter?
 Explain the future of Disarmament with reference to the foreign policy Of major Powers. Explain the world's role in disarmament. Explain to the public how the world has dealt with disarmament .
 Define Economics as an instrument in foreign policy"" and explain its fundamental characteristic which can help to achieve state's objectives . Define the role of economics as a foreign policy instrument and explain how it can help state achieve objectives .
 U.S. foreign policy towards South Asia during and after the Cold war . Carry out a comparative analysis of United States foreign policy .
 How far the super powers have been responsible for the proliferation of nuclear weapons . Nuclear weapons proliferation has been a problem for the world .
 International system creates interactions among states through diplomacy, international law, and economic relations . Short Notes: International Law and International Morality short Notes: Short Notes .
 Do you believe its prospects are threatened because of the current economic crises in general and third world economies in particular? Do you think it is threatened by the current global economic crises? Share your thoughts with CNN iReport .
 Also narrate the implications of the ""War on Terrorism"" for International Law . Also narrates the implications for the International Law for International law .
 Discuss an appropriate response to Domestic and International terrorism . Discuss an effective response to domestic and international terrorism. Discuss the appropriate response .
 Describe interactions among Nations through diplomacy for establishing balance of power to preserve their National Interest . Describe interaction with nations through diplomacy as an example of how diplomacy helps preserve their interests in the U.S.
 Critically discuss the concept of Balance of power in the light of Hans Morgenthau's thought . Criticise the concept in light of the thought of the concept .
 Explain the concept of Balance of Power in international relations and evaluate its relevance after the demise of Soviet Russia . Explain the relevance of the balance of power in the world .
 Ayesha Younas C\»CPRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 16-COLD WAR . Critically discuss the origin of the cold war and its consequences on world politics .
 Discuss the strategic importance of ""Indian ocean"" in the post cold war scenario . Analyze the role of the United States and China in the region . Discuss the importance of "Indian ocean" in a post-cold war scenario.
 Also identify vital political,economic,and strategic interests of both great powers in the contemporary geopolitical situation . Identify vital political and economic interests of the two countries .
 Explain diplomatic means which can help to resolve disputes and conflicts in the world . Tell how diplomatic means can help resolve disputes, conflicts and conflicts .
 International system creates interactions among states through diplomacy, international law, and economic relations . International system is created by diplomacy, law, diplomacy and international law .
 The emergency of sovereign state as a primary actor was just the beginning of the evolution of the modern International System . The emergency . of sovereign states as a . primary actor is just the . beginning to the evolution . of the . evolution of modern international system .
 Assess pace of change in International Relations from 1815 to 1914 . Assess the pace of . change in . International Relations between 1815 and 1914. Assess . change of change of . International relations .
 What are the major demands of the SOUTH against the NORTH for a New International Economic Order? What is the major demand of the South vs. the North? What do you think?
 Economic realities compelled the members of the developing world to demand for the establishment of New International Economic Order . Economic realities forced the creation of the new international economic order, says the UN .
 Substantiate 20: How effective international organizations are in dealing with the global problems . How effective is international organizations? How effective are international organizations in dealing to global problems? We need to find a way to find out how effective they are .
 Two great wars had dismantled colonialism and created Third World and Non-Alignment Movement . The two great wars dismantled colonialism, created Non-Colonial Movement .
 Discuss the significance and increasing role of International Society in the classically sovereign domains of state with reference to United Nations . Discuss the importance of international society in the world's sovereign domains .
 OIC has failed to foster Pan Islamic unity and solidarity to meet the challenges faced by the Ummah in a spirit of cooperation and collective action . SEATO Short Notes: NAM Short Notes .
 The forum is an important forum that needs complete overhauling/restructuring. Indeed it is a forum that must be completely overhauled/restructure. It is a very important forum for the world's most important forum.
 Pakistan's participation in SEATO and CENTO explains political, strategic, and economic causes and define its potential disadvantages for the country's foreign policy and diplomacy . Substantiate Critically discuss the Pakistan's involvement in SeATO .
 Critically evaluate the joining of Western Alliances by Pakistan . Explains its political, economic and strategic consequences for the state's policy . Criticise the joining and explain the political and economic consequences for Pakistan's foreign policy .
 Describe and discuss the concept of Nation-State and evaluate its future in the light of certain recent developments . Describe the concept and evaluate the future of the nation-State .
 Evaluating the Sino-Pak nexus in the light of changing geo-politico-economic scenario of the region . Evaluate the S.Sino-Pakistan nexus in light of the . changing geo .politico . scenario .
 Critically discuss Pakistan's participation in SEATO and CENTO and explain political, strategic, and economic causes and define its potential disadvantages for the country's foreign policy and diplomacy . Critically . discuss the potential disadvantages of Pakistan's involvement in the countries' participation .
 Explain the impact of India-Pakistan nuclearisation on strategic stability in South Asia . Explain the role of India and Pakistan nuclearisation in the region's strategic stability .
 South Asia has been dominated by the antagonism between India and Pakistan . What impact do nuclear weapons have on the balance of power in the region? We ask .
 Analyze the changes in Chinese foreign policy since the death of Mao zedong . Analyze and elaborate changes in China's foreign policy in recent years .
 Pakistan is under pressure from the U.S. to do more to destabilize the regional scenario rather than stabilizing the situation . Critically Define "" American interests in Afghanistan"" and explain its political failure in the region .
 Also discuss the serious impact of the American war on terror on the Pakistan's state . Also discuss how the U.S. war on terrorism has affected Pakistan .
 The introduction of the concepts of Unilateralism and pre-emptive Strike by President Bush has eroded the basis of International law and Diplomacy, in inter state relations, in international relations .
 The conditions for the 'Road Map' of the Palestinian state are the conditions for a Palestinian state . The Palestinian state is a state of Israel, Palestine Palestine, Israel and Palestine .
 Impediments to Middle East peace process . Future prospects and peace efforts. Future prospects . Peace efforts.
 Discuss the silent features in the post cold war situation and explain its grave consequences with reference to eastern Europe, African continent and South Asian tragic incidents . Western concept of Nationalism is Islamic concept .
 Debate whether UN and superpowers played any role in preventing bloodbath in the regions . Also debate whether UN played any part in preventing bloodshed in the region .
 In the light of this statement discuss in detail the nature the attributes of national power, discuss in . The country's national power should be discussed in detail, says President Obama .
 The post Cold War, World Order promised Peace, Security, Democracy, Nuclear Non-proliferation and Human Rights protection . The post-Cold War, the post-cold war world promised Peace and Security, but the world has never seen that .
 Assess the repercussions at present confronted by the world community in the context of Terrorism, Nuclear Proliferation, Globalization and erosion of Human Dignity . Assess its repercussions at . present confronted . by . the world . community in context of terrorism, nuclear Proliferation and Globalization .
 Explain the socio-economic and Political Compulsions which led to the formation of Regional Blocs . Explain the economic and political compulsions that led to formation of regional blocs .
 The peace of Westphalia was the founding moment for modern state system . It was also the birth of the modern state of Germany .
 How for was Germany responsible for the outbreak of war in 1914? Explain, with examples, the main principles of the NEO-REALIST SCHOOL OF THOUGHT in International Relations .
 Explain, with examples, the main principles of the NEO-LIBERAL SCHOOL OF THOUGHT in International Relations . Explain the principles of NEO-Libertarian School of Thought . Use these principles to help students understand and understand each other .
 Identify the main arguments of the Realism and Liberalism in International Relations . Identify an argument for Liberalism and Realism in international relations in the book .
 Short Notes: Crisis Management, Crisis Management and Euro Communism . De-colonization . Crisis Management. Euro Communism. Crisis Management . Crisis management. Crisis management . Euro Communism, Euro Communism and Euro communism .
 Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Short Notes: Politics of environmental protection . Short Notes on Hostile Embargo: Entente, Co-existence and Human rights violations .
 Visualize the post-Taliban scenario in Afghanistan and discuss implications for Pakistan . Visualize Afghanistan's future in Afghanistan . Consider the implications of the Taliban's rise in power .
 Pak-china relations are historic and times tested, have developed a momentum of their own and are continuing . Pak-China relations have developed momentum of its own and continue to be strong, says President Obama .
 The phenomenon of terrorism has occupied central stage in world's today's today . Terrorists have occupied the central stage of world's terrorism .
 Discuss the issue of terrorism in backdrop of what is happening in Afghanistan, Palestine and Kashmir . Discuss the issues in backdrop to what has happened in Palestine, Kashmir and Afghanistan .
 Discuss the economic and strategic importance of Gawadar port of Pakistan and for the region . Discuss the importance of the port in Pakistan and the region in Pakistan .
 Define its main characteristics and explain its devastating consequences on different leading civilizations of the nations . Define the main characteristics of the phenomenon and explain the devastating consequences of it .
 Explain its essential features and justify its offensive gesture which maintained the national and regional strategic balance . Explain the essential features of the . . Explain its . essential features .
 Critically discuss whether or not Pakistan participates in the newly formed military alliance against Terrorism . Explains its political, socio-cultural and strategic implications on the country . Discusses Pakistan's involvement in the alliance against terrorism .
 The positivist and post-positivist debate offers a striking contrast in terms of approach and methodology of the study of International Relations . Q 3: The positivism and the post positivist debate is an example of a new approach to international relations . Q 4: The debate offers an
 Describe, compare and critically evaluate the divergence between the two debates . Describe the difference between the debates and the differences between them .
 The nation-state system is in a flux with an independence referendum in Scotland and another in Catalonia projected for Catalonia in September 2017 . Scotland is due to hold a referendum in September .
 The modern nationstate in Europe faces internal challenges to its sovereignty and territorial integrity . Critically evaluate reasons as to why the modern nation state in Europe is facing internal challenges . Criticize reasons as well as reasons why the nation state faces challenges .
 The rise of China is being heralded as a return of 'balance of power' politics in International relations . Q 5: China's rise heralds a return to balance of power politics in relations .
 As the world moves towards multi-polarity, account for the essential features of the international security architecture and its evolving dynamics . Account for the essentials of the  security architecture .
 Q 6: Define globalization and its attendant manifestations in global politics . Define the role of global politics and the role it plays in the world's politics .
 Critically evaluate the strategically competitive dynamics of Pakistan-India relations in the context of Pakistan's growing ties with China and India's increased alignment with the United States . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 What strategies can the U.N. and major powers implement in order to ensure peace and security in Iraq and Syria? What strategies should be implemented to ensure that?
 At its best it is an objective and systematic approach to those problems" Palmer and Perkins ii. Palmer and Perkinius ii. ii. "At its best, it is a systematic approach"
 The term international was used by Jeromy Bentham in the later 18th century . It was used with regards to laws of nations .
 IR may refer to all forms of interactions between members of separate societies, whether govt sponsored or not . From a broader perspective, IR may also refer to the interactions between different societies .
 The study of IR includes analysis of foreign policies or political processes between nations . The study also focuses on international trade and civil society interaction .
 Every nation is interested in other country's political conditions iv. elements of national power-political dynamics . The political, social, economic organization of political life,   . aspects are considered in order to understand what is happening i. elements are considered .
 China vs United States in Taiwan case due to capitalist vs communism theories vi. Instruments available for promotion of national interest-how national power is attained and what is its effect on the international level V Limitations and control of national power .
 IR is wider in scope than IP ii. Historical ingredients as a background for other factors . International Politics and International Relations IR is wide in scope . IR is also a study of international relations .
 IP focuses on various styles of politics; politics of violence, persuasion, hierarchical policies and pluralistic politics . i.I.IP focuses on different styles of . politics .
 IR embraces the totality of relations among people and groups of people in global society 4) Relevance of International Institutions in IR . Contemporary international institutions in which groups of states or other actors can participate include INGOs or the UN system ii. International institutions such as the UN are
 EU, NATO, SAARC or ASEAN are examples of regional grouping with multiple functions 5) Scope of International Relations Historically, only concerned with the study of diplomatic history. i. ii. European Union, NATO or SAARC is example of regional groups with multiple .
 Field of study widened after the creation of the League of Nation as study of international organizations also included . Study of international organization also included included .
 Post World War II Scenario further widened the scope due to emergence of two super powers, new states coming into society of nations, danger of thermo-nuclear war, rising expectations of underdeveloped states .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT vi. A Project of CSS Writing Club . Ayesha Younas .
 Modern scholars are not willing to treat IR as an independent discipline as it lacks unity of subject matter, unanimity regarding scope and degree of objectivity . IR is not a discipline that has unanimous consensus regarding scope, objectivity and scope .
 IR has a descriptive-historical approach which leads to immense data, but a theoretical framework is required for ordering and interpreting the facts, which new theories are beginning to provide . IR has an approach to history that leads to a more complex understanding of the world's history .
 Organski: "Within next few decades the basic foundations of a new discipline will be laid" 6) Significance of Study: It enables us to understand the basic motives underlying the policies of various states .
 Helping to understand that narrow nationalism is bane to humanity, poses serious threats iv. Helping people understand narrow nationalism bane of humanity . Helping the world understand the threat posed by narrow nationalism poses .
 Traditional concept of national sovereignty has become out-dated and requires modification vi. Various states view problems subjectively and give preference to national interest . Traditional concept has become outdated and needs modification vi .
 Avoid policy of confrontation and instead focus on peaceful co-existence, policy of cooperation, and universal brotherhood . Avoid confrontation and focus instead of confrontation, instead of focusing on peace .
 The principle of dominance solves the collective goods problem by establishing a power hierarchy in which those at the top control those below . i.ii. i.iii. The principle, i.e. dominance, is a form of dominance in which the power of the top controls those of the
 A nation denotes a common ethnic and cultural identity shared by a single people . A state is a political unit with a governance system controlling a territory and its inhabitants . The Nation-State System is defined as a nation and a state .
 The nation promotes emotional relationship amongst its members, while states provide political and legal foundation for the identity of its citizens . i.iii. State provides legal and political foundation for its citizens, i.ii. i. The nation provides emotional relationship between its members and its members . i .
 The term nation-state has been used by social scientists to denote the gradual fusion of cultural and political boundaries after a long control of political authority by a central government . iv. iv.
 The treaty of Westphalia in 1648 created the modern nation-state . The treaty was created by 1648 in Germany .
 Pakistan has to organize the different national identities into one, many grievances with state at times . Switzerland consists of half German and half French, plus after partition Indian Muslims are separate than after partition .
 The treaty established the principle of internal sovereignty (preeminence of rulers from other claimants to power) and external sovereignty (i. external sovereignty) i.i.ii. i.III. The treaty establishes the principle that internal sovereignty is a matter of sovereignty . i.I.
 England, Spain and France obtained independence from dominance by the Holy Roman Empire . iv. iv. ii. iv iv.ii. iviii. ivii ivii . ivii: France, Spain, Italy, France and Spain obtained independence . iviii: France and Italy obtained independence
 Scholars like Machiavelli , Bodin and Grotius defended the authority of the state . They provided justification for the secular state independent of the pope .
 A more subjective than objective approach, seeking to supplement notions of nationalism and patriotism with interethnic interaction and education processes to explain creation of a common identity, i. ii. A more objective than . objective approach to . supplementing notions of . nationalism and . patriotism with . int
 Nation-State State systems underwent further evolution on account of rise of representative governments, the industrial revolution, the population explosion, independence of developing countries, economic growth and growth of multi-lateral organizations .
 It evolved in the 16th century in France during the conflict between the state and the church . i.iii. ii. ii . ii.ii.ii: The state and church were at odds with each other in France .
 Hobbes focused on its absolutist aspect, while Austin focused on legalistic or juristic notions of sovereignty . iv. iv. Hobbes: "Austin, Hobbes, Austin and Hobbes" iv.
 The modern doctrine of popular sovereignty has transferred the source of absolute power from the monarch to the people, says the king .
 The notion of sovereignty is important but it can become rigid unless applied to the evolving pattern of inter-state relations, i. ii. V. V . V. I think sovereignty is an important part of sovereignty, but it must be applied to changing patterns of state relations .
 Nationalism implies elevation of nation above all other values . i. ii. Nationalism in IR is a form of nationalism that elevates nation above other values, i.ii. Nationalistism in the IR means nationalism is an elevation of national values .
 States usually control the mass media to propagate their foreign policy objectives . They centralize their education systems to popularize nationalistic values . i.iii. States control the media to propagate foreign policy goals and popularize their values .
 The economic output, size, population and military strength of a state are tangible and quantifiable aspects . The state's economic output and size, size and population are tangible aspects .
 V Power rests on intangible factors like quality of leadership, ideology, morale and manipulative or diplomatic strength .
 "This long run objective to achieve power also requires exertion of power," says President Obama . "This is a long-term objective of achieving power," he says .
 A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 Ingredients of National power Force-the explicit threat or use of military, economic, nuclear and other instruments of coercion by one state against another .
 i. Influence-using instruments of persuasion by one state to alter or maintain the behavior of another state. i.ii.ii . iv. iv.ii: i.iii. ivii: ivii.vii:  influence-using instrumental 
 Authority-voluntary compliance with directives and orders of a state by other states out of respect, solidarity, or in recognition of expertise . Authority is voluntary compliance with orders and orders by other countries . Authority compliance is voluntary .
 Legal Equality of the States; UN Charter; in reality this principle has become a farce . A state which had general interest and could protect those interests in all spheres was considered a great power . State which had . general interest was considered . considered a . great power.
 Creation of regional blocs lead to dilution of nation-state concept iv. iv. Creation of regions leads to diluting of nation's concept iv .
 Growing role of public opinion alters foreign policy objectives vi. Rise of nuclear weapons; blow to concept of equality of states . Growing role in public opinion changes foreign policy objective .
 The basic structures and principles of international relations are deeply rooted in historical developments . i.I. ii. i. I. I . I. A. I think that international relations is a very important part of the world's history .
 It is the central concept of the 'English School' of International Relations . iv. iv. It is also the concept of a 'English school of international relations' iv.
 Although originally coined to refer to relations among European states, the term may be applied to many different sets of political arrangements among distinct political communities .
 Elements of international society may be found from the time of the first organized human communities . i. ii. i.ii. ii . Elements of  international society can be found in the history of the world's first organized communities .
 Early forms of diplomacy and treaties existed in the ancient Middle East . i.iii. ii. ii . ii.ii.ii: i.ii . ii: ii:ii:ii.iii:ii .ii:iii.ii :ii:i:ii ii:
 Relations among city-states of ancient Greece were characterized by more developed societal characteristics, such as arbitration . Relations among the city-state cities were more developed than those of the ancient Greeks .
 Ancient China, India, and Rome all had their own distinctive international societies . Ancient China and India were the world's first major cities . Ancient India and Rome were the first to have their own societies .
 Medieval Europe's international society was a complex mixture of supranational, transnational, national, and subnational structures . A Project of CSS Writing Club . Ayesha Younas C\»^C
 The Catholic Church played a key role in elaborating the normative basis of medieval international society . vii. vii . The Catholic church played a major role in the development of the medieval world .
 Islam developed its own distinctive understanding of international society . Islam has a unique relationship with international society, especially with the world .
 The main ingredients of contemporary international society are the principles of sovereignty and non-intervention and the institutions of diplomacy, diplomacy, the balance of power, and international law . i. ii. Evolution of International Society: The Principles of Sovereignty and Non-Intervention are principles of international
 Peace of Westphalia was a key event in establishing the concept of the concept . i.ii. ii.iii. i.III. The Peace of Peace was key to establishing the idea of peace in Europe . iv.ii: The peace was a major event in Europe and
 Napoleonic Wars were followed by a shift to a more managed, hierarchical, international society within Europe . Europe's imperial structure in Europe's relations with much of the rest of the world .
 World Wars I and II dominated the 20th century, yet they seem to offer contradictory lessons about the utility of hardline or conciliatory foreign policies . World Wars II and II offered contradictory lessons on how to deal with foreign policy .
 The League of Nations was an attempt to place international society on a more secure organizational foundation . The League was founded in 1903 . It was the first organization of its kind .
 For nearly 50 years after World War II, world politics revolved around the East-West rivalry of the Cold War . The Cold War was centered on the East and the West .
 The bipolar standoff created stability and avoided great power wars, including nuclear war, but turned states in the global South into proxy battlegrounds . This bipolar standoff has created stability, but it has turned states into proxies for war .
 The United Nations was intended to be a much improved League of Nations but the cold war prevented it from functioning as such . The U.N. was meant to be much improved but it was not .
 The post-Cold War era holds hope of growing peace and cooperation . Despite the appearance of new ethnic and regional conflicts, great-power cooperation is possible .
 Decolonization led to the worldwide spread of the European model of international society . Decolonizing led to a worldwide spread in the world of social  society .
 Globalization poses serious problems for a sovereignty-based international society, says Julian Zelizer . He argues that globalization is a problem for the sovereignty of international society . Zelizer: Globalization is an issue for sovereignty-free society .
 These include the challenges emanating from new forms of community, failing states in Africa, American hyperpower, growing resistance to Western ideas, and global poverty and environmental issues .
 The meaning of security has been broadened to include political, economic, societal, social, environmental, and military aspects . Security has been expanded to include economic, political, societal and environmental aspects .
 Differing arguments exist about the tension between national and international security . Differing opinions exist about national security and national security .
 Different views have also emerged about the significance of 9/11 for the future of international security . Different views also emerged on the importance of the September 11 attacks .
 Debates have traditionally focused on the role of the state in international relations . Debates about security have traditionally been focused on state security . The state is a key part of international relations, but it is also a key role in international diplomacy .
 The 'security dilemma' is seen by some writers as the essential source of conflict between states . i.iii. The 'Security Dilemma is seen as a source of tension between states. ii. The security dilemma is seen in some writers to be the essential cause of conflict .
 Realists and neo-realists say trust is often difficult between states because of the problem of cheating . Realists say that cheating is a problem between states .
 Realists and neo-realists point out the problem of 'relative gains' whereby states compare their gains with those of other states when making decisions about security . Realists also point out that states should not compare security gains with that of others .
 Neo-realists reject the significance of international institutions in helping many to achieve peace and security . Neo-Realists reject international institutions as they help many achieve peace, security .
 Liberal Institutionalism sees institutions as an important mechanism for achieving international security . i. ii. See institutions as a mechanism to achieve international security. i.ii. See the role of institutions in international security as a means of achieving international peace .
 Liberal Institutionalists accept many of the assumptions of Realism about the continuing importance of military power in international relations . But argue that institutions can provide a framework for cooperation which can help to overcome the dangers of security competition between states .
 Globalization can be seen in the fields of economic development, communications, and culture . Globalization is a key part of the world's economic development .
 Global social movements are also a response to new risks associated with the environment, poverty, and weapons of mass destruction . ii. ii. Global social movement is also response to the environment and poverty of the world . iReport: Social movements are an answer to new threats associated with new risks
 The 'fracture of statehood' is giving rise to new kinds of conflict within states rather than between states which the state system cannot deal with . The state system is not being able to deal with the conflict between states and other states .
 This has helped encourage an emerging politics of global responsibility, i.ii.iii. This has also helped encourage the emergence of a politics of responsibility .ii.ii .iii.ii: i.i.i: This has led to a greater responsibility for the future of the world
 There are disputes about whether globalization will contribute to the weakening of the state or simply to its transformation . There are also disputes over whether a global society can be created which will usher in a new period of peace .
 Main National, Institutional and epistemic advocates in Asia were US, SEATO, and Five Power Defence Arrangements . Main National and Institutional advocate in Asia was US, SeATO and SEATo .
 Comprehensive Security started due to Domestic politics and regime legitimation . In the 1960s Comprehensive Security was created due to domestic politics .
 Non-traditional security is protection of a state's institutions and governing capacity from non-military threats . Non-military security is the protection of state institutions, governing capacity, not military .
 Common Security is security with a potential or actual adversary realized through transparency, mutual confidence and conflict resolution measures and mechanisms . Common/Cooperative Security in 1970s/1980s due to Ideational prior, institutions; Common Security .
 Inclusive security, emphasizes the need for mutual trust, and rejects exclusive military alliances . Cooperative security implies that security is to be achieved through cooperation, which would involve mutually beneficial partnerships .
 The understanding of security by China and other nations is not static, or dependent on short-term calculations or single incident, but a long-term process . Evolving security is subject to changes that will overcome historical animosities, it states .
 The rise of China, India and Japan is unlikely to change this equation . China, driven by domestic concerns, is striving to achieve a balanced mix between national and nontraditional security .
 It seems to be dealing with its North East Asian neighbours in mainly national security terms . While adopting a primarily non-traditional security approach towards Southeast Asians, it has adopted a non-military approach .
 Human security, the most direct opposite of national security, remains a distant prospect in Asia . Human security is the opposite to national security in Asia, says the author .
 War as a national security referent is not dead, but its effects would reverberate ever more than before across national and sub-regional, even regional boundaries . War would be a major factor in national security, but it would be inextricated from its borders .
 In Asia today, the prevailing security paradigm consists of no single concept, but an interplay of national, non-traditional and human security ideas and approaches . The prevailing security paradigms consists of national and non-national security ideas, the author says .
 The concept of power politics is far more useful in describing a dynamic world in which power is a means by which the demands for change and resistance to change are advanced . Elements of National Power are discussed in the book, "Power Politics"
 Political power is a psychological relation between those who exercise it and those over whom it is exercised . Political power means power can only be exercised by those over who it is .
 It gives the former control over certain actions of the latter through the influence which the former exerts on the latter's mind . The former control of the mind is a form of influence that can be traced back to the former's mind, it is said .
 Whatever the ultimate aim of international politics, power is always the immediate aim of power . The UK has been in the grip of the U.S. since September 2011 .
 There are Four key distinctions; Power influence: i.g. i.i.i., i.v.v.'s advisor can have influence but not power to impose his will. ii.v’s advisor has influence but doesn’t have the power of imposing
 Large size of a country leads to more power; territory swallows the conqueror . Large territory helps in developing effective defense, typography . Large size leads to greater power .
 National morale is the determination with which a nation supports the home and foreign policies of its government in times of peace or war . Morale is the degree of determination with the nation supports its government .
 Balance between resources and policy formulation leading to its execution by the government, while ensuring people's participation, through political institutions, is key . Balance between . resources and . policy formulation . leading to the execution of the government .
 Morgenthau says a nation's diplomacy gives "direction and weight" to other elements of national power . He says diplomacy is the quality of a country's diplomacy .
 All states expected to observe universally accepted moral code of conduct . All states are expected to follow universally accepted morality code .
 International Law; formation of arrangements called collective security by a group of nations to oppose collectively . International Law .
 IPS: Balance of Power is equilibrium of power among members of the family of nations as will prevent anyone from becoming sufficiently strong to enforce its will upon the others . Balance of power will prevent any of them from becoming too strong to impose their will upon others .
 Distribution of existing power between states is based on an assessment of each state's relative power capabilities . The distribution of existing state power is based upon an assessment .
 The Concert of Europe is also a good example of major European states striving to balance power . It is also an example of European states trying to balance their power .
 The increasing power of Germany began seeing bipolar sets of alliances leading to World Wars, and followed by the Cold War . Germany's rise in power led to the rise of the Nazis in the early 1930s .
 Simple BoP requires parity between powers but in more complex situations competing powers can achieve balance from additional sources e.g. alliance . A more complex BoP can be achieved with additional sources such as alliance .
 BoP based on appearances is subjective and fragile, but that based on actual capabilities is objective and more stable . BoP is based on appearance but it is more stable than a person's actual capabilities .
 Fortuitous Bop is not based on particular policies (on luck or chance) whereas Contrived BoP is based on conscious policies of either or both sides . Fortuitous BoP does not rely on luck, chance or chance . Contrived Bop does not depend on the policies of
 Rising power gains strength, challenges previously superior state and, given newness of capacities, war occurs because each side thinks it can win . All states act to increase capabilities but prefer to negotiate rather than fight .
 All states fight rather than pass up an opportunity to increase their capabilities . All states will benefit from increased capabilities, officials say .
 All states stop fighting rather than eliminate an essential state . All states act to oppose any coalition or single state which tends to assume a position of dominance within the system .
 All states act to constrain states who subscribe to supranational (having power or influence that transcends national boundaries) organizing principles . All states permit defeated or constrained states to re-enter the system as potential partners .
 Ideological positioning makes switching sides very difficult in the multi-polar world . Ideological positions make switching sides difficult in multi-polite world .
 Everyone has their own ideology and they consider it superior among others . Everyone has a different ideology and considers it superior .
 No foreign policy — no matter how ingenious — has any chance of success if it is born in the minds of a few and carried in the hearts of none, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The policy of a sovereign state in its interaction with other sovereign states is the policy of the state . i. It is the The Policy of a Sovereign State in interacting with other . sovereign states i. i. The policy is the policies of a . sovereign state .
 Agenda setting: A problem or issue rises to prominence on the agenda. ii. Agenda setting is a way of setting an agenda for a meeting. i.i.ii. A problem, issue or issue, or a problem, is set to be a priority in the meeting. ii
 Official discussions typically involving high-level political and military leaders and focusing on ceasefires, peace talks, and treaties and other agreements . i.ii.iii. i.i.ii: Ceasefires, talks, treaties, other agreements are typically focused on peace talks and negotiations .
 Unofficial dialogue and problem-solving activities aimed at building relationships and encouraging new thinking can inform the official process, academic, religious, and NGO leaders and other civil society actors .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT iv. A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\ » .
 People-to-people diplomacy undertaken by individuals and private groups to encourage interaction and understanding between hostile communities and involving awareness raising and empowerment within these communities .
 It is often communicated through an informal intermediary or through a third party . Vi. vi.
 There are few kinds of approaches of foreign policy, which help in understanding the foreign policy but they are used in different period of history . i. Multitrack diplomacy; A term for operating on several tracks simultaneously, including official and unofficial conflict resolution efforts . ii. A term is used
 Historical or Traditional Approaches . These approaches have been adopted for the study of diplomatic events of a particular period with accuracy, precision, so as to learn lesson for future on the basis of past experience . i.ii. ii.ii . ii.iii.ii: These approaches are
 This approach lays emphasis on the study of foreign policy in legalistic terms . Legalistic approach is a legalistic approach to foreign policy .
 Efforts are made to study the external relations of the states in the light of international law, treaties, constitutional provisions etc. iv. iv . iv. Efforts made to examine external relations in light of the international law and treaties . iv .
 The scholars adopting this approach pick up some specific problems or conceptual framework, using their own judgement on the weighing of various factors . The scholars adopt this approach .
 This approach differs from all other approaches of study not only with regards to the method but also in of international politics . vi. vi.
 Comparative Approach for the study of foreign policies is of relatively recent origin . The comparative approach draws inspiration from study of comparative government . Comparative approach for foreign policy is a relatively recent development .
 This approach tries to analyze foreign policy as an expression of the prevailing political, social or religious beliefs . Ideological approach is an approach to analyzing foreign policy .
 The policies are classified as democratic or authoritarian; liberal and socialistic, peace-loving or aggressive . Thus, the policies were classified as either authoritarian or liberal or socialistic .
 The study of foreign policy purely on ideological basis is not possible, writes Andrew Hammond . When there is clash between ideology and rational interests, the former is abandoned, he says . Hammond says .
 States take action because people in governments, decision makers, choose those actions . Decision makers also choose those who make those decisions . States take actions because they choose to take action against them .
 Decision making is a strong process in which adjustments are made as a result of feedback from the outside world iv. Decision making makes decisions based on feedback from outside world .
 Decision makers set goals, evaluate their relative importance, calculate the costs and benefits of each possible course of action, then choose the one with the highest benefits and lowest costs . In this decision makers choose the best way to make decisions .
 Ayesha Younas C\»^C V Alternative to this is organizational process model . Alternative to that is organizational model model . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Foreign policy decision makers skip the labor-intensive process of identifying goals and alternative actions . They rely instead for most decisions on standardized responses or standard operating procedures .
 One more alternative is government bargaining model, in which foreign policy decisions result from the bargaining process among various government agencies . Government agencies with somewhat divergent interests in the outcome .
 Leaders and people of countries with small territory and population do not expect their country to carry great weight in international affairs and vice versa ii. People of small countries don't expect their small territory to carry much weight in world affairs .
 Geography including its fertility, climate, location, location in relation to their land masses, and water ways influence this ii. Geography . Geography includes its fertility and climate .
 People possessing a unified common culture and historical experience can pursue an effective foreign policy because of the support of all sections of society who share the same values and memories . iv. iv. Culture and History can be successful in pursuing a successful foreign policy .
 Generally, the industrially advanced countries feel more deeply involved in relation with other countries because they have to import different kinds of raw materials and commodities from other countries . The industriously advanced countries are often more involved in their relationship with other nations .
 Countries which possess advance technology are able to provide technical know-how to less developed nations and thus exert necessary influence on their foreign policies . Countries with advance technology can exert influence on foreign policy .
 It depends on its military preparedness, technological advancements and economic development vii. National Capacity depends on the strength of its military .
 A society which is sharply divided on the basis of wealth, religion, regional imbalances can't pursue effective Foreign policy on account of division and lack of co-operation among various groups . viii. vii. Social Structure . vii . A society that is sharply . divided
 It usually follows rather than guides the top leading to progress i. ii. Public mood is usually more important than the top . ii. It is usually followed rather than guided by the top to progress ii. The public mood is more important in the country's future than the government .
 It can exercise a lot of influence on the determination of a foreign policy if the basic realignment in the prevailing great power structure takes place and the state becomes more involved/isolated from world affairs .
 Under authoritarian system, quick foreign policy decisions are possible because the decision making power rests with an individual assisted by his clique . ii. C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT . i.C
 Under this system undesirable opposition can be suppressed through censorship and promulgation of regulations . Under this . system undesirable . opposition can . suppress through censorship, promulgation . of regulations, he says .
 It does so by supplying factual information on the basis of which the people take decision by publishing specialized articles on current international developments . xi. X Role of Process is to help people understand the significance of developments .
 In an open political system, the demands of citizen and group get articulated and transmitted to foreign policy formulation . The demands of citizens and groups get articulated by foreign policy . Political Accountability is a key part of the political process .
 Sovereignty is in fact a relatively recent innovation connected to the emergence of the nation-state as the primary unit of political organization . i. ii. Confusion regarding the concept due to these factors . Confusion about sovereignty is due to the fact that sovereignty is a relatively new innovation .
 A number of contemporary issues have placed increasing limits on the exercise of sovereign authority . The country's sovereign authority has been placed under increasing pressure .
 It means the possession of absolute authority within a bounded territorial space . It means . It also means the . possession of . absolute authority in a bounded territory .
 There cannot exist another sovereign state within the existing sovereign state . Exclusiveness; There cannot be a new sovereign state in the existing state . There cannot also be another sovereign country in the same state .
 The sovereign wields power by virtue of his own right, not by virtue, mercy . Originality is originality, originality. Originality. Sovereigns wield power not by mercy .
 Hobbes focused on its absolutist aspect, while Austin focused on legalistic or juristic notions of sovereignty . Hobbes and Austin both focused on the legalistic aspect of sovereignty, and on the juristic aspect . Austin's views on sovereignty differ dramatically .
 The notion of sovereignty is important but it can become rigid unless applied to the evolving pattern of inter-state relations . The idea of sovereignty must be applied to changing patterns of international relations, says David Cameron .
 The agreement allowed the ruler to determine the religion within his borders . This agreement allowed him to choose his religion based on the religion .
 As Europe colonized much of the rest of the world from the fifteenth through the nineteenth centuries, the state system spread around the globe . The process of drawing boundaries to clearly demarcate borders would be critical for defining sovereign states during decolonization .
 The post-war period also saw the growth of intergovernmental organizations to help govern interstate relations in areas ranging from trade and monetary policy to security . Intergovernmental organizations helped govern international relations .
 V. Granting former colonies independence and recognizing them as sovereign states, they joined intergovernmental organizations . They joined international organizations and were ostensibly the equals of European states . V. V Granting ex-colonies independence, they became sovereign states .
 sovereignty now entitles developing states to development assistance . Now, sovereignty also entitles them to development aid .
 Many post-colonial states have lacked internal dimension of sovereignty . As a result, many states have not been able to fully develop their sovereignty . This has led to the collapse of many of the world's most successful states .
 The growth of multinational corporations and the free flow of capital have placed constraints on states' ability to direct economic development and fashion social and economic policy . Economic Globalization is a key factor in state development .
 The Growth Of Supranational Institutions being partially driven by economic integration and the cause of human rights . Supranational organizations have emerged as a significant source of authority that, at least to some degree, place limits on state sovereignty .
 In 1930 Charles Bears wrote the first book on national interest . The word 'interest' is derived from Latin and means 'it concerns, or it makes a difference to'
 In IR, national interest describes the underlying rationale for the behavior of states in a threatening global environment . National interest preserves and protects one's values against another, says IR .
 Statesmen often have little choice but to put the interest of their own entity above those of others . Statesmen are responsible for and to their separate publics, and operate in an uncertain milieu .
 National interest is understood to mean a state of affairs valued solely for its benefit to the nation . National interest means a state that is valued only for the benefit of the nation.
 National interest often becomes synonymous with national egoism, with its disposition of transferring self love onto the national group . One cannot speak about national interest without reference to values, even if they are a culmination of those held by some or all members of a given society .
 Some put self-preservation (territorial integrity, political independence and fundamental government institutions) at the head of the list . Some put themselves in the list of priorities, such as protecting their integrity .
 Other categories of national interest focus on self-sufficiency, prestige and aggrandizement . National interest is defined as national security .
 Charles Bear focused on the notion of territory and commerce as being the defining features of national interest . Charles Bear: "Territories and commerce are the defining feature of national interests"
 Morgenthau says that a country's national interests should be proportionate to its capacity . Morgenthalau: National interests must be proportionated to their capacity .
 Britain and France after WWII had superpower ambitions, not commiserate to their capacities . The sun never sets on the british raj.
 If one country's ideology is liberal-democratic, it will make policies supporting democratic governments and movements . It will also oppose totalitarian ones, says Julian Zelizer .
 The imperative to act honestly and make decisions in accordance with international laws is the imperative to be honest, the government must act honestly .
 Each organization tends to exaggerate its specific funding request, and to argue in the name of national interest rather than its own interest . Each organization's funding request is likely to be exaggerated .
 To equate the success of one's own political party with an entire nation's success is a mistake, he says . To equate one party's success with one's success, it's a mistake to equate success with success of a nation .
 National Interest is defined in terms of an ethnic or racial minority or majority . National Interest defined as a minority or ethnic or ethnic minority . National interest is defined as the national interest of the nation .
 A particular class will defend its interests while defining national interest, says President Obama . "It's a class that defends its interests and defines national interest," says Obama .
 Preservation of physical, political and cultural identity of the nationstate . National identity of nationstate.
 Protection of citizens abroad and ensuring diplomatic immunity of foreign missions . Protecting citizens abroad .
 Long-term interests of strategic, ideologoical or economic nature which do not change easily, for example with changes in domestic policies, are not easily changed easily . Long-time interests are not easy to change easily with changes to domestic policies .
 Short term interests vary with cross-currents of personalities, public opinion, partisan politics, sectional interests etc . Complementary Interests can serve as basis for agreement on specific issues . Conflicting Interests: Interests which bring countries at odds with each other. Conflic
 These interests can also undergo change due to varying internal circumstances and a changing external scenario . Yet these interests can be changed due to changing circumstances, such as internal circumstances .
 Involve a large number of nations, such as economic interests or diplomatic norms . Specific Interests : Location and issue specific interests emerging from more general interests . Identical Interests: Interests held in common by different states(e.g. climate protection concerns) 6.
 Indirect so they don't infringe directly on other sovereign nations (e.g. embargos, boycotts, severing diplomatic relations) or Direct . Direct . If the other state responds with escalating moves, the other moves may also be escalated .
 Common interests are most effectively perpetuated by means of diplomacy, says President Obama . Diplomatic diplomacy is the key to preserving common interests, he says .
 Also useful in negotiating conflicting national interests without resorting to coercive means . Also useful to negotiate conflicting national interest .
 Defense of the state is naturally the primary concern of foreign policy . National Interest and Foreign Policy is a primary concern for the state .
 Promotion of economic interest, including securing favorable conditions of trade, is a vital objective of foreign policy-makers . Promotion of free trade is an important goal for the U.S. Foreign Policy .
 Maintenance of international peace, respect for international law, pacific settlement of international disputes and strengthening of the system of international organization . Maintaining peace and respecting international law is a priority .
 There are some world leaders who believe that their foreign policy must be committed to a certain ideology, such as Fascism or communism . A Project of CSS Writing Club . Ayesha Younas .
 Morgenthau for example opposes state action based on universal principles . Given the complexities of International politics, Morgenthalau opposes state actions based on Universal principles .
 He advocates a pragmatic approach of acting based on national interests . Instead of acting in national interests, he advocates an approach to national security .
 Growing inequalities and environmental problems require world leaders to think beyond the narrow ambit of national interests . Yet, issues of global concern like growing inequalities and . environmental problems must be global concern, says David Cameron .
 Every foreign policy has two sides: the making of the policy, and the implementation of it . Approaches to Peace: Diplomacy: The making of a foreign policy is the making and implementation .
 Diplomacy is linked with the implementation part of a foreign policy, says David Cameron . If national interest is associated with the formulation part of the policy part, diplomacy is linked to the implementation of it .
 Diplomacy tries to achieve the maximum objectives with a minimum of costs in a system of politics where war remains a possibility . Diplomacy is an attempt to achieve a maximum of the objectives with the minimum of the costs .
 During the middle ages diplomats were mostly confined to maintaining archives rather than negotiating them . Diplomats were mainly confined to keeping archives and negotiating documents . Diplomacy did not grow much during middle ages .
 In the late middle ages, in Genova, the Duke of Milan established the first foreign mission .
 But this was still diplomacy of the court rather than that of the people, says the BBC . "This is still diplomacy for the people rather than for the court," she says .
 After the American and French revolutions, diplomacy became more democratic and less aristocratic . vl. Vl. After the U.S. and French revolution, diplomacy was more democratic .
 The Congress of Vienna laid down procedures for diplomatic immunities and defined diplomatic hierarchies . The Congress was established in Vienna, Vienna, Austria, in 1903 .
 Diplomacy is bilateral in character but as a result of growing international and regional organizations, it is becoming increasingly multi lateral in character . Diplomacy in the U.S. is becoming more bilateral in terms of international organizations, say experts .
 Diplomacy is one of the instruments for the application of foreign policy, says David Cameron . Diplomacy can be used to help develop a nation's future, says Cameron .
 Diplomacy as a concept is narrower in scope than foreign policy, i. ii. In that sense, diplomacy . i.i.i.: Diplomacy is a concept that has a narrower scope than that of foreign policy . ii.i: Diplomacy was a concept of diplomacy as
 Diplomacy is the method and process by which foreign policy is pursued but it is not a policy onto itself, i. i. iv. Diplomacy is the method of pursuing foreign policy by which it is pursued . iv. diplomacy is not the policy on itself, iv. diplomatic
 Traditional diplomacy assumed that major European powers had special responsibility for maintaining world peace . i. ii. The colonies had no more significant diplomatic role than that of satellites . ii. Modern Diplomacy assumes that major powers have special responsibility to maintaining peace .
 Traditional diplomacy was professional but secretive and relied on a limited cadre rather than extended diplomatic channels . i. ii. Traditional diplomacy used to be professional and secretive, but secretive . iv.ii.iii. i.ii . Traditional diplomacy relied upon a small cadre of staff rather than
 Modern diplomacy is more open and democratic; it requires reciprocal bargains and compromises so it is not possible for diplomats to spell out a given stance in advance . iv. iv. John MacIntuffel says diplomacy must be more democratic and more open .
 Multilateralism is increasingly evident in the practice of modern diplomacy, with behind-the-scenes preparations by diplomatic officials . Multilateral diplomacy is becoming more and more evident .
 Foreign office officials include career diplomats and political diplomats appointed by home governments . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: Foreign office staff are career diplomats, political diplomats . iv.ii.: Diplomats are appointed by governments appointed by their respective governments .
 Ambassadors head foreign missions and serve as the personal representative of the home state in host country iv. Ambassadors are the personal representatives of the state in their country .
 Councilors of embassies rank second to the ambassador and they are career diplomats . Councilors are diplomats at embassies and embassies .
 V Secretaries, with first, second and third rankings, are mid-career officials implementing foreign policies of their home countries . vi.
 Credentials of diplomatic envoys are approved by host countries where they are to be appointed . Credentials of diplomatic ambassadors can be approved by hosts countries .
 i. Presentation of credentials and assuming charge in host country involves interaction with the host governments . ii. Presentating credentials in host countries involves interacting with the hosts governments . i. Introduce credentials to host countries and assume charge in countries .
 Diplomatic missions and personnel enjoy certain immunities and privileges like the rights of extraterritoriality and inviolability . (safety, the rules on diplomats are the same as that of their country) i. (safety) i . (Safety) is safety, (Safety, the
 Diplomats can be dismissed or declared persona-non-grata by host countries . Home states can dismiss diplomats or they can be declared persona non-Grata . Host countries can also dismiss diplomats .
 Their main duties are to implement the foreign policies of their governments . They are to protect the national interests of their countries in the alien land .
 For exercising duties successfully, they have to cultivate social contacts on foreign land . For exercising their duties, they must have social contacts in foreign land.
 A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 Negotiating includes transmission of messages between foreign ministries of host and home states and the pursuit of agreements by compromise and direct contact . i.ii. ii. i.i. Negotiates includes . transmission of . messages between . foreign . ministries of . host and . home states
 Report socio-cultural, economic and political conditions of host country for formulating diplomatic strategies and foreign policies . iv. Reporting socio-Cultural, economic, political and political . (Economic, military attaches and political officers . sent to get feedback to frame foreign policy; iv. reporting socio
 A diplomat shall protect the interests of his nation and its citizens in a foreign land . As per provisions of different bilateral and international treaties and agreements, a diplomat shall . Protects interests of the nation .
 For a large period diplomatic activities were conducted secretly . So, for a very large period, diplomatic activity was conducted secretly, says the British ambassador .
 From the first half of the twentieth century, the demand for open diplomacy gained ground . Open diplomacy has been a key part of the history of diplomacy .
 Woodrow Wilson, the former U.S. President, was an ardent supporter of open diplomacy iv. iv. Wilson was a strong advocate for open diplomacy . Wilson was assassinated by the Soviet Union at the age of 50 in 1945 .
 Features of open diplomacy include rejection of conclusion of secret treaties . Conducting of diplomatic negotiations in full public glare . Conduct of diplomatic talks in public glare. Rejects conclusion of conclusion in secret treaties.
 Economic diplomacy avoids political differences, and places greater emphasis on strengthening friendship through economic cooperation . i.ii. i.i.i: Economic diplomacy is based on economic cooperation rather than political differences . ii.ii: The world's most important ally is to strengthen friendship by economic cooperation.
 In a changed international order after the Cold War, economic diplomacy gradually gained momentum in different parts of the world . iv. iv. In a new world of diplomacy, the world has seen a rise in economic diplomacy in recent years . iv.: Economic diplomacy has been a key part of the
 The Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan or the Warsaw Pact were forms of economic diplomacy in some way or the other . The Truman doctrine, the . Marshall Plan, the Warsaw . Pact or the . Warsaw Pact was forms of . economic diplomacy .
 By the 1980s, third world countries had started liberalizing their economies . By the 1990s, the world's third largest economies were liberalizing .
 The role and importance of professional diplomats are coming under scrutiny in the age of information technology . This liberalization programme had presented an unprecedented opportunity to the developed world to engage in economic diplomacy with the third world countries .
 With the spread of democratic ideals and growing demands for open diplomacy, the traditional form of diplomacy is also facing a crisis . The spread of democracy and growing demand for open diplomatic discourse is also a problem .
 Democratic institutions like the Parliament, media and peoples 'organizations are trying to influence the process of diplomacy. i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: The Parliament and media and people 'organize' to influence diplomacy. ii: The people of the world are
 The world of diplomacy is, therefore, no longer the exclusive domain of the professional diplomats only . Science and technology and democratic ideals have made deep inroads into this exclusive world .
 The groundwork and issues for talks between heads of different states have to be prepared by the diplomats . Diplomats are not always very well acquainted with every detail of foreign policies, says the diplomat .
 Foreign policy objectives must be defined in terms of national interest and supported by adequate power, to enable diplomats to negotiate effectively . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: The foreign policy objective must be supported by sufficient power to enable diplomacy to work effectively. i.
 Diplomats must be able to realize the objectives and interests of other nations as well . iv. iv. diplomacy must also realize the interests of others as well as those of them, he says . iv., iv. diplomatic relations must be successful in realizing their objectives, he writes . iv
 Nations must be willing to show flexibility on issues not vital to them or else diplomacy will be in vain . Nations must show flexibility in dealing with issues not important to them, says David Cameron .
 States have strong incentives to free themselves from the insecurities of international anarchy . States should not have to rely on other nations' support for their sovereignty .
 States face coordination and collaboration problems, yet cooperation remains difficult under anarchy . i. ii. States face common coordination problems, but coordination is hard under anarchy, i.ii. i.
 We are concerned with fundamental institutions, of which international law is one of the most important, i.ii. We are also concerned about fundamental institutions such as international law, which are important to us . i.iii. We're concerned with basic institutions, such as the rule of law
 The quest for global governance is pushing international law into new areas, raising questions about whether international law is transforming into a form of supranational law . iv. iv. Aims to be a model of international law for the future .
 Individuals and collectivities are gradually acquiring rights and responsibilities under international law . Individuals, and some extent collectivities, are increasingly acquiring rights . They are establishing their status as both subjects and agents under . international law.
 Non-governmental actors are becoming increasingly important in the development of the development and codification of international legal norms . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 International laws relate to the functioning of individuals, institutions and states in the international arena . i. ii. International laws are rules which relate to functioning of people and institutions in the world's international arena. i.ii. International law are rules relating to the function of individuals and institutions .
 International law has various ingredients including general principles of law and justice, which are equally suited to regulating the conduct of individuals, organizations within a state and states themselves . International law can be applied to individuals and organizations in states and states .
 Early rulers had made international rules to safeguard emissaries, initiation and cessation of hostilities and arrangement of truces, and maritime laws . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: i.iii: The rules were established by early rulers . ii: The laws
 Romans devised principles of just gentrium or law of the people . Romans devised the law to aid governance, and it was then used to govern the country .
 By the time the Roman Empire fell, application of these laws was widely accepted . Application of the laws was accepted by the time of the Roman empire .
 European states contributed to international laws at a later stage in history . European states also contributed to the law in a different way at a time .
 Hugo Grotius, for example, produced a momentous work on laws concerning war and peace, emphasizing the independent nature of law . The work on law and peace was published in the early 1900s .
 During the eighteenth century, three prominent schools of thought concerning international law were evident; the positivists, the naturalists and the Grotians . vi. V. vi.
 The positivists focused on practicalities and the consensual nature of these laws . They focused on the practicalities of the laws . The positivistists were more concerned with practicalities .
 League and UN system have made important contributions to international law . League and the UN system, and subsequently the International Court of Justice, have made significant contributions to law .
 Other institutions like IMF or WTO influence laws concerning trade economic laws . IMF influence laws regarding trade economic law . WTO influence law concerning economic laws.
 Procedural laws define types of permitted behavior whereas substantive laws concern territorial rights of states . i.ii. ii.iii.ii .ii.ii: i.iii: i .ii:    substantially law concerning tensional rights
 There are laws governing behavior of states in a state of war and those meant to prevent outbreak of violence and promote peace . iv. iv. The laws govern behavior of countries in a war are meant to promote peace and prevent outbreaks of violence, i.e. violence, peace. iv
 General or universal laws are applicable to all sovereign states, whereas particular laws are defined by bilateral or regional agreements . General laws are . applicable to . all sovereign countries .
 Those of coordination regulate relations between members of the same group . The coordination of coordination regulates relations between groups of people .
 Laws of reciprocity refer to the intermediary interaction which implies mutual benefit . Laws of receiving occurrence occurs in intermediary interaction .
 Positivists argued that only those international laws had validity, which were adopted by consent of sovereign states, had validity . Positivistists argued only those laws were valid, which are adopted by sovereign states .
 i. Based on principles of universal acceptability, some natural laws are applicable across the world. ii. Some natural laws were based on principles that are universal acceptable across the globe. i. If you want to know more, please contact us at http://www.mailonline.
 Based on the implicit or explicit consent of states, customary laws are mainly based on customs or treaties . iv. iv. ii. iviii. ivii. iv ivii . ivii ivii: customary laws based on custom, customs, treaties, customs and treaties . IVii
 General laws defined with reference to terms like justice or rights, enables jurists to fill in the gaps left by positivist laws . General laws define terms like 'justice' or 'right' in terms of human rights .
 There is no formal institution to make international laws, so they are made outside of formal institutions . V Legal commentaries help clarify, elaborate upon and apply the broad nature of laws to specific circumstances .
 If a sufficient number of states follow a customary practice, it becomes an international custom, i.ii.ii . i.iii. If a number of countries follow a custom, it will become an international practice .ii. ii.ii: i.i.ii.: i.
 The International Court of Justice is composed of UN member states recommended by the Security Council . It has an advisory capacity to interpret treaties, but it lacks the authority of national courts .
 International tribunals also lack the authority of national judicial institutions . International courts lack authority in the absence of national courts, international tribs .
 Prior to the French Revolution, law was understood principally as the command of a legitimate superior . International law was seen as a command of God, derived from natural law . Law was understood in the 'Age of Absolutism'
 In the modern period law has come to be seen as something contracted between legal subjects, or their representatives, and international law has been seen as the expression of the mutual will of nations . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: International law is seen as an
 Because of its historical roots, the modern institution of international law has a number of distinctive characteristics, informed largely by the values of political Liberalism . iv. iv. History of International Law: Origins of the institution, Origins of Liberalism, explains why it has distinctive characteristics .
 The most distinctive characteristics of the modern institution of international law are its multilateral form of legislation, its consent-based form of legal obligation, its language and practice of justification, and its discourse of institutional autonomy . International law is multilateral legislation, consent based on consent, legal obligation and
 Realists argue that international law is only important when it serves the interests of powerful states . Ayesha Younas is a member of the CSS Writing Club .
 Neo-liberals explain how self-interested states come to construct dense networks of international legal regimes . i.iii. Neo-Liberals explain why self-interest states build dense international legal networks . ii. i. The world's most powerful and most powerful states should be able to
 Constructivists treat international law as part of the normative structures that condition state and non-state agency in international relations . Constructivism is a form of international law that condition the state, non-State agency, they say .
 Like other social norms, they emphasize the way in which law constitutes actors' identities, interests, and strategies . iv. iv. ii. iv iv.ii.ii . iv . iv: Law is a matter of law, not just law .
 New Liberals emphasize domestic origins of state preferences and, in turn, international law . New Liberals say they want to focus on international law, not state preferences .
 Within international law, they stress the need to disaggregate the state to understand transnational legal integration and interaction . They prioritize international humanitarian law, and prioritize international human rights .
 Critical legal studies concentrate on the way in which the inherent Liberalism of international law seriously curtails its radical potential . International law has a long history of 'liberalism' in the world .
 As international humanitarian law evolves, issues of global justice are permeating the international legal order . ii. ii. As international human rights laws evolve, issues such as global justice must be dealt with, say experts .
 Placing limits on the legitimate use of force is one of the key challenges of the international community, and the laws of war have evolved to meet this challenge . i.ii. i.iii. Placing limit on legitimate force is a key challenge for the world's armed forces,
 The laws of war have traditionally been divided into those governing when the use of force is legitimate, jus ad bellum, or jus in bello iv . The laws govern how war may be conducted and how it is conducted .
 Laws governing when war is legally permitted have changed dramatically over the history of the international system . Post-1945 view that war was only justified in self-defence or as part of a UN mandated international peace enforcement action . The laws governing war have been changed dramatically in the past .
 Individuals rarely have recourse to self-help within nations . States rely on selfhelp as a matter of norm lest they are bound by a treaty of some sort . i.iii. While individuals rarely have access to self help within nations, states rely on it as a norm .
 With the passage of time, international laws are becoming more accepted and complex . Sanctions and international censure ensure states to oblige to them, says the BBC .
 It influences and channels bilateral or even multilateral economic, social and political cooperation . ii. It influences or channeled bilateral or multilateral cooperation . i.ii. i.i.ii . It influences, channeling and channeling economic and social cooperation .ii.ii: It
 It provides the normative background based on which independent states can make their decisions . It is the background for independent states to make their own decisions .
 Nationalism is used in two related senses: nationalism and nationalism . It is also used in the name of nationalism in the United States . Nationalism means nationalism .
 In the first usage, nationalism seeks to identify a behavioral entity the nation and thereafter to pursue certain political and cultural goals on behalf of it .
 In the second usage, nationalism is a sentiment of loyalty toward the nation which is shared by people." ii. ii. In the first usage of nationalism, nationalism means loyalty to the nation; i.ii. It means loyalty, loyalty and loyalty to a nation .
 Nationalism claims that the nation exists and should form the basis of the political order . ii. Nationalism is a form of nationalism that claims to be the basis for political power . i.ii.iii. The nation is a nation that claims that it exists, and should be the
 Nationalism can be considered as ideology, as sentiments, and as politics . iv. iv. Nationalism is a form of nationalism that can be viewed as ideology and as sentiments . iv . Nationalism was an ideology and sentiment, as well as an ideology, according to the author .
 There are different typologies of nationalism, such as ethnic/civic, elite/mass, statestrengthening/state-subverting . There is a different typology of nationalism .
 The most important debates on nationalism concern whether it is cause or consequence of nation, the relative importance of culture, economics and politics, and the different roles played by internal and external factors . V. V
 Nation-state will be defined largely in terms of its self-description and that of the international community, i. ii. Therefore, nation-states will be defining largely in . terms of their self- description and that . of the . international community . i.ii. The nation
 There is no simple sequence leading either from nationalism to nation-state formation to changes in the global political order or the other way round . i.iii. There are no simple sequences leading either to nationalism or nation-states formation or to change the world's political order . ii. There
 Instead it can take ethnic, civic, and other forms, be elite or popular, strengthen or subvert existing states . iv. iv. can be elite, popular, powerful or powerful, or strengthen existing states. iv iv. could take ethnic or popular forms, such as elite or
 At the start of our history global conflict is shifting power to extensive middle classes in Britain and France, and the national idea justifies demands for reforms . i. ii. The idea is that 'top-down' ideals of power based on religion, monarchy, and privilege should be challenged .
 The British victory over France popularizes its liberal, constitutionalist nationalism . It is taken up in imitative form by elites elsewhere in the world .
 These elites are able to modernize states like Prussia, Japan, and the North in the American Civil War, to form powerful nationstates . These elites were able, especially when linked to modernizing states such as Prussia and Japan .
 These states take up illiberal, imperialist nationalism to challenge British hegemony . These states are taking on illiberal nationalism against the UK .
 Such imperialist nationalism provokes colonial societies to develop counter-nationalism, such as anti-colonialism . Such imperialism provokes anti-nationalist tendencies in colonial societies, he says .
 State-subverting nationalism usually cannot on its own defeat imperial powers . Imperial powers cannot defeat the state-subverted nationalism, it is said .
 World powers weakened in global conflict with each other . Also important is that those powers are weakened in world conflict .
 The ability of state-subverting nationalism to form nation-states is based on a combination of its own social base and political organization, the power and policy of the state it confronts, and a favourable international situation . Therefore the ability of a nation-state-to-state nation-
 The sacrosanct principle of state sovereignty was weakened with the end of the cold war, new nation-state formation, and new economic and cultural forms of globalization . vi. V. V .
 This provoked a first wave of state-subverting ethno-nationalisms which could lead to violence and ethnic cleansing . vii. vii . This provoked the first wave, which could be followed by violence, which may lead to ethnic cleansing, according to the author . iReport
 International recognition for new states as civic, territorial entities is putting pressure on nationalism to move away from ethnic and statesubverting character . However, international recognition of new states puts pressure on nationalists to move from ethnic to statelessness .
 This nationalism can paradoxically get stronger the more the nation-state is weakened, i. ii. This nationalism gets stronger if the state is weakened . i.ii. Nationalism can paradoxly get stronger when the nation is weakened. i.i. The state of the nation should
 The shift of nationalism away from a state focus towards concerns with devolution, cultural recognition, and transnational linkages . However, perhaps more important is the shift .
 Nationalism, once again, is showing how adaptive it is to changes in the nature of global politics . Nationalism once again shows that it is adaptive to adapts to the changing nature of world politics .
 Globalization is evident in the growing extensity, intensity, velocity, and deepening impact of worldwide interconnectedness . i.I.i. ii.i: Globalization shows the growing intensity, intensity and velocity of global interconnectedness. i.i.: Globalization's impact on the
 Globalization denotes a shift in the scale of social organization, the emergence of the world as a shared social space, the relative deterritorialization of social, economic, and political activity, and the relative denationalization of power . i.ii.ii: Globalization is a
 Globalization can be conceptualized as a fundamental shift or transformation in the spatial scale of human social organization that links distant communities and expands the reach of power relations across regions and continents . iv. iv.
 Globalization is to be distinguished from internationalization and regionalization . Globalization should not be compared to internationalization or regionalization. Globalization must be different from regionalization and internationalization, he says .
 The contemporary phase of globalization has proved more robust in the aftermath of 9/11 than the sceptics recognize . V. A. G.E. has proved to be more robust than sceptics think, says the author .
 Contemporary globalization is a multidimensional, uneven, and asymmetrical process . vi. vi.
 Globalization is transforming but not burying the Westphalian ideal of sovereign statehood . Globalization has transformed but not buried the ideal of statehood, writes David Frum .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT i. i. C\ »^C . i.i.u.u: I’m not sure if you’ve got a problem? Please email us at www.css.com/
 Closeness of identification and values, Cultural similarities . Cultural similarities, Symbols of politics and organization . Symbols and organization. Symbolism of organization .
 Reform of the United Nations, New round of negotiations in WTO in WTO, Governance by international conferences, i. i. Reform of U.N. and i. Governance of international conferences . ii. Reforms of the UN, New. round of . negotiations in . WTO
 Policies to protect the environment vs. global environmental pollution and warming iv. iv. policies vs. policies to protect environment iv. v. environmental pollution iv. policy . iv. 2.2.3.4.5.5 .
 Globalization requires a conceptual shift in our thinking about world politics from a primarily geopolitical perspective to the perspective of geocentric or global politics . i. ii. The good and bad sides of the information society . The politics of worldwide social relations is the politics of global social relations .
 Global politics is more accurately described as distorted global politics because it is afflicted by significant power asymmetries. i.i.ii. Global politics more accurately . i.c.cannot be defined as distorted because it's afflicted with significant power . ii.i . Global politics has
 Globalization creates a double democratic deficit in that it places limits on democracy within states and new mechanisms of global governance which lack democratic credentials . iv. iv. 3: Globalization places limits to democracy within state and places new mechanisms to global governance without democratic credentials. iv: New mechanisms of
 Global politics has engendered its own global political theory which draws upon cosmopolitan thinking . Global politics engendered an own global politics which draws on cosmopolitan ideas . The theory of global politics has been called a 'global politics'
 Cosmopolitanism offers an account of the desirability and feasibility of the democratization of global politics .
 Distorted global politics can be interpreted as expressing a contest between statism and cosmopolitanism in the conduct and management of world affairs . The result of this contest can be seen as expressing the forces of statism .
 Because of expectations of war, states have tried to persuade citizens to place obligations to the 'national community' ahead of duties to other associations .
 Most forms of political community in human history have not represented the nation or the people, says Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. King . King: "Most forms of . political community ... not represented . nation or people," he says .
 The idea that the state should represent the nation is a European development which has dominated politics for just over two hundred years . i.ii. ii.iii. The idea of the state representing the nation has dominated European politics for more than a century . ii. i. The state should
 War and capitalism are two reasons why the nation-state became the dominant form of political community . iv. iv. war and capitalism were two reasons for the nation state to be dominant . The nation state is now the most powerful form of society .
 Modern states' 'intensive' and 'extensive' power made global empires possible . The extraordinary power of modern states made them possible, says the author of the book .
 V States have been the principal architects of global interconnectedness over the last five centuries . V. States have also been the architects of the world's interconnectedness in the past century .
 The global spread of the state and nationalism are key examples of global interconnectedness . vi. The state is key example of global connectedness, the author says .
 Citizenship rights developed by way of reaction to the growing power of modern states . Citizenship rights were created in response to the growth of modern statehood . Citizenship is a form of freedom of expression .
 The demand to be recognized as a free and equal citizen began with struggles for legal and political rights to which welfare rights were added in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries .
 The stability of modern forms of political community has owed a great deal to the fact that citizens won these rights . Citizens won the right to vote in the European Parliament in 2004, the European Court of Justice said in a statement .
 Some modernization theorists in the 1960s believed that liberal democracies had largely solved social conflicts of earlier centuries . The social conflicts were largely solved by liberal democracies, they said .
 Modernization theory assumed that non-Western societies would emulate Western paths of development . Modernized theory assumed non-western societies would follow Western paths .
 It was linked with the belief that liberal democracies belong to a unique sphere of peace . It is linked to the belief in liberal democracies .
 Liberaldemocratic states recognize that their citizens value their membership of many communities alongside the nation-state . i. ii. i.i.i: Liberaldamocratic states . ii.i.: Citizens of nations should be able to participate in their communities, not just the nation
 Some liberals have argued that globalization promises a new era of peace between the great powers . Some liberals argue that globalization will bring peace to the U.S.
 This is a condition in which more cosmopolitan political communities may develop, i.ii. This is the case of a cosmopolitan society . i.iii. i.i. The condition in this condition may be that more . cosmopolitan . political communities might develop, and i.
 Many realists argue that the war on terror and the renewed risk of nuclear proliferation indicate that globalization will not alter the basic features of world politics . iv. iv. 9/10: Globalization will continue to be a major factor in world affairs .
 Huntington's notion of the Clash of Civilizations challenged the idea that globalization will lead to a world moral and political consensus . Huntington's idea of a world of cultures was challenged by Huntington . Huntington: The idea is that globalization leads to a moral, political consensus in the world .
 Cosmopolitan approaches which envisage an international system in which all individuals are respected as equal have flourished in the contemporary phase of globalization . vi. vi.
 Communitarians argue that most people value their membership of a particular political community; they are unlikely to shift their loyalty from the nation-state to the human race .
 Post-structuralists argue that all forms of political community contain the danger of domination or exclusion . Post-Structuralists say that all political communities contain the risk of domination .
 Ethnic fragmentation is one reason for the failed state in Europe as well as in the Third World . demands for recognition of cultural differences exist in all political communities .
 Globalization theorists have defended cosmopolitan democracy on the grounds that national democracies are unable to influence the global forces which affect them . iv. iv. Theory: National democracies cannot influence the world's economic and political processes . iReport: How do you know how to get around the world
 The apex of nationalism in relations between the great powers occurred in the first half of the twentieth century . It was the height of nationalism between the two countries .
 Nationalism remains a powerful force in the modern world, but globalization and fragmentation have led to discussions about the possibility of new forms of political community . Nationalism is still powerful force but globalization has led to a new form of community .
 Internationalism is a political principle which transcends nationalism . It advocates a greater political or economic cooperation among nations and people . Internationalists believe that the people of the world should unite across national, political, cultural, racial, or racial boundaries to advance their common interests .
 Analysis of Internationalism • a liberal internationalist strand of political thought epitomized by Richard Cobden and John Bright . Analysis of internationalism • A liberal internationalism strand of thought .
 Strategic Approach to International Relation: War . War has been a central feature of human history . The changing character of war has changed in the course of history .
 Since the end of the cold war both the frequency and lethality of war has shown a sharp decline . i. ii. The frequency and effectiveness of war in war has decreased since the Cold War ended . ii. Since the war ended, the frequency of war is down dramatically . i
 War between the great powers in particular has become much more unlikely than in previous eras . War between great powers is much more likely now than ever before, says historian .
 Changes in the international system may be changing the character of war, i.ii. ii.iii. i. A. War of the Cold War may be on the rise in the world . i.i.ii: The world is changing the way it looks at the future of
 The nature of war remains constant, but its form reflects the particular era and environment it occurs in which it occurs . War is a constant constant in the war, but the form of it reflects the time and environment of it .
 Dramatic technological advances mean that a revolution in military affairs may be underway . Dramatic technology means that the future of the U.S. military is on the rise .
 Opponents with little or no access to RMA technology are likely to use 'asymmetric warfare' to fight the war on their own terms . Opponents of RMA may use the technology to fight on their terms .
 Most recent conflicts have been characterized by the kind of ferocity that was typical of 'modern' war, but overall casualty levels have been much lower . Overall casualty levels are much lower in recent conflicts than in previous wars .
 In fact, there are many different types of wars, which can be classified according to which people actually fight, the intensity of the conflict, and the extent of combatants' use of violence, among other factors . i. ii. i.ii.ii .
 A total war is a war in which combatants use every resource available to destroy the social fabric of the enemy . i. ii. i. War is a battle in which every resource is used to destroy social fabric, i.ii. The enemy is destroyed by the use of every resource
 Total wars are highly destructive and are characterized by mass civilian casualties . Winning a total war often requires combatants to break the people's will to continue fighting . Total wars often require people to break their will to keep fighting .
 World Wars I and II were total wars, marked by the complete destruction of the civilian economy and society in many countries . Many countries, including France, Germany, the Soviet Union, Italy, Great Britain, and Japan, were destroyed .
 A limited war is a war fought primarily between professional armies to achieve specific political objectives without causing widespread destruction . i.ii. ii.i. The war is fought primarily by professional armies in order to achieve certain political objectives . ii. i.i . The war was fought primarily in
 Although the total of civilian casualties may be high, combatants do not seek to completely destroy the enemy's social and economic frameworks . i.ii.iii. ii.ii: Although the . total . civilian casualties . may be . high, they do not . seek to . completely destroy
 Persian Gulf War of 1990-1991 was a limited war in which the United States and its allies forcibly removed Iraqi troops from Kuwait . The U.S. and allies removed Iraqi forces from Kuwait in 1991 .
 A guerrilla war is a war in which one or both combatants use small, lightly armed militia units rather than professional, organized armies . i. ii. Guerrilla war is the use of small militia units in a war against organized armies. i.ii. A guerilla war is
 Guerrilla fighters usually seek to topple their government, often enjoying the support of the people . i.ii. i.iii. Guerrilla . fighters usually sought to topple government, usually enjoying support from the people. ii. guerilla fighters usually try to topple the government. i
 These wars are often very long but also tend to be successful for the insurgents . Mao Zedong's victory over Chiang Kai-shek in China in the 1940s, the Vietcong's Vietnam War victory over the United States in Vietnam War, and the Mujahideen's
 A civil war is a war fought within a single country between or among different groups of citizens who want to control the government and do not recognize another group's right to rule . i. ii. i. V Civil war is fought within or among groups who want control of the government .
 Civil wars are almost always total wars because each side feels compelled to destroy the enemy's political support base . i.ii. ii.ii: Civil wars almost always always always involve destruction of political support bases . ii.iii: Civil war is almost always a total war because of the
 Regional rifts, such as the American Civil War between the North and the South, characterize some civil wars . Other civil wars have been fought among ethnic rivals, religious rivals, and rival clans .
 A proxy war is a war fought by third parties rather than by the enemy states . Third parties are involved in proxy wars, rather than the enemy state .
 Many of the militarized conflicts during the Cold War, such as the Korean War and the Vietnam ii. Vietnam, were also involved in the Vietnam War . The Cold War was one of the most militarized wars in the world .
 War, can be interpreted as proxy wars between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, neither of which wanted to fight each other directly . Neither of the two countries fought directly .
 A war can often be a limited war, a guerrilla war, and a civil war all at the same time . i. ii. Categorizing Wars is a way of categorizing wars. i. Categorically, a war can be a war of war, guerrilla war or
 The United States sent trainers, money, and weapons to Afghan rebels to fight against the invaders . The U.S. sent trainers and money to the Afghan rebels, making it a low-intensity, limited conflict from the United States .
 The Afghan resistance mostly relied on guerrilla tactics . Ayesha Younas is a member of the CSS Writing Club .
 Intervention is a fairly common way for a third-party state to get involved in a civil war or a war between two or more other states . i. Intervention Intervention is the most common way a third party state gets involved with a war . ii. Intervention intervention is a relatively common way
 A state intervenes when it sends troops, arms, money, or goods to help another state that is already at war. ill. ill . State intervention is when it intervenes in the way of intervening in a war with another state .
 During the Cold War, the term intervention was used to describe one of the superpowers becoming involved in a smaller country's war (often a developing country) iv. iv. The term intervention is often used to refer to one country's involvement in a war . iv. Intervention was used
 This type of intervention occurs when a country sends military forces into another state to act as peacekeepers or to block other forces from attacking . The intervention is a type of military intervention by a country sending forces into a state to protect itself .
 Sometimes these interventions are organized or conducted by the U.N. or another international governmental organization . These interventions are often conducted by international organizations .
 The United States, along with other NATO nations, sent troops into the former Yugoslavia on a number of occasions to protect people from war . The U.S. has sent troops in the ex-Yusniya to protect its citizens from war.
 A successful example of this peaceful intervention occurred during the 1999 United States bombing campaign in Kosovo, which helped stop a slaughter of Kosovars by attacking Serbs .
 'New wars', following state collapse, are often conflicts over identity as much as territory . 'New war' is often conflict over identity rather than territory . New wars are often clashes over identity and territory, following collapse .
 The new wars in fact follow a pattern of warfare that has been typical since the late 1950s . New wars in Iraq and Afghanistan follow pattern of war patterns since the 1950s, experts say .
 Such conflicts typically occur in countries where development is lacking and there is significant economic insecurity xi.i. Such conflicts usually occur in those countries with significant economic instability xi .
 Asymmetric warfare can describe a conflict in which the resources of two belligerents differ in essence and in the struggle, interact and attempt to exploit each other's characteristic weaknesses . i. ii. War is described as a war in which resources of the two sides differ, and in
 Unusual warfare often involves strategies and tactics of unconventional warfare . The weaker combatants try to use strategy to offset deficiencies in quantity or quality of quality . Such struggles often involve strategies or tactics that are unconventional warfare tactics .
 V a disrupted structure of expectations, vi. a will-to-conflict. vii. A project of CSS Writing Club .
 It is aggravated by; sociocultural dissimilarity, cognitive imbalance, status difference, state power, coercive state power . viii. vii. It is also aggravated by the social differences between the two cultures .
 It is inhibited by; sociocultural similarity, decentralized or weak, coercive state power . ix. It's inhibited by . sociociational similarity, . decentralized or . weak, or . decentralized state power, it is inhibited .
 The meaning of terrorism is socially constructed . Terrorism lies the word terror . Terrorism is a social construct of terrorism .
 Approximately 15,000 Roman soldiers were killed and hundreds more slain after being taken prisoner . Around 15,00 Roman soldiers died and hundreds were taken prisoner.
 For the Romans, such Barbarian resistance would have been considered terrorism . The Romans would have considered such resistance to Barbarian resistance .
 The Sicarii's most fundamental justification was that all means were legitimate to achieve political and religious liberation . All means necessary to achieve liberation was legitimate, he said .
 New terrorism is terrorism that is indiscriminate; it causes as many casualties as possible . New terrorism 'is indiscriminate', says U.S. President Obama .
 Another major feature of new terrorism is the increasing readiness to use extreme indiscriminate violence . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 While old terrorism was mainly secular in its focus and drive, new terrorism works hand-in-glove with religious fanaticism . New terrorism is now a form of terrorism that works hand in hand with religious fanatics .
 For Ganor, the comparison between old and new terrorism can be articulated through the differences between classical, modern, and postmodern terrorism . Ganor: The comparison between classical and modern terrorism is based on the differences in modern terrorism .
 "The damage is fairly low because the terrorist acts are perpetrated to achieve a specific political objective," says President Obama . The damage is "fairly low," says Obama .
 Although conventional weapons are used in modern terrorism, they are used to create mass fatalities . The U.S. State Department says conventional weapons have been used in terrorism .
 The evolution of terrorism in four waves, the Fourth Wave being new terrorism . The comparison between old and new terrorism can also be explained through the evolution of terrorists .
 Fourth Wave symbolized by religious justification for killing, international scope, unparalleled gory tactics and weapons, and dependence on technologies of modernity . The Fourth Wave is symbolized . religious justification .
 The factors that motivate people to join and remain in terrorist groups can be religious, economic, social, psychological, retaliatory, and so forth . Ayesha Younas C\»^C
 A religious fanaticism is an extreme sense of ideological zeal . It expresses the high dedication of one or more people to their own belief system . It is also a focus on a focused and unrelenting set of activities .
 Radical religious Islamism has been identified as a root cause of terrorism . Radical religious Muslims have been linked to terrorism in recent years .
 For example, in the U.S., radical Christian killers have been involved in abortion-clinic bombings and militia actions . In the past, they have targeted abortion clinics, abortion clinics and militias .
 Catholics and Protestants have perpetrated terrorist acts in Northern Ireland . Catholics and Protestant Protestants have committed terrorism in the past .
 Terrorism can be the result of groups' portrayal of governments as oppressive . Qppression is a form of group's portrayal of the government as oppressive.
 Terrorists often invoke the unfairness of their treatment by governments that deprive them of identity, dignity, security, and freedom as the main reason for joining terrorist groups . In autocratic societies, military-occupied areas, or even in the international arena, may engage in terrorism as a principal
 Terrorists target governments and groups they view as responsible for historical injustices . Terrorist groups target governments they view responsible for historic injustices. Terrorists often target governments, groups they believe to be responsible for injustice . Terrorists also target governments in the U.S. and abroad .
 The international rule of law is the standard by which all nations are subject to and bound by supranational legal covenants . Violation of International Law is a Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Enduring conduct such as extended military occupation or foreign domination in violation of U.N. resolutions may be a major cause . Enduring military occupation is one of the reasons .
 Scholars have found a strong link between poverty and terrorism . Relative Deprivation has been found to be a factor in terrorism .
 In view of the 70% adult unemployment rate in Gaza, the GDP of less than $1,000 throughout the Palestinian Territories, it is easy to allude to the possibility that relative deprivation has helped trigger Palestinian terrorism . Gaza has a 70% unemployment rate, GDP of under $1
 Countries that express hatred toward the global economic hegemony will produce more terrorist groups . Hatred Towards Global Economic Hegemony will produce terrorist groups, author says .
 The background that gave birth to Al Qaeda, namely Afghanistan and Pakistan, symbolizes this notion . Al Qaeda was born out of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Afghanistan .
 The loss is of the same degree as that caused by Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the California earthquake of 1994 . The loss of the loss is similar to that of Hurricane Andrew and California earthquake .
 Corporate hostage taking in Central and South America is more common than in the Philippines . Abu Sayyaf group in Philippines hostage taking happens more out of a desire to earn a ransom than achieving political goals .
 Racism can be a powerful method for dehumanizing adversaries and accomplishing moral disengagement . Racism is a powerful way to dehumanize adversaries and disengage from each other .
 Guilt by Association • for terrorists, you are the company that you keep . A Project of CSS Writing Club . Ayesha Younas C\»^C
 One of the motives was Spain's involvement in the Iraq War, where the country had troops . Spain had troops in Iraq, where it had troops.
 Strategic culture is a useful concept for explaining the profile and behavior of the security policymakers of a state . Determine the role and efficacy of military force in interstate political affairs .
 It conditions their worldview, interpretation of political and military developments, perception of the adversary, and selection of policy options . It conditions the worldview of the U.S. and allies .
 A strong distrust of India and a history of acrimonious Indo-Pakistani relations reinforced by the historical narratives of the pre-independence period and the troubled bilateral interaction in the post-colonial period .
 Aversion to an India-dominated regional power arrangement for South Asia . Avert to a region dominated by India in South Asia.
 An active search for security to maintain its independence in deciding about foreign policy options and domestic policies, says President Obama .
 A close nexus between Islam and strategic thinking, leading to connections between Islamic militancy and foreign policy . Islam is linked to the rise of Islamic terrorism in the Middle East . The U.S. has a close relationship with the Muslim world .
 Realism and organizational imperatives have influenced their outlook and decisions . Realism has influenced many of the world's most important decisions, including those of business leaders .
 At times, the dictates of different approaches conflict with each other and policymakers may be unwilling or unable to make a clear-cut choice . At times it may be difficult to choose between different approaches to solving problems .
 Pakistan's security managers have been wary of militant Islamic groups in the post-9/11 period . This is the case with the approach of Pakistan security managers towards the militants in the past decade .
 It offers a better understanding of the socio-cultural and political context within which policymakers function . It highlights the impact of ideological and other societal variables on policymaking .
 Any study of a state's strategic profile and the possible reaction to security pressures requires, inter alia, a good appreciation of the strategic culture of the country concerned .
 This facilitates communication between the security policymakers and the outside actors, i.e., individuals, states, and organizations, on security-related issues . It also helps identify ways and means to change their policy outputs .
 This is important for promoting arms control in conventional and nonconventional fields . This is quite important for the U.S. to promote arms control, says President Obama .
 The Missile Defence Systems and their impact on global strategic environment 10.10.10 . 10.11.11 . The missile defence systems are the world's most powerful weapons systems . They are designed to protect the nation from the threat of terrorism .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Components of Deterrence . The ability to communicate both capability and resolve is a key component .
 Decisions by both defender and challenger will be based on rational calculations of costs and gains . Assumptions of Deterrence Theory: Decisions will be made by rational calculations . Decisions should be made based on cost and gain of costs .
 Pakistan's nuclear program has been under the scope of the international community for a very long time . Pakistan has a long history of testing nuclear weapons in the past .
 International overblown concerns that Pakistani nuclear weapons or components might fall into the wrong hands are overblown . International concerns over Pakistan's nuclear weapons have been raised in the past .
 Pakistan acquired a lot of its nuclear capabilities through a clandestine program by importing crucial technologies from the Western World, but it is equally true that the all the other nuclear powers have acquired their capabilities through their own clandestine programs . Pakistan acquired its capabilities through its clandestine program .
 Pakistan has effectively dismantled the Abdul Qadeer Khan Network . Pakistan has enhanced security mechanisms inside their nuclear facility . The country's nuclear facility has a strong security system .
 Islamabad has taken a number of steps to improve its nuclear security and prevent further proliferation of nuclearrelated technologies and materials . Islamabad has also taken a step to improve the nuclear security .
 A number of important initiatives, such as strengthened export control laws, improved personnel security, have improved Pakistan's security situation in recent years . International nuclear security cooperation programs have also improved Pakistan security .
 It is safe to conclude that international concerns regarding Pakistan's nuclear program are overblown . The Pakistan nuclear program is very safe, according to the report .
 In the mid-1970s Pakistan embarked upon the uranium enrichment route to acquire a nuclear weapons capability . In the 1970s Pakistan was trying to get a nuclear weapon capability .
 Pakistan conducted nuclear tests in May 1998, shortly after India's nuclear tests, declaring itself a nuclear weapon state . Pakistan conducted its first nuclear tests after India tested nuclear weapons in 1998 .
 Plutonium stocks are expected to continue to increase as Pakistan brings more production reactors online at its Khushab facility . Pakistan is expected to bring in more nuclear production reactors .
 Khan Research Laboratories greatly increased its HEU production capacity by employing more efficient P-3 and P-4 gas centrifuges . The Khan Research Laboratory greatly increased production capacity .
 Initial steps toward Pakistan's nuclear program date to the late 1950s, including with the establishment of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission in 1956 . Initial steps were taken in the late '50s .
 After the December 1971 defeat in the conflict with India, Bhutto issued a directive instructing the country's nuclear establishment to build a nuclear device within three years . The directive was issued in December 1971 after the defeat in December .
 India's detonation of a nuclear device in May 1974 further pushed Islamabad to accelerate its nuclear weapons program . The PAEC had already constituted a group in March of that year to manufacture a nuclear weapon . i. ii. Pakistan's nuclear program was accelerated in 1974 after India detonated a nuclear
 Khan was a metallurgist working at a subsidiary of the URENCO enrichment corporation in the Netherlands . Khan returned to Pakistan to help his country develop uranium enrichment program .
 Khan used various tactics, such as buying individual components rather than complete units, to evade export controls and acquire the necessary equipment . Khan brought centrifuge designs and business contacts back to Pakistan .
 Khan would assert that the country had acquired the capability to assemble a first-generation nuclear device as early as 1984 . Khan would later assert that he had the ability to assemble the first-gen nuclear device .
 Beijing provided Islamabad with various levels of nuclear and missile-related assistance in the late 1970s . The assistance included centrifuge equipment, warhead designs, HEU and missile systems .
 From the 1980s onwards, the Khan network diversified its activities and illicitly transferred nuclear technology and expertise to Iran, North Korea, and Libya . Eventually, from the 1980- onwards, from . the . 80s onwards onwards, . Iran, . North Korea and Libya were the
 The Khan network was officially dismantled in 2004, although questions still remain concerning the extent of the Pakistani political and military establishment's involvement in the network's activities .
 Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif decided to test, and Pakistan detonated five explosions on 28 May . Pakistan detonated the explosions .
 In a post-test announcement Sharif stressed that the test was a necessary response to India, and that Pakistan's nuclear weapons were only ""in the interest of national self-defense... to deter aggression, whether nuclear or conventional.""
 With these tests Pakistan abandoned its nuclear ambiguity, stating that it would maintain a ""credible minimum deterrent"" against India . Pakistan said in a statement it would be a 'deterior deterrent' against India.
 In 1998, Pakistan commissioned its first plutonium production reactor at Khushab . The reactor is capable of yielding approximately 11 kg of weapons-grade plutonium annually .
 Analysis of the cooling system of the heavy water reactors at Khushab estimates the thermal capacity and thus the plutonium production capacity of the reactors to be ""IS kg and ""'19 kg per annum respectively .
 Construction of a fourth plutonium production reactor at Khushab is estimated to be more than 50% complete based on satellite imagery analysis .
 Associated facilities and their associated security perimeters are also being expanded . The plutonium separation facilities at New Labs, Pakistan Institute of Science and Technology, are also expanding .
 Islamabad has yet to formally declare a nuclear doctrine, so it remains unclear under what conditions Pakistan might use nuclear weapons . Islamabad still has no nuclear doctrine .
 Pakistanis argue that in the face of India's increasing conventional capability, it is unreasonable to expect Pakistan to cap its fissile materials production . Pakistanis say India's conventional capability is increasing and Pakistanis should not cap its production .
 The FMCT legitimizes India's fissile material stocks, argue that it legitimizes them . Furthermore, they argue that they legitimize India's stockpile of nuclear material .
 At the Conference on Disarmament in January 2011, Pakistan reiterated its opposition to the commencement of negotiations towards an FMCT . Pakistan has been in talks with the UN to discuss a possible FMCT since 2001 .
 Islamabad called for the CD's agenda to be enlarged to consider A Project of CSS Writing Club . Islamabad maintains opposition to FMCT in its current format .
 Pakistan's position on nuclear disarmament is that it will only give up nuclear weapons if India gives up its own nuclear arsenal . In 2011 the National Command Authority said Pakistan's desire to constructively contribute to the realization of a world free of nuclear weapons .
 Pakistan is unlikely to consent to a denuclearization agreement with India . However, given Islamabad's objective of balancing India's conventional military and nuclear superiority, Pakistan will not agree to an agreement .
 Islamabad has consistently refused to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Islamabad has also consistently refused the Comprehensive nuclear Test Ban treaty . Official statements indicated that even if India signed the treaty, Islamabad would not necessarily follow suit .
 V Pakistan is a member of some multilateral programs, including the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism . Pakistan is also a member member of the GITI to combat nuclear terrorism .
 Islamabad has also put into place more stringent export control mechanisms, including the 2004 Export Control Act . The Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Strategic Export Control Division to regulate exports of nuclear, biological, and missile-related products .
 Pakistan acceded to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material in 2000 . Pakistan is the only country in the world to have signed the convention .
 Pakistan has been involved in the U.S. government's Secure Freight Initiative . The security of Pakistan's nuclear weapons has been of significant concern to the international community in recent years .
 Senior Al Qaeda leaders have also expressed an interest in coopting Pakistan's nuclear weapons . Pakistan has been hit by a series of terrorist threats in the past .
 Such developments increase the likelihood of scenarios in which Pakistan's nuclear security is put at risk, experts say . Such developments are likely to increase the risk of a nuclear attack, they say .
 Taliban-linked groups have attacked tightly guarded government and military targets in the country . Taliban-backed groups have successfully attacked closely guarded government targets in Afghanistan since 2007 .
 Militants carried out small-scale attacks outside the Minhas Air Force Base in 2007, 2008, and 2009, and gained access to the site during a two-hour gunfight .
 Pakistani officials have repeatedly denied claims that the base is also used to store nuclear weapons . A retired army official asserted that Pakistan's nuclear weapons are stored in the base .
 Several Pakistani nuclear facilities, including the Khushab facility and the Gadwal uranium enrichment plant, are in proximity to areas under attack from the Taliban . However, several nuclear facilities are located close to Taliban territory .
 There have been some attempts to kidnap officials and technicians working at nuclear sites in western Pakistan . It is not clear who was responsible or what their intentions were .
 Islamabad has consistently asserted that it has control over its nuclear weapons . It says it is impossible for groups such as the Taliban or proliferation networks to gain access to the country's nuclear facilities .
 Pakistan has taken measures to strengthen the security of its nuclear weapons and installations . The country has also improved its nuclear command and control system . Khan network, Pakistan has also taken steps to strengthen its nuclear security .
 The National Command Authority is the main supervisory and policy-making body controlling Pakistan's nuclear weapons . It maintains ultimate authority on their use . It is composed of key civilian and military leaders .
 In November 2009, Asif Ali Zardari announced that he was transferring his role as head of the National Command Authority to the ex-Prime Minister, Yusuf Gilani . Asif was transferred to Gilani in November 2009 .
 The Strategic Plans Division is the secretariat of the NCA . It is responsible for operationalizing nuclear doctrine and strategy, managing nuclear safety and security .
 Pakistan has strengthened its personnel reliability program to prevent radicalized individuals from infiltrating the nuclear program . Pakistan has also strengthened personnel reliability programs to prevent terrorists infiltrating its nuclear program.
 Pakistani analysts and officials state that they have developed their own version of ""permissive action links" or PALs to safeguard their warheads . They have not relied on the United States assistance for this technology .
 Satellite imagery also shows increased security features around Khushab-4 . Satellite images also show increased security measures in the area of Khush-4.
 In recent years, the U.S. has provided various levels of assistance to Pakistan to strengthen the security of its nuclear program .
 According to reports in April 2009, Islamabad shared some highly classified information about its nuclear program with Western countries in order to reassure them of the country's nuclear security . The Taliban control in western Pakistan increased in 2009 .
 Pakistan has been critical of the U.S.-India nuclear cooperation agreement, but at the same time has periodically sought a similar arrangement for itself . Washington has so far turned down the request for such a deal .
 Islamabad pushed for a criteria-based exemption to the rules of the Nuclear Suppliers Group . Unlike the country-based exception benefiting only India, only India could have made the exemption .
 Islamabad joined other members of the Board of Governors in approving India's safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency in August 2008 . Despite its reservations about the India special exception, Islamabad .
 At the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington in April 2010, Islamabad again sought ""non-discriminatory access"" to civilian nuclear technology . Islamabad also offered nuclear fuel cycle services covered by IAEA safeguards to international community .
 Pakistan has sought to increase civilian nuclear cooperation with China . At the Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague in 2014, Pakistan called for its inclusion in international export control regimes .
 Under a previous cooperation framework China had supplied Pakistan with two pressurized water reactors, CHASNUPPP-1 and CHASnUPP-2 . The reactors entered into commercial operation in 2000 and 2011 respectively .
 These reactors are currently under construction at the Chashma Nuclear Complex . They will also be placed under IAEA safeguards .
 CHASNUPP 3 and 4 are expected to be completed by 2016 and 2017, respectively, respectively . The project will be completed in 2017 and 2016 .
 China, a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group since 2004, did not pursue an exemption to NSG guidelines for Pakistan . China argued that Chashma 3 and 4 are ""grandfathered in"" under the Sino-Pakistan nuclear framework .
 In November 2013, Pakistan announced the construction of two additional Chinese-supplied 1,100 MW reactors . The two additional reactors will be built under a $9 billion agreement . The reactors are expected to be completed by 2020 .
 As of early 2014, the Pakistani government has begun a bid for three additional nuclear power plants . The new plants are reportedly to be built in the Muzaffargarh district, Punjab province .
 At a cost of approximately USD 13 billion, this bid could enable Pakistan to meet its 2030 goal of generating 8,800 MW of nuclear energy to solve its chronic power shortages . The bid could be worth approximately $13 billion .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 1. Retributive Measures A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 The Hague treaties and the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty justifications for armament vs. armament . Justifications for Armaments vs. Armament are based on the nuclear non-proliferation treaty .
 Arms and arms races are costly and potentially very bloody . Arms races could be costly and bloody . Disarmament is the answer to the arms race . Arms race could be a source of conflict .
 History of Disarmament attempts traced back to the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 . Treaty stipulated against the need for building fortifications . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Both Conferences called upon military and naval experts to propose reducing military expenditures through disarmaments . But the major powers were not ready for such moves in practice .
 The devastation caused by WWl impelled statesmen of the world to give serious thought to disarmament . Disarmament after WWl was thought to be a solution to the problem .
 A permanent advisory commission was established in the League in 1920 . The Council of the League appointed another commission in 1920, the Temporary Mixed Commission, with a fixed four year mandate and comprised primarily of civilians .
 The UN Charter laid much emphasis on the need for disarmament after WW2 . The devastation unleashed by WW2 led to calls for the disarmament . Disarmament after the World War II led to disarmament in the United States .
 Eisenhower proposed establishing a pool of fissionable materials donated by nuclear states to the Atomic Energy Commission to be provided to other countries strictly for peaceful purposes . Atoms for Peace Plan was proposed in 1953 .
 The Soviets opposed this plan arguing that an agreement on prohibiting nuclear weapons was necessary prior to disseminating nuclear technology . A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas .
 UN Disarmament Efforts included all five SC members and Canada . UN Atomic Energy Commission included all 5 SC members . Canada .
 The USSR pulled out of both Commissions due to China's representation on them . Ultimately, the USSR withdrew from both commissions due to the Chinese representation . China was the only country represented on both commissions .
 Many disarmament and arms control efforts were undertaken through bilateral means between U.S. and USSR . In 1985 six nation summits in New Delhi was indicative of the growing concern amongst developing countries about nuclear weapons .
 International Atomic Energy Agency initiated a study of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle .
 In late June 1968, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko asked that discussions on limiting both offensive and defensive weapons begin on 30 September . Unfortunately, Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces intervened in Czechoslovakia in August, causing Johnson to postpone talks .
 The treaty called for verification by national technical means (satellite reconnaissance, electronic monitoring) without interference . It established a U.S.-Soviet Standing Consultative Commission to considering questions about compliance and interference .
 A quantitative limit on both intercontinental ballistic missiles —1,054 for the U.S. and 1,618 for the Soviets—and submarine-launched ballistic missiles . No limits on warheads, but no limits on intercontinental missiles .
 After ratification of SALT I, the second phase focused on ""quantitative" limits . Each side should be limited to 2,400 ICBMs, SLBMs and long-range bombers, of which 1,320 could have multiple warheads .
 The Reagan administration offered its 'zero option' concept . The U.S. would cancel its scheduled deployment in the unlikely event the Soviets withdrew their intermediate-range missiles with 1,100 warheads .
 The United States created a new umbrella organization, the On-Site Inspection Agency . To carry out the inspections, the agency would verify compliance with treaty provisions .
 Reagan outlined his plan for the ""practical, phased reduction" of strategic nuclear weapons in two-stages in 1982 . START I and II Negotiations .
 In phase I, warheads would be reduced by a third, with significant cuts in ballistic missiles . In phase II, a ceiling would be put on ballistic missile throw weights and other elements . Phase III, phase IV, phase II would reduce warheads to a third .
 The Soviets, and many NATO allies, opposed SDI because it threatened the existing mutual nuclear deterrent system . SDI was opposed by NATO allies because it was a threat to the existing system . The Soviets and many allied nations opposed the SDI .
 Both men agreed to work for a 50 percent reduction in strategic forces . The Geneva summit made little progress .
 This agreement further reduced the number of strategic nuclear warheads to be held by each party on 1 January 2003 to no more than 3,500 . This agreement also agreed to a further reduction of the total number of nuclear warheads held by the two countries .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT disposal of chemical weapons and of fissile material extracted from nuclear warheads .
 Nonnuclear states' search for comprehensive test ban was closely linked to nonproproliferation treaty . Major nuclear powers' desire to restrict spread of nuclear weapons through nonpro-iferation treaty was closely tied to test ban . Nonnuclear state's search for a comprehensive ban on nuclear weapons was
 The spread of radioactive fallout resulting from atmospheric nuclear tests aroused public protests in the 1950s . 63 percent of the American people favored banning tests, compared with 20 percent three years earlier . President initiated the tripartite test ban negotiations .
 His sobering encounter with Khrushchev at Vienna in 1961 and the subsequent Berlin crisis, however, derailed his plans . The Berlin crisis and the Vienna crisis in 1961 derailed his ambitions .
 Washington's emphasis on the ""safeguard"" continued to be used to justify testing after the Cold War ended . Washington's focus on the 'safeguarded' continued to justify tests after the end of the Cold war .
 The People's Republic of China's first nuclear test on 16 October 1964, focused President Lyndon B Johnson's attention on the dangers of nuclear proliferation . The Non-Proliferation Treaty was signed by the U.S. President Johnson in 1964 .
 In 1965 both the U.S. and Soviet Union submitted their own draft treaties to the UN call to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons . After resolving a few differences, the treaties became identical by 1967 .
 The comprehensive test ban issue was dormant during the early years of Richard Nixon's presidency . It would not interfere with U.S.-Soviet negotiations on strategic arms limitations . It was dormant for Nixon's administration .
 The pact provided, for the first time, on-site inspections under certain circumstances . The pact was created under the guise of an agreement to allow inspections of facilities .
 The Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty is a proposed international treaty to prohibit the further production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other explosive devices . The treaty is proposed to prohibit further production in nuclear weapons .
 The treaty has not been negotiated and its terms remain to be defined . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Neither proposal would prohibit production of fissile material for non-weapons purposes, including use in civil or naval nuclear reactors . The proposal would also prohibit the production of nuclear material for civilian or naval reactors .
 Pakistan has repeatedly blocked the CD from implementing its agreed program of work, despite severe pressure from the major nuclear powers to end its defiance of 64 other countries in blocking international ban on the production of new nuclear bomb-making material .
 Since negotiations have not yet begun, it is unclear if scope of the treaty will include pre-existing stocks of fissile material .
 The designation FMT, used by the International Panel on Fissile Materials, makes this disagreement explicit . FMT is the designation used by an international panel on materials materials .
 The U.S. submitted a draft treaty to the CD in 2006 . IPFM released its own draft treaty in 2009 .
 Flas robust command and control system under NCA for safety, nonproliferation etc. i.i.ii.iii. For safety and nonproperliferation, i.d.c. safety, etc.ii . i. Flas is robust command, control
 The U.S. Strategic Plans Division was created in 2000 to improve the control of nuclear operations . It was created to improve control of the nuclear program .
 PNRA that collaborates with IAEA V Export Control Act 2004 to regulate nuclear exports vi. INAA V export control Act 2004 . IAEa V export Control Act was passed in 2004 . It is the first nuclear export control act to be approved by the IAE
 Pakistani scientists are 37/300 Pakistani scientists; India is not even a member of CERN . CERN member CERN is a non-member member .
 Flas four-decade long experience of safe and secure nuclear power plants, viii. Flas . Flas had four decades of experience .
 Pakistan's energy thirst can be quenenched by civil nuclear energy projects . i. ii. Pakistan's economy and industry simultaneously benefit from civil nuclear power projects. i.Nuclear energy projects will give boost to the economy . iNuclear power projects can also boost the economy and
 Import for civil nuclear and save domestic stock for military purpose. import for civil civil nuclear . import for civilian nuclear and import for military purposes. import domestic stock to save domestic stockpile for military use. import national stock for civilian purpose. Import national stock to military purpose . import national stockpile for
 A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C .
 China is largest nuclear trade partner with two dozen nuclear power plants . China's largest nuclear power plant in the world is located in China . China is also the world's largest producer of nuclear plants .
 Countries such as France and South Korea will be able to trade with Pakistan . viii. vii. Pakistan has been ruled out of trade with France, South Korea .
 India's membership may result in regional instability owing to its hegemonies, i. iv. iv.: It may also lead to regional instability in the region . iv. India is one of the most powerful countries in the world, with the West .
 V India will accrue larger benefits than Pakistan in access of nuclear materials . vi. India will benefit from access to nuclear materials more than Pakistan does .
 Exception for India means exception for other nations which should not be the case. vii. exception for India is exception for others, which should be the same case. iReport: India should not have been treated as an exception to other nations. iReporter: "Exception for
 Strategic stability cannot be achieved with India ONLY membership. viii. vii . Strategic stability can be achieved only with India only membership . vii. Vii.
 Discriminatory approach for membership may halt regional peace, security . Discriminating approach to membership could halt peace and security . ix. ix .
 Credibility and effectiveness of group can be damaged if India as member uses veto against any group objective . India as a member of the group can use veto to block any objective of a meeting .
 The United Nations Outer Space Treaty provides the basic framework on international space law . Space should be reserved for peaceful uses, says the treaty .
 There are no weapons deployed in space or terrestrially meant to attack space objects, such as satellites . Neither are satellite weapons deployed against terrestrial targets .
 The United States plans to place the ""SBIRS Low"" network of two dozen infrared missile-tracking satellites for ""TMD"" and ""NMD"" (Theater Missile Defense and National Missile Defense) in this region .
 Globalstar's 48 satellites providing mobile communications and telecommunications; Orbcom's 35 mobile communications satellites . A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C .
 These circulate easterly, precisely 35786 kilometers above the Equator with a period of 24 hours . Hence they remain stationary with respect to any given position on the surface .
 Only China, France, India, Japan, Russia, Ukraine, and the United States possess such rocketry . At present only China and France possess such rockets .
 Terrestrial and satellite based ASATs would be intended to target enemy and opponent's militarily relevant satellites . Terrestrial, satellite-based ASAT systems would be aimed at enemy and enemy satellites .
 Opponents in such a race would be able to threaten the U.S. with nuclear weapon carrying ICBMs . Opponents would also endangering its early warning satellites . I • Opponents could also threaten the United States with nuclear weapons .
 An overwhelming majority of nations in the UN have expressed support for a treaty Preventing an Arms Race in Outer Space . Such a treaty by itself would not be sufficient .
 There would always be fear of surreptitious weaponization of space by the opponent . There would also be fear that space would be weaponized .
 Iraq, Romania, DPRK, Libya, Iran, Syria, Syria and now. A lessening of commitment to non-proliferation, shown by non-compliance cases . Iraq, . Romania, . DPRK, . Libya, . Iran, Iran and now .
 North Korea as well as political ambivalence by many governments or at least their diplomats . Benefits of non-proliferation not always recognised too often seen as a ""North-South"" issue . The spread of sensitive nuclear technologies particularly through an active black market including even nuclear weapon designs
 Theories in IPE: Mercantilism, Economic Liberalism, and NeoMarxism . International institutions were created to facilitate cooperation in the world-economy after the Second World War .
 The onset of the cold war postponed the operation of these institutions, as the U.S. stepped in directly to manage the reconstruction of Europe and the international monetary system based on the dollar .
 The Bretton Woods system of managed exchange rates and capital flows operated until its breakdown in 1971 . The USA announced it would no longer convert the dollar to gold to gold .
 1970s were marked by a lack of international economic cooperation among the industrialized countries . The 1970s saw the rise of trade protectionism and floated exchange rates and protectionism .
 Developing countries' dissatisfaction with the international system came to a head in the 1970s when they pushed unsuccessfully for a new international economic order . vi.
 Trade negotiations were broadened to include many new areas but this led to later resistance from emerging economies . vii. vii .
 Emerging economies such as China and India playing a more prominent role in negotiations in trade, finance, and development assistance . In 2007, a power shift became more obvious in the global economy .
 Institutionalists apply rational choice to states in their interactions with other states in order to explain international cooperation in economic affairs . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: The rational choice is rational choice in the context of international economic cooperation .ii.iii: The
 Constructivist approaches pay more attention to how governments, states, and other actors construct their preferences . They highlight the role of identities, beliefs, traditions, and values in this process . Constructivism is a form of constructivist theory .
 Neo-Gramscians highlight that actors define and pursue their interests within a structure of ideas, culture, and knowledge which itself is shaped by hegemonic powers . Neo-Neo-Gramncians say actors define their interests in a structure that shapes them . Neo
 Institutionalists argue that international institutions will play an important and positive role in ensuring that globalization results in widely spread benefits in the worldeconomy . Institutionalistists say international institutions are important to ensure that globalization benefits widely .
 Realists reject the institutionalist argument on the grounds that it does not account for the unwillingness of states ever to sacrifice power relative to other states . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Constructivists pay more attention to how governments, states, and other actors construct their preferences . They highlight the role that state identities, dominant beliefs, and ongoing debates and contestation plays in this process . Constructivism is a theory of state identities and dominant beliefs in society .
 In particular, the emergence of global capital markets means that all governments have to be cautious in their choice of exchange rate and interest rate policies . i. ii. All governments must be cautious about their exchange rates and interest rates policies, i.E. Robinson says .
 On other issues of economic policy, wealthier and more powerful countries are less constrained by globalization than is portrayed by the globalists . Wealthier countries are more constrained by globalists than they are portrayed as globalists, says Julian Zelizer .
 This is because firms and investors are not solely concerned with levels of taxation and wages . Governments are keen to attract firms which are not concerned about levels of tax and wages, it is said .
 They are equally concerned with factors such as the skills of the workforce, the provision of the infrastructure, and proximity to markets . i.ii. They are concerned with . skills of workforce, . provision of infrastructure and . proximity to . markets . ii. It is also concerned with the
 At the international level the more powerful states in the system get to set (and enforce) many of the rules of the new global economy . The more powerful state get to enforce (and set) the rules, they will be able to set the rules for the future .
 It was believed that national strength could be maximized by limiting imports via tariffs and maximizing exports . i. ii. It was thought that . national strength would be maximised by limiting . imports via . tariffs and . maximizing exports, i.ii. It is believed that . limiting imports
 Beginning around 1650, the British government pursued a policy of mercantilism in international trade . i.iii. ii. ii . ii.ii.ii: The British government's policy of international trade was based on mercantillism .
 Mercantilism stipulates that in order to build economic strength, a nation must export more than it imports . iv. iv. A nation must import more than they import to build strength, iv. a nation's economic strength must be built on the strength of its exports . iv
 The English passed regulatory laws exclusively benefiting the British economy . To achieve this favorable balance of trade, the English passed laws exclusively helping the British .
 The laws created a trade system whereby Americans provided raw goods to Britain, and Britain used them to produce manufactured goods . The raw goods were sold in European markets and back to the colonies .
 As suppliers of raw goods only, the colonies could not compete with Britain in manufacturing . The colonies were not able to compete with the British in manufacturing.
 English ships and merchants were always favored, excluding other countries from sharing in the British Empire's wealth . i. ii. England was always favored by English ships, merchants, i.I.E., i.E. was the only country to share its wealth in the empire . i
 British mercantilism manifested itself in the form of the triangular trade . The triangular trade was a form of mercantilation .
 Trade routes linked the American Colonies, West Indies, Africa, and England . Trade routes between the colonies and the West Indies .
 New England rum was shipped to Africa and traded for slaves, which brought to the West Indies . The West Indies traded for sugar and molasses, which went back to New England .
 i. goods were shipped from the colonies to England, where they were swapped for a cargo of manufactured goods . i. Goods were shipped to the colonies from England, and were exchanged for manufactured goods. i. A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Mercantilism and triangular trade proved quite profitable for New England tradesmen and ship builders . The triangular trade was profitable for the New England trade .
 Navigation Acts vastly lowered tobacco prices in the southern Colonies . But in the Southern Colonies, economies suffered from the act .
 The triangular trade also spurred a rise in the slave population and increased the merchant population, forming a class of wealthy elites that dominated trade and politics throughout the colonies . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: Triangular trade led to rise in slave population, increased
 That every little bit of a country's soil be utilized for agriculture, mining or manufacturing . That every bit of the soil should be used for agriculture .
 That all raw materials found in a country be used in domestic manufacture, since finished goods have a higher value than raw materials . Finished goods are more valuable than raw material .
 All export of gold and silver be prohibited and all domestic money kept in circulation . That all export of silver and gold be prohibited .
 Where certain imports are indispensable they should be obtained in exchange for other domestic goods instead of gold and silver . That where certain imports must be obtained they be obtained at first hand, in . Instead of . Gold and silver, it should be exchanged for domestic goods, not gold or silver .
 That opportunities be constantly sought for selling a country's surplus manufactures to foreigners, so far as necessary, for gold and silver . That opportunities should be sought for sales of surplus manufactures .
 That no importation be allowed if such goods are sufficiently and suitably supplied at home . No importation should be allowed in the UK, says the PM . That no imported goods should be imported in the country, he says .
 It includes a spectrum of different economic policies, such as freedom of movement, but it is always based on strong support for the market economy and private property in the means of production . i.ii. ii.ii: It is always . based on support for a market economy, private
 Economic liberalism tends to oppose government intervention in the free market when it inhibits free trade and open competition . Although economic liberalism can also be supportive of government regulation to a certain degree .
 Economic liberalism may accept government intervention in order to remove private monopoly . This is considered to limit the decision power of some individuals . However, economic liberalism may allow government intervention .
 While economic liberalism favours markets unfettered by the government, it maintains that the state has a legitimate role in providing public goods, vi. V. V .
 Economic liberalism is most often associated with support for support for free markets and private ownership of capital assets . It is usually contrasted with similar ideologies like similar ideologies such as similar ideologies .
 Economic liberalism also contrasts with protectionism because of its support for free trade and open markets . viii. vii. economic liberalism also supports free trade, open markets and free trade .
 Historically, economic liberalism arose in response to mercantilism and feudalism . Historically, it arose from the reaction to mercantsilism, feudalism and mercantillism . Economic liberalism arose as a result of economic liberalism .
 Neo-Marxism is a pretty loose term, and tends to encompass most of the trends of Marxist philosophy arising from the New Left . Today, economic liberalism is also generally considered to be opposed to non-capitalist economic orders, such as socialism .
 There is certainly no unified ideology of Neo-Marxism in the way that there is in orthodox Marxism, and many of the former's currents are in fact not in agreement with one another . i.ii. ii.iii. i.iii: There are no unified ideologies of Neo
 Neo-Marxism seeks to answer questions traditional or orthodox Marxism cannot, especially in light of technological advances and economic and political developments that Marx and Engels did not address or foresee . Broadly, Neo- Marxism seeks answers to questions traditional Marxism cannot answer .
 The most influential and important current in Neo-Marxist thought is the Frankfurt School . The Frankfurt School founded the Institute for Social Research in 1923 . It is the most influential current in neo-Marxism .
 Frankfurt School is critical of both capitalism and Soviet state communism . The Frankfurt School sought to rectify the inadequacies of traditional Marxist theory .
 They draw from other schools of thought, such as antipositivist sociology, Weberian sociology, psychoanalysis, and existentialism . vi vi.
 The original Frankfurt School thinkers were only loosely affiliated as a group, but shared a common philosophical approach . They shared a belief that a different path of socio-economic development from Soviet communism was needed .
 Dependency Theory originated with the work of Hans Singer and Raul Prebisch . The current of Neo-Marxist thought that is probably the most important and influential historically and today is Dependency .
 In Dependency Theory, economic processes are largely defined as external and based on a core-periphery model of the world economy, rather than the internal approach of orthodox Marxism that sees economic exploitation occurring on nation-state scale .
 Much of the work in the Dependency Theory school was done on Latin America and the decolonizing world by scholars such as Andre Gunder Frank and Samir Amin . The Dependency theory school was founded by the University of Columbia .
 Dependency Theory has evolved into World Systems Theory, whose originator is Immanuel Wallerstein . Today's leading scholar is Immanmanstein . World systems Theory is based on World System Theory, which is now based on Immanstein's theory .
 World Systems Theory expands on many of the basic ideas of Dependency Theory, but is an even more macro approach to economic and social change . It argues that nationstates should not be the basic unit of socio-economic analysis, but rather that international economic systems themselves are the key .
 IPE: Theories of Imperialism, Dependence and Interdependence discourse . Imperialism is a policy of extending a country's power and influence through colonization, use of military force .
 Its name originated from the Latin word ""imperium", which means to rule over large territories . i.ii. ii.ii: "Imperium" is a Latin word which means "ruling large territories"
 The term imperialism has been applied to Western political and economic dominance especially in Asia and Africa in the 19th and 20th centuries . It was applied to the West's dominance of Asia and African nations .
 Poor states are impoverished and rich ones enriched by the way poor states are integrated into the ""world system" i. ii. It is a central contention of dependency theory that poor state are impoverished .
 Theory arose as a reaction to modernization theory, an earlier theory of development which held that all societies progress through similar stages of development . The task in helping the underdeveloped areas out of poverty is to accelerate them along this supposed common path of development, by various means .
 Dependency theory rejected this view, arguing that underdeveloped countries are not merely primitive versions of developed countries, but have unique features and structures of their own . And, importantly, are in the situation of being the weaker members in the world market economy .
 Dependency theory no longer has many proponents as an overall theory, but some writers have argued for its continuing relevance as a conceptual orientation to the global division of wealth . i. ii. Some writers argue that dependency theory is still relevant to the world's wealth division .
 Poor nations provide natural resources, cheap labour, a destination for obsolete technology, and markets for developed nations . Without these they could not have the standard of living they enjoy . Premises of Dependency Theory A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Wealthy nations actively perpetuate a state of dependence by various means . Wealthy countries commit to dependency on each other by means of economic prosperity .
 This influence may be multifaceted, involving economics, media control, politics, banking and finance, education, culture, and sport . i.iii. This influence includes politics, media, politics and banking, banking, finance and education . ii. The influence may also include media control
 State-owned companies have higher rates of corruption than privately owned companies, i.i. ii. State-run companies are more likely to be corrupt than privately run companies . i.Yunun: State owned companies have more corruption rates than private companies .
 By subsidizing in-country industries and preventing outside imports, these companies may have less incentive to improve their products, to try to become more efficient in their processes, to please customers, or to research new innovations . i.ii. i.iii. i . i: By subsid
 Industries reliant on government support may not be sustainable for very long in poorer countries and countries which largely depend foreign aid from more developed countries . iv. iv.
 Subsidies on domestic industries come out of state coffers and therefore represent money not spent on other ways, like development of domestic infrastructure, seed capital or need-based social welfare programs . Subssidies come from state coffers, therefore not used in other ways .
 The higher prices caused by tariffs and restrictions on imports require the people either to forgo these goods altogether or buy them at higher prices, forgoing other goods . At the same time, the higher prices are caused by trade restrictions and trade restrictions .
 Imperialism is simply a manifestation of the balance of power and is the process by which nations try to achieve a favorable change in the status quo . Imperialism simply is the result of a desire for a change in status quo, says David Cameron .
 The purpose of imperialism is to decrease the strategic and political vulnerability of a nation, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," says Mandela .
 Imperialism is necessary to preserve the existing social order in the more developed countries . Imperialism will be necessary in order to preserve social order, says the author of the book .
 It is necessary to secure trade, markets, and to maintain employment and capital exports . It is also necessary to channel the energies and social conflicts of the metropolitan populations into foreign countries .
 There is a very strong ideological and racial assumption of Western superiority within this body of thought . There is also a strong ideological assumption, says the author .
 Imperialism is a policy choice, not an inevitable consequence of capitalism, says Julian Zelizer . Imperialism not inevitable, it's a policy decision, he says, not a result of capitalism . Imperialistism is policy choice and not a natural reaction to capitalism .
 Increasing concentration of wealth within the richer countries leads to underconsumption for the mass of people . The world's richest countries have the most wealth in the world, according to the OECD .
 Overseas expansion is a way to reduce costs (and thereby increase or maintain profit levels) and to secure new consumption . Overseas travel is a key to reducing costs and securing new consumption for the company .
 Imperialism arises because increased concentration of wealth leads to undeconsumption . Imperialism also arises because increase in wealth means undeconumption of consumption . Imperialistism arises due to increased concentration in wealth, says historian .
 Since the state represents the capitalist interest it is not possible to reduce underconsumption effectively through liberal strategies . The state represents a capitalist interest, says the author .
 Marx and Lenin did not view this strategy as possible as possible . Both strategies involve taking away money from the bourgeoisie . Lenin and Marx and Marx believed this was possible .
 Lenin said the rich countries would then fight over the redivision of the world . Lenin said that the world would be completely divided up and then divided up .
 Imperialism is objectless expansion, a pattern learned from the behavior of other nations and institutionalized into the domestic political processes of a state by a ""warrior"" class . Imperialism simply learned from other nations, institutionalized in the domestic politics of the state .
 This warrior class is created because of the need for defense, but, over time, it will manufacture reasons to perpetuate its existence, usually through manipulation of crises . i.ii. ii. ii: Over time, the class will manufacture excuses for its existence . ii.ii: Over
 These theories have been updated and modified by theorists who see an alliance between the warrior class and corporate interests . Theories have also been updated to reflect the rise of the corporate world .
 Realism assumes that all nation-states are motivated by national interests, or, at best, national interests disguised as moral concerns . National interest must be defined in terms of power . The Classical Approaches-Realism 1) Introduction Realism .
 National power has an absolute meaning since it can be defines in terms of military, economic, political, diplomatic, or even cultural resources . National power can be defined in terms military, . economic, . political, . diplomatic, diplomatic or cultural resources, . iv. iv. national power
 Realist thinking is that states find themselves in the shadow of anarchy such that their security cannot be taken for granted . The unifying theme around which all realist thinking converges is that state security is at risk of anarchy .
 Realism continues to attract academicians and inform policy-makers . But in the period since the end of the cold we have seen heightened criticism of realist assumptions . Realist assumptions have been criticised in recent years by some .
 Hans J Morgenthau: Politics is governed by objective laws which are based on human nature and psychology . The Twenty Years' Crisis: 1919-1939 V Hans j Morgenthaus: Politics .
 i. Concept of national interest in terms of power, understood only on rational basis. i. i i.i.ii.ii . i.iii.ii: i.v.i:   i. v.v.: i.l.v: i .v
 Universal moral principles cannot be applied to state's actions . These must be modified according to the circumstances of time and place, says the minister .
 V. Morgenthau does not find any identity between moral aspirations of a nation and moral law which govern the universe . He asserts that political actors pursue their national interests . vi.
 Political sphere is as autonomous as the spheres of the economist, or the lawyer or the moralist . Political spheres are autonomous as those of the economists, lawyers and moralists . Political sphere should be autonomous as it is of economist, lawyer, moralist or moralist, says Putin .
 First, for the theorist, the state is the pre-eminent actor and all other actors in world politics are of lesser significance . The theorist says the state, for example, is the most powerful actor in the world, and all others are lesser .
 First, state 'sovereignty' signifies the existence of an independent political community, one which has juridical authority over its territory . Second, state sovereignty is a form of state sovereignty, one of the world's most powerful political communities .
 Statism is flawed both on empirical (challenges to state power from 'above' and 'below') and normative grounds (the inability of sovereign states to respond) i.C.C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT to collective global problems such as famine, environmental degradation
 Realism tries to describe politics rationally, not on the basis of morality, but there is no universally acceptable definition of power . i.iii. Realism is not about morality, it's about power, not morality, and it's not about moral values .
 The primary objective of all states is survival; this is the supreme national interest to which all political leaders must adhere . All states must adhere to the principle that survival is their primary objective .
 All states have to rely upon their own resources to secure their interests, enforce agreements they may have entered into with other states, or maintain a desirable domestic and international order . vi. vi.
 "No other state or institution can be relied upon to guarantee your survival," says CNN.com.com . "Your survival will depend on your survival. No other state, institution or . institution can . guarantee your . survival."
 Self-help is not an inevitable consequence of the absence of a world government . Self help is a logic that states have selected, says David Cameron . Self-helping is not inevitable .
 There are historical and contemporary examples where states have preferred collective security systems in preference to self-help .
 Realists also think that there is a constant struggle of power as power is the ultimate aim for all states, which is not necessarily the case 7) Vulnerability: imbalance between strong and weak actors . Military ii. Military ii . Military i. Militaryii . Militaryii. Military i
 Neoclassical realists bring individual and unit variation back into the theory . Neocassical realist realists brought individual and individual variation back in the theory.
 Wrongly assumes that all men and states seek their national interests in terms of power i. Wrongly assume that all . men and . states seek national interests i. v. of power . i. wrongly assumes all men . and states want national interests, i. wrongly
 Wrongly assumes that power is the most important goal that nations pursue iv. Power is not the only important goal for nations to pursue, it is the goal of power .
 Theory defective in so far it treats the world as static unit in which power is permanent guiding factor . Theory is defective in treating the world like static unit of power, it's not a permanent guiding force . Theory of the World is defective, it says .
 C\»^C RACTICE MAKES PERFEC 10) Conclusion: Still it holds advantages; it is persuasive, supported by historical evidences . Political sphere not autonomous; it's not autonomous .
 Liberalism is generally considered the second great body of theory in contemporary international politics . More reliance on realist perspectives . The Classical Approaches-ldealism/Liberalism 1) Introduction . Liberalism generally considered to be the second greatest theory in international politics.
 The liberal tradition in political thought goes back as far as the thinking of John Locke in the late seventeenth century . John Locke's views on the liberal tradition of political thought go back to the 17th century .
 Liberal ideas have profoundly shaped how we think about the relationship between government and citizens . From then on, liberal ideas have shaped how they've shaped how government-led citizens .
 Unlike Realism, which regards the 'international' as an anarchic realm, the 'International' realm is 'an anarchic' Realism is a form of anarchy .
 Liberals seek to project values of order, liberty, justice, and toleration into international relations . i. ii. Liberalism seeks to project . values into international . relations . Liberalism is an attempt to project order and liberty, liberty and tolerance .
 The high-water mark of liberal thinking in international relations was reached in the inter-war period in the work of Idealists . Idealists believed that warfare was an unnecessary and outmoded way of settling disputes between states .
 Domestic and international institutions are required to protect and nurture these values . Domestic and foreign institutions are needed to protect these values, says the author of the book .
 Liberal values and institutions allow for significant variations which accounts for the fact that there are heated debates within Liberalism . iv. iv. But note that . note that these values and . institutions allow . significant variations .
 Liberals disagree on fundamental issues such as causes of war and institutions . Liberals disagree over what kind of institutions are required to deliver liberal values in a multicultural world .
 An important cleavage within Liberalism is between those operating with a positive conception of Liberalism, who advocate interventionist foreign policies . Those who incline towards a negative conception, which places a priority on toleration and non-intervention . V.
 Enlightenment liberals believed that a latent cosmopolitan morality could be achieved through the exercise of reason and through the creation of constitutional states . Enlightenment liberals thought that this was possible .
 In addition, the unfettered movement of people and goods could further facilitate more peaceful international relations . In addition to the freedom of movement, it could also facilitate peaceful relations, experts say .
 Enlightenment liberal Idealism was more programmatic than programmatic, writes Andrew Hammond . Idealism is the belief in the power of world public opinion to tame the interests of states .
 For idealists, freedom of states is part of the problem of international relations, not part of solution . Freedom of states should be a problem, not a solution, idealists say .
 First, states must be part of an international organization, and be bound by its rules and norms . Second, states need to be bound to the rules of the international organization . Third and last, states should be bound under international rules, not to be left out of the world .
 Central to Idealism was the formation of an international organization to facilitate peaceful change, disarmament, arbitration, and enforcement . Idealism is an organization that facilitates peaceful change and disarmament .
 League of Nations was founded in 1920 but its collective security system failed to prevent the descent into world war in the 1930s . iv. iv.
 Great powers were able to prevent any enforcement action from taking place which might be contrary to their interests . Membership was near universal and the great powers prevented enforcement action .
 In the post-1945 period, liberals turned to international institutions to carry out a number of functions the state could not perform . V. V. In the past, the state has relied heavily on international institutions .
 This was the catalyst for integration theory in Europe and Pluralism in the U.S. The United States. This was a catalyst for Integration Theory in Europe, Pluralist in the United States .
 By the early 1970s Pluralism had mounted a significant challenge to Realism .
 It focused on new actors (transnational corporations, non-governmental organizations) and new patterns of interaction . vi .
 Neo-liberalism represents a more sophisticated theoretical challenge to contemporary Realism . Neo-libertarianism is a more complex theoretical challenge than Realism, says Julian Zelizer . The Neo-Liberalism challenges the idea of neo-realism, he says .
 Neo-liberals explain the durability of institutions despite significant changes in context . Neo-Liberals explain why institutions are strong enough to withstand change in context.
 In their view, institutions exert a causal force on international relations, shaping state preferences and locking them into cooperative arrangements, they say . vii. vii: Institutions exert power to shape state preferences, locking them in cooperative arrangements .
 The growth of international organizations and international laws vi. Prime objective is world peace . Prime objective of world peace is to protect the planet .
 Promotion of universal human rights and conflict prevention in the U.N. vii. The United Nations is a member of the world's most powerful body of people .
 Domestic and international reforms must be linked . A Project of CSS Writing Club is a project of CSS writing club .
 Neo-conservatism under the late Clinton and Bush administrations owes much to liberal idealism . Neo-Conservatism under Bush and Clinton administrations owes a lot to liberal ideals, author says .
 They explain observable government behavior on the basis of concepts like balance of power, national interest, diplomacy etc. etc. They explain what government behavior is based on these concepts .
 Traditional realists try to understand and resolve the clashing interests that inevitably lead to war . They regard ir as a sub-discipline of history and political science . There are historical, philosophical and legal variants to the traditional approach . Scientific scholars challenged the traditionalist, arguing that IR is
 They began constructing conceptual frameworks and partial models of international systems . They tried to collect and analyze data to refute or validate a formulated hypothesis .
 It focuses on understanding the reasons behind the action/behavior of states and other international actors .
 This approach has contributed to understanding how people and organizations of different cultures interact, the effects of propaganda and stereotypical views on conflict situations and IR .
 It is difficult to determine the behavior of states, which is the aggregate behavior of a large number of individuals and of superimposing authorities . It is impossible to determine state's behavior, especially in the aggregate of individuals .
 This approach can be used to test the validity of idealist's hypothesis for example to see if democratic or authoritarian states are more likely to be engaged in internal conflicts . It can also be used as a test to see whether democratic states engage in internal conflict .
 It does so by focusing on international systems which are interdependent and interrelated, it says . It also focuses on the interdependent nature of international systems .
 These systems range from small systems to intermediate and large systems . These systems include small systems and intermediate systems . The systems are intended to be small and intermediate sizes .
 Neo-realism and neo-liberalism represent paradigms or conceptual frameworks that shape individuals' images of the world and influence research priorities and policy debates and choices . i.ii.iii. More than just theories, neo-realist or neo-libertarianism represents parad
 Game theory has been integrated into neo-realist and neo-liberal theory to explain policy choices and the behaviour of states in conflict and cooperative situations .
 Neo-realist and neo-liberal theories are status quo-oriented problem-solving theories . Neo-reformist theories include neo-realism, neo-libertarian theories . The Neo-liberal theory is a form of neo-reality theory .
 They share assumptions about actors, values, issues, and power arrangements in the international system . They share many assumptions about actor, values and issues in the world .
 Neorealists study security issues and are concerned with issues of power and survival . Neorealistists are concerned about issues of survival and power .
 Neo-liberals study political economy and focus on cooperation and institutions . Neo-Liberals are concerned about the future of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Waltz claims that the structure of the international system is the key factor in shaping the behaviour of states . Waltz: The structure of international systems is key to shaping behaviour of nations .
 He agrees with traditional Realists when he states that major powers still determine the nature of the international system . However, he agrees with Traditional Realists .
 Structural realists minimize the importance of national attributes as determinants of a state's foreign policy behaviour . Structurally realists say national attributes are important to foreign policy decisions .
 To these neorealists, all states are functionally similar units, experiencing the same constraints presented by anarchy . i.ii.iii. i. The neorealist argues that anarchy is not anarchy, but anarchy is anarchy, and anarchy is a form of anarchy .
 They believe that force remains an important and effective tool of statecraft . Balance of power is still the central mechanism for order in the system, they say . iv. iv. They say balance of power still a vital part of the system .
 Joseph Grieco represents a group of neo-realists or modern realists . He is critical of the neo-liberal Institutionalists who claim states are mainly interested in absolute gains . Grieco: "Neo-realist" is a group critical of state-based institutions .
 Grieco claims that all states are interested in both absolute and relative gains . Grieco says all states want to see relative gains and absolute gains in their economies .
 Scholars in security studies present two versions of neo-realism or modern realism . V Scholars in Security Studies present neo-reality and modern realism respectively .
 Like traditional Realists, they believe that conflict is inevitable in the international system . Leaders must always be wary of expansionary powers .
 Defensive realists are often confused with neo-liberal Institutionalists . Institutionalistists are defensive realists, not neo-liberals .
 They recognize the costs of war and assume that it usually results from irrational forces in a society . They also assume that war is caused by irrational forces . They say they recognize the cost of war .
 They admit that expansionary states willing to use military force make it impossible to live in a world without weapons . However, they admit that expandingary states making use of weapons make it difficult to live without them .
 Cooperation is possible, but it is more likely to succeed in relations with friendly states . Cooperation between Russia and Ukraine is possible but it's not likely to happen in friendly states, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 In the policy world, neo-liberalism is identified with the promotion of capitalism and Western democratic values and institutions . i. ii. In the . policy . world of neo-libertarianism is . identified with promoting capitalism and the . promotion of Western democratic . values .
 Contemporary neo-liberalism has been shaped by the assumptions of commercial, republican, sociological, and institutional Liberalism . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: The assumptions of neo-libertarianism have been made by the assumption of commercial and sociological
 Commercial and republican Liberalism provide the foundation for current neo-liberal thinking in Western governments . Commercial liberalism is the foundation of neo-libertarian thinking in the West .
 These countries promote free trade and democracy in their foreign policy programmes . These countries are known for promoting free trade, democracy and free trade .
 Neo-liberal Institutionalism, the other side of the neo-neo debate, is rooted in functional integration theoretical work of the 1950s and 1960s and the complex interdependence and transnational studies literature of the 1970s and 1980s . Institutionalistism is rooted
 Institutionalists see institutions as the mediator and the means to achieve cooperation in the international system . Neo-liberal Institutionalistists think institutions are mediator of international cooperation .
 Regimes and institutions help govern a competitive and anarchic international system . They encourage multilateralism and cooperation as a means of securing national interests . vi. vi.
 Neo-liberal Institutionalists recognize that cooperation may be harder to achieve in areas where leaders perceive they have no mutual interests . vii. vii .
 Neo-liberals believe that states cooperate to achieve absolute gains . The greatest obstacle to cooperation is 'cheating' or non-compliance by other states, they say . Neo-Liberals believe states cooperate in order to achieve the absolute gains of the state .
 They share an epistemology, focus on similar questions, and agree on a number of assumptions about international politics . They also share an . assumption about international relations .
 Neo-liberal Institutionalists and neo-realists study different worlds of international politics . Neo-realist Institutionalist and Neo-Realist study international politics in their own way .
 Neo-liberal Institutionalists focus on political economy, environmental issues, and, lately, human rights issues . i.ii. ii.iii. i.i.ii . ii.ii: i.iii:   i.i:  Neo-liberal
 Neo-realists explain that all states must be concerned with the absolute and relative gains that result from international agreements and cooperative efforts . They say all states should be concerned about the relative and absolute gains resulting from international cooperation .
 Neo-liberal Institutionalists are less concerned about relative gains and consider that all will benefit from absolute gains . iv. iv. The Neo-Liberal Institutionalist is less concerned with relative gains, and considers that all benefit from relative gains .
 Neo-realists are more cautious about cooperation and remind us that the world is still a competitive place where self-interest rules . Neo-reactionists are cautious of cooperation and are wary of cooperation in the world .
 Neo-liberal Institutionalists believe that states and other actors can be persuaded to cooperate if they are convinced that all states will comply with rules and cooperation will result in absolute gains .
 This debate does not discuss many important issues that challenge some of the core assumptions of each theory . This debate is the result of a debate between the two theories of the universe .
 Neorealism cannot explain foreign policy behaviour that challenges the norm of national interest over human interests . For example, foreign policy cannot be explained by neorealism, says David Cameron .
 Transnational social movements have forced states to address critical international issues and in several situations that have supported the establishment of institutions that promote further cooperation, and fundamentally challenge the power of states . i. ii. i.i. The international community has been forced to address the issues of state sovereignty
 Neo-realists think that states are still the principal actors in international politics . Neo-reactionists think states are the principal players in international affairs .
 Globalization challenges some areas of state authority and control, but politics is still international, i.ii. i.i. Globalized challenges some of the world's most powerful institutions, but they are still international . i.iii. The world is changing, but it's changing,
 Neo-realists concerned about new security challenges resulting from uneven globalization, namely, inequality and conflict . Neo-Realists are concerned about the security challenges due to uneven globalization and conflict.
 Globalization provides opportunities and resources for transnational social movements that challenge the authority of states in various policy areas . Globalized social movements challenge authority of state in policy areas such as food and medicine policy .
 Neo-realists are not supportive of any movement that seeks to open critical security issues to public debate, they say . Neo-Realists are opposed to any movement seeking to open discussion of security issues in the public .
 Eventually, all states will benefit from the economic growth promoted by the forces of globalization, says President Obama . All states benefit from globalization, Obama says .
 They believe that states should not fight globalization or attempt to control it with unwanted political interventions . vi. State should not try to control globalization, they say .
 Some neo-liberals believe that states should intervene to promote capitalism with a human face or a market that is more sensitive to the needs and interests of all the people . The state should intervene in the way of promoting capitalism, they say .
 New institutions can be created and older ones reformed to prevent the uneven flow of capital, promote environmental sustainability, and protect the rights of citizens . New institutions should be created to prevent uneven flow .
 As a rough guide, explanatory theories tend to be foundational, constitutive theories tend not to be anti-foundational . Theories are more likely to be 'foundational' than 'instructive' theories .
 One thing that they do share is a rejection of the core assumptions of rationalist theories . One thing is that they both reject is the idea that rationalists are rationalists .
 Its central focus is with how societies develop the forms that they do . It's also with how society develops the forms it does .
 It is basically a study of the interactions between states, classes, capitalism, and war . It is the study of interactions between state, class, capitalism and war.
 He argues that the decisive reason was the ability of the national state to fight wars . He says that the country's ability to win wars was the reason for its success .
 Liberal feminism looks at the roles women play in world politics and asks why they are marginalized . A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C
 In the new documentary, we look at the ways masculinity and femininity get constructed . They look into the ways in which masculinity, femininity and masculinity are constructed .
 Lyotard defines post-modernism as incredulity towards metanarratives, meaning that it denies the possibility of foundations for establishing the truth of statements existing outside of discourse . The French philosopher says that postmodernism denies possibility of foundation for establishing truth .
 He proposes two main tools to enable us to see how arbitrary the seemingly 'natural' oppositions of language actually are . He looks at how texts are constructed, and proposes two tools to help us to understand how they are .
 Constructivists treat ideas as structural factors, consider the dynamic relationship between ideas and material forces as a consequence of how actors interpret their material reality, and are interested in how agents produce structures and how structures produce agents . Social Constructivisim 1: Constructivist is concerned with human
 7) Power can be understood not only as the ability of one actor to get another actor to do what she would not do otherwise . Power can also be understood as the production of identities and interests that limit actors' ability to control their fate .
 Feminism is a movement dedicated to achieving political, social, and economic equality for women . Feminism aims to achieve social, economic, and political equality for the first time .
 Feminists believe that we cannot separate knowledge from political practice . They believe that feminist knowledge should help improve women's lives . Feminist knowledge should be used to help improve the lives of women .
 Gender is a set of socially constructed characteristics that define what we mean by masculinity and femininity . Gender is defined by social constructions that define the characteristics of masculinity and masculinity .
 It is possible for women to display masculine characteristics and vice versa . It is also possible to display feminine characteristics in a man .
 IR feminists build on other IR theories, such as liberalism, critical theory . IR feminism builds on other theories, like liberalism and critical theory, to build on feminism .
 They claim that we must look more deeply at unequal gendered structures in order to understand women's subordination . They say we need to look at inequality to understand how women are subordinate .
 Feminist critical theory examines how both ideas and material structures shape people's lives . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 IR feminist critical theorists show how changes in the meaning of gender have changed the practices of international organizations over time . IR feminist critics show how these changes have changed organizations' practices over the years .
 Elisabeth Prugl shows us how these ideas shaped the framing of international legal conventions . Prugls: The idea of international law was shaped by the framings of international conventions .
 Men have generally been seen as knowers and subjects of knowledge, say experts . They suggest that men have been generally seen as subject of knowledge . Men have been known to be subject to knowledge, says experts .
 Women's subordination must be differentially understood in terms of race, class, and geographical location . All women should be seen as agents rather than victims, say the authors .
 In today's wars, women and children are being killed and injured in large numbers . Women and children have been killed, injured in many of the wars .
 This image is being challenged by an increasing number of women in militaries around the world . The image of a woman in the military has been challenged by a growing number of young women .
 There is a debate among policy-makers and in militaries, and even among some feminists, as to whether women should fight in military combat . There is also a debate over whether women are allowed to fight in combat .
 It makes it difficult for women's voices to be seen as legitimate, particularly in matters of security policy, says Ms. Smith . Women's voices are difficult to be heard, she says, especially in security policy .
 The national security of states, defined in masculine terms that emphasize military strength, can cause a trade-off with the physical and economic security of individuals . The nation's national security can be defined in terms of military strength .
 This gender-sensitive perspective helps us see how women's relative disadvantage is due to the gendered division of labour . It helps us understand how women are disadvantaged in the workplace . The gender-conscious perspective is key to understanding women's disadvantages .
 The role distinction between workers in the public and private spheres has an effect on the kind of work that women do in public sphere . The distinction has a significant impact on women's work in the private sphere .
 Women do more subsistence agriculture than men and men more often work with advanced agricultural technologies . Women work in subsistence agriculture more often than men do in advanced agriculture .
 When it is not paid, household labour is invisible in economic analyses . Household work is invisible when it's not paid out of economic analysis .
 We must not overgeneralize about the negative effects of the gendered division of labour . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 The Paris Peace settlement failed to address the central problems of European security . In restructuring the European state system created new sources of grievance and instability . The Paris peace settlement has created new problems for Europe .
 The rise of Hitler posed challenges that European political leaders lacked the ability and will to meet . Hitler's rise was a challenge that European politicians lacked the will and ability to cope with .
 The German attack on the Soviet Union extended the scope and barbarity of the war from short and limited campaigns to extended, large-scale, and barbaric confrontation, fought for total victory .
 Debate persists over whether the atomic bomb should have been used in 1945 . Debate persists about the effect that this had on the cold war .
 European powers adopted different attitudes to different regions/countries. European powers adopt different attitudes . European powers have different attitudes toward different regions and countries .
 British withdrawal from Asia came much more quickly after 1945 than from Africa . For example, British withdrawal in Asia came more quickly than in Africa . The withdrawal of the British from Asia was much more rapid after 1945 .
 The process of decolonization was relatively peaceful in many cases . It led to revolutionary wars in others . The scale and ferocity reflected the attitudes of the colonial power and the nationalist movements .
 The struggle for independence/national liberation became embroiled in cold war conflicts when the superpowers and/or their allies became involved . For example Vietnam, Vietnam was the focus of the struggle .
 Whether decolonization was judged successful depends on perspective of European power, independence movement, or the people themselves . Decolonization's success depends on perspectives of the European power or independence movement .
 There are disagreements about when and why the cold war began, and who was responsible . The Cold War is still raging in Russia and Ukraine .
 Distinct phases can be seen in East-West relations, during which tension and the risk of direct confrontation grew and receded . Distinct periods of tension and risk of confrontation were seen during the 1950s and 1960s .
 Some civil and regional wars were intensified and prolonged by superpower involvement . Others may have been prevented or shortened . Some civil, regional wars have been intensified or prolonged .
 The end of the cold war has not resulted in the abolition of nuclear weapons . Nuclear weapons are still being used in North Korea, South Korea and Russia .
 Agreements on limiting and controlling the growth of nuclear arsenals played an important role in Soviet-American relations . Russia and the U.S. agreed to limit and control nuclear weapons .
 Various international crises occurred in which there was the risk of nuclear war . Various crises occurred during the 1950s and '60s when there was a nuclear war risk .
 How close we came to nuclear war at these times remains open to speculation . Judging how close . came to . nuclear war . remains open .
 The revolution happened in stages through two separate coups, one in February and one in October . The revolution was carried out in stages by two coups in October and February .
 The new government, led by Vladimir Lenin, would solidify its power only after three years of civil war, which ended in 1920 . Lenin's government was formed after the end of the civil war .
 The events of the Russian Revolution happened abruptly, the causes may be traced back nearly a century ago . The Russian Revolution was the first Russian Revolution to take place in Russia's history .
 Nicholas II personally witnessed revolutionary terrorists assassinate his grandfather and, subsequently, his own father respond to the assassination through brutal oppression of the Russian people . Nicholas II was the tsar who led Russia in the years leading up to the revolution .
 When Nicholas II himself became tsar in 1894, he used similarly severe measures to subdue resistance movements, which were becoming bolder and more widespread .
 Nicholas ll's grip on power became very tenuous . Nicholas ll made concessions gradually until he was in control of the country .
 Vladimir Lenin rose to prominence as the most powerful figure in Russia . As Nicholas II grew weaker, Vladimir Lenin became a powerful figure . Lenin was one of Russia's most powerful men to rise to power .
 Famous leader of the October Revolution was not even in Russia for the February Revolution . He had lived in self-imposed exile in Europe since 1900 and returned to Russia only in 1917 .
 Few other Russian revolutionaries possessed Lenin's decisiveness and strength of vision for Russia's future . Few other revolutionaries possessed the decisiness and vision for the future of Russia . Lenin's vision was that of Lenin, who was a strong leader in Russia .
 Vladimir llich Ulyanov was born in 1870 in Simbirsk, Russia . He was profoundly affected by his older brother's execution for being involved in a plot to assassinate the tsar .
 Vladimir took the pseudonym Lenin but swore that he would never engage in the sort of ""adventurism"" that had ended his brother's life . As a young adult, Vladimir joined the A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 His actions would one day become very adventurous indeed . Nevertheless, his actions would soon become very exciting indeed .
 Russia's new rulers were drawn largely from the intellectual and working classes rather than from the aristocracy . The new government would prove to be at least as repressive as the one it replaced, the new rulers would prove .
 The revolution opened the door for Russia to fully enter the industrial age . The revolution was the birth of the industrial revolution in Russia .
 Russia was a mostly agrarian nation that had dabbled in industrial development only to a limited degree . Prior tol917, Russia was largely a mostly agricultural nation .
 By 1917, Russia's European neighbors had embraced industrialization for more than half a century, making technological advancements such as widespread electrification, which Russia had yet to achieve . Russia had never achieved electrification .
 After the revolution, new urbanindustrial regions appeared quickly in Russia and became increasingly important to the country's development . Urban industrial regions became important to Russia's development after the revolution .
 Education also took a major upswing, and illiteracy was almost entirely eradicated . Literacy was also eradicated, with literacy almost entirely wiped out .
 The Russian Revolution also had considerable international consequences . The revolution in Russia was a major event in the world .
 Lenin's government pulled Russia out of World War I, changing the balance of forces for the remaining participants . Russia pulled out of the war in order to save its country from World War One .
 During the ensuing civil war in Russia, several nations, including the United States, sent troops to Russia in hopes of keeping the chaos from spreading beyond Russia's borders . During the civil war, Russia's civil war was the focus of the U.S.
 The Soviet Union actively sponsored and assisted Communist movements and revolutions around the world in an effort to broaden its sphere of influence . Over the next several decades, the Soviet Union supported and assisted movements around the globe .
 The country also played a fundamental role in the defeat of Nazi Germany during World War 11 .
 Governments of many Western nations viewed Communism as a spreading threat and moved to isolate the Soviet Union as much as possible . Threatened by the possibility of revolutions in their own lands, governments of many nations viewed the threat .
 Following World War II and the advent of the nuclear age, a confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States took center stage . Following the Soviet-U.S. confrontation, the Cold War escalated into a nuclear war .
 As this Cold War got under way, the two countries emerged as superpowers . Much of the rest of the world fell in behind one or the other .
 A protracted nuclear arms race between the U.S. and Soviet Union would last until the USSR finally collapsed in 1991 . The United States and the Soviet Union had a long-running nuclear weapons race .
 The common features of this movement were their hostility of democracy and socialism and the aim of establishing dictatorships . i. ii. i. The common feature of the movement was their hostility to democracy . ii. The aim was to establish dictatorships, i.ii. The movement was to
 They succeeded in many countries of Europe, such as Hungary, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Germany and Spain .
 Their success in Italy and Germany had the most serious consequences . iv. iv. III: The success of the Nazis in Germany and Italy had the greatest consequences .
 It was first used from the movement which started in Italy under the leadership of Benito Mussolini .
 Lawrence Britt has examined the fascist regimes of Hitler, Mussolini, Franco, Suharto and several Latin American regimes . He has examined fascist regimes including those of Hitler and Mussolini .
 Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays . i. ii. i.i.ii.i: Flags are . seen everywhere . i: Flag symbols are . visible everywhere .
 The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc. i.ii.iii. The people often look other way . i.Torture, assassination, long incarceration of prisoners and long imprisonment of
 The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated . V Rampant Sexism is a form of sexism .
 Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution . vi. vi. Divorce is suppressed .
 Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives .
 Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses . Fear of national security is used to motivate the masses. Fear is also used as motivational tool for the government . Fear is an obsession with national security .
 Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion . Religion and Government are Intertwined Governments use religion and government as a weapon of power .
 Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government's policies or actions .
 The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite . Corporate Power is Protected in fascist countries .
 Labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia . Fascism is a form of intolerance for higher education and the arts .
 It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested . It's not uncommon to censor or arrest professors or other academics .
 Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws . The police have an obsession with crime and punishment . Police in fascist regimes have almost limitless powers .
 The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism . The people often overlook police abuse in the face of patriotism.
 There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations . xiii. xii. xiii . The police force is often used in fascist countries, such as Italy .
 Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use government power to protect their friends from accountability . Fascist governments almost always use governmental power and authority .
 It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders . xiv.xiv. xiv . It is often not uncommon for fascist regimes to steal national resources .
 Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a sham . Sometimes elections are a complete sham. Sometimes they are in fascist countries . Sometimes they're in a fascist nation's fascist state .
 Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media .
 Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections . Fascist countries typically use judicaries to manipulate their judisiaries .
 The League of Nations was the predecessor to the United Nations . It was founded in 1903 . The League was the precursor to the U.N.
 The founding Covenant was formulated as part of the Treaty of Versailles . i. ii. It represented a major attempt by the great powers after the First World War to institutionalize a system of collective security .
 The first meeting was held in Geneva in 1920, with 42 states represented .
 Over the next 26 years, a total of 63 states were represented at one time or another . i.ii. i.63 states represented in the U.S. at the beginning of the century .
 The League consisted of an Assembly, a Council, and a Secretariat . Like the United Nations, the League was formed from an Assembly to a Council .
 The Assembly, consisting of every member state, convened annually in Geneva . The Assembly is held in Geneva annually .
 The Council was composed of several permanent members (France, Britain, Italy, Japan, and later Germany and the Soviet Union) and some nonpermanent members elected by the Assembly .
 The CSS Writing Club met more often than the Assembly to consider political disputes and to focus on the reduction of armaments . Ayesha Younas was a member of the CSS writing club .
 Several other organizations were associated with the League such as the World Court and the International Labour Organization . The League was associated with several other organizations such as World Court .
 To some extent, the League was an extension of liberal, parliamentary practice to international relations . The League was extended to some extent to include the League's international contacts .
 The League was based on the idea that political compromise arrived at by open discussion was the best means to promote political stability . Woodrow Wilson was one of the main architects of the League, and the idea was deeply held by one of its founders .
 League was designed in light of the alleged lessons of the First World War, of which three were particularly important . Like so many international organisations, the League was also designed to reflect the lessons of that war .
 It was believed that in future wars it would be easy to decide who was the aggressor, a decision that was meant to trigger a range of collective countermeasures, ranging from diplomatic boycotts to the imposition of sanctions and ultimately war . ii. It was thought that in . future wars
 The system for the prevention of conflicts rested on the assumption that war could be prevented by the application of reason based on legal principles . Second, the system for preventing war was supposed to be based on reason, not legal principles, it was based on law .
 The idea that power could be subordinated to law was a common assumption among many idealists of the interwar period . i. iv.ii. ii.ii: The idea of subordinating power to law is a common belief among idealists . iv.iii: The idealist
 The speed of political developments in 1914 led to the implementation of several mechanisms of delay to slow down unilateral decision-making in a crisis . Third, the speed of the political developments led to a series of mechanisms of . delay .
 Only after a period of three months subsequent to bringing a dispute to the Council was resort to war legal . Only after after a dispute was brought to the council was resorting to the war legal.
 It was based on the Fourteen Points of the United States President Woodrow Wilson . i. ii. The Fourteen points were based on Wilson's Fourteen Point of the US President .
 It was created to ensure that there would be no repeat of the First World War . i. i. Wartley: 'It was created in order to ensure there would not be a repeat of that war' i. V. D.I. v. J.E.
 It was suppose to keep the peace by encouraging nations to negotiate over disputes rather than resorting to war . iv. iv. It was supposed to encourage nations to talk over disputes instead of resort to war, but it was meant to keep peace by keeping nations to avoid war .
 V Article 10 promised collective security whereby members agreed that if one member were attacked all other members would come to their protection . vi. Article 10 promises collective security where members agreed to protect each other . vi .
 Initially 42 members joined which later grew to 59 members by the 1930s . The original 42 members were initially 42 members of the group .
 The USA refused to join the League despite the fact Wilson's had founded it . Wilson's founded it but refused to take part in the League .
 It should be noted that the League was never fully representative of the international community . i.ii. i. The League should have been fully represented by the international body, i.iii. It should also be said that it was not fully representative by the League itself .
 The U.S. Senate did not ratify the treaties and did not become a member of the League . The United States did not accept the treaties .
 The Soviet Union was not invited to Versailles, and did not join the League until 1934 . The League did not meet with the Soviet Union until after the war .
 Few South American states were represented, and only China, Japan, and Thailand represented Asia .
 Germany was missing from the start in light of its alleged responsibility for the First World War. viii. vii. Germany was not in the right place at the start of the war. Germany has been missing from start in the war .
 The League was primarily a European body, the number of states that were able to carry out any police action against an aggressor was effectively limited to France and Britain .
 France in particular was determined to use the League to contain Germany in Europe . Without their consent, no decision was likely to be carried out .
 The ultimate failure of the League to maintain international peace and security was a product of its limited membership, its preservation of a territorial settlement that humiliated Germany, and its faith in the willingness of great powers to subordinate their short-term national interests to preservation of international peace .
 A powerful bloc of states that glorified war and embarked on a sustained rearmament programme to achieve their aim to reconfigure the global balance of power in their favour . Confronted with the rise of fascism in Italy, Germany, and Japan in the 1930s .
 It was established during a period in which powerful states continued to rely on war as a means of resolving conflict . New forms of nationalism not only undermined some European empires but also justified new patterns of imperial domination .
 In light of the rapid shifts in power that were taking place in the first half of the twentieth century, it is hardly surprising that the League participated in rather than prevented the decline of Europe . The League's involvement in Europe's decline was hardly surprising .
 During 1938, Britain and France tried a new policy 'appeasement' (negotiating directly with Flitler) This failed in 1939 when he invaded Czechoslovakia . During 1938 and 1939, the two countries tried to negotiate with him .
 When war broke out in 1939, the League closed down in Geneva . Its headquarters in Geneva remained empty throughout the war .
 In 1943 at a Conference in Tehran America, Britain and Russia agreed to set up a new international organisation when the war finished . America and Russia also agreed to establish a new organisation in 1945 .
 On 12 April 1946, the League met in Geneva and formally abolished itself . The League was officially abolished in 1946 .
 Start an inquiry by the Council, provide a hearing by an impartial neutral country . Provide an inquiry into the Council by a neutral country.
 V International suspicions and rivalries between countries continued . vi. vi . vi vi.
 Economic sanctions especially without United States support proved very ineffective . viii. vii. economic sanctions were ineffective without U.S. support .
 It had to uphold the Treaty of Versailles, which was increasingly viewed as unfair . The Treaty was also seen as unfair as it was seen as being unfair .
 World War II , also known as the Second World War, was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945 . Related conflicts began earlier, though related conflicts began before .
 Major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, erasing the distinction between civilian and military resources . In a state of ""total war"", the major participants threw all their economic and scientific resources behind the effort .
 World War II resulted in an estimated 50 million to 85 million fatalities . The Holocaust, the strategic bombing of industrial and population centres and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki killed approximately 11 million people .
 British victory in Battle of Britain forces Hitler to postpone invasion plans . British victory forces Hitler's invasion plans to postpone plans .
 Singapore falls to the Japanese in February around 25,000 prisoners taken . Singapore is Singapore's first city state to fall to Japan in February .
 American naval victory at Battle of Midway, in June, marks turning point in Pacific War . U.S. naval victory in Midway was key to victory over Japanese in World War II .
 Allied victory in North Africa enables invasion of Italy to be launched . Allied invasion of North Africa was launched in 1943 .
 Truman becomes President of the United States on Roosevelt's death, and Attlee replaces Churchill . Churchill replaces Churchill in 1945 .
 Japan surrenders after atomic bombs are dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Hiroshima and Hiroshima were bombed on August 14, 1945 . Japan surrendered to Japan in 1945 .
 This was a line of steel and concrete fortifications stretching from Belgium to Switzerland . It was called 'a gate without a fence' because Germany would be able to avoid it and invade France via Belgium . The line was called a 'gate without a gate' because it would have been able
 Britain signed an Anglo German naval Treaty allowing Germany's navy to be 35% of the size of the Royal Navy . Britain was sympathetic towards Germany and even signed a treaty with the German navy .
 Hitler used his new found arms to support Franco in the Spanish Civil War . Hitler sent the Condor Legion of the Luftwaffe to bomb Guernica on 26th April, 1937 .
 Franco went on to conquer the Basque areas of Spain . Guernica was razed to the ground and Franco went to conquer it . The city was destroyed by the Franco government .
 The Remilitarization of the Rhineland is the result of the Treaty of Versailles . Having broken the treaty once, the Germans were able to re-activate the Rhine .
 Hitler risked doing it a second time by marching 30,000 troops into Cologne on 7th March 1936 . Hitler risked it again by marching into Cologne in 1936 .
 250,000 troops mobilised, because Britain would not support her . France, with A Project of CSS Writing Club . France . France with Ayesha Younas C.C .
 Britain took the view that Germany was 'marching into her own back yard' ii. ii. Britain took a view of Germany's march into its own backyard . ii. Germany was seen as 'marraging her own backyard'
 He went on to build his own defensive fortification, the Siegfried Line, in Germany . The Siegfried line is the name of a German fortress built in the 1930s .
 Britain threatened oil sanctions against Mussolini during the Abyssinian crisis . Talks were held with Britain and France at the Stresa Front but came to nothing in 1935 .
 Neville Chamberlain became British Prime Minister on 28th May 1937 . He followed the policy of appeasing Germany, believing that all Hitler wanted to do was unite German speaking people . Neville Chamberlain believed that Hitler was trying to unite Germans .
 Hitler would break the Treaty of Versailles but Chamberlain did not believe he would cause war . Chamberlain did believe Hitler would not cause war, but did not think he would .
 Austrian Fascists wanted to unite with Germany but Schuschnigg, the Austrian Chancellor, wanted Austria to be independent . Austria was ruled independent in the early 1930s .
 He was unable to gain support from abroad so agreed to meet Hitler in Berlin . Hitler was Hitler's first German dictator to meet the British leader .
 He was persuaded to accept Hitler's henchman Seyss-Inquart as Minster of the Interior . He was convinced to accept the appointment by Hitler's side-eyed Seyss Inquart .
 Rioting increased under Seyss-Inquart's leadership and Schuschnigg resigned . Rioting in Vienna increased under the leadership .
 Seyss-Inquart invited Hitler to assist him and on 13th March, 1938 troops from the Wermacht entered Austria .
 In a plebiscite on the Anschluss a vote of 99.75% in favour was recorded . In the referendum a vote was recorded in favour of the German-occupied Austria .
 Hitler made it seem that he had been invited into Austria, in fact he had incited the union . Hitler made the impression that he was invited in Austria, but he was not invited in .
 The Sudetenland was lost by Austria in the Treaty of St. St. Louis . Hitler gained control of the region in the 1920s .
 Czechoslovakia gained 3 million German speaking people in 1919 . St. Germain (10th September 1919) was the birth of the first republic republic .
 After the Anschluss the Sudeten German leader, Konrad Henlein, demanded a union with Germany . The Sudetan German leader wanted to join Germany .
 Unable to receive help from France, the Czech Premier, Benes, mobilised alone . The Czech Premier mobilised his troops in a bid to save his country .
 Fearing war, Chamberlain met Hitler on three occasions at Berchtesgaden, Godesburg and Munich . Chamberlain met the Nazi leader at three times in Germany and Germany .
 Hitler could take the Sudetenland the following day without a plebiscite, Hungary and Poland could take border districts from Czechoslovakia, Britain and Germany would never go to war . Britain would never be war-torn again, and the war would never end .
 In March 1939, Hitler forced Lithuania to give him Memel where most people spoke German . The Fall of Czechoslovakia was the result of the fall of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 So far Hitler had only taken German speaking territory, so Chamberlain could still appease Hitler . So far he had taken German-speaking territory, but so far he hadn't invaded German speaking areas .
 The Czech Republic surrendered to the Nazis in 1939 after Hitler threatened to bomb Prague . The Czechs surrendered after the threat of a bomb was given by Hitler .
 Chamberlain realised appeasement had failed, so he began to rearm Britain and guarantee peace in Poland . Chamberlain began rearming Britain and guaranteeing peace in the country .
 By the summer of 1939, Hitler's plans to invade Poland were complete . The Nazi-Soviet Pact The Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact was signed in 1939 .
 He realised that to invade Poland would cause Britain to attack him from the West . But he was more concerned to avoid a Russian attack from the east .
 Hitler arranged the Nazi-Soviet Pact, which said that if either country went to war the other would remain neutral . Therefore to avoid a war on two fronts, he arranged the pact . i. ii. He arranged the agreement to avoid war .
 Hitler gained the chance to invade Poland with a war on one front, if Britain supported Poland . i.ii. ii.ii: If Britain backed Poland, Hitler would be able to invade one front . ii.iii: Hitler would have been able to get Britain to support Poland in
 Stalin of USSR gained time to rearm in case Hitler attacked him later, and the chance to gain the eastern half of Poland . Stalin's time was given to prepare for invasion of eastern Poland .
 German tanks invaded West Prussia and Posen on the 1st September 1939 using blitzkrieg tactics . The invasion was part of the German invasion of Poland and West Germany .
 Chamberlain sent an ultimatum saying that if Hitler did not withdraw from Poland by 11am, 3rd September 1939, Britain would declare war . Chamberlain sent a letter to Hitler asking him to withdraw from the country by 11pm September 1939 .
 On 3rd September, Britain, followed by France, declared war on Germany .
 To unite German speaking people (using NSD which had been denied at the Treaty of Versailles) to unite German-speaking people . NSD was used to unite Germans-speaking Germans .
 He wanted lebensraum in order to gain selfsufficiency . He wanted to dominate Europe and the World . To achieve any of these aims would involve breaking the Treaty of Versailles .
 Mussolini wanted a Fascist-Roman empire in the Mediterranean and Africa . Japan wanted a Nipponese empire extending into China and Australia (e.g. Japan)
 Germany, Italy and Japan were hostile to Communism . This way way a cause of war and vice versa . Germany and Italy were hostile .
 Democratic powers were passive USA-Isolated A Project of CSS Writing Club . Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 France was unlikely, and reluctant, to intervene against Germany, because she could not rely on Britain's and America's support . ii. France was reluctant to intervene because she was unlikely to rely on the support of Britain and America . i.ii. France would be unlikely to intervene,
 Between 1934 and 1937, Britain was sympathetic to German recovery . Between 1934 to 1937, the British government was sympathetic .
 The decolonization of Asia and Africa was the gradual growth of independence movements on the Asian and African continent, leading ultimately to the creation of a number of nation-states in the region . i. ii. Cold War: Decolonization was the retreat of foreign powers and the creation
 A number of events were catalysts for this shift, most importantly the Second World War . i. II. ii. II II II: The war was the catalyst for this change . ii: The world's first major war was in fact the war of the 20th century . i
 Some countries such as the Philippines during 1898 had proclaimed independence from Spain . Prior to World War II, some countries such a country such as Spain proclaimed independence .
 The first state to be de-colonised was the Philippines in 1898, and the last was Macau in 1999 . The Philippines was the last state to have been de-colonialised .
 During the decades of imperialism, the industrializing powers of Europe viewed the African and Asian continents as reservoirs of raw materials, labor, and territory for future settlement . i. ii. II. II: Europe viewed Africa and Asia as a reservoir of raw material, labor and territory .
 In most cases, significant development and European settlement in these colonies was sporadic . European settlement was sporadic in most of these colonies .
 i. Flowever, the colonies were exploited, sometimes brutally, for natural and labor resources, and sometimes even for military conscripts . i. flowever,  colonial colonies were exploited for natural resources and labor resources, sometimes for military conscript
 colonial rule drew arbitrary natural boundaries where none had existed before, dividing ethnic and linguistic groups and natural features . The introduction of colonial rule created numerous states lacking geographic, linguistic, ethnic, or political affinity .
 During World War II Japan, itself a significant imperial power, drove the European powers out of Asia . During WWII, Japan was itself a major imperial power .
 After the Japanese surrender in 1945, local nationalist movements in former Asian colonies campaigned for independence rather than a return to European colonial rule .
 In many cases, as in Indonesia and French Indochina, these nationalists had been guerrillas fighting the Japanese after European surrenders, or were former members of a colonial military establishment .
 In many others, independence was achieved only after a protracted revolution . i.iii. In many other countries, independence only came from within a protracted process of political struggle . ii. i. ii. In some cases, independence came only after the death of Julius Caesar .
 A few newly independent countries acquired stable governments almost immediately . Others were ruled by dictators or military juntas for decades, or endured long civil wars .
 Some European governments welcomed a new relationship with their former colonies . Others contested decolonization militarily . Some European countries welcomed decolonialization .
 The process of decolonization coincided with the new Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States, and with the early development of the new United Nations .
 Decolonization was often affected by superpower competition, and had a definite impact on the evolution of that competition . Decolonizations were often affected, and often had an impact on superpower competition .
 It also significantly changed the pattern of international relations in a more general sense . vii. vii . It also changed the way international relations have been handled in the past .
 The creation of so many new countries altered the composition of the United Nations and political complexity of every region of the globe . European powers colonized much of Africa and Southeast Asia in the mid to late 19th century .
 During the decades of imperialism, Europe viewed the African and Asian continents as reservoirs of raw materials, labor, and territory for future settlement . The industrializing powers of Europe viewed Africa and Asia as reservoirs .
 In most cases, however, significant development and European settlement in these colonies was sporadic . i.ii.iii. European settlement was sporadic. i.i. In most of these colonies, European development was limited to a few years . ii. In some cases, European settlement of these
 The colonies were exploited, sometimes brutally, for natural and labor resources, and sometimes even for military conscripts . However, they were exploited for natural resources and labor .
 After the Japanese surrender in 1945, local nationalist movements in the former Asian colonies campaigned for independence rather than a return to European colonial rule .
 The United States generally supported the concept of national selfdetermination . It also had strong ties to its European allies, who had imperial claims on former colonies . vi.
 The Cold War only served to complicate the United States position . U.S. support for decolonization was offset by concern over communist expansion and Soviet strategic ambitions in Europe .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT vii. A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\ » .
 NATO allies assert that their colonial possessions provided them with economic and military strength that would otherwise be lost to the alliance . Several of the NATO allies asserted that their . colonial . possessions provided . economic and . military strength . NATO allies .
 Nearly all of the United States' European allies believed that after their recovery from World War II their colonies would finally provide the combination of raw materials and protected markets for finished goods that would cement the colonies to Europe . viii. vii.
 The alternative of allowing the colonies to slip away, perhaps into the U.S. economic sphere or that of another power, was unappealing to every European government .
 This might serve to shift the international balance of power in favor of the Soviet Union, i. ii. This might . remove access to economic resources from United States allies . ii. The Soviet Union might remove . access to . economic . resources from U.S. allies . i.
 Events such as the Indonesian struggle for independence from the Netherlands (194550), the Vietnamese war against France , and the nationalist and professed socialist takeovers of Egypt and Iran served to reinforce such fears . New governments did not directly link themselves to the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. used aid packages, technical assistance and sometimes even military intervention to encourage newly independent nations in the Third World to adopt governments that aligned with the West . i.iii. The United States used aid . packages, . technical assistance . and sometimes . military intervention .
 Soviet Union deployed similar tactics in an effort to encourage new nations to join the communist bloc . The Soviet Union attempted to convince newly decolonized countries that communism was an intrinsically non-imperialist ideology .
 Many of the new nations resisted the pressure to be drawn into the Cold War . They joined in the ""nonaligned movement,"" which formed after the Bandung conference of 1955 .
 In 1946, there were 35 member states in the United Nations; as the newly independent nations of the ""third world"" joined the organization, by 1970 membership had swelled to 127 .
 These new member states were non-white, with developing economies, facing internal problems that were the result of their colonial past . Their colonial past sometimes put them at odds with European countries and made them suspicious of European-style governmental structures, political ideas, and economic institutions .
 The UN Assembly was often ahead of the Security Council on issues of selfgovernance and decolonization . These countries also became vocal advocates of continuing decolonialization .
 The new nations pushed the UN toward accepting resolutions for independence for colonial states and creating a special committee on colonialism . Even though some nations continued to struggle for independence, in the eyes of the world, the colonial era was ending .
 Cold War refers to the phenomenon that overshadowed world politics from the end of WWII until the fall of the former Soviet Union . The Cold War was the period when the Cold War dominated world politics .
 The Cold War was waged on political, economic, and propaganda fronts and had only limited recourse to weapons . Cold War had limited use of weapons and was waged mainly on political and economic fronts .
 It was first used in the United States by financier Bernard Baruch in a speech at the State House in Columbia, South Carolina in 1947 .
 The Cold War did result in an arms race, diplomatic confrontation, proxy warfare, ideological competition which engulfed the entire world order . V.I.V. V. V
 Cold War resulted in formation of eastern and western power blocks and corresponding alliances and institutions under the Communist and Capitalist power blocks . The Cold War led to formation of Eastern and Western power blocks, resulting in alliances under the Communists and Capitalists .
 The United States accused the Soviet Union of seeking to expand their version of communism throughout the world . The U.S. accused the Soviets of trying to expand the world's communism .
 The Soviets charged the United States with practicing imperialism and attempting to stop revolutionary activity in other countries . The Soviets, meanwhile, charged the U.S. with practice imperialism .
 Cold War tensions increased the likelihood of a third world war, which could have led to devastating consequences due to the possibility of nuclear conflict . The possibility of a nuclear war increased the risk of a second world war .
 The Korean War, the Vietnam War and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan were some of the violent conflicts indirectly fueled by the Cold War .
 It was far from certain that a global nuclear war wouldn't result from smaller regional wars, which heightened the level of concern for each conflict . Indeed, it was far more likely than it would result from small regional wars .
 This tension shaped the lives of people around the world almost as much as the actual fighting did . The tension between the two sides of the war was the most intense of the conflict .
 A major arena in the war between the U.S.R. and U.K.A. a major arena was the strategy of technology . Technology was key to the success of the two countries .
 This cold war also involved covert conflict, through acts of espionage . The Cold War was also known as the Cold War of Cold War .
 One major hotspot of conflict was Germany, particularly the city of Berlin . Berlin was one of the major hotspots of conflict .
 The Wall isolated West Berlin from East Berlin and the territory of East Germany . East Germany was completely surrounded by the Wall and supported by the Soviets . West Berlin was isolated from the East Berlin area .
 The eastern power block led by the Soviets and the western power block by the United States also formed alliances . The U.S. and the Soviet Union formed alliances with each other . The Soviet-U.S.-led Soviet blocs formed alliances in the early 1950s .
 The common ownership of means of production and distribution provided the political and economic basis for the spread of communism, based on Marx's philosophy of empowering the proletariat . Communism is a form of socialism that empowers the proletariat, Marx said .
 Communism in practice resulted in dominance of a single political party and centralized decision making . Communism was a model of Soviet-style communism .
 The bureaucracy became the new bourgeoisie under communism under communism in practice . The bureaucracy was the new bourgeois in practice, according to the historian .
 Capitalism is based on the notion of individual liberty and the right to own private property . Capitalism is a form of liberty and property ownership, the author says .
 At the political level, capitalism emphasized the need for democratic government, multiparty politics, the independence of the judiciary, and freedom of press . capitalism emphasized need for democracy, multi-party politics, independent judiciary, the independent press, and free speech .
 In practice capitalism has caused problems for minorities, growing inequalities and arguments concerning the role of the state in managing the economy . Capitalism has also caused growing inequalities in the society, says the author .
 Neither side ever fought the other the consequences would be too appalling but they did 'fight' for their beliefs using client states who fought for their behalf .
 North Vietnam was pro-Communist and fought the south using weapons from communist Russia or communist China . South Vietnam was anticommunist and was supplied by America during the war . North Vietnam used weapons from Russia or China .
 In Afghanistan, the Americans supplied the rebel Afghans after the Soviet Union invaded in 1979 . They never physically involved themselves thus avoiding a direct clash with the Soviet Soviet Union .
 By 1948 the Soviets had installed left-wing governments in the countries of eastern Europe that had been liberated by the Red Army . By 1948, the governments had been installed by the Soviets .
 The Americans and the British feared the permanent Soviet domination of eastern Europe . The threat of Soviet-influenced communist parties coming to power in western Europe .
 The Soviets were determined to maintain control of eastern Europe in order to safeguard against any possible renewed threat from Germany . They were intent on spreading communism worldwide, largely for ideological reasons . The Soviets, on the other hand, wanted to spread communism worldwide .
 The Cold War had solidified by 1947-48, when U.S. aid provided under the Marshall Plan to western Europe had brought those countries under American influence . Soviets had installed openly communist regimes in eastern Europe .
 In this period the Soviets unsuccessfully blockaded the Western-held sectors of West Berlin . The Soviets exploded their first atomic warhead, thus ending the American monopoly on the atomic bomb . North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950, setting off an indecisive Korean War that lasted until 1953 . The
 From 1953 to 1957 Cold War tensions relaxed somewhat, largely owing to the death of the longtime Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin in 1953 .
 A unified military organization among the Soviet-bloc countries, the Warsaw Pact, was formed in 1955 . West Germany was admitted into NATO that same year . The Warsaw Pact was formed, and West Germany joined NATO in 1986 .
 The United States and the Soviet Union began developing intercontinental ballistic missiles in 1962 . In 1962, the Soviets began secretly installing missiles in Cuba that could be used to launch nuclear attacks on U.S. cities . The missiles were installed in Cuba .
 This sparked the Cuban missile crisis . The confrontation brought the two superpowers to the brink of war . An agreement was reached to withdraw the missiles .
 The two superpowers soon signed the Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty of 1963 . The treaty banned aboveground nuclear weapons testing .
 The crisis hardened the Soviets' determination never again to be humiliated by their military inferiority . They began a buildup of both conventional and strategic forces that the U.S. was forced to match for the next 25 years . The crisis also hardened the Soviet determination to never be humiliated .
 Throughout the Cold War the U.S. and the Soviet Union avoided direct military confrontation in Europe and engaged in actual combat operations only to keep allies from defecting to other side .
 The U.S. helped overthrow a left-wing government in Guatemala, supported an unsuccessful invasion of Cuba and invaded the Dominican Republic and Grenada . For its part, the United States also tried to prevent communist North Vietnam from bringing South Vietnam under its rule .
 A major split had occurred between the Soviet Union and China in 1960 and widened over the years, shattering the unity of the communist bloc . The split was caused by a major split between the two communist blocs .
 Western Europe and Japan achieved dynamic economic growth in the 1950s and '60s, reducing their relative inferiority to the U.S. In the meantime, western Europe, Japan and Russia achieved dynamic growth . The United States is now the world's most powerful economy .
 Less-powerful countries had more room to assert their independence . Less powerful countries often showed themselves resistant to superpower coercion or cajoling .
 The 1970s saw an easing of Cold War tensions as evinced in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks that led to the SALT I and II agreements of 1972 and 1979 . The two superpowers set limits on their antiballistic missiles .
 The Cold War was followed by a period of renewed Cold War tensions in the early 1980s . The two superpowers continued their massive arms buildup and competed for influence in the Third World .
 The Cold War began to break down in the late 1980s during the administration of Soviet leader Mikhail S Gorbachev .
 He dismantled the totalitarian aspects of the Soviet system . He began efforts to democratize the Soviet political system . The former Soviet leader is credited with bringing democracy to Russia .
 When communist regimes in the Soviet-bloc countries of eastern Europe collapsed in 1989-90, Gorbachev acquiesced in their fall . The former Soviet Union leader acquiesced to the fall of communist regimes .
 The rise to power of democratic governments in East Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia was quickly followed by the unification of West and East Germany under NATO auspices, again with Soviet approval .
 In late 1991 the Soviet Union collapsed and 15 newly independent nations were born from its corpse . The Soviet Union had a democratically elected, anticommunist leader . Russia was one of the 15 nations born from the corpse of the USSR .
 The Soviet Union""s ambitions were checked by the rise of fascism in Italy and Germany . The USSR was defeated by fascism in both countries .
 At the end of WWII, tensions grew between the former Allies over dividing the spoils of war . The former Allies were divided over how to divide the war spoils .
 The Soviets were reluctant to grant Poland independence and did not want to vacate their troops from eastern Germany . The Soviets wanted to leave eastern Germany after independence .
 The Soviets managed to install Communist regimes in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania . The Cold War intensified in the next few years and the Soviets were able to install regimes .
 Thereafter, Albania, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia also came under the influence of the Soviets . Finland's coalition government was also dominated by the Communists .
 Truman vowed to check the Soviet influence and to actively protect its foreign interests abroad . The post-WWII outbreak of conflict in Greece between the government and the Communist guerillas was a turning point in U.S. foreign policy .
 Truman Doctrine was meant to fill the vacuum in power politics created by the weakening of Britain so as to prevent the global domination of Communism . The Truman Doctrine has been described as 'the Truman Doctrine' by historians .
 The Marshal Plan was an extension of the Truman Doctrine to protect Europe from economic collapse and communist domination . It was intended to protect European nations from communist domination in the 1950s .
 Aid under the Marshal Plan was used to reconstruct war ravaged Europe . It became the basis for lending for development to newly independent countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America .
 The disposed Chiang Kai Sek government was exiled to Formosa, which is now Taiwan . The government was ousted from Formosa after the war with China .
 The spread of Communism to China also lent support to North Korea, where the U.S. backed the South Koreans . North Korea is now a major ally of China .
 Soviet support to the North Vietnamese led to more serious U.S. engagement in the conflict . The fear that Cambodia, Laos, Burma and Thailand could also become Communist . The United States engaged in the war with the Soviet Union in Vietnam .
 North Vietnamese won the battle with support of China and the Soviets . Despite sending up to 600,000 troops to Vietnam by 1965, the North Vietnamese were victorious . China and Soviets were involved in the battle .
 In the M.E, the U.S. provided active support to the Israelis . The Soviets were not able to influence the ME conflict to its advantage .
 In Latin America, Soviet influence in Cuban and Nicaragua made the United States very nervous . The U.S. supported brutal regimes like that of Pinochet in Chile to prevent its fall to communist influence .
 The Congo, Ghana and Gold Coast got military and financial aid from the Soviets, which led the United States to take counter measures in Africa . The U.S. also took measures in response to the Soviets' aid .
 The invasion of Afghanistan became a major Cold War arena for a proxy war between the Superpowers . In South Asia, besides Indian leaning towards the Soviet and the Pakistani inclination towards the US, the invasion was a Cold War proxy war .
 Khrushchev and Eisenhower met at Camp David to discuss disarmament . Camp David was the beginning of the trend towards disarmament in the Cold War .
 From 1969 to 1978, both sides accepted the status quo in view of the mutually assured destruction capacity of the superpowers . The realization concerning costs of nuclear arsenals was becoming apparent .
 Nixon visited USSR and signed a Limitation on Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms . Both superpowers adopted a defensive rather than offensive posture by both superpowers .
 The invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 fanned the embers of the Cold War again . The U.S. proposed ban on using mobile land sites and the superpowers also reached an agreement on a Seabed Treaty, banning use of sea-beds as nuclear launch sites .
 The USSR""s interference in Angola was also another irritant . The new U.S. administration was also less tolerant and it wanted to begin building bridges with China, which Soviets were now opposed to .
 The Soviets banned the LA Olympics in 1984 and shot down a South Korean air liner . By 1983 they pulled out completely from bilateral arms talks with the United States after the Cruise and Pershing 2 missiles were found deployed by west European countries .
 The overthrow of the Shah of Iran in 1979 also impelled the United States to secure bases in Oman, Kenya and Somalia . The U.S. protects its interests around the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean from Iran .
 The Soviets, Cubans, Nicaraguans and even the Ethiopians were accused by the United States of supplying arms to insurgents El Salvador in Central America . The U.S. accused the Soviets and Cubans of supplying weapons to insurgents .
 The Cold War ended practically with dismantling of the 35 km Berlin Wall in 1989 . It wasn't until the London Summit a few years later that the Cold War was formally announced to be over London Summit .
 The London Summit emphasized the need for the U.S. to reduce the number of nuclear weapons it had deployed in Europe . The London summit emphasized the reduction of the nuclear weapons deployed in the region .
 It obtained a pledge to withdraw the 1470 nuclear tipped artillery shells from West Germany and for the Soviets to withdraw troops from Central and Eastern Europe . It also got a pledge from the Soviet Union to withdraw its troops from Europe .
 NATO has redefined NATO's new role from strength seeking alliance to peace keeping mission . NATO has been transformed into a peace-keeping mission since NATO was formed in 1994 .
 Malta Summit led to the Malta Summit between President Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev in 1989 . The Malta Summit was the first of its kind in the world .
 The Washington Summit in 1990 between the same leaders resulted in signing of number of nuclear, chemical and conventional arms reduction agreements .
 Eisenhower's speech on the Military-industrial complex is often seen as a major factor in the end of the war . Enormous defense spending by America under President Ronald Reagan under President Reagan is often thought to have been key to the war's success .
 The robust Western economies could absorb the expenses of programs such as the Star Wars missile defense but the Eastern bloc countries crippled themselves trying to match them .
 Reagan's policy towards the Soviet Union defined Eastern bloc governments as ""totalitarian" under a doctrine which denied that such regimes could ever undergo internal transformation towards democracy . However, Reagan's policies in the 1980s and '90s defined Soviet governments as 'totalitarian'
 Reagan's foreign policy was never intended to bring about the changes which actually occurred in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union . Thus Reagan's policy was not intended to change the situation in the region .
 Corrupt governments and citizens' desire for greater personal freedom and greater individual wealth were also major factors in the collapse of the Soviet Union and its satellite countries .
 There is certainly evidence that the CIA played up Soviet military power through the 1980s . There is also evidence that there was also evidence of a CIA cover-up .
 Unresolved conflicts, in Korea, Vietnam and Germany, complicated by the interference of the superpowers came to a quick end . Unresolve conflicts came to an end in Korea and Vietnam, Vietnam .
 A new world order emerged at the end of the Cold War, which was influenced by multilateralism and a unilateral superpower . New world order was formed after the collapse of Cold War and the fall of superpower superpower .
 The end of the Cold War called for a new focus in IR which could better analyze and anticipate the realties of a new world order . IR is a tool that can anticipate and anticipate a future world order.
 The end of communism also had economic implications which boosted the legitimacy of the market mechanism . The market mechanism was also boosted by the end of the communist era .
 At the political level, capitalism emphasized the need for democratic government, multiparty politics, independence of the judiciary, and freedom of press . capitalism emphasized need for democracy, multi-party politics, independent judiciary and press freedom . Capitalism emphasized need to be democratic, independent and democratic .
 The United States believed that the Soviet Union's expansion threatened the developing nations of the world . The U.S. believed that it threatened the world's developing nations .
 In 1949 Truman and Congress approved nearly $400 million for technical development programs in Latin America, Asia, and Africa .
 The goal of this Point Four Program was to modernize and strengthen developing nations and discourage the growth of communism . The Point Four program was designed to encourage modernization of developing nations .
 Gorbachev's policy of Glasnost eliminated the strict censorship practiced for hundreds of years . The policy eliminated strict censorship practices practiced for centuries .
 Glasnost stands for openness, and Soviet citizens were now allowed to speak openly about their country's problems . The Soviet Union was now able to talk openly about its problems .
 Perestroika, or ""restructuring,"" was Gorbachev's attempt to end inefficiency and corruption in government . Perestoika was a Soviet state of Soviet Union in Soviet Russia .
 The United States and other Western nations decided to form alliances against possible Soviet attempts to extend their sphere of influence . The U.S. and others formed alliances with the West to prevent possible Soviet influence .
 In April 1949 the U.S. signed the North Atlantic Treaty . The United States A Project of CSS Writing Club is a project of CSS writing club members .
 An attack on one of them would be considered an attack on all of them, members of the group said . Members agreed that an attack would be seen as an attack against all of the members of Congress .
 The Soviets later formed an opposing alliance known as The Warsaw Pact . The Soviet-led Warsaw Pact was formed in the 1950s .
 Many countries in the world now own nuclear weapons . Because of the arms race many countries now own nukes .
 February Joe McCarthy begins Communist witch hunt 1950: June Korean War begins . October November November Rebellion put down in Communist Hungary . September 1954: March KGB established 1954 CIA helped overthrow unfriendly regimes in Iran and Guatemala . November 1956: May Warsaw Pact formed 1956: October November rebellion put down
 Egypt took control of Suez Canal; United States refused to help take it back . U.S. refused to assist in taking back control of the canal . Egypt took over the canal from the United States in 1973 .
 The Cold War was a complex relationship that assumed competition but remained cold in large part because of the existence of nuclear weapons . The cold war was a complicated relationship that remained cold because of a nuclear war .
 There is no academic consensus as to why the cold war came to an end when it did or why it did . Most experts assumed it would continue and were surprised when it came to a peaceful conclusion .
 The end of the cold war divided—and still divides International Relations scholars into mainstream realists and ideas-oriented constructivists . International Relations scholars are divided into realist realists, ideas-orientated constructivistists .
 The term 'globalization' was rarely used before 1989 but became one of the most popular ways of defining international politics after the cold war . 'Globalization' is now a popular way of defining global politics .
 Analysts agree that globalization is a one-world system where all actors have to play by the same economic rules . Analysts say globalization is much disputed term, but analysts agree that it describes a one world system .
 Globalization has become the master discourse of governments around the world . Globalization is a master discourse for governments . It has become an important part of the world's discourse .
 Globalization has produced many winners and a large number of losers, but there would appear to be no escaping its competitive logic . Globalization produces winners and losers, and there are no winners or losers in the process, says CNN.com .
 Most experts did not anticipate—and some did not look forward to—the new American hegemony following the end of the cold war . Most experts didn't anticipate the new American dominance after the Cold War .
 Most U.S. policy-makers still viewed the world as a threatening and dangerous place during the 1990s . In spite of the spread of A Project of CSS Writing Club Ayesha Younas .
 After the fiasco in Somalia the majority of Americans were reluctant to use United States forces abroad . Europe benefited as much from the end of the cold war as the United States .
 Europeans after the cold war were divided over a series of key issues, most notably the degree of European integration, economic strategy, and foreign policy aspirations of the European Union . Europeans are divided over how much European integration and the foreign policy of the EU .
 The European Security Strategy of 2003 was one of the first serious efforts by the EU to think about its international role under conditions of globalization . The EU's first serious effort was to look at the EU's role under globalization .
 Many issues face Europe, including Turkish membership of the EU, the position of Europe's Muslims, and China's economic challenge . Many issues, including Turkey's membership of EU, will be discussed in Europe .
 Yeltsin sought a new partnership with the West but was often accused by his domestic enemies of not defending the Russian national interest . The first Russian President, Boris Yeltsins, sought a partnership with West . He was accused of failing to defend his country's interests in Russia .
 Vladimir Putin, his successor, has pursued more authoritarian policies at home and abroad . He has pursued a more nationalist foreign policy abroad . Putin has brought Russia's economic assets back under state control .
 A new cold war between the West and Russia is unlikely because of the important economic and political changes that have occurred in Russia since the collapse of the USSR in 1991 . Russia has made significant changes in its political and economic policies since the Soviet Union collapsed .
 The international relations of East Asia during the cold war were highly volatile, marked by revolutions, wars, and insurgencies . Compared to Europe after 1945, East Asia after 1945 was the most volatile region .
 The end of the cold war left many issues in its wake and led Aaron Friedberg to conclude that Asia was primed for further rivalry . Friedberg: Asia is primed for more rivalry .
 One of the defining areas of instability during the cold war was the Third World . The Third World was a major source of instability in the Cold War .
 With the end of the cold war the term 'Third World' has been challenged by many analysts . Many analysts have questioned the legitimacy of the term "Third World"
 China and India are prime examples of countries where globalization has produced high levels of development . China is prime example of countries that have benefited from globalization . India is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 Inequality creates security challenges in the form of migration, refugees, and in certain instances, political violence directed against the more powerful West .
 September 11 effectively brought the post-cold war era to an end and in the process transformed U.S. foreign policy . 9/11 effectively ended the Cold War era and transformed the United States foreign policy. September 11 was September 11, 2001 .
 The reasons for going to war have been much disputed, though most people now believe it was a strategic error . The war to remove Saddam Flussein was sold as part of the war on terror; few analysts saw a connection between Iraq and 9/ll .
 The longer-term impact of the Bush doctrine could very easily weaken America's global position over the long term . The Bush doctrine has been described as a 'weak link' to the U.S.
 With the breakup of the Soviet Union and the re-emergence of Russia, the world of pro-U.S. and pro-Soviet alliances broke down . The United States and Russia are no longer pro-Russian alliances .
 Different challenges presented themselves, such as climate change and the threat of nuclear terrorism, the minister says .
 Regional powerbrokers in Iraq and Saddam Hussein challenged the peace with a surprise attack on the small nation of Kuwait in 1991 .
 Bush organized a coalition of allied and Middle Eastern powers that successfully pushed back the invading forces . The coalition stopped short of invading Iraq and capturing Hussein .
 As a result, the dictator was free to cause mischief for another twelve years . The dictator was freed from prison for another 12 years .
 After the Gulf War, many scholars like Zbigniew Brzezinski claimed that the lack of a new strategic vision for U.S. foreign policy resulted in many missed opportunities for its foreign policy .
 The United States scaled back its foreign policy budget as well as its cold war defense budget during the 1990s . President Clinton succeeded in achieving a budget surplus for 1999 and 2000 . The U.S. focused on domestic economic prosperity under Clinton .
 After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the post-Cold War world was widely considered as unipolar, with the U.S. the sole remaining superpower . The United States is the only remaining superpower in the world .
 The Cold War also marked the apex of peacetime military-industrial complexes, especially in the United States . Large-scale military funding of science was also a key part of the Cold War .
 These complexes, though their origins may have been found as early as the 19*^ century, have grown considerably during the Cold War .
 The military-industrial complexes have great impact on their countries and help shape their society, policy and foreign relations . The military industrial complexes have influence on society and foreign policy .
 The most widely discussed application of the phrase of recent times came at the end of the Cold War .
 The most widely discussed application of the phrase of recent times came A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE .
 No weapons of mass destruction were found after the military conquest of Iraq, there was skepticism that the war had been fought to prevent terrorism . The continuing war in Iraq has had serious negative public relations consequences for the image of the U.S.
 The United States remains a strong power economically and militarily . Rising nations such as China, Pakistan, India, Brazil, and Russia have challenged its dominance .
 The coming decades can be peaceful and productive provided there are no misunderstandings or dangerous rivalries . And if they can avoid war, the coming decades will be peaceful, productive .
 The confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union defined the Cold War period . U.S. and Soviet Union fought in the 1950s and '60s .
 The collapse of the European imperial system, the emergence of new states and the struggle between the Soviets and Americans for domination and influence also defined the confrontation .
 In the end, the Cold War was a struggle built on Europe's decline, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The Cold War is built on the decline of Europe .
 Many shifts in the international system accompanied the end of the Cold War . The Cold War was a time when it was the most powerful weapon in the world .
 Maastricht Treaty created the structure of the subsequent European Union . Treaty was created in Maastirir, creating structure of subsequent EU . Treaty created structure of European continent .
 A vast coalition dominated by the United States reversed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait . The U.S. led a vast coalition of nations to defeat Iraq in the 1990s .
 The rise of China as the center of global industrial growth based on low wages has led to the rise of low wages . The second was the rise in China's rise of industrial growth in the United States .
 The third was the re-emergence of Europe as a massive, integrated economic power . The European Union is now a major economic power in the Middle East .
 Russia, the main remnant of the Soviet Union, reeled while Japan shifted to a dramatically different economic mode . Meanwhile, Russia reeled as Japan shifted its economy to a new economic model .
 A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 The first assumption was that the United States was the dominant political and military power but that such power was less significant than before, since economics was the new focus . The U.S. is no longer dominant in the world, but its focus is on economics .
 The U.S. assumed pre-eminence included the power to reshape the Islamic world through military action . China and Europe single-mindedly focused on economic matters . The second phase revolved around the three Great Powers .
 China's economic miracle is drawing to a close and Beijing is beginning to examine its military options . Like the Japanese economic miracle before it, the Chinese economic miracle will end soon .
 The United States is withdrawing from Afghanistan and reconsidering the relationship between global pre-eminence and global omnipotence . The U.S. is pulling troops out of Afghanistan .
 Europe primarily defined itself as an economic power, with sovereignty largely retained by its members but shaped by the rule of the European Union . Europe's sovereignty is largely shaped by its membership of the EU .
 Europe is fragmenting, but now this untenable idea has reached its end and Europe has fragmented . Europe has been fragmenting since it was formed in the 1970s . But now it has reached an untenable end, and Europe's future is uncertain .
 One region, including Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, has low unemployment . The Netherlands, Luxembourg and the Netherlands have low unemployment rates .
 The other region on the periphery has high or extraordinarily high unemployment . Other regions have high or exceptionally high unemployment.
 Germany wants to retain the European Union to protect German trade interests . Berlin properly fears the political consequences of a fragmented Europe . Berlin wants to keep the EU to protect its trade interests and protect its interests .
 Germany also wants to control the economic behavior of the EU nation-states . But as the creditor of last resort, Germany is also trying to control its own country's behavior .
 Berlin does not want to let off the European states by simply bailing them out . Berlin wants to avoid letting them off the EU states by bailing out them out of the crisis .
 EU member states do not want to cede sovereignty to a German-dominated EU apparatus in exchange for a bailout . But the member states want to avoid ceding sovereignty to the German- dominated EU apparatus .
 Cyprus has been treated with particular economic savagery as part of the bailout process . In the indebted peripheral region, Cyprus is treated with special treatment . Cyprus is the only country in the region not to be bailed-out of the eurozone .
 V China's economy couldn't possibly continue to expand at the same rate . China's economic growth has been slowing at the rate of late .
 Growth in an export-oriented economy requires economic health among its customers . Leaving aside all the specific arguments, extraordinarily rapid growth in the export-orientated economy requires health among customers .
 Growing demand requires revolutionizing life in the interior of China, says author . It is nice to imagine expanded domestic demand, but in a country as impoverished as China, it is hard to imagine . Increasing demand requires changing life in China's impoverished interior .
 It is interesting to recall the extravagant claims about the future of Japan in the 1980s . It is also interesting to remember the extravagant claim that the country's future was possible .
 Westerners did not see the hollowing out of the financial system as growth rates were sustained by cutting prices and profits . Westerners didn't see a hollowing of the system as well as the rise in profits and prices .
 Japan exists, but behaves differently than it did before; the same is happening to China . Japan exists but behaves different now, and behaves differently now, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Both Europe and China thought about the world in the post-Cold War period similarly . China and Europe thought about each other similarly in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Each believed that geopolitical questions and even questions of domestic politics could be suppressed and sometimes even ignored . They believed that questions of foreign policy could be ignored .
 Both Europe and China assumed they had entered a period of prosperity that would never end . They believed this because they both thought it was permanent prosperity . It was in fact an extraordinary prosperity that both assumed would never stop .
 History has caught up with Europe and China's economic boom and austerity . Periods of prosperity, of course, always alternate with periods of austerity . China has been in the middle of a recessionary slump for years .
 Europe is confronting the political realities of EU unwillingness to make the fundamental and difficult decisions on what union really meant . Europe, which had wanted union and sovereignty, is confronting political realities . Europe is confronted by the political reality of the EU's inability to make a decision .
 China wanted a free market and a communist regime in a region it would dominate economically . For its part, China wanted to have a . free market . regime in the region . It wanted to dominate the region economically .
 Its economic climax has left it with the question of whether the regime can survive in an uncontrolled economy . Syria's regional power would look like if it weren't prosperous, it would be prosperous .
 However attractive military intervention is, it always looks easier at the beginning than at the end . However, it looks easier to start the process than the end.
 The greatest military power in the world has the ability to defeat armies, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "A Great Power manages the routine matters of the world not through military intervention, but through manipulating the balance of power," says Vladimir Putin . Putin says he will not use military intervention in the Middle East as a tool of power .
 Even with the power the U.S. had in 2001, it could not impose its political will, writes Aaron Miller . Miller: It is that the United States had to commit all of its power and treasure to transforming a country like Afghanistan .
 The United States has emerged into the new period with what is still the largest economy in the world . The U.S. has the fewest economic problems of the three pillars of the post-Cold War world .
 It has emerged far more mature and cautious than it entered the period . But it's emerged that it is far more cautious now than at the start of the decade .
 There are limits to the greatest military power and there are limits . Great Power needs prudence in both lending and invading, writes David Frum .
 The Cold War era meandered for decades, during which U.S.-Soviet detentes or the end of the Vietnam War could have seemed to signal the end . For example, the Cold War ended with a series of Cold War detents and Vietnam War victories .
 The post-Cold War model no longer explains the behavior of the world, author says . Now, we are at a point where the Cold War model is no longer relevant, he says .
 The U.S. remains the world's dominant power in all dimensions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It will act with caution, however, recognizing the crucial difference between pre-eminence and omnipotence .
 Second, Europe is returning to its normal condition of multiple competing nation-states, Europe says . Europe is back in its normal state of competing nations, Europe's second-largest economy .
 Germany will dream of a Europe in which it can write the budgets of lesser states . But the EU nation-states will look at Cyprus and choose default before losing sovereignty .
 Russia is giving preferential terms for natural gas imports to some countries . Russia is buying metallurgical facilities in Hungary and Poland, and buying rail terminals .
 Russia has always been economically dysfunctional yet wielded outsized influence — recall the Cold War . Russia is always dysfunctional yet wields outsized power — recall Cold War. Russia has a history of economic dysfunction .
 The deals are not in their economic interests, but they increase Moscow's political influence substantially . The deals they are making, of which this is a small sample, are not economic interests . They are not only in the economic interests of Russia, but also in their political interests .
 China is becoming self-absorbed in trying to manage its new economic realities . V. Fourth, China is being self- absorbed in managing its new realities . China is trying to cope with its new reality, writes John Defterios .
 Without prosperity, it has little to offer beyond a much more authoritarian state . The U.S. has little of a viable alternative to an authoritarian state, it says .
 A host of new countries will emerge to supplement China as the world's lowwage, high-growth epicenter . And fifth, China will emerge as the low wage, high growth epicenter of the global economy .
 Latin America, Africa and less-developed parts of Southeast Asia are all emerging as contenders . Latin America and Africa are also emerging as potential candidates .
 The fragmentation of Europe and the weakening of China mean the U.S. emerges more powerful, since power is relative . While the United States has committed many errors, the United. States. has committed errors .
 It was said that the post-Cold War world was America's time of dominance . America's dominance of the Cold War era was said to have been America's greatest success .
 Its two great counterbalances are losing their ability to counter U.S. power because they mistakenly believed that real power was economic power . The United States is losing its great counterbalance .
 The United States had combined power — economic, political and military — and that allowed it to maintain its overall power when economic power faltered . The U.S. has combined power, political, military and military .
 China is reaching for military power, but it will take many years to produce the kind of power that is global . China can do so only if its economy allows it to, and it can only do so if it wants to .
 The United States defeated the Soviet Union in the Cold War because of its balanced power . The U.S. defeated the USSR in the 1950s because of the balance of power .
 Europe and China defeated themselves because they placed all their chips on economics . Europe's economic success is down to economic success . China and Europe's success is due to the success of the U.S. economy, it is said .
 The official purpose of the campaign was to eliminate al-Qaeda and other militant organizations . The campaign was meant to eliminate militants .
 The two main military operations associated with the War on Terror were Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq . The two major military operations were those in Afghanistan, Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The phrase ""War on Terror" was first used by United States President George W Bush on 20 September 2001 . The phrase first used in the U.S. on September 11, 2001 .
 Bush administration and Western media have since used the term to denote a global military, political, legal, and ideological struggle targeting organizations designated as terrorist and regimes accused of supporting them .
 It was typically used with a particular focus on Al-Qaeda and other militant Islamists .
 The term is not officially used by the administration of U.S. President Barack Obama . It is still commonly used by politicians, in the media, and officially by some aspects of government . The Global War on Terrorism Service Medal is a medal awarded by the United States .
 The United States supported the Islamist mujahadeen guerillas against the military forces of the Soviet Union and the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan . The U.S. supported the Islamists in the 1980s .
 In May 1996 the group World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders was sponsored by Osama bin Laden and later reformed as al-Qaeda . The group formed a large base of operations in Afghanistan, where the Taliban had seized power .
 In February 1998, Osama bin Laden, as the head of alQaeda, signed a fatwa declaring war on the West and Israel . In May of that same year al-Qaeda released a video declaring war against the U.S., Israel and the West .
 The Taliban demanded evidence of bin Laden's link to the 11 September attacks . If such evidence warranted a trial, they offered to handle such a trial in Islamic Court .
 In October 2001, United States forces invaded Afghanistan to oust the Taliban regime . Subsequently, the U.S. invaded Afghanistan in October 2001 . The Taliban regime was overthrown .
 On 7 October 2001, the official invasion began with British and U.S. forces conducting airstrike campaigns over enemy targets . British and United States forces conducted airstrikes on enemy targets during the invasion .
 The Taliban and al-Qaeda remnants fell back to the rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan, mainly Tora Bora . Al-Qaeda and Taliban remnants are believed to have fallen back to Afghanistan's mountains .
 Osama bin Laden escaped into Pakistan during the battle . It is believed he escaped into the country during the operation .
 Iraq had been listed as a State Sponsor of Terrorism by the U.S. since 1990 . Iraq had invaded Kuwait in 1990, when Saddam Flussein invaded Kuwait . The United States listed Iraq as a state sponsor of terrorism .
 Iraq was also on the list from 1979 to 1982; it had been removed so that the U.S. could provide material support to Iraq in its war with Iran . Iraq was removed from the list in 1982 .
 Flussein's regime proved a continuing problem for the U.N. and Iraq's neighbors due to its use of chemical weapons against Iranians and Kurds . The regime's use of such weapons has caused problems for the United Nations and neighbors .
 In October 2002, a large bipartisan majority in the United States Congress authorized the president to use force if necessary to disarm Iraq in order to ""prosecute the war on terrorism" The majority of the U.S. Congress authorized use of force against Iraq in October 2002 .
 The Bush administration stated that the invasion was the ""serious consequences" spoken of in the UNSC Resolution 1441 . The invasion was a response to UNSC resolution 1441, which was passed by the Bush administration .
 The Bush administration also stated that the Iraq War was part of the War on Terror, a claim that was later questioned .
 Baghdad, Iraq's capital city, fell in April 2003 and Saddam Hussein's government quickly dissolved . Baghdad was the capital city of Iraq and the country's capital, Baghdad .
 On 1 May 2003, Bush announced that major combat operations in Iraq had ended . Bush announced the end of Iraq combat operations .
 An insurgency arose against the U.S.-led coalition and the newly developing Iraqi military and post-Saddam government . However, an insurgency arose in Iraq against the coalition and Iraqi military .
 The insurgency, which included al-Qaeda affiliated groups, led to far more coalition casualties than the invasion . The insurgency led to many coalition casualties, including more coalition deaths .
 Iraq's former president, Saddam Hussein, captured by U.S. forces in December 2003 . Saddam Hussein was captured by United States forces in 2003 .
 End of History: I One was Francis Fukuyama's ""end of history"" thesis . The thesis was first outlined in an article in the National Interest in 1989 then elaborated in a book published in 1992 .
 It pronounced total victory for Western capitalism and liberal democracy over all other competing ideologies . It even predicted a boring future of peace and tranquility . The book was published in 2007 and is published by the University of Cambridge .
 This article was written in 1989, in a period of unpredictable changes in the history of the world's history .
 In this newly occurring situation, he wrote his article, without examining this process in detail and with its multi-dimensional aspects . He wrote this article, "without examining this situation in detail"
 The victory of economic and political liberalism occurred at the end of the 20th century, he says . At the beginning of this article, he briefly summarizes his main argument as follows .
 The victory of the West and Western idea is evident firstly with the collapse o f systematic alternatives to Western liberalism . Western liberalism is evident in the collapse of systematic alternatives, says Julian Zelizer .
 In the past decade, there have been important changes in the intellectual climate of the world's two largest communist countries . Reform movements have begun in both communist countries, according to the author .
 He states his arguments without a strong basis and with a lack of evidence . But as we see from the beginning, he states his argument without a . strong basis, he says .
 After expressing his main arguement, he makes some references to Marx, Hegel and Kojeve . He also makes reference to Marx .
 He says that his main concept 'the end of history', is not an original concept . He says his concept is not a concept that is not original .
 According to Hegel, history is a dialectical process, with a beginning, a middle and an end . According to the philosopher, history has a beginning and a middle, and end .
 Marx believes that, the direction of historical development was a purposeful one and would come to an end with the achievement of a communist Utopia that would finally resolve all prior contradictions . On the other hand, Marx, believes, that, history would end with a communist utopia that would
 According to this perspective, mankind has progressed through a series of primitive stages of consciousness, on his path to the present . This perspective is based on this view of the evolution of consciousness .
 Hegel believes that, at the end, rational form of society and state became victorious . Hegel believes a rational state and rational society became victorious.
 According to Hegel, history came to an end in 1806 with Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at the Battle of Jena . Napoleon's victory symbolised the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution .
 At that point, the vanguard o f humanity actualized the principles of the French Revolution . The French Revolution was the first French Revolution in France .
 But particular regimes in the real world might not implement these ideas fully, he says . It's possible that some regimes may not implement the ideas fully .
 According to him, the state that emerges at the end of history is liberal, democratic, recognizes and protects man's universal right to freedom through a system of law . He says the state is liberal and democratic, recognizing and protecting man's freedom through law .
 Fukuyama, also makes references to Kojeve, who is a modern French interpreter of Hegel, who translated Hegel to Hegel .
 Human history was based on the existence of contradictions; as it can be seen in the primitive man's search for mutual recognition, contradiction .
 In the universal homogeneous state, all prior contradictions are resolved and all human needs are satisfied . The state is a state of homogenous state, with no prior contradictions resolved .
 There is no conflict over large issues and there is no need for generals or statesmen, what remains is primarily economic activity . There are no need to statemen or generals, but economic activity is what remains .
 Main contradictions of human history will come to an end with the end of history . So he states that, main contradictions of . human history . will . come to end with end of . history . He states that . main contradictions . of human . history will end .
 Fukuyama, also tries to improve the inefficiency of materialist theories and support Hegel's idealist perspective . He also supports the idealist view of materialism and materialism .
 He gives examples about Far Eastern societies; he emphasizes their cultural heritage, the etrnc of work, family and other moral qualities which are important in explaining economic performance .
 Samuel Huntington's ""clash of civilizations" thesis was first presented in a Foreign Affairs article in 1993 and then in a book published in 1996 . Huntington's thesis was published in the book The Clash of civilizations . I The Samuel Huntington thesis was presented in 1993 .
 He predicted that the end of the U.S.-Soviet rivalry would be followed by a new wave of conflict fueled by civilizational competition . He was decidedly pessimistic .
 Three years later the book with the same title, now without the question mark, appeared . Three years after the book, the book appeared, with the title still without a question mark .
 The appeal of Huntington's theory is his attempt to develop an all-encompassing construct that explains the conflicts of the present and future, and the key features of the international political system .
 Since it also touches upon intrastate conflicts, its implications reach beyond international relations . The implications of the conflict reach beyond the borders of international relations.
 There have been a number of 'world images' of international politics predicted for the twenty-first century .
 Some of the more optimistic students of globalization and the alleged spread of democracy see the world's peoples coming closer together in economic, political, and cultural terms . On the one hand, some of the optimistic students see globalization and democracy coming together .
 More pessimistic analyses have focused on the gap between 'zones of peace and war' and clashes between emerging great powers in a multipolar era .
 V Huntington's diagnosis belongs in the pessimistic camp, although it is distinctive in its focus on civilizations as the main unit of analysis . Huntington's analysis belongs to a pessimistic camp of analysis, but it's not pessimistic .
 Huntington argues that the world is divided into a number of civilizations . Huntington says the world's civilizations are divided into several different civilizations .
 They include Western, Latin American, African, Islamic, Sinic, Hindu, Christian Orthodox, Buddhist, and Japanese . They are Western, . Latin American . African, . African . Islamic, . Islamic and Sinic .
 Within some of these civilizations, there is a core state, often possessing nuclear weapons . The core state is often in possession of nuclear weapons, often with nuclear weapons.
 Sinic civilization has China as its core; Japan has its own civilization . Sinic civilizations has China, Japan as its own core; Sinics have China as their core .
 Western civilization has linked cores in the United States, France, Germany, Germany and the United Kingdom . Western civilization is linked to core states in the U.S., Germany, France and Germany .
 Islam lacks a core state, as does Latin America and Africa . In contrast, Islam lacks core states, as do Latin America, Africa and Latin America . Islam is the only major religion to have a state of its own .
 Orthodox versus Western Christianity and Islam; Muslim versus Hindu; Sinic versus Hindu . Sinic vs. Hindu. Orthodox versus Hindu. Christian vs. Muslim . Orthodox vs. Western vs. Christian . Christian/Hindu . Orthodox versus Christian .
 Huntington defines a civilization as the broadest grouping of people beyond the level distinguishing humans from other species . Huntington defines it as a broad group of people that distinguishes humans from others .
 A civilization is defined by common objective elements language, history, religion, customs, and institutions as well as by people's self-identification . A civilization can be defined as a society defined by language and history, history .
 Huntington is particularly concerned about the challenge that Islam poses to the West . The birthrate of Islam is higher than that of other civilisations and because of its popularity at the end of the twentieth century .
 Its rejection of Western values and American influence means that these two civilizations are bound to clash at some point . Moreover, its rejection of western values and U.S. influence means it will clash with the Islamic world .
 If China allies with Islamic states against the U.S. against the United States, the danger of war will be very high . China is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Huntington offers guidelines or rules of conduct to avoid such a fate . Huntington offers some guidelines to avoid being in trouble .
 Core states should abstain from intervening in the internal affairs of other civilizations . They must mediate disputes that could turn into wars on fault-lines between civilizations . All civilizations should work to identify shared values, the core states should not intervene .
 Huntington urges the U.S. to strengthen alliances with others in the Western bloc, and avoid weakening its distinctive cultural values . He urges the United States to strengthen its alliances with the West .
 Huntington is no supporter of multiculturalism and the politics of respect among different minorities . Huntington is not a supporter of multilingualism or multiculturalism, he says . Huntington says he is against multiculturalism .
 To reduce the number of civilizations to eight or nine does not seem serious . XL Criticism A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Huntington lumps together as Western civilization has internal fractures . What he calls it "Western civilization has considerable internal fractures," Huntington says . Huntington: Western civilization suffers internal fractures.
 Some religions, such as Islam, are defined primarily by their religious inspiration . In others, like Confucian civilization, the relationship between the religion inspiring them and the political force they exert is less clear .
 Catholic or Protestant versions of Christianity form part of the cultural landscape . Western citizens of Western states are deeply divided with regard to religious beliefs . Catholics and Protestants are divided on religious matters .
 In each of Huntington's civilizations there are trends of thought that follow confessional lines, and others that follow secular lines, a subject of debate today in countries such as Turkey and Italy .
 Besides religion, cultural splits make it difficult to look at civilizations as politically compact blocs, says historian .
 Huntington talks of Latin American culture but ignores, for example, the division between the Spanish and Indian cultures . Huntington says, "Latin American culture is not Latin American"
 There are also considerable splits between social groups that benefit from the international economic system and those it discriminates against . Social groups benefit from international economic systems, say experts .
 On the African continent, oligarchies share Western values and cultural preferences . Other groups make do with socially devalued lifestyles far removed from modernity .
 Huntington's argument is that the relationship between states and civilizations remains unclear . Huntington's view of the relationship remains unclear, but he argues that it is unclear . V. V
 Huntington's analysis of alignments between China and Islam explicitly crosses civilizational boundaries and reflects the interests of powerful states, he says . Huntington's own analysis shows that alignments with powerful states reflect their interests, he writes .
 One might argue that military power and the balance of power among states could overwhelm the influence of culture and religion . vi. vi.
 Critics have argued that Huntington underestimates the enduring strength of Western civilization, global capitalism, and interdependence . Huntington has been accused of underestimating the strength of the Western civilization .
 Cultural values can exacerbate particular conflicts, such as between the former Soviet Union and Afghanistan, writes David Cameron . Cameron's vision is flawed in some important respects, he says .
 Two major prophecies about international order emerged as the Cold War ended . I Two major predictions about the future of international order were made in the 1950s . I
 Both Fukuyama and Huntington might claim vindication in the recent turn of events . Huntington might be vindicated in the way he dealt with the crisis .
 Many have interpreted the emergence of the Islamic State as evidence of the truth of the "clash of civilizations" A Project of CSS Writing Club has created this article .
 Fukuyama foresaw the end of great power rivalry but continued strife in the Third World . He says his thesis remains ""essentially correct"" even as he acknowledges that liberal democracies and civil liberties might suffer from ""decay,"" as may be happening in the United States .
 Two big ideas of the post-Cold War era have been proven to be wrong-headed . Despite my respect for the intellect of their protagonists, I argue that the two big ideas are not only mostly wrong, but also wrongheaded .
 Islam and the Islamic world have played a significant role in disproving and discrediting ideas, not necessarily in the most predictable ways . Islam has played a major role in dispelling these ideas in the world, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 This was an ironic claim, since the defeated alternatives to Western liberalism, namely fascism and communism, were still Western ideas, he said . This was a claim, which was ironic, since they were Western ideas . The defeated alternatives, such as communism and fascism and fascism, are still Western
 The end of history was really the victory by one set of Western ideas over another, says historian . So the end of the world was really a victory by Western ideas, he says .
 Only large states caught in the grip of history can produce and sustain big ideologies to challenge Western liberalism and thereby cause conflict in the international system . For him, only ""large states still caught in history" can produce big ideologies, he says .
 The only candidates for offering such a challenge after the end of the Cold War would be Russia and China . Both were embracing Western-style markets and even, to some degree, political openness, thus moving out of said grips of history .
 Russia and China might signal the 'return of geopolitics' in the international system . V. V. Putin and Putin may signal the return of the world's geopolitics, says Vladimir Putin .
 Fukuyama dismissed the potential of Islam to offer a political alternative to either liberalism or communism . He said Islam could offer an alternative to both liberalism and communism . The Muslim world is divided over whether Islam is a political or political alternative .
 Islam, without a large or great power in its ranks, could pose no traditional Realpolitik challenge to liberalism . Islam's lack of power in the Middle East poses no traditional challenge to the liberal state of liberalism .
 There are 49 Muslim majority countries in the world, about one fourth of the total U.N. membership .
 The world's Muslim population, at 1. billion, constitutes 23 percent of the total world population . The Muslim population has significant growth among its youth, with significant growth in its youth .
 Huntington's list of reasons for the clash of civilizations between Islam and the West is based on demographic factors . Huntington: Islam and West are at odds with each other in the Middle East .
 Adding China's 1.35 billion to the equation means that about a third of the world's population theoretically remain outside of the West's triumphant ideology . Adding China to the mix means that a third, or more, could remain outside the West .
 Even an ardent believer in democracy, such as this author, finds Fukuyama's claims that there are no ""real alternatives"" to Western style liberal . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 The impetus for the Arab Spring came mainly from within Arab societies and had little to do with Western help . The Arab Spring was largely inspired by Arab societies rather than Western help, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is no direct link between the downfall of Saddam Hussein and the Arab Spring . No direct link was made between Saddam Hussein's downfall and Arab Spring, says CNN's John Sutter .
 By now, it is clear that the Arab uprisings were more of a protest against corrupt and repressive regimes than a call for the establishment of Western style liberal democratic institutions . By now it is also clear that it was more of an anti-regime protest than an attempt to establish
 Tunisia is the only country in the Middle East to fall victim to the Arab Spring . Tunisia is one of the most isolated countries in the world, but Tunisia is not one of them .
 While it would be wrong to say that a single or consistent Islamic world view runs through Muslim states and societies, it is equally wrong to assume that they simply identify with or adopt Western liberalism .
 This should not be confused with an acceptance of the Hungtingtonian clash of civilizations . This is not the same as accepting the idea of a clash of civilization .
 The vast majority of Muslims and Muslim nations who do not accept Western liberalism have no sympathy for al-Qaeda or the Islamic State or other form of Islamic extremism . Most Muslims and Muslims do not reject Western liberalism .
 X Huntington's clash of civilizations has gained support in recent years as the new paradigm of global conflict replacing the Cold War . The West could identify the threat against which the United States and the West could focus and mobilize its strategic response .
 It reinforced the fear of Islam and might have offered an implicit justification for the U.S. invasion of Iraq . It might have been a pretext for the United States invasion .
 Huntington's thesis has flunked its test in the Islamic world and elsewhere . However, like Fukuyama's, Huntington's theory has failed to work in Islamic world .
 The Bush presidency invaded Iraq in 2003, but this was because of the invasion flouted international norms and disdained the UN Security Council . The Bush administration invaded Iraq, but it was because it disditched international norms .
 Some of the most prominent Islamic countries have joined hands with the U.S. to fight the Islamic State and other terrorist groups in Syria, Iraq and Yemen . The United States has joined forces with some of the world's most prominent nations .
 Some point to the conflicts in the Middle East and Ukraine as proof of Huntington's pessimism . But Fukuyama too believed that conflicts other than those among the great powers would persist .
 The Armed Conflict Survey estimates a rise in the number of fatalities from major conflicts from 56,000 to 180,000 in 2014 . The International Institute for Strategic Studies estimates the rise in deaths from major conflict in recent years .
 Even if one assumes that these two conflicts are civilizational in nature—rather than social, economic or political causes like repression— the evidence of a world on fire is limited at best .
 The MSS survey also confirmed that the overall conflict numbers in the world are still going down, from 63 in 2008 to 42 in 2008 . The survey also confirms that the number of conflict numbers is also going down .
 More damning for the Huntington thesis is the fact that the overwhelming majority of the targets and victims of violence perpetrated by Islamic extremist groups are Muslims . The majority of those victims are Muslims, Huntington argues .
 Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan are all with Muslim-majority populations . They are epicenters of the War on Terror . The U.S. has been involved in 9/11 attacks in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Contrary to Huntington's thesis, violence in the Islamic world is mainly a clash within a civilization . The violence that occurs in the Muslim world is more likely to occur within a society, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Some of the long-term causes of international stability include the end of colonialism and the Cold War . International norms against the use of military force except in self-defense or authorized by the UN, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peacebuilding operations to prevent and stop wars .
 Report identified ""inclusive democratization"" in previously authoritarian countries that contributes to non-violent conflict resolution and hence internal stability within these states . One other factor identified by the Report is ""inclusion democratization"
 It is clear that many of these factors, which are unlikely to disappear, cut across civilizational fault lines . Many factors, like climate change, are likely to remain in the U.S.
 They are not uniquely the result of Western ideologies and leadership but are actively supported by both Western and non-Western states and societies . They say they are not unique to be Western ideologies or leadership but they are supported by other nations .
 China and other authoritarian nations of East Asia led the way in building state capacity and economic growth and fostering economic interdependence . For example, China's authoritarian nations led the . way in developing state capacity, economic growth .
 India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Indonesia are among the world's largest contributors to UN peacekeeping . Countries such as Pakistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh contribute to peacekeeping missions .
 Peace in today's world is possible because civilizations can and do learn from each other and cooperate . Peace is possible if civilizations learn to cooperate and learn to help each other . Peace can only be achieved through cooperation and cooperation, says John Sutter .
 The only history that is rapidly ending is that of the relatively short period of Western dominance . Western dominance in the long march of civilization is the short period Western dominance of civilization .
 The principal characteristics of the contemporary order that give it its distinctive quality are difficult to discern . Ayesha Younas is a member of the CSS Writing Club .
 There is often a tension, for example, between state-centred concepts of order and those that promote individual values . There is also a tension between the state and individual values, such as order .
 The balance of power might lead to support for regimes with bad human rights' records . For instance, policies based on the balance of the power might support regimes with human rights records .
 It was the Soviet Union's marginalization from processes of globalization that revealed, and intensified, its weaknesses . The Soviet Union was marginalized from processes that revealed and intensified its weaknesses, he says .
 Globalization is often associated with a 'borderless world' in which the old Westphalian order no longer applies . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT. A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Some of this is generated by the feeling that traditional democracy does not offer effective representation in the global order . Some of the feeling is that traditional democracies do not offer a good representation in global order, says the BBC's John Defterios .
 If this were the case, ideas of international order would be much less relevant to our concept of order . The U.S. should not be able to rely on international order, it says .
 This leads to the idea of a globalized state as a state form, and introduces an insideout element . The idea of globalized states as state forms leads to an inside out element in the state form .
 In this case, there is no contradiction between the norms and rules of a state system operating alongside globalized states . In the case, this is not the case of a globalized state, it is a state that operates alongside globalised states .
 Rules of sovereignty and non-intervention are undergoing change as symptoms of this adaptation . Rules are being adapted as a result of the change in the world's rules .
 The Russian Federation emerged after the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Russia emerged as the largest country in the contemporary world .
 It is one of the fifteen independent countries created from the former Soviet Union . The country was formed from the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Today's Russian Federation is twice as big as the United States and China, and six times bigger than India . Russia is now the world's largest country, with the U.S. and China at the center of its growth .
 Russia inherited a large portion of nuclear arsenals from the Soviet Union . Russia has retained permanent seat in the UN Security Council .
 Russia is now an emergent economy, a multiparty democracy, and very rich in energy resources . Russia's economy is now emergent, multiparty democratic, and rich in Russia's energy resources, experts say .
 It is believed to have all the capabilities of emerging as an important power in world politics . So far, it has not been seen as a major threat in the world .
 The present foreign policy of Russia is geared to take up the 'big power' role in international politics . Russia's foreign policy is geared towards taking up a big power role in world politics, says Putin .
 After the end of the Cold War, with the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia entered the Commonwealth of Independent States along with eleven other former Soviet republics . Russia is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Immediately after the Cold War, it was struggling to find its proper role in world politics . However, immediately after that, it struggled to find a proper role .
 During this period (199199), it concentrated more on domestic political and economic reconstruction, and pursued a modest, not-too-ambitious foreign policy, unlike the former Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin administration had to give more time to build the 'new look' Russian Federation was passing through a transitional phase after the disintegration of the Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin tried to give a new dimension to Russian foreign policy as he made major departures from the preceding Gorbachev era . He made major changes to Russia's foreign policy in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In early 1992, Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev announced that Russian foreign policy would differ from foreign policy under Gorbachev's 'New Thinking'because now democratic principles would drive it .
 These new democratic principles would give Russia the opportunity to engage itself in the global peace process in a new international order after the Cold War . Russia would be the first country to engage in the peace process, says Vladimir Putin .
 Kozyrev also emphasized that the basis for the new foreign policy would be Russia's national interests rather than the so-called class interests of the workers of the world .
 For two years (199293), Russian foreign policy was generally low key and conciliatory towards the West with endorsement of many Western positions in world politics . Russia's relations with the West have been described as 'cold-blooded'
 Yeltsin's 'low key' foreign policy was aimed at domestic problems faced by Yeltsins' government . Foreign policy was 'low-key' policy aimed at tackling domestic problems .
 Yeltsin's departure from the traditional socialist policies raised severe public debates . Yeltsins' conciliatory attitude towards the West was seen as a departure from traditional Socialist policies .
 Ultranationalists and communists criticized the new foreign policy as detrimental to Russian national interests . Ultran nationalists and communists criticize the new policy .
 Russia should not follow a lowkey foreign policy with a 'soft' attitude towards the West . Some of them argued that Russia's foreign policy should not be based on a low key foreign policy . Russia's relations with the West has been described as 'cold' and 'soft',
 Foreign policy issues were troubling the Yeltsin government immediately after the end of the Cold War . Foreign policy and domestic problems were troubling Yeltsins' government .
 Yeltsin government came up with a comprehensive foreign policy document in 1993 to allay criticisms that the government's initial foreign policy measures were sketchy and lacked imagination . In response to the criticisms, the Yeltsins government created a comprehensive document .
 The Foreign Policy Concept was the first major official foreign policy document of the Russian Federation . It was approved by the Russian Parliament in April 1993 and named as the 'Foreign Policy Concept' This document was named as 'The Foreign Policy Concepts'
 The 1993 Foreign Policy Concept declared Russia as a great power with several foreign policy priorities . The 1993 foreign policy concept was declared Russia's first great power in the world in 1993 . Russia's foreign policy has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 FPC calls for enhanced ties with Asia-Pacific countries to balance relations with the West . FPC also called for increased ties with Asian-Pacific nations .
 Yeltsin government placed greater emphasis on the protection of Russia's vital interests . Through the FPC, Russia's interests were protected by the Yeltsins government .
 The FPC of 1993 was Yeltsin's answer to his critics and an attempt to place Russia as a great power in the new international order . Yeltsins' FPC was an attempt at placing Russia as an international power in new world .
 Yeltsin was rather unsure about the role Russia would take in international politics . During his first term in office he was unsure about Russia's role in the world .
 Fie began in 1991 with a conciliatory foreign policy that manifested a soft attitude towards the U.S. and the West . But soon changed his position under increasing criticism from his rivals in Russia .
 From 1993-94, he started to espouse Russian nationalism and began to talk in terms of Russia as a great power . The former KGB chief became a prominent figure in the 1990s .
 Yeltsin said in his first State of the Federation Address to the Russian Parliament in February 1994, Russia was capable of preventing any global war, cold or hot . Russia would also prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
 Yeltsin's emphasis is on Russia as the single main actor to prevent future global wars . What is worth notable here is Yeltsins' emphasis on Russia's role in preventing future global war .
 Yeltsin tried to appease the Russian military and other conservatives within Russia that the U.S. and the West still remained a threat . V. V.
 He opposed expansion of NATO to include Central European states leaving out Russia . He also opposed the expansion of the NATO to leave Russia out .
 He put emphasis on making the CIS an economic union with a common market and a common security system with guarantees on human rights . The CIS is a common economic union and security system .
 Russia would not tolerate any harm to its national interests, Putin said . Russia will not tolerate harm to Russia's interests, he said . Putin said Russia would never tolerate harming its interests .
 The nationalist rhetoric of 1993-94 mellowed down in favour of conciliatory policies again in 1995-96 . The nationalist policies of the late 1990s and early 2000s were seen to be less confrontational than in the 1990s .
 Yeltsin highlighted a cooperative and conciliatory foreign policy for Russia in 1995 . In his State of the Federation Address of February 1995, Yeltsins outlined a cooperative foreign policy . Russia's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin hints at possible reductions in Russia's armed forces . Putin says Russia's intention to adhere to arms control agreements .
 Yeltsin continued with Russia's objection to the enlargement of the NATO and called it a threat to European security . Yeltsins continued with his objection to NATO's enlargement .
 In 1995-96 Russian foreign policy would be peaceful and committed to principle of 'real partnership in all directions' with the US, Europe, China, India, Japan and Latin America .
 Yeltsin declared in his address that Russian foreign policy would be guided by a 'balance of interests' with respect to the CIS and the Western world including the United States . The Russian president declared that Russia's foreign policy will be 'balanced'
 During his second term in office, Yeltsin was troubled by recurring health problems, domestic political turmoil, more intense separatist movements in Chechnya, and a weak economy . Yeltsins was also troubled by a series of health problems .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin had to continue with conciliatory policies towards the West with occasional outbursts of Russian nationalism . As a result of his policies, Putin has had to deal with the West .
 During the 1999 Kosovo war, he strongly opposed NATO military operations . He warned of possible Russian intervention and a resumption of the Cold War if NATO deployed ground troops .
 He also had differences of opinion with the American President Bill Clinton over Moscow's military intervention in Chechnya .
 Clinton requested him to stop military operations in Chechnya, which he refused . Clinton refused to stop operations in the region . Clinton requested that he stop operations, but refused .
 Yeltsin relied heavily on the Americans and US-supported financial organizations for the reconstruction of the Russian economy . The Russian economy was heavily dependent on the U.S. for reconstruction .
 Russia sought help from the IMF, World Bank and U.S. Treasury Department for economic revival . President Vladimir Putin sought the help of the IMF and the World Bank . Putin sought help for Russia's economic revival, seeking help from IMF and World Bank officials .
 Russia received more than United States $40 billion from international financial organizations . During his presidency, Russia received $40billion from international organizations . Russia received over $40bn from U.S. during his presidency .
 His government was also accused of embezzling funds, and other financial corruptions . His government has also been accused of corruption .
 Yeltsin's foreign policy, like his domestic policies, was marked by inconsistency and incoherence . Yeltsins' foreign policy was inconsistent and incoherent, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia was searching for its proper identity and place in world politics during the Yeltsin presidency . Russia was looking for its place and identity during its time in power . The country is searching for a new identity and a new political identity .
 Russia was unsure of its status in the new international order . Although it inherited the legacy of the former Soviet Union, Russia still felt unsure about its status .
 It wished to bask in the superpower glory, and wanted to play a bigpower role in international politics, it said . It wanted to be a big power player in world politics .
 Russia was sceptic about its big-power status in international politics . However, the world at large, and Russia itself, was sceptical about its role in international affairs .
 Russia's transition from a socialist political system to a liberal democracy was arduous . With a struggling economy, a nascent and weak democracy, pressing domestic problems, and an ailing but obstinate President, it was a difficult time for Russia .
 It had to take conciliatory policies towards the West, yet wanted to pursue big-power ambitions . But it also had to deal with the West and take on big power ambitions .
 These incoherent policies did not help Russia to assume a leading role in international politics during the Yeltsin period . Russia's 'incompetence' did not lead the country to international politics, writes Alexander Nekrassov .
 Russian economy, political stability, and more assertive foreign policy, say experts . This observation could be substantiated by the progress of the Russian economy and political stability .
 Russia is seventh largest economy in the world in terms of purchasing power . During Putin's eight years as President, Russian economy grew at an average 7 per cent . Russia is currently the seventh largest in purchasing power in world .
 The country's GDP increased six-fold between 2000 and 2008 . The poverty level decreased from 30 per cent in 2000 to 14 per cent .
 Putin enjoyed a very high approval rating from the Russians, an average of 65 per cent during his presidency . He was credited with bringing political stability to the country and restoring rule of law .
 Putin firmly placed Russia as a leading state and earned respect for it . Yeltsin nurtured a dream that he nurtured, but failed to achieve it . Putin's success in international affairs was achieved by Putin's leadership in Russia, Putin says .
 A Project of CSS Writing Club is a project of CSS writing club . This was possible through an assertive foreign policy .
 During his presidency, Russia emerged as an able competitor to the United States and Europe . Russia has emerged as a strong competitor to U.S. and Europe, President Obama said .
 The theoretical foundation of Putin's foreign policy was laid in the 'Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation', approved and issued by the President on 28 June 2000 .
 A 16-page document clearly stated the foreign policy objectives of the Putin government, and Russia's priorities in the new international order in the twenty-first century . The document was published by Vladimir Putin's government in 2011 .
 There is a growing trend towards the establishment of a unipolar structure of the world with the economic and power domination of the United States . The United States is currently the dominant power in the world .
 In solving principal questions of international security, the stakes are being placed on western institutions and forums of limited composition, and on weakening the role of the U.N. Security Council .
 Russia shall seek to achieve a multi-polar system of international relations that reflects the diversity of the modem world with its great variety of interests . Russia will seek a 'multipolar system' that reflects diversity of world's interests, says Putin .
 Putin's FPCRF denounced the U.S. as the power wishing to perpetuate its dominance in international affairs . Russia was in favour of a multipolar world, it said in a statement . Putin's statement denounced such tendencies .
 Putin wanted Russia to be strong and resilient, both in economic and security terms . These pronouncements sounded like resumption of Cold War by the Putin administration, although it was proved later on that Putin was not interested in another Cold War .
 Russia conveyed its opinions clearly without antagonizing other important powers . Russia conveyed the opinions without antagonising other major powers, Russia said .
 Putin condemned U.S. attacks on Iraq in 2003 and called for removing economic sanctions from Iraq . Putin also called for removal of sanctions on Iraq from Iraq in the past .
 Putin allowed coalition military bases in Central Asia during the US-led military operations in Afghanistan in 2001, despite objections from the ultranationalists in Russia . Before the Iraq war, Russia allowed coalition bases in .
 Putin's opposition to the U.S. was issue-based, not chronic, says CNN's John Sutter . This instance showed that Putin's opposing to the United States was not chronic . Sutter: "This instance shows that Putin has a point of honor"
 Fie signed the very important 'Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty' with Bush in Moscow in May 2002 . The treaty was signed by Fie in Moscow on 26 May 2002.
 According to the treaty, both the U.S. and Russia would reduce 1,700 to 2,200 operationally deployed nuclear warheads each . The treaty would see the United States and Russia reduce some of the world's nuclear warheads .
 SORT, a significant step towards nonproliferation, would expire on 31 December 2012 . The SORT would be the first time the SORT has been allowed to be released .
 Putin's moderate but assertive foreign policy earned respect for Russia from the international community . Putin's government has been criticized for its aggressive but moderate foreign policy . Russia's foreign policy has earned respect from the world for its assertiveness .
 Putin objected to Kosovo's plan for separation from Serbia . Putin warned U.S. and European powers not to encourage Kosovo's cessation of Serbia .
 Fie opposed NATO's expansion programme, but also formed the NATO-Russia Council . Fie led Russia against expansion of NATO, but formed the council against it .
 Fie understood correctly that Russia would require economic help from the U.S. and other European powers . Fie understands that Russia needs economic assistance from the United States .
 Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT . Therefore, he did not blindly oppose these nations to appease Russian nationalists .
 He projected the image of a constructive critique of the United States in international relations . Yet he never missed any chance to condemn American 'dominance' in international politics .
 Putin's foreign policy achievements were significant . During his eight years as President of Russia, Putin was Russia's most successful leader .
 Russia regained its status as a leading global power during the presidency of Putin . Putin's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Sustained economic growth, coupled with assertive domestic and foreign policies, led to Russia's enhanced international prestige and acceptance . Russia's economic growth has led to assertiveness and increased acceptance .
 It had emerged as the world's biggest energy base, producing more oil than Saudi Arabia . The country has emerged as a world of energy base .
 Almost the whole of Europe is dependent on the export of natural gas from Russia . Russia is the world's largest gas exporter of all its own .
 The growing arms and commodity items exports have made Russia the third largest reserve of foreign exchange in the world .
 Russia under Putin formed several multilateral forums like the Sanghai Cooperation Organization, NATORussia Council, Collective Security Treaty Organization and Quartet on the Middle East . Russia has increased its presence and importance in international politics .
 Russia's involvement in all these forums indicated Putin's desire to achieve a big-power role for his country . Russia's active involvement in these forums indicates Putin wants a big power role for Russia .
 Anti-Russian regimes in neighbouring states like Kyrgyzstan, Georgia and Ukraine emerged for some time to threaten Russia's security and its foreign policy initiatives in neighbouring countries . Russia's foreign policy initiative in neighbouring Georgia and Georgia is one of Russia's most important foreign policy goals .
 Putin successfully made Russian position secure in Central Asia and East Europe . Putin successfully met these challenges and made Russia secure, says Putin . Putin: "Russia's position is secure and made secure"
 A failed 'tulip revolution' initiated by anti-Russian groups in Kyrgyzstan in 2005 turned into a nightmare for the local population . 'Tulip revolutions' started in 2005 but turned into nightmare for locals .
 The failure, accompanied by killings and chaos in the capital and other cities, frightened the local elites and population . But at the same time it strengthened Russia's position in Central Asia, it strengthened its position .
 The 'colour revolutions' destabilized Russia-friendly governments in Georgia and Ukraine in 2004-05 . The political elite close to Russia came to power in both countries .
 Failed revolutions in effect ensured the success of Putin's foreign policy in neighbouring states . These failed revolutions have ensured Putin's success in neighbouring countries .
 Putin warned the U.S. and West European powers not to meddle in Georgia and Ukraine . The situation never went out of Russia's control, Putin says .
 The Americans restrained themselves because they did not wish to antagonize Putin due to increased American political and business interests in Russia . The Americans, with limited strategic interests in Georgia and Ukraine, also restrained themselves .
 Putin and his Russia commanded more respect from the international community compared to Yeltsin's Russia of the 1990s . Putin's Russia now commands respect from international community . Putin and Russia of 1990s command more respect than Yeltsins of the 90s .
 Russia, despite strong economic growth, failed to emerge as a major trade partner for many of its important neighbours . Russia's economic growth has been a major problem for Russia's neighbours .
 Russian trade remained insignificant during the Putin period . With industrial nations like Germany, Italy, England, and Canada, Russian trade was insignificant .
 Russia's trade volume with important regional organizations like the EU and the ASEAN did not assume significant proportions during the Putin presidency . Further, Russia did not have significant proportions with the EU or the A.S. during Putin's presidency .
 Russia in 2009-10 seemed to have lost its earlier political influence in neighbouring states, especially in Georgia and Ukraine, with the proliferation of anti-Russian forces in these states .
 Negative points in Putin's foreign policy are outweighed by the positive points, say experts . However, negative points in foreign policy outweighs the positives, they say .
 Putin was successful in establishing Russia as an important actor in international politics . Without reviving the Cold War and significantly antagonizing the West, Putin was very successful . Putin has established Russia as a major player in world politics .
 Medvedev was widely known as the person groomed by Putin to take over the mantle after him . Putin was known to have groomed him to succeed him in the Kremlin . Putin is known to be a strong leader in Russia .
 Putin continued with Putin's policies in domestic and foreign affairs, although he often showed sparkles of his individuality in dealing with internal and external issues . He continued with his policies, but showed his individuality .
 Medvedev was not known in Russian politics as a person comfortable with foreign policy . He was more a 'domestic' politician. Unlike Putin, he was known in Russia for his domestic domestic politics .
 He was largely dependent on Putin and the Russian foreign ministry for external affairs . He was a key figure in Russia's foreign policy in the 1980s .
 Medvedev also issued a Foreign Policy Concept on 31 July 2008, that outlined foreign policy priorities of his government . Like his predecessors, his government has issued a foreign policy concept .
 It contained six priority areas that Russia wished to follow in international relations . The list of priorities included six areas of Russia's foreign policy priorities .
 The FPC of 2008 contained nothing unique as compared to the FPCRF issued by the Putin government in 2000 . The Russian government issued the same document in 2000 as in 2008 . The 2008 version of the Russian government's FPC was released in March 2008 .
 The former also opposed the expansion of the NATO and called for equitable relationship between Russia and the NATO in the Russia-NATO Council .
 It objected to the inclusion of Georgia and Ukraine in the NATO and the projected expansion till the borders of Russia . Russia objected to inclusion of the two countries in NATO and its projected expansion .
 Russia calls for building a truly unified Europe without divisive lines through equal interaction between Russia, the European Union and the United States . The FPC stated that 'Russia calls for ... equality between Russia and the EU'
 It also stressed on increasing cooperation with the CIS, EU, Japan, China, the two Koreas, the ASEAN, and several West European, African and Latin American states .
 Medvedev met United States President Barack Obama in April 2009 . A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas .
 The two presidents issued a joint statement after their bilateral meeting which was cordial and positive . The two leaders issued a statement after the bilateral meeting .
 Medvedev and Obama agreed to pursue verifiable reductions in their huge nuclear arsenals . Medvedeva and Obama have agreed to reduce their nuclear weapons arsenals together .
 Medvedev made a departure from the earlier Putin administration, which did not go for the verifiable reduction clause after the SORT, signed in 2002 . By agreeing to verifiable reductions, Medvedeva made a change from the previous administration .
 Medvedev and Obama reiterated their commitment to a nuclear-weapon-free world . The two leaders vowed to work together to achieve the goal . Both said they are committed to a world of nuclear-weapons free .
 They underscored the need for enhanced cooperation between their nations to meet the demands of the new international order .
 Medvedev, like Putin, continued the policy of economic diplomacy for Russia . Russia's economic policy has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 He also used the resurgent Russian economy and strong energy resources to establish Russia's position in international politics .
 Russia under Medvedev continued as the largest arms and energy exporter in the world . Russia continued to be the world's largest arms exporter . Russia is also the largest exporter of energy and military equipment .
 Medvedev gradually came out of the shadow of Putin in foreign and domestic policy matters . He has put the stamp of his own personality in these areas . Putin has been a key figure in Russia's foreign policy .
 Medvedev wanted the dismantling of the moribund OSCE in favour of more active security and cooperation mechanisms for Europe . He proposed a European Security Treaty, and proposed an OSCE-style security treaty .
 He established a Customs Union with Belarus, and proposed similar unions with other CIS-countries .
 Medvedev is no longer another Putin in a different garb; he is a different mind as well . Putin is not only another Putin, but he is also a different man as well as a leader as well, he's changed his mind as also .
 Russia under Medvedev is doing well in economic development and international affairs . But the process of building a democratic Russia is far from over, he says .
 Russia drives Georgian forces from South Ossetia and Abkhazia, then recognizes both as independent states . Russia drives forces from Georgia and recognizes them as independent countries .
 Parliament votes overwhelmingly in favour of a bill that would extend the next president's term of office from four to six years . V 2008 November Parliament votes to extend the presidency from four years to six .
 Supplies to southeastern Europe are disrupted for several weeks as a result of the dispute . The dispute is expected to disrupt supplies to the region for weeks .
 Medvedev and Obama meet for the first time since 2010 . Russian President's first visit to the White House was in 2010 . Medvedeva and Obama met in 2010 in Washington .
 Obama says the United States will back Russia's World Trade Organisation accession . Russia will allow the U.S. to resume poultry exports . The United States says it will also allow poultry exports to resume .
 Tens of thousands turn out in opposition protests alleging fraud, in first major anti-government protests since the early 1990s . First major protest since the 1990s against the government since then .
 Opponents take to the streets of several major cities to protest at the conduct of the election, and the police arrest hundreds . Police arrest hundreds of protesters .
 Russia formally joins the World Trade Organization after 18 years of negotiations . Russia joins the world trade organization for the first time . Russia has been in talks with the WTO for 18 years .
 Angered by a United States bill blacklisting Russian officials in connection with the death in custody of lawyer Sergei Magnitsky, Moscow bans Americans from adopting Russian children .
 U.S. and its European allies impose sanctions and accuse Russia of stoking separatism in eastern Ukraine . This sparks biggest East-West showdown since Cold War, with the United States and European allies imposing sanctions and accusing Russia .
 Ukraine accuses Russia of sending a big column of tanks, artillery and troops into eastern Ukraine . Ukraine says Russia has sent tanks, guns and troops to eastern Ukraine in recent days . Russia denies any involvement in the Ukraine-Russia conflict .
 Moscow court finds leading opposition figure Alexei Navalny guilty of fraud charges and imposes a suspended prison sentence . Navalny is accused of defrauding a bank account worth $1.2 billion .
 They deny charges, one after alleging he was coerced into confessing . They deny the charges . They say he confessed to the crime .
 There is widespread scepticism about the official account . There are widespread domestic and international scepticism .
 West and Syrian opposition say it overwhelmingly targets anti-Assad rebels instead . West and Syria opposition say the Syrian government is targeting rebels . But Syrian opposition says the regime targets rebels instead of rebels .
 China's political history is nearly seven thousand years old . One of the world's most ancient civilizations, China is one of the most ancient societies .
 During this long political history, China was under various rulers and political systems . The country has been ruled by rulers and rulers throughout its history .
 The Manchu rulers governed China from 1661 to 1911 . They ruled China for a very long period, between 1661 and 1911 .
 They were able to create a large territory that included Tibet, Mongolia and Sinkiang . They created a territory of Tibet, Mongolian, and Tibetan people .
 The Manchu rulers were unable to govern and protect this large empire . But at a later stage, the Manchu ruler was unable to protect the empire . He was later forced to step down as a result .
 Inefficiency, corruption and extravagance of the later Manchu rulers led to the downfall of the Manchu dynasty . Inefficiency and corruption led to downfall of Manchu .
 This unstable situation was exploited by different foreign powers to proclaim their dominance in different parts of China . Different foreign powers exploited the situation in China to proclaim its dominance .
 China never came under any particular foreign rule; parts of the land were occupied by different foreign rulers at different times . But it should be remembered at this point that entire China never ever came under foreign rule .
 Boxur Revolt was led by Sun Yat Sen during 18951900 . To protest against the presence of foreign rulers, and the corruption in Manchu rule, the Boxur revolted .
 Although this revolution was not totally successful, it nevertheless inspired people to unite against foreign rule and the Manchu dynasty . It was not a totally successful revolution, but it still inspired people .
 China experienced a republican system instead of the earlier monarchical system . Since then, China has a republican state instead of a monarchy .
 Yuan Shi Kai declared himself as the Emperor of China during the First World War reviving possibilities of returning to a monarchical system again . During the first World War he declared himself . as the . Emperor of . China reviving . possibilities of . returning to the monarchical . system again
 After Shi Kai's death in 1916, the Kuomintang appointed Li Yuan Flang as the President of China, and declared China as a Republic . Flowever, after the death of Shi Kai, Shi Kai was appointed as President of the Republic .
 After the death of Sun Yat Sen in 1925, Chiang Kai Shek assumed leadership of the Kuomintang party and China .
 Kuomintang preferred to call itself a nationalist party with the aim to create a unified China . Chiang Kai Shek became, as the undisputed leader of his party, the harbinger of this aim .
 Mao was pressurizing the Kuomintang government for rapid land reforms programme in favour of the peasants . Since 1935, Mao was pressing for rapid reforms programme . The land reform programme was started in 1935 .
 Mao's focus on rural areas yielded tremendous results as the popularity of Mao and his party soared in a largely agro-based China . Mao's success in rural areas led to his party's success .
 Before the Second World War, the communists gave issue-based support to the Kuomintang to fight Japanese aggression . However, ideological differences continued to grow .
 Mao's very able leadership; call for land reforms and establishment of rights of the peasants; support from the 'socialist' Soviet Union; and a corrupt Kuomintang rule. Mao's ability to lead China; support for land reform, land rights; and support from 'social
 Mao was trying to topple the Kuomintang regime, and training the communists to fight it . Mao was training the communist party to fight the government of China .
 In 1946, a civil war started in China between the communists and the Kuomintangs . The war ended in 1946, when the communists took over China from the communists .
 The United States supported the Kuomintang regime through military and economic assistance . The U.S. supported the U.K. regime in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Communist Party of China won the civil war in 1949, but it was not organized and efficient . The modern Peoples'Republic of China was formed on 1 October 1949 .
 The modern Chinese state was born in 1949 and Mao Zhe Dong became its supreme leader . Mao was the supreme leader of China's first state of independent China .
 Mao Zhe Dong was the undisputed leader of the PRC from 1949 till his death in 1976 . He was the chief architect of China's foreign policy . From 1949 to 1976, he was China's undisputed head of state .
 America's assistance to the Kuomintang regime during the civil war in China, and later in Taiwan, led him to locate the United States as an adversary . America's help in China's civil war led to the U.S. involvement in Taiwan and China .
 Fie believed that after the Second World War, when European imperialism had taken a backseat, the U.S. had assumed the role of a neo-imperialist and a neocolonialist . Fie .
 Mao's PRC was very critical of the U.S. role in Taiwan and in other parts of the world . The United States allegedly tried to interfere in the domestic affairs of states through economic and security assistance .
 American interference in the Korean War in 1950 angered Mao, and China's relations with the U.S. plunged to an abysmal low after the war .
 Mao openly labelled the U.S. as an imperial and neocolonial power . At various times in his leadership, Mao labelled the United States as a imperial power . Mao also labelled China as a powerful imperial power in China .
 Understandably, China's relations with the U.S. have been strained from the beginning of the relationship with the United States . The relationship has been strained since the beginning .
 Mao was sceptical about other Western European powers like Britain, France, West Germany and Italy for their perceived anti-communist ideological positions . Mao was also sceptical of Western European countries like France, Germany and West Germany's anti-Communist ideology .
 Mao was deeply resentful of the West Bloc, and almost turned China away from the Western world . Mao was a committed person to socialist ideologies, and was deeply resented .
 China's relations with the U.S. and other Western powers were very cold and distant during the Mao era . Mao era saw relations between China and the United States very cold, distant .
 Mao's PRC went on a bonhomie with the Soviet Union, the first socialist state in the world, a superpower and a supporter of the Chinese communists during China's civil war and thereafter .
 Ideological proximity and material support brought the Soviet Union closer to China . Ideological close ties between China and the West saw Soviet Union as a major ally .
 Moscow gave huge economic and technological assistance to China after 1949 . State-building process was going on in full swing when state-building was underway . Moscow gave China huge economic, technological assistance in 1949 .
 China was creating its industrial and transport infrastructure with Soviet assistance during the Soviet era . China was developing its industrial, transport and industrial infrastructure .
 Differences emerged from the mid-1950s, overtly on the issue of transfer of poor Soviet technology to China . But differences emerged covertly over the broader issue of leadership of the Socialist bloc .
 The same year, the two countries levelled charges of illegal occupation of territories around their borders against each other . The two countries have been accused of illegal occupations .
 China severely criticized the presence of Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia in 1968 to curb a popular movement against the communist government . China also severely criticized Soviet presence of troops in the country .
 From the mid1960s, China tried to be close to the East Bloc countries, only to arouse further Soviet suspicion . From the 1960s to the mid-1980s, the Chinese government was wary of the East-Bloc countries .
 The Soviet Union viewed this Chinese zeal as designs to curb the Soviet influence in the East Bloc countries . The Chinese zeal was seen as a bid to curb Soviet influence .
 China was able to develop close relationship with Albania by the mid-1960s . Flowever, China had a close relationship between Albania and China .
 An angry Soviet Union stopped economic and technological assistance to Albania as a retaliatory measure . Albania was hit by the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 The Sino-Soviet rift continued throughout the 1970s and the 1980s . Both countries viewed the other with suspicion and mistrust .
 United States President Richard Nixon's visit to China in 1972 further fuelled the suspicion . Nixon's trip to China was also fuelled by his visit in 1972 .
 Soviet leaders alleged that China was trying to build an unholy nexus with the U.S. to marginalize the Soviet Union in international politics . Soviet leaders said that China tried to build a . unholy . nexus with . the United States .
 China's relations with the U.S. were mostly adversarial in Mao's time . Relations with the socialist superpower were largely adversarial during Mao's rule of China .
 Mao's China provided support to the anti-colonial struggle in the developing states with the desire to become the leader in those states . Mao provided support for the struggle to become a leader in the states .
 China also became friendly with India, and the two big countries of Asia went along well for some time . China and India were friendly for years .
 From the late 1950s, border disputes and the issue of Tibet created serious differences between the two countries . which ultimately led to the 1962 Indo-China war . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT . The 1962 war was the result of a series of
 China concentrated on building good relations with some other Asian states like Burma , Nepal, and Pakistan . Instead of building relations with them, China focused on developing relations with other countries .
 Foreign policy analysts in India viewed this Chinese move with suspicion, a latent design to isolate India and strengthen anti-India sentiments in these countries . The move was viewed with suspicion by some in India as an attempt to isolate the country .
 China's efforts to become a leader of the third world failed, as it could not take leadership in the NAM, and as it developed acrimonious relations with many thirdworld countries . However, China's attempts to be a leader failed as it failed to take leadership, as
 After 1965, China's relations with Indonesia and many other countries in Africa and Latin America deteriorated . China's relationship with many countries in Latin America and Africa deteriorated .
 President Suharto alleged that China was instigating the communists in Indonesia with a view to create internal disturbances in the country . Suhartoo alleged that the communists were instigating Indonesia's communists in the 1950s .
 Three African states, Burundi, Ghana, and Central African Republic, cut off diplomatic relations with China in 1965-66 . Three African countries cut diplomatic relations between China in 1966-65 .
 Kenya condemned the aggressive 'socialist imperialism' of China during this time . Kenya also condemned the aggression of China .
 Mao's China failed to develop close connections with the developing countries of Latin America . Mao's failed to establish close ties with the Latin American countries . Mao also failed to become close allies of Latin American nations .
 China's aim to lead the third world against the 'imperialistic' policies of the two superpowers was not realized, as Mao's China got estranged from several third world countries . Mao's attempt to lead third world was unsuccessful, as China's relationship with the world's two super
 Viewed from an objective standpoint, Mao's foreign policy was not very successful . Mao's policy was "not very successful," says Mao's former aide .
 He isolated both the superpowers and developed adversarial relations with them . He isolated them and developed relations with the world's superpowers .
 Mao's China developed very antagonistic relations with India, Indonesia and Yugoslavia . With important states of the third world like India and Indonesia, China developed an antagonistic relationship .
 China remained isolated from the industrially developed Western European countries due to Mao's apathy for these 'capitalist', formerly colonial powers . Mao also remained apathetic about the 'capitalist' Western European nations .
 Mao isolated poor countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America . Mao was supposed to develop cordial relations with the poor states for his support to the anticolonial freedom struggle in poor countries .
 The Soviet influence over East Europe was a deterrent for Mao to make any significant impact in East Europe . Mao tried and succeeded to establish close links with one or two smaller states in the region .
 Mao's foreign policy did not help China economically or politically, as China got estranged from the industrially developed U.S. and the West . Mao's ideological underpinning of his foreign policy, to avoid 'colonial'and 'imperial'powers, did not . help China
 The confusion in Mao's foreign policy was manifested further when China got entangled in bitter rivalries with 'socialist' Soviet Union and 'nonaligned' countries . Mao's ideology should have gone well with the third world .
 Mao's China was soon termed as politically ambitious, with an eye to leadership in the A Project of CSS Writing Club . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT socialist bloc, and the third world .
 This China has aroused suspicion in the world, and as a consequence, failed to win friends . This China aroused suspicion, and . as well as failing to win . friends, he said. "This China has never won friends"
 During Mao's tenure, China remained largely estranged in international relations . Mao's regime was largely estranged from the West .
 After the death of Mao Zhe Dong, China's domestic and foreign policies were controlled by another supreme leader, Deng Xiao Ping . This proposition clearly refers to the fact that after the death, Mao's foreign and domestic policies were tightly controlled by a supreme leader .
 Deng officially assumed leadership in 1978, succeeding Hua Guo Feng, who took over leadership for a very short period after Mao's death . Deng's rise in Chinese politics could be noticed from 1977 onwards .
 Deng Xiao Ping remained the most prominent figure in Chinese politics from 1977 till his death in 1997 . From 1977 till 1997, he was the country's most prominent political figure .
 Chinese foreign policy was also controlled by Deng during this period . Deng was in charge of China's foreign policy during the period .
 Fie made significant departures from Mao's policies, both in domestic and international spheres . Fie was a member of the Communist Party of China . Mao made significant changes to his policies in the 1960s .
 Mao's foreign policy was loaded with ideological issues like distance from the 'capitalist' and 'imperialist'states' and spreading the message of socialism . Mao's support for 'revolutionary'communist and nationalist movements around the world .
 Deng's foreign and domestic policies were considered more pragmatic than ideological . Deng's policies were seen as pragmatic rather than ideological. Deng's policy was considered to be pragmatic and ideological .
 Deng was the architect of economic reforms in China which opened hitherto closed Chinese doors to the Western world . Deng's reforms opened previously closed doors to China to the industrial world .
 Chinese economic reforms helped Deng pursue a more realistic and internationally acceptable foreign policy . Deng's economic reforms allowed him to pursue more realistic foreign policy, he says . Deng: China's foreign policy is now an internationally acceptable policy .
 Deng realized it would not help China much to isolate both the United States and the Soviet Union simultaneously . Deng realized that it wouldn't help China very to isolate the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 For China's economic development, the US, Western European states and an industrially developed Japan were crucial and more welcome than the socialist rival, the Soviet Union .
 China could no longer afford to ignore the Western states as 'capitalist'and 'imperialist' powers . China could 'no longer afford' to ignore Western powers as 'capitalists' powers, says Chinese leader .
 Apart from economic interests, a common adversary also brought China and the U.S. closer . The United States and China have been drawn together in recent years .
 American President Richard Nixon tried to break the ice in Sino-American relations by visiting China in 1972 . Richard Nixon visited China in 1973 to try to break up the ice by visiting it .
 Mao's label on the United States as an 'imperialist' power led to differences between China and the U.S. But differences between the two nations persisted over Taiwan, which China claimed .
 Sino-U.S. relations continued to be indifferent during the Mao period . China's relationship with the United States remained indifferent during that period .
 Deng broke real grounds to establish closer links with the U.S. and other developed states of the West . Deng was Deng's first foreign leader to enter into the Middle East . Deng broke ground for closer ties with the United States and other Western states .
 China opened up its economy in 1979, allowing private business to proliferate and foreign investment to come . In 1979, China's economy opened up to private business, allowing for foreign investment .
 A new Chinese Constitution was introduced in 1982 to facilitate liberal economic developments in China . A new constitution was introduced to facilitate the country's liberal economic development .
 Deng's China created Special Economic Zones, mainly in the coastal areas, to give special privileges to foreign investors . Deng's special economic zones were created in coastal areas to give foreign investors special privileges .
 Advanced states, apathetic to China for long for its 'closed door' policies, felt encouraged and got attracted to China . Now, the industrially-industrialally, China is the focus of the world's most advanced states .
 Deng introduced the socialist market economy that Deng introduced in China was a new model in international politics and economy . Deng introduced a socialist economy that was a model for international politics, economy .
 China retained one-party control in Chinese politics and society, but allowed deregulation of the economy . It retained one party control in China's politics, society, and allowed deregulation .
 Deng, the conservative pragmatist, is the undisputed leader of modern China . The SME proved to be a huge success and made Deng the leader of the country .
 Deng's foreign policy, must, therefore, be analysed in the context of the SME and his conservative pragmatism . Deng's Foreign Policy must also be analysed as a result of his conservative realism .
 The success of the state-controlled liberal economy in China, manifested through its economic growth rate, made China a very attractive destination for foreign investments . China's liberal economy has made it very attractive to foreign investors, says Chinese official .
 American, Japanese and west European private business started to enter China in a big way from the early 1980s . Private business began in China in the 1980s, paving ways for the relegation of political differences to the background .
 China's annual average economic growth rate for the decade 1960-70 was 5.2, and 5.5 for 1970-80 . China's average growth rate is 5.3 per cent, the highest rate for decades .
 China shed ideological bias to invite foreign investments from 'capitalist' and 'imperialist' states of the West . As China shed its ideological bias, these countries also changed their views about a 'rigid' socialist state in Asia .
 China began to play a significant role in mainstream international economics and politics in the 1980s . Gradually China's relations with the Western world improved, as China became more mainstream .
 Mao's China also wanted to play a major role in world politics, but could not fulfill its desires due to China's closed economy and adverse international relations . Deng's China, economically open and strong, could play this desired role more easily, as China became more acceptable to the rest of
 China's relations with the Soviet Union also improved after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the USSR in 1985 . China's relationship with the USSR also improved in the 1980s after the then-Soviet Union leader became president .
 Border trade between the two socialist giants went up and got strengthened by the late 1980s . Border trade was strengthened between the 1980s and 1990s .
 Before his visit, the Soviet Union announced the withdrawal of 5,00,000 Soviet troops from its borders with China . The Soviet Union had withdrawn 5,000,000 troops .
 A ten-year vision on close cooperation in trade, economic and technological areas was announced during Peng's visit . The visit was part of a 10-year cooperation plan between the two countries .
 With 'glasnost' and 'perestroika' taking shape, the Soviet Union also opened up and shed its earlier hostility towards China . The Soviet Union shed its hostility towards the Chinese in the early 1980s .
 Deng also reached out to third world countries, including India, to assess possibilities of improved trade and commerce . Deng also wants to improve trade relations with India and other countries .
 China secured its place in the international order as a rapidly growing economy, strong military, and a more open state with a realistic view of the world . By the early 1990s, when Cold War was nearing its end, China had a strong military and a growing economy .
 China's journey towards a major power status continued after the end of the Cold War . China is now one of the world's most powerful countries .
 China maintained its spectacular economic growth after the Cold War . Continued to use economic diplomacy as its major thrust in international relations . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Deng Xiao Ping resigned from all official posts in 1991, but remained as the central figure in Chinese politics . He virtually controlled the party and the state in China till his death in 1997 .
 The SME brought economic gains for China, which subsequently helped China conduct international diplomacy more effectively . China helped China in conducting international diplomacy better effectively, according to experts .
 After the Cold War, the United States remained the only superpower in an altered international order . The U.S. was the last superpower in the world's post-Cold War era .
 Deng's pragmatic China wanted to be close to the world's only remaining superpower . Deng wanted to move close to China's world's oldest remaining superpower, China said .
 The United States also wanted to forge strong economic relations with China because of its emerging market . The U.S. also wanted the U.K. to establish strong economic ties with China .
 In 1994, the United States granted the 'Most Favoured Nation in Trade 'status to China . China was granted the status in 1994 by the US .
 U.S. did not hesitate to grant MFN status to China for trade and economic interests . Despite persistent criticism in the United States Congress about human rights violations in China . China has been accused of human rights abuses in the country .
 By 1998-99, China became the fourth largest trading partner of the United States . bilateral trade reaching United States $94. billion at the end of 1999 .
 Since then, it has become a major player in the WTO, supporting interests of the developing states . The WTO is a major body in the world's most powerful body .
 Two-way trade reached a substantial United States $409.4 billion in 2008 . Trade between the U.S. and U.K. in 2008 was $409 billion .
 The United States emerged as the top trading partner of China in 2008 and 2009 . Japan was the second largest trading partner in 2009, with the U.S. becoming the top trade partner .
 China had used its economic diplomacy after the Cold War to bring former adversaries close towards China . China's economic diplomacy brought former adversaries closer towards each other .
 US-China economic relations remained strong after the Cold War . Despite occasional concern for an authoritarian political system, and violation of democratic and human rights in China, these would continue to remain strong in the future for mutual trade and business interests .
 Strengthened economic relations also helped Sino-American political relations to improve after the Cold War . Sino and U.S. political relations also improved after Cold War.
 Top-level mutual visits by the leaders of the two nations continued after the war .
 The US-China joint statement issued during Obama's visit acknowledged China's leading role in world politics, and particularly in Asia .
 The statement, which raised eyebrows in India, clearly indicated that China occupied a dominant role in Asia . The statement was made by President Xi Jinping .
 It appeared to highlight the new Democratic Administration's preference for China . The move was seen as a signal of support for the Chinese government .
 This preference may also strengthen US-China political relations in future, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 With Gorbachev becoming the President of the Soviet Union, Sino-Soviet relations began to improve . The relationship between China and the West has been strained for years .
 China's relations with the new Russian Federation continued to grow after the Cold War . China's relationship with Russia has grown in the past .
 In 1991, the Sino-Russian Border Agreement was signed apportioning territory that became controversial during the Cold War period . The agreement was signed in 1991 . It apportioned territory that was contested during the S.Sino-Soviet border conflict .
 In 1992, Russian President Boris Yeltsin visited China, and signed economic and defence agreements with China . In 1992 the Russian President visited China and signed agreements with the country .
 After Gorbachev's visit, leaders of the two states continued to pay mutual visits to each other . After the visit, the two countries continued to visit each other for mutual benefit .
 These toplevel visits helped to normalize relations between the two countries .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin visited China in 2000, and signed three important economic and trade agreements with China . Putin's visit was the first visit to China since 2000 .
 Russia emerged as the top supplier of defence equipments to China in 2001 . In 2001, Russia was the top Russian defence supplier to China .
 In 2001, the close relations between the two countries were formalized with the 'Treaty of Good Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation' The treaty is a twenty-year strategic, economic, and arguably, an implicit military, treaty .
 The two countries joined Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to form the Shanghai Cooperation Organization . Before this treaty was signed, the two countries were part of a multilateral forum .
 The Russian government agreed to transfer Tarabarov Island as well as one half of Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island to China in 2004 . The move ended a long-standing border dispute between the two countries .
 The transfer had been ratified by both the Chinese and the Russian parliaments . The transfer of the Russian national team was ratified in both countries .
 This event was a big leap forward in bilateral relationship between China and Russia . It could act as a confidence-building measure in the future, says author .
 Two-way trade between the two countries registered significant growth in recent times . Trade between China and the U.S. has also registered growth .
 Chinese President Hu Jin Tao told Russian journalists that he was very optimistic about bilateral trade reaching United States $80 billion by 2010 . Chinese President Dimitry Medvedev also expressed similar hopes during his state visit to China in 2008 .
 It appears from the analyses made here that both countries are eager to forge strong economic and political relations in a changed international order after the Cold War .
 China improved relations with Japan, a close neighbour and economic giant, after the Cold War . China also improved its relations with its close neighbour, Japan, in the 1980s .
 China allowed Japanese companies to do business in the country . Under the SME, China allowed businesses to be opened in Japan . The SME allows Japanese businesses to operate in China .
 This Chinese gesture helped ease tensions between the two Asian neighbours . The gesture was seen as a gesture of goodwill to ease tensions .
 This was the first visit to China by any Japanese Emperor after the Second World War . The Emperor visited China on a visit to the country for the first time since WWII .
 Visit aroused great interests in the two countries and helped to improve relations . Naturally, this visit aroused great interest in both countries . It helped to help improve relations.
 In 1993, Japan's erstwhile Prime Minister Hosokawa expressed regrets on behalf of his people for Japan's aggression over China during the Second World War .
 Top-level mutual visits by the leaders of the two states are taking place regularly . The two states have a history of mutual visits between their governments .
 Abe stressed cooperation in bilateral trade and investment with Chinese leaders . Abe also stressed cooperation with China on bilateral trade, investment .
 Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited Japan in 2007 and held talks on various areas of cooperation between the two states . Wen visited Japan and visited the country in 2007 .
 Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi visited Japan in November 2009 and met Japanese leaders . China's foreign minister visited Japan for the first time in 2009 .
 Japan's Foreign Minister Okada welcomed Yang on his official visit to Japan, and stated that Japan and China had engaged in dialogues on a variety of issues . He would like to further promote active cooperation not only in bilateral relationship but also in regional and global issues .
 Japan emerged as the second largest trade partner of China in 2008 with a total trade volume of U.S. $266. billion . Japan had emerged as China's second biggest trade partner in 2008 .
 Sino-Japanese bilateral relations improved significantly after the Cold War . Mutual economic interests had paid dividends in Sino and Japanese relations .
 China also endeavoured to improve its relations with the ASEAN, the regional organization with strong economic credentials . China is also endeavouring to improve relations with its neighbours, including the region .
 China and ASEAN now hold regular summits, also known as the 10 + 1 mechanism . China and the A.S. have a long history of bilateral meetings . China is one of the world's largest economies .
 The Twelfth China-ASEAN Summit was held in Hua Hin, Thailand, on 24 October 2009 . The summit was held at the end of the month of October 24 .
 Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and the leaders of ASEAN-countries attended the summit . The summit took place in Beijing, China's capital .
 The two sides reviewed the joint efforts to tackle the international financial crisis and other challenges faced by the two sides over the past one year . They reached broad consensus on comprehensive cooperation .
 The China-ASEAN Free Trade Area would become another important milestone in the history of relations between the two sides . China-AFFA is to be completed by 2010, with the first phase due to take place in 2010 .
 The current relationship between China and the ASEAN is featured by stronger mutual trust, closer ties in different areas, and the will to work for peace and security in the Asia Pacific region . The relationship has been described by China as "strong mutual trust"
 China's relations with EU were established in 1975, and are currently guided by the 1985 EU-China Trade and Cooperation Agreement . China's trade and cooperation agreement with EU was signed in 1985 . China is one of the world's most populous countries .
 At present, apart from regular political, trade and economic dialogue meetings between China and the EU, there are over twenty-four sectoral dialogues and agreements, ranging from environmental protection to industrial policy .
 The Twelfth EU-China Summit took place in Nanjing, China, on 30 November 2009 . The summit was held in China's capital Nanjing .
 Joint statement issued after the summit acknowledged the role played by EU and China in fostering peace and harmony in the world . Joint statement called for increasing cooperation between the two countries in the areas of trade, security, environment, education and culture .
 As a group, the EU emerged as the largest trade partner of China in 2008 . As a result, China is now the largest economic partner of the EU .
 China's relations with the developing nations of Asia, Africa and Latin America also improved after the Cold War . Free market economy and free market economy changed political calculations . China's relationship with the world's developing nations also improved .
 China is helping many developing states improve their industrial and social infrastructure through economic and technological assistance . The country is helping to improve its industrial, social and technological infrastructure .
 On the whole, an economically resurgent China is now playing the role of an important actor in world politics after the Cold War . China is playing a key role in the world's most powerful and influential role in politics after Cold War.
 After the war, England's powers were diminished because its economy was hit hard due to the war . Its colonies all over the world became free of British control, depriving it of essential resources .
 The United States and the Soviet Union emerged as strong economic and military superpowers after the Second World War, relegating England to a lesser-power status in international politics .
 British economy and foreign policy became largely dependent on the US, its ally before and after the war . Britain's foreign policy and economy was largely dependent upon the US . The U.S. was Britain's most powerful ally during the Second World War .
 All the important bases of British power for centuries started eroding before the Second World War, leaving Britain satisfied with a medium-power status today .
 Of these five 'strengths', imperial interests and balance of power ended with the Second World War . Imperial interests ended with World War II with the collapse of the Empire .
 The vast British empire, in the form of colonies in almost every part of the world, went out of British control after the war .
 For almost three and a half centuries Britain did not allow any other power to dominate in Europe . Britain maintained a balance of power in the continent through its command as holder of the balance .
 The system of balance of power also came to an end after the Second World War with the rise of two superpowers possessing nuclear weapons . But the system of balancing power came to a halt after the second World War .
 With unprecedented development in the field of science and technology from the early twentieth century, several European states—such as Italy, Germany, France, Portugal and Spain—started competing with England as important sea powers .
 Britain's dominance as a sea power and a trading state faced challenges before the Second World War . So Britain faced challenges as a maritime power and trading state .
 British economy, traditionally dependent on sea power and trade, found many competitors after the Second World War . Japan, the US, Italy and the USSR lost ground after WWII and lost ground .
 All these factors led to Britain's 'fall from grace' as a great power in world politics . Britain's fall from grace as a world power has led to a 'fall of grace'
 During the Cold War, Britain wished to play the role of an important actor in international politics, and succeeded to some extent, with the help of the U.S.
 Britain and the U.S. remained strong allies before and after the Second World War . With common bonds of heritage, language and culture, the two nations were strong allies .
 Britain's post-war foreign policy was preoccupied with the task of thwarting the 'advancement' of communism and the Soviet Union in the world .
 Britain's relations with the socialist countries of East Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America were distant, and sometimes antagonistic . For this reason, Britain’s relations with socialist countries were often distant .
 Britain did not always support the United States blindly during the Cold War . But it must be pointed out that Britain not always supported the U.S. during the cold war .
 It expressed its reservations about the American policy on China, and put forward the view, as early as in 1950, that trade with China must be A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Britain's views proved right in the long run. With impressive and increasing volumes of Sino-American trade today, China's trade today is booming .
 Britain also opposed U.S. policies during the Suez Canal Crisis and Vietnam War .
 Britain tried to expand its sphere of influence in the world, independent of the US, through the Commonwealth, through Commonwealth . The Commonwealth is the UK's largest body of influence outside the United States .
 Britain was able to establish close political, economic, and cultural links with more than a hundred states in the world through the commonwealth system . Britain established close political and economic links with many of the world's most important states .
 Although the commonwealth is a much heterogeneous movement now, with lesser British control, it nevertheless helps British foreign policy to cultivate closer ties with many states, and has proved to be beneficial for British diplomacy .
 In 1979, during the premiership of Margaret Thatcher, Britain successfully resolved the Rhodesian crisis leading to the establishment of Zimbabwe . Zimbabwe was the first African nation to become Zimbabwe .
 Thatcher also won the Falklands War against Argentina in 1982 to re-establish British control over the Falkland islands . Thatcher, the last Prime Minister of Britain during the Cold War, was the last British Prime Minister to win .
 British victory in the Falklands War reminded the world that Britain was not a spent force and could preserve its national interests effectively . The Falklands was the first time the British forces were able to preserve national interests .
 Major and his team did not seek a very proactive role for Britain in the new world order immediately after the Cold War . Major's team failed to seek a more proactive role in Britain's role in the world order .
 Flowever, the first Gulf War in 1991 and the Masstricht Treaty for a revamped European Union were tough foreign policy challenges for the Major government in the 1990s . Flowever was Flowever .
 The Masstricht Treaty and the issue of a united Europe raised political storms in Britain . It brought out the shaky position of the Major government on foreign policy matters .
 Flowever showed determination during the first Gulf War by sending British troops to defend Kuwait, and by persuading the American President Geoge Bush to support 'no-fly zones'
 Fie paved the way for the Belfast Agreement, also known as the 'Good Friday Agreement', between Britain and Northern Ireland which sought to end London's direct control over Northern Ireland . The Belfast Agreement was the first agreement between the two sides to reach an agreement .
 Under him, Britain preferred an 'interventionist' role in international politics . Under him he preferred to a more interventionist role in the world .
 Britain's involvement in NATO attacks on Kosovo and Serbia in 1999 in the wake of ethnic conflicts in these regions . The Blair government's interventionist interventionist A Project of CSS Writing Club compiled by Ayesha Younas .
 Blair administration also made England an active player in the 'humanitarian intervention' in Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2003 . Blair administration made England a major player in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 The British military joined hands, mainly with its American counterparts, to launch massive attacks on disruptive forces in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 Blair government cooperated closely with the U.S. to achieve its foreign policy goals of making Britain a principal actor in international politics again . In Kosovo, Serbia, Afghanistan and Iraq, Blair's government coopered with the United States . In all these operations, the Blair .
 Blair was an ardent advocate of US-UK partnership to secure and promote Britain's national interests . Blair was a staunch advocate of the U.S.-UK partnership .
 This cooperation became stronger after suicide bombers attacked civilians in London in 2005 . This cooperation was strengthened after a suicide bomber attack on civilians in 2005, it was claimed .
 Blair government took active interest in matters related to the European Union . Blair government aimed to secure a prominent role for Britain in European affairs .
 Blair government asked the British Treasury to assess the possibility of adopting the Euro . Britain worked hard towards achieving a European Monetary Union .
 The government decided to defer the adoption of euro for Britain when the single currency was introduced in many countries of Europe in 2002 . After careful assessment, the government decided .
 It hoped that the currency would be introduced in Britain in future . But it hoped that it would not be introduced to the UK in any way .
 The Labour government endorsed the Nice Treaty in 2002 which sought to strengthen the European Union . The Nice Treaty sought to revamp the EU's internal structure by revamping its internal structure .
 The UK signed the Brussels Reform Treaty in 2007 that wanted to extend the powers of the union . Further, it signed a treaty to extend its powers to the European Union .
 The Belfast Agreement was initiated by the former John Major government to bring peace to Northern Ireland . It was the first government to implement the Belfast Agreement .
 This agreement formed part of Blair's policy to brighten England's image in Europe . It was part of a policy to improve the image of the UK in the EU .
 In deference to the Belfast agreement, the Tony Blair government helped to restore the 'Stormont', the Northern Ireland Parliament, in 2007 . Stormont was restored to Stormont by the Blair government in 2006 .
 During his two tenures, Blair visited almost every part of Europe, including several areas in East and Central Europe . Blair visited many of these countries to restore Britain's close ties with these countries which were affected by Cold War politics .
 Blair's euro-centric policies helped in many ways to reestablish Britain at the helm of European politics after the Cold War . Blair's Euro policies helped reestablish the UK at the top of the continent's politics .
 Brown continued with the foreign policy priorities of the Blair government . Brown sought closer ties with the United States and an active role in European and international politics .
 Brown ordered withdrawal of British combat troops from Iraq in 2008 . Brown was committed to the Iraq War, but ordered withdrawal in 2008 from Iraq .
 Wanting to improve relations with China, he paid an official visit to the country in July 2008 . Wanting a better relationship with the country, he visited China in 2008 to improve ties .
 The volume of bilateral trade would touch United States $60 billion by the end of 2010 . China-U.S. economic relations would touch U.S., China's trade volume would touch $60billion by end of year .
 British sympathisers of the Tibetan unrest in 2008 wanted Brown to send a strong message to China . Brown attended the closing ceremony of the summer Olympics of 2008 in Beijing .
 Brown was in favour of building closer ties with China, a booming economy and an important power in today's world politics . Brown said he wanted to build ties with the world's most powerful power .
 The Brown government expressed support to the people of Georgia during the South Ossetia War of 2008 between Russia and Georgia . British relations with Russia suffered a setback when the Brown government voiced support for the people in Georgia .
 Foreign Secretary David Miliband visited Georgian capital Tbilisi to meet the Georgian President . Miliband said that the British government and people stood in solidarity with the Georgian people .
 The opposition party in Britain accused the Brown government in October 2009 of a 'frozen relationship' with Russia that was reminiscent of the Cold War disengagement between the countries .
 Brown met with Medvedev twice in 2009, but the relationship appeared far from cordial . Brown's relationship with the Russian leader was strained in 2009 when he met with Putin .
 With Japan, the Brown government nurtured a traditionally close relationship with Japan . The Brown government has further strengthened its relationship with the country .
 The EU signed the Lisbon Treaty in December 2007 . It sought to reform the EU by amending the earlier Masstricht Treaty .
 The treaty was ratified by the British Parliament in July 2008 . It was an important foreign policy victory for the Brown government .
 The Cameron government became the first coalition government in the UK since the Second World War . Cameron government is the first to form a coalition government since the war .
 Cameron Ministry is new in Britain and it will take time to evaluate its performance . The Cameron Ministry will be new to the UK and will be evaluated by the end of the year .
 Criticism arose within and outside England that British foreign policy was nothing but another face of U.S. foreign policy . Criticisms arose within . and outside of England that Britain was nothing more than another . face of American policy .
 Policy planners in Britain had been searching for a 'British'identity in their foreign policy since the end of the Second World War .
 "Due to several reasons, their policy could not come out of the American sphere of influence," says President Obama . "The U.S. will continue to influence the region," says Obama .
 Labour reliance on the U.S. on the United States bears testimony to such observations . The reliance of three successive Labour governments (Blair and Brown periods) on the US bears testimony .
 Blair government faced intense domestic criticism for its role in Afghanistan and Iraq . The Blair government was criticised for its failure to check human massacre in Rwanda, Bosnia and Serbia .
 British foreign policy often suffers from an identity crisis . Foreign policy would continue to haunt policy makers in Britain in the future .
 The foreign policy of any nation is the reflection of its tradition, cultural heritage, and sociopolitical and economic conditions . India's foreign policy is a reflection of the nation's tradition and cultural heritage .
 It draws inspiration from the age-old tradition of the land, its rich cultural heritage, as well as from the comparatively recent socio-political and economic experiences .
 India's foreign policy is imbibibed with ideas of peace, universal brotherhood, non-interference and nonviolence . The country has a long history of non-violent acts of violence .
 The philosophical basis of India's foreign policy is rooted in its rich cultural heritage that rests on Buddha's tolerance . India's policy is based on the belief that Buddha's tolerant tolerance is key to its foreign policy .
 Emperor Ashoka's non-violence, Sri Chaitanya's love for humanity and Kabir's religious harmony . Kabir: "Emperor Ashoka was a great example of humanity and the love of humanity"
 India was an old civilization with great cultural resources which, however, was stratified socially, economically and politically . India was a great civilization but stratified social and economically .
 The ambition reflected in the Preamble of the Constitution is to form an egalitarian, secular, socialistic-type society focused on the social and economic development of the people and politically united .
 It led to a foreign policy of non-alignment as a means of retaining strategic autonomy . The foreign policy was designed to create solidarity of Asian/ developing countries as a political support base .
 In the wake of the Cold War, India's pro-Soviet-tilt and Pakistan's total support for the West as well as China's occupation of Tibet, helped to exacerbate tensions .
 In spite of trying to settle peacefully through the UN the Kashmir issue created by Pakistan's aggression, the issue got converted there into an Indo-Pakistan dispute . The Kashmir issue became a problem in spite of the UN trying to solve it peacefully .
 Two wars, one in 1965 and the other in 1971, changed the political geography of the sub-continent . The respective peace agreements signed in Tashkent and Simla failed to resolve the problem . The two wars were fought in the early 1960s .
 Pakistan started using terror as a state policy to try to force India to submit as part of its proxy war strategy . Subsequently, Pakistan started trying to use terror as state policy . Pakistan has been using terror against India to try and force India into submission .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT base of foreign policy . The policy side consists of the philosophical or theoretical side .
 The philosophical or theoretical base of foreign policy is built upon the tradition, culture, social and political history, and political ideas of great personalities of the state . Foreign policy is based on the tradition and culture of the nation's great personalities .
 The application side, on the other hand, is developed on the basis of the changing contours of national and international politics . Application side, the other side, is . developed on . the basis . of the changes in politics, the application side is developed .
 It is more pragmatic and dynamic as it has to constantly adjust itself with the changing demands of the times and politics . As such, it is more dynamic and adapts itself to the changing needs of the country .
 The application side of a state's foreign policy may not always reflect the ideologies contained in the policy side . The application of foreign policy is not always the same as the ideology behind it .
 One aspect of India's foreign policy is the policy of nonalignment . For instance, one aspect of the theoretical base of the policy is nonaligned . The policy is a theoretical basis of the Indian foreign policy .
 India's nonaligned policies were not beyond doubt during the Cold War period . But in its application, India's policies were still beyond doubt .
 One theoretical premise of the United States foreign policy is noninterference in the internal matters of sovereign independent states . Further, the U.S. foreign policy has been criticized for interfering in the country's internal affairs .
 Americans were true to this idea of non-interference during and after the Cold War . But in the application of U.S. foreign policy, one might also question if the Americans are true to that idea .
 India's foreign policy is based on the principles of its foreign policy . It is not the policy of the West or the West, but the West .
 Recent Indian administrations have understood that achieving their domestic objectives will require the engagement of the international community . While local politics in India mandate an internal focus, recent Indian administrations understand that achieving domestic goals will require engagement .
 In recent years, India's military, diplomatic and economic energies have expanded far beyond Nehru's Non-Aligned position .
 India's foreign policy is driven by five principal factors, through which are interwoven its relationships with two countries: the United States and China . The U.S. and China are the two countries where India has the most influence in foreign policy .
 Pakistan is historically perceived to be India's main conventional threat, as evidenced by the military stand-off in late 2001 and early 2002 . i. ii. Pakistan is seen as the country's main conventional threat .
 China is also India's closest military equal . India's 1998 nuclear tests were in response to the threat posed by China . i.iii. India is also close to its closest military .
 Notably, however, there are no known Indian al Qaida or Taliban members (excepting the 2006 Fleathrow plot). iv. iv. There were no known members of the Indian Taliban or al Qaeda in the country . iv. 5.5.5 .
 India is located in a volatile neighborhood, with ongoing wars, insurgencies and unrest taking place in Sri Lanka, Nepal, Pakistan, and Afghanistan . India is also located in the region, including Sri Lanka and Nepal .
 Flowever, if India hopes to continue to lift up the 60% of its population in the rural sector and build infrastructure, it must increase its foreign financing significantly . Flowever says India must increase foreign financing to boost its infrastructure .
 Exchange with its neighbors has supported India's growth, from the ""Look East"" policy of the early 1990's to today's increasing engagement with ASEAN, BIMSTEC, and the new SAFTA agreement .
 At the same time as it pursues regional agreements, India also engages bilaterally (with free trade agreements with Singapore and a possible bilateral investment treaty with the U.S.) i.S. and taking a leadership position in the WTO Doha negotiations .
 India's growth has been bolstered by China's 10% annual growth since 2000 . China has achieved annual growth of over 10% since 2000, according to CNN.com .
 India engages in China's traditional stronghold of manufacturing, and China focuses on the services market . However, the two countries will compete increasingly, as India engages with China in manufacturing and services .
 India is projected to import 80% of its energy needs by 2025 . i.i. ii. India currently imports 70% of the oil and 50% of gas . ii. It is projected that India will need to rely heavily on oil and gas to meet its energy requirements .
 Polls indicate that the Indian public is recognizing the importance of more attention to environmental concerns . India holds that it should be allowed to expand energy consumption and emissions until its per capita levels correspond with those of Western countries .
 India is increasingly exploring nuclear power as an alternative energy source . India is also one of the leading R&D venues for solar and wind power .
 Currently only 6% of potential non-conventional energy resources have been tapped . iv. iv. However, currently only . 6% have been explored by the world's largest oil and gas companies .
 India's nuclear policy is shaped by its unstable relations with Pakistan and China, as well as the recent escalation of nuclear proliferation in the wider region .
 Its goal is to build a ""credible minimum deterrent"" through land-, air-, and seabased capabilities . i. ii. i.i.ii.i: The U.S. will build a credible minimum deterrent through land, air and sea-based capabilities .
 Since 2002, the India-Pakistan Composite Dialogue has significantly lowered tensions and resulted in several agreements to mitigate the chance of a mistaken nuclear attack . i.ii.iii. The dialogue has been successful in reducing tensions between India and Pakistan since 2002 .
 If the U.S.-India civil nuclear agreement is completed, India will be able to take a more active role in promoting nonproliferation directly . The goal has long been touted as vital to India's national interest . The agreement is expected to be completed in July .
 India has the second largest population in the world, and one of the youngest . The country is one of its youngest and has the largest population .
 India's soft power remains strong, and its military, economic and diplomatic reach is increasingly important . India is increasingly dependent on its economic, diplomatic and military strength .
 While already a leader of the developing world, India now wants status in the developed world . ii. India now want status in developed world. ii. While already leader of developing world .
 Given South Asia's instability, there are ample opportunities for India to focus on helping to alleviate the conflicts in neighboring Nepal, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh .
 In so doing, India often confronts China's similar desire for regional leadership and seniority . China's desire to exclude India in 2005 from the newly formed East Asia Summit . i.iii. China's attempt to exclude India in 2005 from East Asia summit .
 These five broad drivers of India's foreign policy have major implications for its relations with the two principal regional powers: China and the U.S. India's relations with China are key to its success in Afghanistan .
 Given their mutual desire for stability leading to economic growth, China and India have worked hard to improve their relationship .
 China is developing a ""string of pearls" policy to encircle India by building relationships with its neighbors . China has long-standing strong links to Pakistan, Pakistan, Burma and Bangladesh .
 India is countering this by building its own avenues of leverage in the region, i.ii.iii. i.i. India is countering this by developing its own ways to gain leverage . i.v. India has a long history of using its influence in the Middle East to
 Increasingly the environment is going to conspire to complicate this relationship, says Peter Bergen . The relationship is building on inherent areas of conflict in the economic, energy, nuclear, strategic and security realms, he says .
 Pressure on India and China to lead Asia is likely to increase as both countries pursue leadership roles in Asia . Pressure will increase as China and India pursue leadership role in Asia, say experts .
 Since 2000, India's relations with the U.S. have undergone a ""transformation,"" reaching a level of primacy today . India's relationship with the United States has been transformed since 2000 .
 India began to move towards a more self-determining policy in the 1990s . After advocating for nonalignment, India began moving towards self-determination .
 In 2000, then-President Clinton led a path-breaking visit to India that transformed Indian views of the U.S. and launched the new relationship .
 The foundations for this new interaction were put in place by U.S. Ambassador Robert Blackwill from 2001 to 2003 . i. ii. i. The foundations were put into place by United States Ambassador Robert . Blackwill .
 America's principal challenges today lie in such areas as terrorism, extremism, proliferation, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, economic growth, energy, environment, narcotics, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, North Korea and potentially China . America's main challenges today are terrorism and extremism .
 Foreign policy challenges are similar to the principal foreign policy challenges facing India today . A Project of CSS Writing Club is a project of CSS writing club .
 The U.S., India, and many of their other allies can only be addressed through long-term engagement and cooperation by the United States and India . i.S. and many other allies, i.C.R.V. India is one of the world's most powerful
 This bilateral relationship is held back by a number of constraints, most notably bureaucratic inertia and lack of trust, and the political considerations that accompany democratic polities . However, this bilateral relationship has been held back .
 As India advances its position in the world, it could become a powerful force for transformation in key areas such as energy, nonproliferation, environment, economic development and terrorism .
 If the U.S. does not engage seriously on an equal basis with India, the vacuum will be filled with other players, i. ii. America will have lost an opportunity to build a strong and vital alliance with a growing Asian power . i.i.
 Builds a truly strategic relationship with India that transcends the civil nuclear deal . Builds partnership with the U.S. with India to transcbe a 'strategic relationship'
 This requires committing time, energy and resources to other significant elements of the relationship . This requires commitment to other important elements of a relationship, such as a relationship .
 India's bid for permanent membership in the United Nations Security Council and the G8 is supported by the U.N. Security Council . India is a principal player in the world, says President Obama .
 Support India's involvement in global energy groups, including the International Energy Agency and serious bilateral engagement on post-Kyoto protocols . Support India in the process of bilateral engagement with the IEA .
 Push India to start to carry the burdens of leadership in areas of its direct interest, such as nonproliferation and terrorism . Push the country to start carrying the burden of leadership .
 The territory, known as the United States today, was discovered in the early sixteenth century by John Cabot . Cabot, an Englishman by birth, discovered the territory in early 16th century .
 Cabot reached the East coast of America and established a settlement in Maryland, Virginia . Cabot was the first explorer to reach the East Coast of America .
 Before Cabot, another sailor, Christopher Columbus, reached the nearby islands of West Indies in 1492 .
 As Cabot was a British, he ultimately handed over the power to rule Virginia to the British monarch Henry VII . The colony, the first foreign colony in America, was set up in Virginia .
 Other foreign powers reached different parts of America and set up colonies . Gradually other foreign powers set up their colonies .
 Spain established its rule in the Southwest, near the present Florida, in the 16th century . Spain ruled the area for centuries .
 French people occupied Novo-Scotia, the Dutch-captured areas around the Hudson Valley, while the Swedish set up their colony in Delaware .
 The first official colony in America was set up in 1607 at James Town . i.ii. ii.iii.ii: The first colony was set to be set up by James Town. ii: The colony was established in 1608 .
 By 1732, the number of formal official colonies rose to 13, all ruled by European powers . The colonies were ruled by Europe's most powerful powers .
 British defeated the Dutch and captured the Dutch-ruled areas in 1664 . In 1664, the British captured the areas of the Dutch .
 The British captured the Spanish colonies and established British rule over a vast area of America . Similarly, they also captured Spanish colonies .
 The Englishmen defeated the French in the Anglo-French war of 1763 . The war established their sovereignty over the whole of America .
 Anger and frustration over British rule began to be noticed in all thirteen colonies . Protest movements started all over America all over the world .
 Dissident leaders in all colonies gradually established close links among themselves bypassing political differences . The dissident leaders established close ties among them bypassed political differences in the colonies .
 On 4 July 1776, leaders of the thirteen colonies signed a declaration proclaiming independence from British rule . iv. iv. 1776 .
 Although America got freedom from British rule in 1776, it took eleven more years to start the constitutional process in the territory .
 In 1787, the constitution was adopted and the United States of America was officially formed . The U.S. was formed from thirteen former colonies .
 The two Houses of the American Parliament met separately in April 1789 . The House of Representatives and the Senate met separately for the first time in 1789.
 On 30 April 1789, George Washington took charge as the first President of the US . John Adams assumed office in 1789 as the Vice President . George Washington was George Adams' first Vice President, John Adams took charge of the country .
 The United States Federation consists of fifty states . Gradually, states were reorganized in the United States . Today, states are divided into 50 states .
 The United States is the only economic, political, military and technical superpower in the world . U.S. has abundance of natural resources, spectacular development of agriculture and industry .
 In its long constitutional history, the U.S. foreign policy mainly followed a policy of isolationism . But in its long history, it has been more of an isolationist approach .
 From 1789 to 1940, the United States never involved itself actively in international politics . The U.S. maintained diplomatic ties with several countries, including Russia .
 Maintaining a balance of power among nations . Working with allies to solve international problems vi. Working to help solve international issues vi .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT viii. Furthering cooperative foreign trade and global involvement in international trade organizations A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\ » .
 Examining these goals closely reveals that they are based on cooperation with other nations, although ""preserving the national security of the United States"" implies possible competition and conflict .
 Germany and Japan, after the United Nation's victory, should not again wage an aggressive war, says the U.N. i.R. Roosevelt . i. Roosevelt: "We need to take steps to prevent Germany, Japan, from again waging war"
 Establishment at the earliest possible moment of a U.N. security organization to maintain peace, by force if necessary, for generations to come . iv. iv.  iv. 3.
 Agreement on measures to expand world trade so that the United States can maintain full employment . U.S. can enter with other nations into an era of expanding production and rising standards of living .
 V. Encouragement of all conditions of international life favorable to the development by men and women everywhere of institutions of a free and democratic way of life .
 Presidents have more power in foreign and defense policy than in domestic affairs . Presidents have responsibility in foreign policy than domestic affairs, experts say . President Obama has more power than any other president .
 They are the commanders in chief of the armed forces; they decide how and when to wage war . They are also the leaders of the country's armed forces . They decide how, when and when they wage war.
 As America' chief diplomat, the president has the power to make treaties to be approved by the Senate . The president has vetoes of treaties that need to be ratified by the U.S. Senate .
 During World War II, the internationalist wing of the GOP gained strength, as former isolationist Arthur Vandenberg switched sides . i. ii. i. V. Vandenberg was an isolationist .
 The leaders of the anti-isolationist or ""internationalist"" wing were Dwight D Eisenhower , and Richard Nixon . i. Eisenhower and Nixon were both anti-Isolationists .
 Conservative leader Barry Goldwater in 1964 rejected isolationism and called for an aggressive Rollback strategy to defeat Communism . The policy followed by Ronald Reagan . iv. Reagan .
 The rejection of the League of Nations treaty in 1919 marked the dominance of isolationism from world organizations in American foreign policy .
 Roosevelt acted with great care not to provoke isolationist sentiment . Despite his Wilsonian background, he and Secretary of State Cordell Hull acted carefully . Roosevelt's Wilsonian past was noted for his efforts to avoid further isolationistism .
 Roosevelt's message to the world monetary conference effectively ended any major efforts by the world powers to collaborate on ending the worldwide depression, and allowed Roosevelt a free hand in economic policy .
 The Good Neighbor Policy was a re-evaluation of U.S. policy towards Latin America . Roosevelt's first term was the first term of his first term .
 By 1940, it was in high gear, with bipartisan support, partly to expand and re-equip the Army and Navy and partly to become the ""Arsenal of Democracy"" supporting Britain, France, China and the Soviet Union .
 As Roosevelt took a firmer stance against the Axis Powers, American isolationists attacked the President as an irresponsible warmonger . America First and Charles Lindbergh and America First attacked President Roosevelt as a war hawk .
 FDR continued his twin policies of preparedness and aid to the Allied coalition . i.ii. i.iii. FDR was confident in the wisdom of his foreign policy initiatives . ii. FDR's foreign policy was criticized by some for its lack of transparency .
 They viewed communism as a secular, millennial religion that informed the Kremlin's worldview and actions . They viewed it as the chief threat to U.S. security, liberty, and world peace .
 Truman in 1947 announced the Truman Doctrine of containing Communist expansion by furnishing military and economic American aid to Europe and Asia . Greece and Turkey were key allies of the United States .
 He followed up with the Marshall Plan, which was enacted into law as the European Recovery Program . The Marshall Plan pumped $12.5 billion into the European economy, forcing the breakdown of old barriers .
 Truman convinced the Republican-controlled Congress to support the Truman Doctrine by sending massive aid to Greece . Greece was threatened by a Communist takeover by the U.S. in 1947 .
 The rest of Europe was still in economic ruin, which Washington feared would help the spread of Communism . The Marshall Plan was proposed to help restore the European economies .
 Washington decided on a strategy of containment, as embodied in the NATO military alliance set up in 1949 . The NATO alliance was formed in the wake of the rise of the Cold War .
 The plan was to prevent further Communist expansion, hoping that the internal weaknesses of the Soviet system would soon lead to its collapse . The Soviets hoped that internal weaknesses would lead to the collapse of the system .
 The problem with containment was that it meant fighting wars against Communist expansion, especially in Korea in 1950-53, and in Vietnam 1963-73 .
 Containment had the basic flaw that the enemy could choose the time and place of movement, while America and its allies had to defend everywhere at all times . Containment has the same flaw as containment, the author says .
 In 1949 Mao ZeDong and his Communists won the civil war in China showing the failure of containment in Asia . Mao's victory in China showed the failure to contain China in Asia.
 Truman ordered General Douglas MacArthur to use all American forces to resist the invasion . Without consulting Congress Truman ordered the use of American forces against the invasion of Germany in 1945 .
 In late 1950 China intervened unexpectedly, drove the UN forces all the way back to South Korea . UN forces were forced to withdraw from South Korea in 1950s .
 In 1950 Truman approved NSC-68, a top-secret policy paper that formed the grounds for escalating the Cold War . The paper was the basis for tripling spending on rearmament and building the hydrogen bomb . Truman approved the paper in 1950 .
 The integration of European defense was given new impetus by continued U.S. support of NATO, under the command of General Eisenhower . General Eisenhower commanded NATO in the early 1950s .
 A vast foreign aid program supplemented a network of military alliances stretching around the globe . The aid program was funded by the U.S. State Department of Defense .
 The services contained about 3 million soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines at all times . The services contain 3 million troops, sailors and airmen at all time .
 The military stressed mechanization and electronics, with elaborate support mechanisms and a huge training program in technical skills . Fewer than 20% of the servicemen were in combat roles . The military
 The necessary hardware was supplied by the ""military-industrial complex" of big corporations and labor unions . Corporations and unions supplied the necessary hardware .
 A peaceful race to the moon, won by the Americans in 1969, was played out against rapid advances in size and accuracy of rockets by both sides . Both sides were involved in a peaceful race for the moon .
 The downside was his inexperience in foreign affairs, standing in stark contrast to the vast experience of the president he replaced . President Obama replaced him with a more experienced cabinet member .
 Kennedy sent CIA-trained Cuban exiles into ill-prepared attack on Castro's Cuba in 1961 . Kennedy's rashness and inexperience caused a national humiliation in 1961 as he sent CIA trained exiles .
 At the Bay of Pigs, all Kennedy's invaders were killed or captured, and he was forced to ransom them for cash . Kennedy's invasion forced him to kill or capture the invaders, but he was able to pay a ransom .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev reached a compromise whereby the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba publicly . Kennedy secretly removed American missiles from Turkey aimed at the Soviets, and promised that America would never invade Cuba .
 Vietnam proved a trap for Kennedy as he sent in 16,000 military advisors to prop up an ineffective regime in South Vietnam . Vietnam proved to be the trap for the president when he tried to pull troops from Vietnam .
 Nixon and Kissinger sought both to maintain U.S. military strength and to inaugurate peaceful economic, cultural, and scientific exchanges to engage the Soviet Union in the international system . Kissinger and Nixon sought to maintain military strength .
 Nixon and Kissinger engineered a rapprochement with Communist China in 1972 . Nixon visited China in 1971, 1972, and Kissinger in 1972, when he and Kissinger visited China . At the same time, they successfully engineered a thaw in China .
 Nixon and Kissinger worked to achieve a disengagement of U.S. forces fighting in Vietnam . i. ii. Nixon and . Kissinger worked together to achieve disengagement from Vietnam . ii. Kissinger .
 One challenge to detente came with the outbreak of the October 1973 Arab-lsraeli War . The Arab-Israeli conflict was the start of the Arab-Arab Spring .
 Faced with a threat of Soviet intervention, Nixon put U.S. military forces on worldwide alert . Nixon put United States military forces be placed on global alert .
 Fie then employed shuttle diplomacy to secure cease-fires between Israel and the Arab states and restore U.S. Egyptian diplomatic ties, broken since 1967 . i. Fie used shuttle diplomacy in order to secure a cease-fire in Israel and Egypt .
 Nixon administration sought to protect U.S. interests during Latin American nationalism and expropriations, 1969-74 . Nixon administration was trying to protect economic and commercial interests of Latin American nations .
 The administration initially adopted a flexible policy toward Latin American governments that nationalized American corporations' assets . The influence of Nixon's economic ideology, domestic political pressures, and the advice of his close adviser led to the change .
 Secretary of the Treasury John Connally, led to a more confrontational stance toward Latin American countries . iv. iv. John Reagan's administration led to an increased confrontational approach to Latin American nations .
 During the South Asian crisis in 1971, the White Flouse stood firmly behind Pakistani president Yahya Khan and demonstrated a disdain for India and particularly its leader, Indira Gandhi .
 Many analysts believed that Pakistan's role as a conduit of rapprochement with China and Kissinger's focus on geopolitical concerns greatly influenced the U.S. decision in 1971 . Many analysts believe that Pakistan played a key role in the decision .
 Nixon resigned in 1974 under the threat of impeachment . He was succeeded by Gerald R Ford, who kept Nixon's policies . Nixon was succeeded in 1974 by Gerald Ford .
 The United States was not involved in 1975 when North Vietnam invaded and defeated South Vietnam, except to rescue Americans and some Vietnamese supporters . The U.S. did not participate in the invasion, except for rescue of Americans and supporters .
 He singled out the Soviet Union as a violator of human rights and strongly condemned the country for arresting its citizens for political protests . i. ii. He also condemned the USSR for arresting citizens for . political protests. i.ii. The Soviet Union was singled out for being a viol
 Carter tried to remove the U.S. image of interventionism by giving Panamanians control of the Panama Canal . Carter also gave Panamanian control of Panama Canal to remove image of American interventionism .
 He was strongly opposed by conservatives but won, and gave back the Canal . He won, but was heavily opposed, and won .
 U.S. invaded Panama in 1989 to overthrow a nasty dictator named Noriega . The result was disaster and the United States invaded Panama . i.III. The result of the invasion was disaster .
 Detente with the Soviet Union collapsed in 1979 when Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, setting off a long war that the Soviets lost . The Soviets lost the war in Afghanistan .
 President Carter responded by giving military aid to rebels, imposing an embargo on the sale of grain to the Soviet Union . Carter boycotted the 1980 Summer Olympic Games in Moscow .
 The policy of detente that was established by President Nixon had ended . President Nixon's administration had ended its detente policy . President Obama's administration has been criticized for its policies .
 V Carter's only triumph was a historic peace treaty known as the Camp David Peace Accords, between Israel and Egypt, which had been bitter enemies for decades .
 The treaty was formally signed in 1979, with most middle eastern countries opposed to it, bit it remains in effect in 2009 . Most middle eastern nations are opposed to the treaty .
 In 1979, a new radical Islamic regime lead by Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran overthrew America's close ally Shah . The new regime overthrew the Shah, which led to the overthrow of the Shah .
 In November 1979 student revolutionaries stormed into the American embassy in Tehran and captured 52 U.S. diplomats as hostages . The embassy was stormed by student revolutionaries in Tehran .
 Carter tried to use the United States military action to rescue the hostages, but it was a total failure . Carter used the U.S. military action as a way to rescue hostages .
 The hostages were released minutes before Reagan was inaugurated on January 20, 1981 . Fearful of what President Reagan might do, the Iranians released hostages .
 The result was a major humiliation for the United States, and a consensus that the country was now an underdog and needed new leadership to claw its way back . The U.S. needs new leadership, says President Obama .
 Reagan restructured American politics in a manner reminiscent of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal Coalition . Reagan's coalition was reminiscent of the New Deal coalition . The coalition was formed in the wake of the Second World War .
 Reagan built entirely new electoral coalitions using fresh issues, such as opposition to taxes, opposition to economic regulation, and support for moral issues promoted by Catholics and especially evangelical Protestants .
 The defeatism of the late 1970s sparked a new determination among the Reaganites . Reaganites were determined to fight back against defeatism in the '70s .
 In the 1970s the Soviets had rejected detente, expanded Cold War operations into Africa, Asia and Latin America, enlarged their long-range A Project of CSS Writing Club . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 The fall of the Berlin Wall in November, 1989 marked the end of the Cold War with a stunning American victory .
 Relations with Britain had been strained since the Suez crisis of 1956 . Relations between the two countries have been strained for decades .
 Both countries were led by like-minded leaders who collaborated closely . Now both countries are led by leaders who collaborate closely .
 Their collaboration was based on a striking convergence of ideologically driven conservatives . They shared similar domestic agendas and a common foreign policy . Their collaboration is based on an ideological convergence of conservatives .
 Both led domestic political revolutions-supply-side economics, increased defense spending, privatization, deregulation, and an overall conservative agenda . Both led the country to a political revolution .
 Reagan and Thatcher's mutual trust strengthened Reagan's hand against the Soviet Union . Thatcher and Reagan's trust helped secure Reagan's victory in the Cold War . Thatcher's trust with Reagan was crucial to the success of the Reagan administration .
 U.S. foreign policy was new to such conditions and it had the responsibility to adjust itself and protect American interests, i. ii. United States foreign policy should adjust itself, ii. U.K. had to protect its interests in this new international order . i.U.
 Foreign policy planners in the U.S. were ready to take up the challenges posed by the post-Cold War international order . i.ii. ii.iii. i.i.i: The United States was ready to deal with the challenges of the Cold War . ii.
 Bush administration zealously pursued nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the world . The Bush administration has pursued non-proligion policies .
 Flis administration was the first significant U.S. foreign policy planner after the Cold War . Flis was first significant American foreign policy planning post-Cold War .
 During his presidency, nonproliferation of WMD became an important element of American foreign policy . During his administration, the non-WMDs were an important part of U.S. foreign policy.
 Clinton administration declared different countries of the world as nuclear 'rogues'and 'threshold'states' Clinton administration declares different countries as nuclear "rogues" and 'thrresholds'
 India, Pakistan, Israel, South Africa, Brazil and Argentina were termed as nuclear 'threshold'states' Argentina, Argentina, Brazil, Argentina and South Africa also termed as 'nukes'
 The U.S. identified South Asia as a 'nuclear hot spot' along with North Korea and Iraq, and engaged in diplomatic talks with India and Pakistan . The United States also engaged in diplomacy to encourage nonproproliferation in these countries .
 Normally, the U.S. tries to avoid relations of economic, political or security-related significance . C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT with countries alleged to have violated human rights .
 Economic Diplomacy places importance on trade and business, keeping aside political considerations . Economic diplomacy places importance to business, not politics .
 After the Cold War, the United States worked hard to pursue policies of economic diplomacy with different states . The U.S. tried to pursue economic diplomacy in the wake of the Soviet-Russian tensions .
 Trade and commercial relations with other countries are integral elements of American economic diplomacy . American financial assistance for industrialization and developmental activities in other states is an important part of American diplomacy .
 Bush administration declared 'anti-terrorism assistance programme' that contained military training, exchange of information and security assistance to countries involved in war on terrorism .
 'rewards for justice' programme sought to exchange information about international terrorists with friendly states, and give rewards of upto $25 million for information on international terrorists .
 Obama administration stepped up American efforts on counter-terrorism . Obama administration also stepped up efforts to counter-terror efforts .
 Obama's 'Af-Pak Policy', announced in March 2009, sought to eliminate terrorist groups like Al Qaeda and the Talibans from Afghanistan and Pakistan . The policy sought to provide massive economic and security assistance to these countries .
 Security Assistance Programme became an integral part of U.S. foreign policy after the Second World War . U.N. Security Assistance Program was integral to the U.K. effort to help rebuild the country's economy .
 Almost 50 per cent of American assistance to different countries during the Cold War period came under this programme . It was considered crucial for U.S. strategic interests to counter Soviet influence .
 In absence of the Soviet Union, whether it would be wise to spend huge amounts on the SAP became a controversial issue . The U.S. has spent huge amounts of money on SAP .
 All American Presidents after the Cold War preferred to continue with the programme . U.S. Congress approved the budget on the SAP from time to time .
 The continuance of the programme by all American administrations during the post Cold War period proved the importance of the SAP as an element of American foreign policy in recent years .
 President George W Bush lobbied hard to retain the SAP after the Cold War . President Bush was the first U.S. President to lobby for the SAP .
 Bush considered SAP as a very significant part of U.S. defence strategy . SAP was considered a major part of the United States defence strategy in the 1990s .
 Fie believed that the SAP would be very useful to protect vital American interests, mainly in these areas . Fie believes the SAP will protect vital U.S. interests, especially in the South American region .
 After Bush, all post-Cold War American Presidents lent their support for the SAP . The SAP is considered an integral part of American security policy .
 After the Cold War, the SAP was used to strengthen democratic processes in East Europe, help counter-terrorism and anti-narcotic activities around the world, and above all, protect U.S. national interests .
 Fears of cataclysmic wars faded, to be replaced by new threats, especially those arising in the Middle East . The Middle East is now the focus of concern .
 When Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1991, the United Nations demanded that Iraq withdraw . Iraq under Saddam Flussein invaded its neighbor Kuwait, the U.N. demanded Iraq withdraw from Kuwait .
 U.S. led a broad coalition that pushed Iraq out, but left Hussein in power under UN supervision . When it refused the United States led the coalition to push Iraq out of the country .
 In 2001 Al Qaeda terrorists attacked the United States, leading America into a war on terrorism . The U.S. went on a mission to defeat Al Qaeda in Afghanistan .
 America was the world's only superpower, with military strength much greater than everyone else combined . America had economic muscle and high technology to back it up . The U.S. was the only superpower .
 The overwhelming strength of the United States, and the absence of any countervailing force like Communism, meant that fears and hatreds came to focus on America . America was widely seen as a new empire, and was seen as an empire .
 Americans meanwhile, to adjust to heightened levels of security at home, and were ill-disposed to listen to foreign critics . Americans meanwhile meanwhile and to adjust . Americans are ill-prepared to adapt to heightened security levels at home .
 The ways to which society and culture of the American homefront would adjust to the new Age of Terror became a central issue of the new century . i. ii. i. The American Homefront was a key part of the story of the 'Age of Terror' i.I.
 He moved in close cooperation with Britain and other allies, but without the endorsement of the United Nations . The U.N. has been critical of the move .
 The goal of creating a democratic nation in Iraq proved much more difficult than expected . The occupation of Iraq was met with violence and the goal of a democracy proved difficult to achieve .
 The superpower-as-bully syndrome brought out the old cliches about the ""Ugly American"" that had been in circulation for decades, emboldening anti-American forces . Americans, in the 2004 presidential campaign, took a hard look at the nation's role in the world
 Obama is a much different candidate today from the senator who distinguished himself by his opposition to the ""dumb war" on his way to the presidency in 2008 . Obama is the candidate for the White House .
 Obama has pursued a fairly conventional, at times, hawkish foreign policy . Obama has turned out to have pursued a relatively conventional foreign policy.
 He has had some notable successes, such as the bin Laden raid and this year's withdrawal from Iraq . He has also had some successes, including the successful overthrow of Muammar al-Qaddafi .
 ""apology tours"" and ""leading from behind"" have already become buzzwords for Republican candidates . All the same, the term has already become a buzzword for Republicans .
 He has also faced heavy criticism on the left for a sometimes inconsistent approach to international law in counterterrorism operations .
 Pentagon will lead a ""fundamental review"" of U.S. military capabilities in order to cut $400 billion in defense spending over the next 10 years . Pentagon will also lead a review of United States military capabilities .
 Obama's engagement in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has probably been the most frustrating foreign policy initiative of his presidency . Obama insists that enacting comprehensive immigration reform, which would likely include a path to citizenship for at least some illegal immigrants, is still a ""top priority"
 The administration has confirmed that it will veto Palestine's statehood bid in the U.N. Security Council .
 Obama has repeatedly criticized China for currency policies that he says have a distorting effect on the global economy .
 In 2010, Obama announced an overhaul of U.S. foreign aid policies . He vowed to place aid policies at the center of United States foreign policy . i. ii. Obama: "I want to put aid programs in the heart of our foreign policy"
 Early in his presidency, Obama made several overtures to Iran in an effort to improve relations . Obama has been criticized for his actions in the past .
 In October, Obama signed long-delayed free trade agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea .
 On his trip to Asia this November, Obama is working to promote a new trans-Pacific free trade agreement . Obama is scheduled to visit the region in November .
 Obama signed an executive order closing the Guantanamo Bay detention center as one of his first actions as president . Obama signed the order as a president in 2009 .
 The facility remains open, however, largely due to congressional opposition over where to house the remaining prisoners . xi.xi.i. remains open .
 Despite his stated support for environmental legislation and green energy, there has been little progress on passing major climate change bills under Obama's watch .
 One of the centerpieces of Obama's first-term foreign policy was the effort to ""reset" relations with Russia . One of Russia's efforts to reset relations with the U.S. was a major effort .
 The president successfully negotiated the New START nuclear reduction treaty, xiii. xii. The president negotiated the treaty with the president . The treaty was signed by President Barack Obama .
 Syria's civil war, eastern Ukraine engulfed in a Russian-backed insurgency, and the Islamic State governing large parts of Syria and Iraq . Still, with 200,000 dead in Syria and eastern Ukraine, it can be hard to see what's ""better"" about this world .
 On each of these crises, one can criticize Obama for how badly they have turned out, but that assumes that the U.S. had the ability to influence these crises for the better before they spiraled out of control .
 The foreign policy of Pakistan is primarily directed to the pursuit of national goals of seeking peace and stability through international cooperation . i. ii. Foreign Policy of Pakistan post 9/11 is based on national security, stability and stability .
 To project the image of the country as a dynamic and moderate society, i.i.ii. To . project the . image of . the . nation as a . dynamic and . moderate society i. to . project . The country's image is that of a dynamic, moderate society
 Seeks to promote the internationally recognized norms of interstate relations iv. iv. Seeks for international recognition of international relations .
 We believe in the principle of honesty and fair-play in national and international dealings . We are prepared to make our contribution to the promotion of peace and prosperity among nations of the world .
 Pakistan will never be found lacking in extending its material and moral support to the oppressed and suppressed peoples of the world and in upholding the principles of the United Nations Charter." ii. Pakistan will not be lacking in extended its material . support to oppressed . and suppressed people of the . world .
 Pakistan as a dynamic, progressive, moderate, and democratic Islamic country i.i. i. Promoting Pakistan's progressive, progressive and moderate status ii. Pakistan as an Islamic country ii. Progressively, progressive Islamic country, i. Achieving a democratic Islamic state of Pakistan i
 Safeguarded national security and geo-strategic interests, including Kashmir, i. Safeguarding national security  interests,  including Kashmir . i.S.C. J.A. Kashmir is a key region in Kashmir . J. A. Kashmir was a key ally of
 Liaquat AN Khan once said: ""Pakistan came into being as a result of the urge felt by the Muslims of this subcontinent to secure a territory, however limited, where the Islamic ideology and way of life could be practiced"
 Pakistan's foreign policy makers always sought western assistance. i.iii. ii. ii . ii.ii. ii: i.ii: The West has always sought Pakistan's support for Pakistan’s foreign policy . i.i.ii.: The West was always interested in Pakistan
 i. Pattern of relationship established with the outside world for the promotion of national interest of a country. ii. Public Opinion Formulation. 4) Foreign Policy of Pakistan . i. Public opinion Formulation .
 Foreign policy of any country is a reflection of its domestic situation, particularly on matters related to politics and economy . Foreign policy reflects the situation of the country, especially in its domestic politics, the BBC says .
 Other factors such as religion, culture, ethnicity and leadership also influence the foreign policy making process . i.iii. Sometimes other factors such a religion or ethnicity may also influence foreign policy decisions .
 Foreign policy often considered as the first line of defense of any country . Foreign policy is considered as a vital part of any nation's survival .
 Pakistan is surrounded by different security situations, says author . This is truer in case of Pakistan, as it was surround by different national security situation .
 Foreign policy is based on shear realism and is free of allusions, romanticism and emotions . Foreign policy should be based on realism and not romanticism, says David Cameron .
 Pakistan is, geo-politically, at the cross roads of central Asia, west and South Asia . Pakistan is a geo-political player in the region .
 Its proximity to the Persian gulf and the middle east is also a source of its strategic prominence . vi.
 Pakistan has been a focal point of international political events due to its strategic location and due to the interests of the global powers in the region . vii. vii . Pakistan is a key region in the Middle East and has a history of instability .
 Pak foreign policy based on the desire to safeguard the country's independence and terrestrial integrity . The country's sovereignty is at stake in securing its sovereignty .
 A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C 5) 6 ) viii.
 In 1990's we shifted from bilateralism to multilateralism, after the end of cold war, says Putin . Putin: 'In 1990's, we shifted to bilateralism. After the end cold war. It was a good time for Russia, Putin says . Putin says Putin's
 Pak established better ties with Beijing and Moscow and sought option to play a viable role in the 3rd world and in the Muslim world .
 Events in international politics in the 1990's and early 21st century shaped the dynamics of our foreign policy . The events in this year's events in the U.S. have shaped the world's foreign policy since the 1990s .
 Event of 9/11; attacks on Twin Towers, heavily affected our foreign policy . Era of Neutrality; 1947-53 neutral foreign policy ii. Neutrality ii. neutral policy ii . Neutrality was neutral policy in the U.S. for decades .
 Pakistan became US' ""most-allied ally in Asia"" i.63-71 phase of transition iv.63/71 . U.S. became Pakistan's most powerful ally in the world .
 9/11 attacks proved to turn the foreign policy of Pakistan upside down . i.9/11 attack proved to be the turning point of Pakistan's foreign policy . ii.9-11 attacks prove to be a turning point for Pakistan's policy in Pakistan .
 It was a crucial time that demanded an intelligence filled response, i.ii.iii. i. It was the time for an intelligence-filled response to the situation, I said . i.i.ii: It's crucial time for the U.S. to respond to the
 Musharaf was one of the foreign leaders to receive a call from Washington (You are either with us or against us) iv. (You must be with us and against us iv. iv. Musharafi) iv . (You should be with them or against them iv.
 To exigently join United States in principle and workout the modalities later on 2.2.3.5.5 years later . 2.3 years later, 2.5 million more people will join the United States .
 U.S. might have bracketed Pak with Taliban with Taliban while declaring Pak a terrorist state . ii.U.S might have . bracketed . Pak . with Taliban . i.S . declared a terrorist . state. ii. Pakistan has been declared a state of terror by
 Our territory would have been subjected to furious onslaughts and airstrikes to neutralize resistance under the pretext of eliminating terrorist bases . i.ii.iii. i.i.i: Our territory . would have . been subjected . to furious . onslaughter and airstrikes would have
 India would have given a green signal to attack Kahuta as it had done previously . The attack would have been given the same green signal as the previous .
 Kashmiri freedom struggle might have been labeled as a terrorist insurgency . Kashmiri's freedom struggle may have been called a 'terrorist insurgency' xvii. xviii .
 Pakistan's Choice Taliban refused to hand Osama Osama to America despite Pak's pleadings . Pakistan's choice to hand him over to the U.S. was rejected by the Taliban . Osama bin Laden was killed in 1999 in a suicide bombing attack .
 Musharaf on 19th Sept. 2001 while addressing the nation said, ""Pakistan comes first, everything else is secondary."" i.iii. Musharafi on 19 Sept.2001 .
 Pakistan joined U.S. in strategic interest of, 1. territorial security, 2. protection of its own nuclear and missile programs 3. revival of economy iv. reviving of economy . Pakistan has joined the United States in the past .
 "Joining was the most appropriate among the available options and was generally, if not entirely, in national interest," he said . Joining was "in national interest", he said, adding that it was in national interests .
 This shift in foreign policy of Pakistan showed the strategic intelligence of government towards the oncoming hurricane, xviii. V . V . This shift of foreign policy showed the intelligence of Pakistan's government, says Shah .
 Alliance to stop Al-Qaeda operations at its border . i.S. Demands by U.S After Alliance To stop Al Qaeda operations . ii. U.N. has been in talks with the U.K. over the years with al-Qaeda .
 i. To give blanket over flight and landing rights for military operations.ii. To . give blanket . over flight . rights to military operations .ii.ii . To give . overflight and . landing rights, i.e. to military . operations .
 To cut off all shipments of fuel to Taliban and stop recruits from going to Afghan. Taliban. The Taliban want to cut off fuel shipments to stop recruits going to Afghanistan .
 Pakistan must not meddle with Afghan affairs and it must support the reconstruction process, i. ii. Arms race in South Asia . To take into account the domestic constraints .
 Pakistan needs to establish Good relations with China and other countries . Pakistan should not only stick only to the United States iv. The country needs to become closer to China and not just the U.S.
 Strong foreign policy is possible only when Pak's economy is strong and political stability and good governance is in place . Pakistan's economy must be strong, and there is political stability, good governance in the country, she says .
 Pakistan should not go the extreme extent of assisting U.S. vi. Pakistan must not go as far as possible, says U.N. diplomat .
 Pakistan's decision to join world community in the war against terrorism brought it back into the international mainstream . Pakistan has won the revived and stronger support from major countries of the world .
 i.e. Peaceful co existence, i.i. i. e. further development of regional ties and the strengthening of their own positions.ii. v. peace and prosperity of the region . i. Peace and prosperity will be achieved in the region, and i. peace
 The future strategy of Pakistan in its foreign policy must be a shift from traditional diplomacy to economic diplomacy as well as cultural diplomacy, i. iv. iv . iv. v. Pakistan's future strategy must be to shift to economic and cultural diplomacy . i.v. Pakistan must shift from
 An effective policy requires domestic stability and a national consensus on issues, says Obama administration . Obama administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The British Empire in the subcontinent is divided into two countries: India and Pakistan . Pakistan and India were the British Empire's first two countries . Pakistan is now the most populous country in South Asia .
 The war ends with a UN-ordered ceasefire and resolution seeking a plebiscite for the people of Jammu and Kashmir to decide whether to become part of India or Pakistan . India and Pakistan fight their second war .
 A rebellion in East Pakistan and alleged interference from the Indian side lead the two countries to war for a third time . Fighting ends after the United Nations calls for a ceasefire .
 V 1972 — Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi sign agreement in Indian town of Simla over principles meant to govern relations . V.74 — India detonates its first nuclear device. vii.89 — Separatist revolt
 India accuses Pakistan of arming and sending militants into the region, which Pakistan denies . India carries out nuclear tests . Pakistan denies the allegations .
 Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee holds summit with Pakistani counterpart Nawaz Sharif in Lahore . February 1999 — Indian PM meets Pakistani counterpart at Lahore summit . Indian prime minister Vajpaye and Pakistani PM Sharif meet for first time .
 1999 — India and Pakistan wage brief conflict in the mountains above Kargil on the Line of Control . 1999 . Kashmir is the border region dividing Jammu and Kashmir . Pakistan and India are the two countries that fought in Kashmir .
 Summit between Musharraf and Vajpayee in Agra in India ends in failure . Summit between Pakistani leader and Indian leader ended in failure in 2001 . Summit was between Pakistani and Indian prime minister .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT xii. A Project of CSS Writing Club . Ayesha Younas .
 India blames Pakistan-based militants Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-Mohammad of launching attack . India says Lashkar e-Militants Lashkar and Jaisman are responsible for attack .
 Tensions rise as one million troops are mobilised on either side of the border . War only averted months later in June 2002 . Pakistan, India agree ceasefire on the Line of Control .
 November 2008 -- 10 gunmen launch three days of multiple attacks in Mumbai, killing 166 . November 2008 — Ten gunmen attack three days in Mumbai killing 166. November 2008 .
 India again blames Pakistan-based militants and snaps talks with Pakistan . xvi.xvi. xvi . India again blamed Pakistan-born militants and snapped talks with Pakistani government .
 February 2009 — India cautiously welcomes Pakistan's probe into Mumbai attack . February 2009: India cautiously welcomed Pakistan's probing into Mumbai attacks .
 Pakistan admits the attack was launched and partly planned from inside Pakistani territory . Pakistan admits it was launched from inside Pakistan territory .
 Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Pakistani President Asif AN Zardari meet on sidelines of an international gathering in Russia .
 Singh tells Zardari he wants him to ensure militants cannot operate from Pakistan . Singh says he wants to ensure Pakistanis cannot operate in Pakistan from abroad . Singh: I want Pakistanis to stop militants operating in Pakistan .
 India gives Pakistan new 'evidence' to investigate Mumbai attacks and prosecute Hafiz Mohammad Saeed, suspected mastermind of the carnage . India gave Pakistan new evidence to investigate the Mumbai attacks .
 Singh invites Pakistani Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani to watch a historic World Cup cricket match between the two sides and discuss reviving peace process . March 2011 — Singh invites Pakistan PM to watch World Cup match between two sides . Singh and Gilani watch historic cricket match and discuss
 Indian and Pakistani troops exchange cross-border fire after an Indian soldier is killed by Pakistani troops in Kashmir . The incident occurred in Kashmir in May 2011 . The two countries have been at odds for years over Kashmir .
 After talks, India and Pakistan break no ice on how to demilitarise the no-man's land above the Siachen glacier . xxi.
 Foreign ministers of India and Pakistan hold talks in New Delhi, hailing a ""new era"" in ties . Pakistan and India met for talks in July 2011 .
 November 2011 — Pakistan decides to grant India Most Favoured Nation trade status . November 2011 – Pakistan grants India trade status with Pakistan . Pakistan also grants India most Favoured nation trade status. November 2011 - Pakistan decided to grant it trade status to India .
 Singh and Gilani promise a new chapter in their history after discussions in the Maldives . Pakistan takes further steps toward normal trade and travel ties with India . Pakistan agrees to open most commerce by February 2012 .
 April 2012 — Zardari meets Singh in New Delhi in the highest-level meeting on each other's soil in seven years . The meeting was the highest level meeting between the two countries in the last seven years.
 November 2012 — India secretly hangs the lone survivor of the Pakistan-based militant squad responsible for the 2008 Mumbai attacks . The lone survivor was killed in the Mumbai attacks on November 26, 2012 .
 India accuses a group of Pakistani soldiers of 'barbaric and inhuman' behaviour . Two Indian soldiers are killed in a firefight in Kashmir and their bodies mutilated . India accuses Pakistan of killing two Indian soldiers in Kashmir .
 India hangs a Kashmiri man for the 2001 attack on its parliament that New Delhi blamed on militants backed operating from inside Pakistan . Peace talks stall and Indian Prime Minister Singh says there can be no ""business as usual"".
 India reacts furiously to death in Pakistani jail of an Indian farmer convicted of spying . The farmer was badly beaten by fellow inmates in a Pakistani jail .
 May 2013 — Nawaz Sharif returns to power in Pakistan and looks to ease mistrust with India . May 2013: Nawaz's government is looking to ease tensions with India and ease tensions .
 C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT xxx. A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\ » .
 Both sides express willingness to begin new era of bilateral relations . Diplomatic relations between the two countries have been strained for years .
 Richard Hallbroke said that America will not play a role of mediator between Pak and India over Kashmir . U.S. policy took a u turn when he visited India .
 Kashmir dispute is the core hurdle in the normalization of relations between the two countries . Kashmir dispute has been a key stumbling block in normalizing relations between India and Kashmir . Kashmir is a major source of tension between the countries .
 There are other issues including Siachen, Sir Creek, water and so on and they need to be immediately resolved, if both countries want to cultivate an environment of friendship . i. ii. Then there is other issues such as Siacen, Sir Cree, water, and so
 The basic problem between both countries, Pak wants to solve all the mutual problems in the parameters of composite Dialogue . The composite Dialogue includes all the issue including terrorism also . Pakistan and Pakistan want to solve their mutual problems .
 India, on the other hand, wants to satisfy her apprehensions against terrorism . ii. India wants to . satisfy her . apprehensions about terrorism . i.I. wish to . be satisfied with her. i.E. India, i.Dhara says .
 Second stumbling block is the existing mistrust between the two countries . Trust Deficit is the second stumbling block between the countries .
 Yousaf Raza Gillani and Dr Manmohan Singh met on the sidelines of Saarc Summit in Bhutan . They agreed to take steps to eliminate the trust deficit in each other .
 Flowever, all such efforts were thwarted by the circumstances and bigoted attitudes, were thwarted . Flowever. Flowever's efforts to change the situation were thwarted, Flowever said .Flowever said: "All such efforts are thwarted"
 With lack of exchanges of sportspersons, academicians, students, parliamentarians and parliamentarians, civil society activists, and the general public the trust deficit won't end anytime soon . i. ii. Sportspersons and academicians need to exchange trust with each other, i.
 Track-ll or Track-Ill diplomacy in the context of Pakistan and India has always been dependent upon Track-1 or formal diplomacy . Track-ill diplomacy has been a key part of Pakistan's relationship with India, writes Shah .
 It means if the governments are comfortable with each other and are in a mood to negotiate, only then the visas for all other forms of non-formal diplomacy will be made available . i.ii.iii. ii.ii: It means that if governments are happy to negotiate only
 Terrorism Terrorism is another formidable challenge for both India and Pakistan . Terrorism is a formidable challenge to both countries . Terrorism terrorism is a major problem for both nations .
 Instead of extending cooperation to each other to eradicate this menace, the two countries have been pointing fingers at each other . Unfortunately, instead of cooperating, they've been pointing finger at each another .
 India accuses Pakistan of being behind all acts of terrorism in India . Modi also reiterates this stance in his first meeting with Nawaz Sharif .
 Pakistanis blame India of patronizing terrorism in Pakistan . Indian funding for insurgents in Balochistan and FATA has been a source of concern in Pakistan. On the other hand, Pakistanis say India has patronized terrorism .
 India has not been able to conclude the investigation of Samjhota Express tragedy so far . The investigation has not concluded the investigation into the tragedy .
 Narendra Modi's security and foreign policy team is also being seen as a challenge . Modi's Security and Foreign Policy team has been criticised for lack of foreign policy .
 Dr Manhohan Singh had Shiv Shankar Menon as his National Security Advisor . Dr Manohan Singh was in charge of the country's national security team . Dr Menon was also the National Security Adviser at the time of his appointment .
 Mr Menon had served as India's Fligh Commissioner to China and Pakistan . He was India's fligh commissioner to China, Pakistan and India's vice president .
 India is one of the most important countries in the world . So, he was privy to the concerns of India's two most important neighbours .
 Modi chose a former head of Indian Intelligence Bureau, Ajit Doval, as his new National Security Advisor, which also indicates some wrangling in future . i. Flowever, Modi chose him as his National Security Adviser, which is a former Intelligence Bureau .
 India's obsession pointing fingers at Pakistan in any act of terrorism could hamper efforts aimed at normalization of relations . The obsession with blaming Pakistan for any terrorist act is a serious problem .
 Sushma Sauraj, a Hindu hard-liner, is known as a dove neither in domestic political arena nor on external affairs . The Minister for External Affairs is known for his hard-liners .
 Allocating a cabinet slot to former Army Chief General V K Singh is not a positive sign . Mr Singh had been engaged in war games against China and Pakistan during his career .
 Mian Nawaz Sharif announced that his top priority will be economic diplomacy and development . The Prime Minister announced that he will focus on economic diplomacy .
 In India, Narendra Modi contested the election on the slogan of development and good governance . Narendra Modi was elected as prime minister of India .
 Nawaz Sharif himself comes from Pakistan's powerful corporate sector . Narendra Modi was also fully backed by that of India . Nawaz and Narendra Modi both come from powerful corporate sectors of Pakistan .
 If trade and business gets a driving seat in policies of both the countries, huge gains in bilateral relations will definitely be reaped . vi. Trade and business will be key to bilateral relations between the two countries .
 According to Indus Water treaty Pak to get 55 thousands cusec water in peak season . But Pak got 20 cusc last year . i. ii. i.i.i . i got 55,000 cuscs, i.ii. i got 20,000
 Construction of Kashan ganga, Dulhasti, Dugar, Gondhala, Such Khas hydro power projects on Chenab, Jehlum rivers have greatly decreased the flow of water into Pakistan .
 India has to inform Pak 6 month in advance regarding any plan of construction of new dams over the rivers that flow into Pak . This is a clear Violation of 1960 Indus water treaty by India .
 Buglihar and other water issues should be solved through negotiations as was done in case of ""Salal"" dam in 1978 . The dam was built in 1978 in a bid to reduce the threat of hydroelectricity .
 Talks held on Sir Creek and working group is trying to abolish visa restrictions by both countries . Working group is also trying to remove visa restrictions from Sir Creek .
 Indian foreign secretary acknowledges that Indian decision to suspend dialogue after 26/11 was made . A Project of CSS Writing Club c\»^c .
 Dialogue should continue even long studying issues like Kashmir and Mumbai attacks is not resolved, says V.I. v. vii. i. Vii. viii. Dialogue should not stop studying issues such as Kashmir .
 If it collapse it would be for the whole South Asia, and India would suffer more than any one . India would be the only country to suffer from collapse .
 Both India and Pak should recognize and acknowledge each other stakes in Afghanistan . Both countries should recognize the stakes of Afghanistan, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Demolition of visa restrictions will help normalization of relations better than the settlement of this dispute or that . Demolition is better than settling this or that. Demolition should be more important than normalization, he says .
 Success in dialogue could be achieved only if high up (PMSthe heads of both the states) are involved in discussion . xi. X Success in . dialogue could not be achieved if high . up . up is necessary to achieve success in dialogue .
 India did not blame Pak for this attack . For the first in Indian history did not, India did . For first in India history did . Not blame Pakistan for attack .
 Khar offered ""uninterrupted and uninterruptible peace dialogue"" to India. viii. vii. Khar . vii . Khar also offered an interimmediate peace dialogue to India .
 And it is troubling Pak... in return the whole region is destabilized"". ii. ii. And it's troubling Pak . In return, the region was destabilized". i.i.
 Indian consulates in Afghanistan especially in the bordering areas of Afghanistan troubles Pakistan . i.ii. ii.iii.ii . ii.ii: The Indian consulate in Afghanistan is a source of trouble in Pakistan . ii: The consulates are located in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 The Construction of Namyan-Chaghbar road in Afghanistan by India, worth 1.1 billion dollars, to minimize the strategic importance of Pakistan . India is building a road worth 1 billion dollars in Afghanistan to minimize Pakistan's strategic importance in Afghanistan .
 Through this road India wants to minimize the dependency of the world over Pakistan transit facility in order to reach out to the CARS resource . India wants the world to minimize dependency on Pakistan transit .
 According to the Commerce and Trade President of pak; ""This road would affect the Pak transit over 40%"" iv. According to  pak, the road would . affect the . transit over . 40% of the . population .
 ISIS also has connections with Indian security agencies, as do the majority of the groups, which announce their allegiance to it . ISIS has good contacts with RAW and is being exploited as proxies against Pakistan . The emergence of ISIS in Afghanistan (to counter Taliban) also has .
 ISIS claimed incident in Jalalabad also has traces of Indian linkage . ISIS claimed to have been involved in the incident in the city . The incident was reported to have taken place in the Indian capital .
 In fact, India, through ISIS in Afghanistan, is trying to counter the Taliban . India is fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan . The Taliban is a Taliban-influenced group .
 Indian Defense Minister Manohar Parrikar said in a TV interview that India had to ""neutralize" terrorists through terrorists .
 The current TTP chief Mullah Faziullah is being protected by Afghan intelligence agents in Afghanistan . Mullah is the current leader of the TTP, who is believed to be a Taliban leader .
 U.S. troops snatched former TTP chief Flakimullah Mehusd's deputy, Latifullah Mehsud, from Afghan intelligence last year . Last year, United States troops snatched Mehusud's deputy from Afghanistan .
 Latifullah had been traveling back and forth to coordinate attacks in Pakistan with Afghan agents, authorities say . He was traveling between Pakistan and Afghanistan, according to reports .
 Afghan Government's Advisor, Ehsanullah Aryanzai, in his statement, said, ""India is using Afghan soil to destabilize Pakistan and Afghan security agencies are unable to stop Indian intervention due to the absence of a centralized government mechanism"", ix. ix .
 Indian Involvement in Pak Pak shared evidence with United States regarding Indian involvement . i.i. ii. i. shared evidence that India had been involved in Afghanistan . ii. U.S. shared information with U.K. about Indian involvement in Afghanistan and Afghanistan . iRep
 Leader of Baluch Liberation Army received with red carpet in India. i. ii. Leader of the Baluch liberation Army received red carpet . i.ii.iii. ii . Leader of a Baluch separatist group received with a red carpet of red carpet.ii .
 RAW hired Afghanistan's defunct intelligence agency, KHAD's agents to establish a bridge between the Tahreek Taliban Pakistan Pakistan and itself . KHAD agents set up the bridge between Afghanistan and Pakistan .
 RAW, via TTP, has hired the services of criminal elements/groups to gather information and conduct surveillance of potential targets . iv. iv. IV. iv .
 India's external intelligence agency, the Research and Analysis Wing, has long faced allegations of meddling in its neighbors' affairs . It has long been accused of meddling with its neighbors .
 V Prime Minister Modi appointed Ajit Doval, a well-known hawk, as his National Security Advisor . Doval is a well known hawk who has been in touch with the U.S. for years .
 In the 1990s, Mr Doval served as an undercover RAW agent in Pakistan for seven years . In the 90s, he served as a spy for the government in Pakistan .
 RAW, in collaboration with the Afghan intelligence agency, 'National Directorate of Security' has been encouraging separatists . Besides, in Baluchistan, in . collaboration with . Afghanistan, RAW, has also encouraged separatists .
 Baluchistan Liberation Army provides funding and weapons to Baloch militant groups . Baloch militants groups such as Baloch Republican Army and Baloch Liberation Front for terrorist activities in province .
 Intelligence reports suggest Baloch militants are being harbored at various places and training camps located in Kabul, Nimroz and Kandahar in Afghanistan . Intelligence reports say Baloch militant is being held in various places .
 RAW is involved in providing fake identity and travel documents to Baloch militants for moving out of Afghanistan to India, the UAE and Western countries . vii. vii .
 A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Modi .
 The modification of the general geopolitical content in the region after the completion of the combat mission of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan and the withdrawal of the major part of the coalition forces in December 2014 . i. Secondly, the modification of . the . general geopolitical . content in . Afghanistan
 Thirdly, the establishment of India had an impact on the development of foreign policy, particularly in the Pakistani direction, i. ii. Thirdly . i.III. i.II.III: India had a significant impact on Pakistan's foreign policy . ii. III: The establishment
 Kashmir sovereignty issue again included as a major point in the agenda of Pakistani-Indian relations . The Kashmir issue is again a major issue of the two countries' relations .
 Government urged to "freeze" this and settle some technical issues, visas (providing expedited visa regime for certain categories of citizens of both countries), transportation , etc. On the contrary, the government urged to ""freeze"" this and settled some technical . issues .
 Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and Narendra Modi met in May, 2014 for the first time when the head of the Federal Cabinet of Ministers of Pakistan was invited to the inauguration in New Delhi . The two leaders were invited to New Delhi to attend the inauguration .
 The first political battles were turned by them against each other at the end of September 2014 at the UN General Assembly .
 Pakistan severely criticized the position of India directed at blocking the execution of a referendum in Kashmir . Pakistan strongly criticized India's position of trying to block an execution of the Kashmir referendum .
 A little later, in January 2015, this point was again voiced during the visit of President Barack Obama in New Delhi . iv. Obama's visit to New Delhi was also voiced during his visit .
 The ceasefire is the main mechanism for the stabilization of the situation on the Line of Control and the Working boundary between the two countries . They confirmed that in order to find their solutions concerted efforts are required .
 The visit of the Secretary Ministry of Foreign Affairs of India in Pakistan was generally formal . It was held on the eve of the SAARC summit, which will take place in Islamabad . The SAARC Summit will be held in Islamabad, Pakistan .
 Analysts pointed out that it had not brought much hope for a qualitative breakthrough, improvement of bilateral relations . Analysts said it had brought little hope for an improved bilateral relations with Russia .
 At the same time, according to the A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Pakistani side .
 The games are planned in the United Arab Emirates, away from the unpredictable behaviour of the majority of the fans . The games will be played in the UAE away from unpredictable behaviour .
 "One step forward, two steps back. And so all the years of these relationships one step forward," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 i. Implement its pledge to grant MEN status to India by the end of 2016 . ii. Implement a pledge to give India MEN status by the year end of 2015 . i. implement its pledge that India will be granted the status by 2016 .
 i. Punish those involved in the 2008 Mumbai attacks, communicate any challenges to trials of the accused or related legal processes, including military interference, to Indian counterparts . i.Punish those responsible for the 2008 attacks, including those who were killed in the Mumbai attacks. i.
 Act against banned groups that operate freely and against any groups calling for jihad against India, invoking laws against incitement to violence. iv iv. iv. Act against groups that . operate freely . Act against . banned groups and against . individuals calling for . jihad against . India, invoke laws
 i. Take action against all militant groups, including India and Afghanistan-oriented jihadi outfits . ii. Take aim against India, Afghanistan-orientated jihadi groups, i.iii. Take control of the situation in Afghanistan .
 Pakistani exporters have unimpeded access to the Indian market under the MFN regime, i. ii. repealing the Armed Forces Special Powers Act and other draconian laws, replacing a military-led counter-insurgency approach in Jammu and Kashmir with accountable policing and holding a meaningful
 Focus on short, medium and long-term measures to optimize the use of water resources, going beyond project-related disputes that the IWT can already address, says IWT . Focus should be short, short and long term measures that can optimize use of resources, IWT says .
 Prioritise cooperation on joint energy-related ventures, such as petroleum product pipelines from India to Pakistan . Assess feasibility of a bilateral, and at a later stage regional, energy grid .
 International forces were first used in 1948 to observe cease-fires in Kashmir and Palestine . International armed forces first used to observe a cease-fire in 1948 in Kashmir .
 The use of such forces as a buffer between warring parties pending troop withdrawals and negotiations was formalized in 1956 during the Suez Crisis between Egypt, Israel, France, France and the United Kingdom . Peacekeeping is not mentioned in the UN Charter .
 Peacekeeping missions are designed to be peaceful, involve military troops from several countries, and that the troops serve under the authority of the UN Security Council . Peacekeepers missions have taken many forms, though they have a common form .
 In 1988 the UN Peacekeeping Forces were awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace . UN peacekeeping forces were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1988 .
 The region has so far failed to observe a durable and long-lasting peace . Several efforts, both at the governmental and nongovernmental levels, have been made to resolve conflicts .
 The 'Cricket Diplomacy' between the two countries at the time of the Cricket World Cup, held in India in February-March 2011, has helped melt the ice . Relations between the nuclear-armed neighboring countries of South Asia are still in the transitional phase .
 The current thaw in relations between India and Pakistan needs to be noticed for several reasons . Pakistan and India have been at odds for years over the past decade .
 First, a realization occurred on both sides of the border that a continued brinksmanship may escalate into a full-fledged war . First, the realization occurred both sides realized a continued confrontation may escalate .
 India and Pakistan are the only nuclear neighbors, which are involved in active conflict with each other . Pakistan and India are the other nuclear neighbors .
 Kashmir issue has become a nuclear flashpoint between the two states . Kashmir issue is a nuclear issue between Kashmir and India . Kashmir is a major source of tension between the Kashmir issue .
 The world narrowly escaped the nuclear disaster when both the states had deployed over a million troops on borders during the crisis after the attack on the Indian Parliament in December 2001 .
 The keen interest of the U.S. in the South Asian affairs has also put pressure on both India and Pakistan to work for peace-building in the region . Second, the keen interest is also putting pressure on the two countries .
 It must be noted that for the success of the Global War on Terror , peace between India and Pakistan is a prerequisite . Peace between Pakistan and India is a pre-condition for success in the war .
 Washington needed Islamabad's active support in counter-terrorism operations both in Afghanistan as well as in Pakistan, Washington says . Washington also needs Islamabad's support in Afghanistan and Pakistan, he says .
 For this, normalization of India Pakistan relations was necessary so that Islamabad could effectively concentrate on its western borders . Normalization of Indian Pakistan relations is necessary for Islamabad to effectively concentrate its west borders, says Ravi Agnew .
 Third, a realization has also occurred in both India and Pakistan that for the economic growth and development, peace in the region is inevitable . Peace in Pakistan is inevitable for economic growth, development, says Shah .
 The militant Jihadi groups, which were previously nurtured by the Pakistani state, have now become too powerful to control . The militant groups are now too strong to control, according to Pakistani officials .
 The blowback of the policy of using the Salafi/Jihadi groups in Afghanistan and Kashmir could be seen in the form of sectarian violence in Pakistan, says Dr. Ghaffar Hussain .
 A crackdown against militant groups was the need of the time. Therefore, crackdown against those militant groups is the need for the time .
 The policy also met the Indian demand to dismantle terrorist infrastructure in Pakistan before the beginning of a meaningful dialogue between the two countries . This policy also meets the Indian demands to dismantle terrorists infrastructure .
 U.S. has become an important regional actor in South Asia because of its presence in Afghanistan and Pakistan, writes CNN's Peter Bergen . The United States has now become a regional actor, he says .
 The U.S. would not remain uninvolved in case any crisis occurs between India and Pakistan . Therefore, it is in no way that the United States would be uninvolved . The United States could not be left out of the situation .
 The U.S. would no more bear Pakistan's policy of supporting militant Jihadi groups in Kashmir in order to engage India in a low intensity conflict . Moreover, the United States would not more bear the policy of . supporting militants in Kashmir .
 It is argued that the United States presence and role will determine the future course of India-Pakistan relations . U.S. presence will determine course of relations, including Kashmir, between them .
 First, the US, today, enjoys a greater degree of influence on both India and Pakistan simultaneously . The U.S. enjoys greater influence in both countries .
 The common threat to the regional as well as global peace and security is the menace of terrorism . Second, a realization on the part of the US, India and Pakistan has occurred that the common threat is terrorism .
 Both nationalists and conservative Islamists along with the military in Pakistan saw India as an enemy, which was against their existence . On the other hand, both the nationalists and conservatives in Pakistan believed India was an enemy of their existence.
 This enemy image on both sides of the border set the future direction of the relations between the two countries . Therefore, this enemy image will set the course of relations between Russia and the U.S.
 The unjust and delayed distribution of assets and territory further marked the increasing mistrust between India and Pakistan . The unjust . distribution of . assets and . territory further . marked the . increasing . mistrust between the two countries .
 The principle of 'communal majority' was applied to the partition of the Indian SubContinent . The principle was used in the partition .
 Under this principle, the contiguous Muslim majority areas were included in Pakistan, while the contiguous Hindu majority areas became the part of India . The contiguous majority areas of India were part of Pakistan .
 When faced with the tribal invasion, the Maharaja ""invited the Indian army to repel the invaders but India first demanded his accession, which he provided" The Maharaja was faced with an invasion of tribal tribes .
 Kashmir has been the bone of contention and the issue of continuous antagonism between the two countries . The two countries have fought two major wars in 1948 and 1965, and a limited war in Kargil in 1999 . Kashmir is a major source of tension between Kashmir and India .
 Different and opposite approaches on Kashmir have not only complicated the situation between India and Pakistan, but have also diminished the prospects of the resolution of the dispute .
 Islamabad then resorted to a strategy of engaging New Delhi in a lowintensity war in Kashmir . Islamabad has failed to resolve the Kashmir dispute through bilateral and multilateral negotiations .
 Pakistan extended its full support to the militant Jihadi groups fighting against the Indian troops in Kashmir . For this purpose, Pakistan extended support to militants fighting against Indian troops . Pakistan extended full support for the militant groups .
 Pakistan has denied its role in Kashmir . It was disclosed during the Kargil incident in July 1999, when it was revealed that Pakistan-based militant groups along with regular forces participated in the operation .
 Pakistan's engagement with the militant Jihadi groups and its involvement in the Kargil war further authenticated when the then Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, rushed to the U.S. in July 1999 and sought American assistance to avert the crisis .
 After achieving nuclear capability in May 1998, Pakistan became confident that the lowintensity war strategy in Kashmir would bear fruits . V. V. became confident of the low intensity war strategy .
 The Kargil war sabotaged the whole peace process, which was started after the visit of the Indian Prime Minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, to Pakistan and the signing of the Lahore A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 The region missed another opportunity to improve India Pakistan relations when Pakistan's then President General Pervez Musharraf visited Agra in July 2001 . The region also missed a chance to improve relations with India Pakistan .
 Musharraf and Vajpayee agreed to the basic fundamentals of the draft agreement . The draft agreement had fallen victim to the hard-line mindset of the Indian hawks, who did not want to see peace between the two neighboring countries .
 Pakistan's policy of supporting the militant Jihadis in the Indian Held Kashmir continued even after the 9/11 incident . However, Pakistan' policy of backing the militants in the Kashmir region continued . Pakistan has been accused of supporting militants in Kashmir since 2001 .
 Islamabad hoped Washington would ignore its policy of engaging New Delhi in a low-intensity war in Kashmir . Islamabad believed that since Washington badly needed its assistance in Afghanistan against the Al-Qaeda and Taliban, it would ignore New Delhi .
 The policy proved to be ineffective and counter-productive with serious repercussions for Pakistan . Nevertheless, the policy proved ineffective and counterproductive with serious consequences .
 The 9/11 incident changed the overall international and regional political scenario in terms of renewed alliances to wage war against international terrorism . The world's most powerful ally in the Middle East is the U.S. State Department .
 With reference to India Pakistan relations, the immediate impact of the 9/11 incident could not be seen . The immediate impact was not immediately seen, says author .
 The success of the GWOT was largely depended upon normalization of relations between India and Pakistan . The element of mistrust, which was created in Kargil, continued to be a part of the war .
 Pakistan became the frontline ally of the U.S. in the war against Taliban and Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan . Pakistan has faced the Indian pressure to dismantle home-grown terrorist infrastructure .
 New Delhi linked the cross border terrorism with international terrorism . New Delhi has linked cross-border terrorism with the international terrorism.
 India and Pakistan could not formulate a common strategy to counter the most pressing menace of terrorism . Pakistan and India continued to remain at loggerheads and could not discuss common strategy .
 India accused Pakistan of its support to the Lashkar-e-Taiba, which was involved in that incident . India also said Pakistan was behind the attack in Kashmir . Pakistan has denied the allegations .
 It massed its troops on the borders threatening an invasion across the Line of Control in Kashmir or across the international borders; i. ii. It threatened an invasion in Kashmir . i.I. massed my troops on . borders threatening . an invasion . in Kashmir, i.i
 i. It demanded to hand over 20 people who were allegedly involved in terrorist activities in India; i.ii. It also demanded that the government hand over people who are alleged to have been involved in terrorism in India . i.i. demanded that 20 people were alleged to be involved
 India also demanded Pakistan to ban militant Jihadi organizations, which were involved in that attack . India has also demanded that Pakistan ban militant groups involved in the attack .
 Musharraf in his address to the nation on January 12, 2002, vowed to take severe action against the A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Their accounts were frozen and their activities in Afghanistan and Kashmir were halted . Also, their activities were halted and their accounts were also frozen . The government also froze their accounts and halted their activities .
 In a conciliatory tone, Vajpayee said, "I wanted to have friendly relations with our neighbors and I went to Lahore, but it was returned with Kargil"
 We are again extending a hand of friendship but hands should be extended from both the sides . We are extending our friendship with each other, says Martin Jolie .
 Pakistan also announced a ceasefire on the Line of Control and lifted the ban on the air service . Pakistan has also lifted a ban on air travel from the border .
 Both sides had realized the need of the dialogue process, but could not move forward and stuck to their old stances on the issue of Kashmir . Kashmir is a major source of tension between India and Pakistan .
 Composite Dialogue started between India and Pakistan in January 2004 . I In continuation of conducive environment, which developed with Vajpayee's offer of peace, the Composite Dialogue process started in 2004 .
 Sir Creek, Terrorism and Drug Trafficking, Economic Cooperation, and Promotion of friendly Exchanges . Sir Creek is the site of the first meeting of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 With the coming of Manmohan Singh in power in May 2004, the peace process continued with full realization that it would ultimately lead to sustained engagement and understanding between the two countries .
 Even Musharraf, despite domestic pressure from religious-political party, the Muttahida Majlis-iAmI (United Action FrontMMA), emphasized upon the outof-box approach .
 Musharraf floated an idea for the resolution of the Kashmir dispute in 2005 . In an interview to an American TV Channel on April 21, 2005, he said Kashmir dispute resolution would be possible .
 Musharraf also proposed the opening of the LoC at five points after the earthquake in Pakistan on October 8, 2005 . The LoC is located in the border with Pakistan .
 Nauseri-Tithwal; Chakoti-Uri; Hajipur-Uris; Hajlipur- Uri; Rawalakot-Poonch and TattapaniMendhar . Nagai-Titwal is one of India's most important
 No major breakthrough on materializing the materialization of those proposals took place because of the severe opposition from the Indian Army . However, no major breakthrough took place .
 The peace process under the Composite Dialogue continued until it suffered a severe setback when Mumbai incident took place on November 26, 2008 . Despite this, the peace process continued until 2008 .
 Pakistan has offered India its full support and cooperation with the investigation . Pakistan strongly condemned the incident and offered India's full support .
 The Indian government attributed the attack to the LeT for perpetrating the terrorist activity . The LeT claimed responsibility for the attack .
 Only survived terrorist Ajmal Kasab was the citizen of Pakistan . However, later on, it acknowledged the only survived terrorist was a citizen of the country .
 This was acknowledged by the then National Security Advisor of Pakistan, Major General Mahmud AN Durrani . The then-National Security Advisor said this was acknowledged .
 Durrani revealed that Ajmal Kasab was a Pakistani national . He also revealed that Kasab had been killed in a car bomb attack .
 Yousuf Raza Gilani, then Prime Minister of Pakistan, sacked Mr Durrani . The then PM sacked him after the revelation .
 Mumbai incident has had serious consequences for IndiaPakistan relations, and of course, the regional peace . The Mumbai incident was a major incident in the region and has serious implications for the region .
 The mistrust between the two countries reached to its height when in an interview with the CNN in November 2009, Manmohan Singh raised doubts over Pakistani civilian leadership's control over the military . Singh also raised questions over compatibility of Pakistan's and US' objectives in Afghanistan .
 The major casualty of the Mumbai carnage was the derailment of the 'Composite Dialogue' process between India and Pakistan . Second, the major casualty was the derailedment of India-Pakistan talks .
 Pakistan offered its assistance in joint investigation, but India rejected it . India is the only country to offer joint investigation into the incident .
 Pakistan faced a very awkward situation when the international community supported the Indian position . Third, at the diplomatic front Pakistan faced an awkward situation . Pakistan was faced with the international support of India .
 They agreed to restore trust and confidence, which was shattered after the Mumbai incident . The two sides have been in talks to restore the trust that were shattered in Mumbai .
 Both countries did not concede to the 'Composite Dialogue' process . They pledged to restore peace process . Both the countries pledged peace process.
 The positive sign of the Thimphu Summit was that it paved the way for the high-level dialogue process . However, the positive sign was that the summit paved the path for the dialogue process. The summit was the first of its kind in the country's history .
 Foreign ministers of the two countries met in Islamabad in July 2010 . To advance the peace talks, the foreign ministers met in Pakistan .
 India's this claim came immediately after it was disclosed during the interrogation of David Coleman Headly, A Pakistani American, who was arrested in Chicago in 2009 . India's claim came after it came to light during interrogation of Headly .
 This further underscored the element of mistrust and diminished the prospects of peace between the two nuclear-armed countries of South Asia . The two countries have nuclear arms arms in the region .
 The dormant peace process between the two countries once again got further impetus when Manmohan Singh in his address in March 2011 at a university in Jammu and Kashmir offered peace talks .
 He said, "We wish to resolve all outstanding issues between the two countries through friendly dialogue and constructive and purposeful negotiations"
 The dialogue at the secretary level remained successful and resulted in the signing of various agreements . The two sides signed agreements at the end of the talks .
 Commerce Secretaries of both countries in their meeting on April 28, 2011, agreed to form various groups of experts to examine the feasibility of trading electricity and petroleum products, promotion of travel facilities .
 The resumption of the dialogue between the two neighboring countries was a dire need particularly after the Mumbai incident . The element of mistrust has not yet reduced. V.
 India still doubts that Pakistan is not doing enough to dismantle the terrorist infrastructure, which causes cross-border terrorism . India believes that Pakistan's terrorist infrastructure is not being dismantled enough .
 The Indian argument is that the peace process with Pakistan will not go forward until the latter ends its support for terrorist groups . Pakistan has been accused of supporting terrorist groups in Pakistan .
 Both India and Pakistan need to seek the help of the third party mediation in order to ensure a stable peace in the region . In the presence of such a deep element of mistrust and the history of failed negotiations, it is argued .
 After the 9/11 incident the U.S. has become an active extra regional actor in South Asia . It is also argued that after the 9.11 incident, the United States has become a regional actor .
 The American involvement as a third party mediator between India and Pakistan may help both the neighboring countries resolve their longstanding disputes, mainly Kashmir . The U.S. involvement may help resolve Kashmir disputes .
 It must be noted that the American engagement in the region is not a new phenomenon, it must be said . U.S. involvement in the Middle East has been a long-standing phenomenon .
 It has played an active role in averting crises between India and Pakistan . It has also brought the two countries on the negotiation table . Pakistan and India have been at odds for years .
 During the Cold War period, the American role in the South Asian region could only be seen with reference to its relations with Pakistan . The United States Engagement in South Asian affairs was limited to Pakistan relations .
 The major interest of the U.S. was to counter the expansion of Communism in South and South-East Asia . The United States' interest in the region was to stop the spread of Communism .
 India saw the former as an imperialist power and the latter being an agent of it . The US and Pakistan have been at loggerheads for years . The U.S.-Pakistan relations have been strained in recent years .
 The US, like Pakistan, could not lure India and its influence in the region remained marginal during the Cold War period . Therefore, the U.S., like Pakistan and the Pakistan, couldn't lure India .
 The disintegration of the Soviet Union and India's policy of economic liberalization in 1992 led to the establishment of favorable relations between Washington and New Delhi .
 The Kargil crisis paved the way for an active American engagement in the South Asian affairs till 1999 . Flowever, it did not pave the way to an active U.S. engagement .
 It was the first armed confrontation between India and Pakistan after their nuclear tests in May 1998 . The confrontation took place in Pakistan's capital, Islamabad .
 The crisis was averted when Nawaz Sharif visited the U.S. in July 1999 and sought American assistance . The crisis in Pakistan was avoided by a visit to the United States in 1999 and a visit in 1999 .
 A meeting between Mr Sharif and then American President, Billl Clinton, was held on July 4, 1995 .
 It is a wellknown fact that it was an American facilitation which led to the formal end of the Kargil crisis . It was a well known fact that the U.S. helped end the crisis .
 The successful American facilitation during the Kargil crisis could not last long . The two nuclear states of South Asia once again faced a grim crisis when Pakistan-based Jihadi groups attacked the Indian Parliament on December 13, 2001 .
 For the success of the GWOT, the U.S. is very keen to see cordial, friendly and tensionfree relations between the two neighboring states of South Asia . The United States wants to see a cordial relationship between South Asia and the West .
 It is a fact that the rigid mistrust between India and Pakistan has impeded resolution of political disputes between the two countries . The rigid mistrust has led to an impasse between Pakistan and India . The two countries have been at odds for years .
 India and Pakistan may seek U.S. assistance to play role of a third party mediator . Bilateral means to resolve disputes have proven ineffective . Pakistan and India may take advantage of the United States stakes in the region in post-9/11 scenario .
 India opposes any third party mediation in the bilateral talks with Pakistan . India must understand that without involving the third party, Islamabad would not be satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations .
 Both India and Pakistan need to bear in mind that this is high time to seek U.S. assistance to resolve their political disputes and move forward .
 The matter of the fact is that once Afghanistan is politically stabilized and Al-Qaeda infrastructure is uprooted, the U.S. would leave the region without any responsibility of cleaning the mess as it did in late 1980s .
 Had the 9/11 incident not taken place, the U.S. would not have taken keen interest in this region . The United States would not be interested in the region if not for the first time .
 The 9/11 incident and as a result the U.S. compulsion to depend on India and Pakistan for the successful launching of military operations, is a blessing in disguise . In other words, the 9.11 incident is the result of the United States' compulsion to rely on India
 On the part of the US, it is imperative to play the role of a third party mediator between India and Pakistan . The U.S. should play a mediator in the region, writes Shah .
 The success of the GWOT largely depends on the joint cooperation of India and Pakistan . The U.S. must understand that the success of this war is dependent on the cooperation of Pakistan and India . The United States must understand this, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Washington needs to keep pressure on Islamabad to curtail its support for the militant groups fighting in Kashmir . Islamabad has links with militant groups in Kashmir who have their links with militants in Afghanistan . Washington must take advantage of its leading role in the GWOT .
 If Pakistan discontinues its support to the militant Jihadi groups, it will ease Indian concerns about Pakistan's non-seriousness in dismantling terrorist infrastructure . It will also ensure the success of U.S. strategy to defeat AIQaeda and associated groups, fighting in Afghanistan .
 The US, by taking advantage of its nuclear deal with India, can also pressure the latter to seriously work upon mending the fences with Pakistan . Similarly, the U.S. can pressure the Pakistanis to mending their fences with India .
 The United States must transform its role as an agent of conflict management to conflict resolution . U.S. must transform role from conflict management into conflict resolution, the author says .
 The support of the United States to the existing peace process between India and Pakistan is also necessary . In this regard, the U.S. should support the ongoing peace process .
 The world has entered the 21st century with lots of hope and expectation of progress and prosperity . Peace making I. Peace making is peace making I . The world is entering a new century with a lot of hope .
 Unfortunately, South Asia continues to remain the least developed . South Asia has the expected 'destiny' of rampant corruption .
 The leadership of the respective countries has even failed to give its people any hope for a better future, says CNN.com.com . "The leadership of each country has even . failed to . give their people any . hope," she said .
 With huge natural and human resources, the South Asian region has a potential to progress at a rapid speed . South Asia has huge natural resources, with huge potential to develop at rapid speed.
 The only thing which is lacking is the political will among the respective countries to take bold decisions to resolve inter-state disputes, which have hindered the prospects for peace in the region . The region's political will is lacking, says the author .
 The most important challenge for both India and Pakistan is how to continue and sustain the dialogue process . The dialogue process could lead to the establishment of perpetual peace between the two belligerents . Pakistan and India are the two countries involved in Kashmir .
 Both India and Pakistan have several times initiated talks on various contentious issues, including Kashmir, but they failed to materialize them because of the deep element of mistrust . Both countries have several attempts to reach an agreement on Kashmir .
 Extremist tendencies on both sides of the border have strengthened. As a result of their failed ventures, the extremist tendencies have strengthened . The extremists have strengthened in recent years .
 Extremist tendencies have not only caused the rise of terrorism, but also marginalized the saner elements on both sides of the border . These extremist tendencies have led to the rise in terrorism, the author says .
 Kashmir has the potential to cause another war between India and Pakistan, i.e. Pakistan . It is therefore a high time to invite a third party for mediation in order to evolve a workable strategy for the resolution of the conflict .
 India, Pakistan and even the US need to take few steps for confidence-building measures . However, before such mediation takes place, India needs to take a few steps . The U.S. needs to be involved in the process .
 India has to play a leadership role and at the same time de-emphasizing upon being a hegemonic power of the region . Being a big regional power, India must play leadership role, he says .
 If India wants long-lasting peace in the region, it has to alter its attitude towards its smaller neighbors, particularly Pakistan . India must change its attitude to Pakistan, especially Pakistan, if it wants peace .
 A nuclear Pakistan cannot accept bullying from India, and New Delhi needs not to outstare Islamabad . This is a fact that a nuclear Pakistan can't accept bullying .
 Pakistan has to shun the policy of engaging India in a low-intensity war in Kashmir by disassociating itself from the militant Jihadi groups .
 Failing to do so, may not only enrage India, but also disorient the U.S. from engaging itself in the dialogue process . The United States needs to engage in dialogue with India, experts say .
 The United States enjoys a greater leverage in South Asia than any other country in the world . Being the sole super power and an active extra-regional actor after the 9/11 incident, the U.S. enjoys greater leverage over South Asia .
 It is in a position to pressure both India and Pakistan to make the existing peace process meaningful and result oriented . Pakistan is the only country to pressure India and India to engage in a meaningful peace process .
 If this happens, the region will not only witness the economic prosperity, but also the resolution of political disputes, including Kashmir . Kashmir is a key part of the region's future .
 I CBMs are such actions and agreements, which would be helpful in detente . CBMS and Peace in South Asia I CBM are such . CBM is such actions, agreements, that would help detente, says Ravi Agrawal .
 It can be defined as a bilateral or multilateral measure that builds confidence or trust, arrests the undesirable drifts towards open hostilities, reduces tensions and encourages the adversaries to make contact for negotiations .
 Both countries are armed with nuclear weapons and therefore, the threat of intentional, accidental or inadvertent use of nuclear weapons has increased . It is a fact that both . both countries . are armed .
 Successful CBMs need consistent negotiations, which may evolve a proper mechanism of defusing tension . CBMs must also have a mechanism to defuse tension, says the author .
 Both India and Pakistan have failed to implement CBMs, says Pakistanis . Pakistan and India have not succeeded in implementing CBMs .
 Their relations are the product of cold peace and cold war and even hot war . Their relations have been cold peace, cold war or hot war, they say. Their relations were cold peace .
 Misperceptions, misunderstandings and incompatibilities have plagued their relations . Misperception and misunderstandings have plagued them for years .
 India and Pakistan have signed a number of agreements to establish ground rules for military exercises . The aim is to avoid the outbreak of an accidental conflict between the two countries .
 An agreement was ratified in August 1992 on Advance Notice of Military Exercises, Man oeuvres and Troops Movements . The agreement was signed on August 1992 .
 The agreement does not permit military man oeuvres of the Pakistani and Indian land, naval, and air forces in close proximity to or in the direction of their international border . Pakistan and India are not allowed to engage in military manoeres .
 No military activity is permitted within 5 km of the international border . Military activity must be allowed within 5km of the border .
 The agreement also provides for prior notification of major military exercises within a specified timeframe .
 Both countries have violated spirit of the spirit of this agreement, it was this non-compliance of the agreements that had resulted in Kargil crisis . The two countries have not been able to reach an agreement to resolve their differences .
 A similar agreement was signed in 1991, also ratified in 1992 for the Prevention of Airspace Violations by Military Aircraft, establishing a no-fly zone along their international border .
 Combat aircraft are prohibited within 10 kilometers of the international border . Unarmed transport and logistics aircraft are permitted up to 1000 meters from each other's airspace . The agreement was reached in 2007 .
 This agreement has not been honored, and it has failed to de-escalate tension, especially during the time of military crisis . This agreement is not being honored, especially in this time of crisis .
 Pakistan's downing of two Indian aircraft during the Kargil crisis are the most suitable quotable examples . India's attack on Pakistan's two aircraft near the international border is the most appropriate quotable example .
 Realizing the nuclear status of each other, both countries have entered into a nuclear specific CBM-Prohibition of Attack on Nuclear Installations and Facilities . Both countries have agreed to a nuclear ban on attack on nuclear installations .
 Both countries were to inform each other about the volume and any change in nuclear installation . According to this agreement, on 1st of January of every year, both countries were . to . inform each .
 The accuracy of nuclear facilities lists is also not beyond doubt, according to the BBC .
 A direct communication link known as ""Hotline"" between DGMOs was established in 1971 . The link was established between the DGMO and the European Commission in 1973 .
 In 1990, due to the mounting tension on borders, it was decided to use this line on weekly basis . i. ii. i.i.i: In 1990 due to mounting tension, we used this line due to be used on a weekly basis. In 1990 the line was
 Establishment of hotline between Pakistan Air Force and Indian Air Force . i. i. Establishment of hotline would be between Pakistan and India . I.E. I.I.I . Establishment of a hotline between the two countries is between Pakistan .
 Naval vessels and aircraft of the two navies . when in each other's vicinity . iv. Communication between the Naval Vessels and Aircraft of the . two . navies when in the . vicinity of each other. iv. communication between the . naval vessels and . aircraft . of the
 Establishment of a hotline between Prime Ministers in 1997 after Male summit . Establishment of hotline between PMs and PMs .
 Invitation of the Guest Speakers at each other's national defense colleges . Invitation to each other national defense college .
 Despite of such a list of CBMs, both have failed to achieve peace in the region . Both have failed in the past to achieve a peace agreement .
 They, probably, use them more as instruments to influence the West then to defuse tension in true sense . They probably use them as instruments, rather than just to influence West, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Lack of political will has also marred the mechanism of conflict resolution, experts say . Lack of a political will is also marring the resolution process, they say . The United Nations has not been able to find a way to resolve the conflict .
 Military CBMs have become even more essential due to the absence of political reconciliation between the two geographically contiguous, nuclear-capable states . Military CBM has become more important due to political reconciliation in the region .
 The following suggested CBMs could improve the deteriorating atmosphere of peace in South Asia . CBMs have been suggested to improve the deterioration of the peace in the region . CBM could help improve the situation in the country .
 Withdrawal of troops from border areas and creating a 20 miles a troops free Security Zone . With withdrawal of troops . Creating a 20-mile-free security zone .
 It is globalization of the world economy and closer co-operation of individual economies in the world that has engaged the global entities in economic diplomacy for peace building . The world's economic diplomacy is a key part of peace building, says President Obama .
 Economic CBMs involve elimination of tariffs, custom duties, taxes, and nontariff barriers etc. etc. They involve mainly the elimination of custom duties and taxes . CBMs include elimination of trade and custom duties as well as elimination of tax and customs duties .
 In South Asia, intra-SAARC trade has remained at 4.2%, which shows the lack of confidence of South Asians over each other . As far as South Asia is concerned, South Asia's trade deficit has remained low .
 According to an estimate, India and Pakistan trade volume is $120 million since 1994 . Their combined total global trade is $ 72 billion and has shown no substantial increase over the years .
 There are so many agreements, which have been chalked out for co-operation in economic field, but it is an irony of fate that all such ventures are lying on the paper and no concrete steps have been taken .
 The 1995 South Asian Preferential Agreement-SAPTA has been a strategic instrument in bringing about economic development in the region . The most important of all these is the intraregional trade co-operation under the 1995 SAPTA .
 In the next round, 2,000 products will be covered by the regional agreement . The regional agreement will cover more than 2,500 products .
 If it is fruitless, it is because of the non-serious attitude of the regional members of the region, he says . "If it's fruitless it will be fruitless," he says. "It will be a fruitless failure"
 Joint Ventures in different trading items initially in both countries and then in the 3rd country iv. iv. Joint ventures in different . Items initially in . both countries, then in third country . Joint Ventures .
 V. One may not find more proper time to discuss and eagerly request for CBMs in South Asia than now . Relations between India and Pakistan have reached to their lowest ebb since 1971 .
 In May 1998, both countries went nuclear and celebrations on both sides were watched with fearful eyes . Both sides went nuclear in May 1998 and celebrations were watched by fearful eyes.
 Kargil conflict caused intense war jingoism and had shaped South Asia a potential nuclear flashpoint . It was followed by Kargill conflict that had caused intense jingoistism . South Asia was a potential flashpoint for nuclear weapons .
 The postponement of the SAARC summit, due to India's unwillingness to talk to the military rulers of Pakistan, was serious setback to the normalization of the peace process . India's refusal to talk with the military ruler of Pakistan was a setback to normalization .
 Flijacking of Indian plane was another event that deepened the thaw in the regional tension . The incident deepens the rifts in the region .
 It is a fact that both governments are entangled by their domestic political problems . Both governments are entwined by domestic problems, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Indigenous turmoil-government and traders row, pressure from political parties to hold elections, future political set up, and deteriorating law and order situation in Pakistan . Growing freedom struggle in Kashmir, insurgency in Assam, attacks on Christians and holy churches by fundamentalist Flindus .
 Both governments are busy to deflect attention of their people from these real issues to the enemy across the border . But both governments have been busy deflecting attention to the real issues of the country .
 "Instead of acting insanely, one must follow long-term policies for eternal peace here," says President Obama . Instead of acting "insultously," one should follow long term policies, he says .
 One of the very important determinants for peace making in South Asia is political will . Political will is key to making peace in the region of South Asia, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 It is necessary now, because both countries as a matter of national policy are trying to harm each other to pursue their ends . The U.S. and Russia need each other more urgently to achieve their objectives, the author says .
 Public statements coming out of the leaders of both countries are most harmful, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 They need to lower their rhetoric to create an environment of building at least a minimum level of confidence . The government needs to lower its rhetoric and create a minimum of confidence.
 Even the conciliatory statements being made by both sides are meant more to impress the international community than to reduce tensions and restore stability in the region . Both sides are more likely to be motivated by a desire to impress international community rather than reduce tensions .
 The unrelenting harassment of each other's diplomats has to come to stop as it further increases animosity and aggravates the crisis . It has been a source of tension between the U.S. and Russia .
 Both countries are facing the extremist posture adopted by the religious fundamentalist organizations . X Another very difficult problem, which both countries face, is the extremist stance .
 Hindu, Muslim, and Christian minorities do exist on both sides of the border . Hindus, Muslims, Hindus and Muslims live in India .
 Lack of tolerance among them has further contributed in plaguing the relations . Lack of tolerant amongst them has also contributed to the problems, say officials .
 It would be in the fitness of the things that a direct interaction between the fundamentalist organizations may be arranged, which will in turn help in easing tension . The fundamentalist organizations will be able to work together in order to ease tension .
 Probably the situation is not that worse as has been portrayed by the respective intelligence agencies . The situation is likely to be worse than the intelligence agencies portrayed by them, says CNN.com .
 It is their over-efficiency and suspicions that have made each other's face grimmer . Over-efficiency is over the efficiency and suspicion that has made them grimmer, they say .
 Gap of communication among agencies has flared up mutual antagonism . Gap of communicating amongst agencies has flare-up of mutual antagonisms .
 It is the need of the moment to initiate a dialogue between the intelligence agencies of both countries so that misunderstandings may be addressed . Under such circumstances, it is necessary to initiate dialogue between intelligence agencies, the author says .
 As a major achievement of international peace and conflict research, there is a broad consensus that peace is more than just the absence of war . Peace is more important to peace, says the author of the CBMs I .
 Will to peace and the capability for peace is more important than deterrence, says U.S. President Obama .
 If South Asia is observed intently, the state of affairs since 1947 cannot be called Peace . South Asia needs to be watched intently by the U.N. peacekeepers .
 Even when Pakistan and India did not clash militarily, their regional cold war was going on . Even when the two countries did not meet militarily .
 The problem of the will to peace and the capability for peace is a major factor for answering the question whether peace is possible in this part of the world . So, discuss the imperatives of peace in South Asia, the problem of peace is discussed .
 "If we want peace in South Asia, a real peace, then we have to bring peace in our minds," says Ravi Agrawal . He says if we want to achieve peace in the region, we must bring peace .
 "We have to convince our people that for our survival and of the world at large, there is no other choice but to live in peace with neighbors," says President Obama .
 We have to re-educate our media who are busy in providing Hot News early in the morning through creating war, ideological, enemy, and threat hysteria . We need to reeducate the media who is busy in creating war and ideological propaganda .
 People can be secured by providing them food, shelter, and clothing, and this is possible only when both countries will bring peace, harmony, and economic well being in the region .
 National security cannot be ensured by arms race, rather it would A Project of CSS Writing Club . Compiled by Ayesha Younas C. Younas .
 CBMs do not mean peace, rather these are the ways to long lasting harmony . CBMs are not peace, but they are ways to achieve long-lasting harmony . The CBM is not peace but it is a way of harmony .
 A chronology of key events: 1838-42 British forces invade, install King Shah Shujah . Afghanistan Cold war theatre; Soviet Invasion and Mujahedeen; Geneva Accord; Post Cold War situation . Operation Enduring Freedom; The Bonn Process withdrawal .
 Soviet intervention 1979 December Soviet Army invades and props up communist government . Soviet intervention overthrown in 1979 December .
 Opposition intensifies with various mujahideen groups fighting Soviet forces . But opposition intensifies as Soviet forces fight Soviet forces in Afghanistan .
 US, Pakistan, China, Iran, Iran and Saudi Arabia supply money and arms to the mujahideen . U.S. and Pakistan have been involved in the fight against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Half of Afghan population now estimated to be displaced by war, with many fleeing to neighbouring Iran or Pakistan . Many fled to neighbouring countries such as Iran and Pakistan .
 Last Soviet troops leave, but civil war continues as mujahideen push to overthrow Najibullah . Red Army quits .
 2001 October US-led bombing of Afghanistan begins following the September 11 attacks on the United States . 2001 October October 2001 October 2001 . 2001 September 2001 September 2002 September 2001 October 2002 September 2002 October 2001 September 2003 October 2001 December 2001 October 2003 September 2001 .
 Hamid Karzai sworn in as head of an interim power-sharing government . Karzai is sworn in to head of the interim government in Afghanistan . He is the first Afghan prime minister to be sworn in .
 Karzai picks members of his administration which is to serve until 2004 . Karzai's government will be based in Afghanistan until 2004. Karzai will be the first Afghan president to take office .
 Loya Jirga adopts new constitution which provides for strong presidency . Elections 2004 January Jiraga adopts a new constitution that provides for a strong presidency. Elections 2004 .
 Nato assumes responsibility for security across the whole of Afghanistan, taking command in the east from a US-led coalition force . The first parliamentary poll in more than 30 years was held in 2006 .
 U.S. President Barack Obama unveils new strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan . New United States approach 2009 March .
 An extra 4,000 U.S. personnel will train and bolster the Afghan army and police . There will also be support for civilian development in Afghanistan .
 An Al-Qaeda double agent kills seven CIA agents in suicide attack on a U.S. base in Khost . The attack was carried out by a double-agent known as a double agent .
 Operation Moshtarak, in bid to secure government control of southern Helmand province, is underway in southern Afghanistan . Operation is part of a government-led effort to take back control of the province from Taliban .
 Karzai says private security firms accused of operating with impunity must cease operations . Karzai: Private security firms must stop operations . Afghan President says security forces must be stopped operating in Kabul .
 President Karzai wins the endorsement of tribal elders to negotiate a 10-year military partnership with the United States at a loya jirga traditional assembly .
 The proposed pact will see U.S. troops remain after 2014, when foreign troops are due to leave the country . It will see the United States remain in Afghanistan after 2014 .
 Pakistan and the Taleban boycott the scheduled Bonn Conference on Afghanistan . The Taleban will not attend the conference on Afghanistan in Bonn .
 Pakistan refuses to attend after Nato air strike killed Pakistani soldiers on Afghan border . Nato air strikes killed Pakistan soldiers on the Afghan border last month . Pakistan refuses attend after the strike, which killed soldiers in Afghanistan .
 United States believed Taliban prisoners were using the books to pass messages, and that they were extremist texts not Korans . U.S. officials believed the books were being used by prisoners .
 Nato summit endorses plan to withdraw foreign combat troops by the end of 2014 . Nato withdrawal plan 2012 May summit endsorses the plan to withdrawal foreign combat forces by 2014 .
 French President Francois Flollande says France will withdraw its combat mission by the end of 2012 a year earlier than planned . He says the withdrawal will come a year early than originally planned . France's combat mission will be withdrawn by 2012, he says .
 A former Taliban minister, he was crucial in reaching out to rebel commanders . He was crucial to reach out to rebels in the Taliban .
 Three U.S. Marines are also disciplined for a video in which the bodies of dead Taliban fighters were urinated on . The video was filmed in Afghanistan and showed the dead Taliban dead .
 The U.S. suspends training new police recruits in order to carry out checks on possible ties to Taliban . Follows series of attacks on foreign troops by apparent police and Afghan soldiers by apparent Afghan soldiers .
 They back opening of an Afghan office in Doha and urge the Taliban to do the same for talks to take place . They back the opening of a Doha office in Afghanistan .
 President Karzai suspends security talks with the U.S. after Washington announces it plans to hold direct talks with Taliban . Karzai suspended security talks after Washington announced it will hold direct negotiations with the Taliban . The Taliban has been fighting a Taliban insurgency in Afghanistan since 2001 .
 Afghanistan insists on conducting the talks with the Taliban in Qatar itself . Afghanistan insists it will hold the talks in Qatar .
 Election officials begin recount of all votes cast in June's presidential run-off, as part of a USmediated deal to end dispute between candidates over widespread claims of fraud .
 Ashraf Ghani and Abdullah Abdullah sign a power-sharing agreement . The deal follows a two-month audit of disputed election results . The two rivals for the Afghan presidency signed the deal in September .
 Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan reaches an all-time high, according to a U.S. report . December NATO formally ends its 13-year combat mission in Afghanistan, handing over to Afghan forces .
 2014 said to be the bloodiest year in Afghanistan since 2001 . Despite the official end to Isaf's combat role, violence persists across much of the country .
 The lynching of a woman wrongly accused of burning a Koran provokes widespread revulsion and criticism of hard-line clerics . Hard-line cleric says the woman was lynched because she had burned a Koran .
 The incident leads to widespread protests against the treatment of women . The incident was the first of a series of protests against sexual violence .
 Both sides agree to continue the talks at a later date . The Taliban insist they will not stop fighting until all foreign troops leave the country .
 Even before the declaration of war on the Axis powers in 1942, officials in Washington were pondering the shape and character of the post-1945 international economic system . Bretton Woods, IMF, WB, WTO, UNO, ICJ, IMF and WB are among the organizations Bretton
 This approach also underpinned the 1942 Lend-Lease agreement with Britain which allowed the President to transfer munitions and other war-fighting material to those countries fighting the Axis powers .
 Given their antipathy to capitalism, it was not surprising that the Soviets would not accept the institutional arrangements agreed to by the other participants . The Soviet Union had a long history of anti-capitalist tendencies .
 It also had the largest standing army among the Western states . It also possessed the only functioning economy of any global significance . The country had the most functioning economy in the world .
 The meetings at Bretton Woods resulted in a range of measures to stabilise the international financial system and facilitate the expansion of trade . The meetings led to the creation of the Bretton-Woods system .
 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, commonly known as theWorld Bank, was established to offer assistance in the form of loans to those countries devastated by the Second World War . The International Monetary Fund, the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade .
 The distinctive feature of the Bretton Woods system, however, was the fixing of exchange rates . The system was set up in 1944 .
 Bretton Woods was remarkably successful in reviving an international economy destroyed by war . But it was seriously flawed as a long-term economic strategy . Bretton was a flawed economic strategy, but it was a remarkably successful one .
 Bretton Woods failed to provide enough new gold to compensate for the growth in world trade . The world's gold reserves have not been enough to meet demand for new gold .
 From that point on, currencies began to float freely against each other . From that moment on, currency markets began to be more open .
 Despite its formal demise, much of the framework of the Bretton Woods system remains . The system's formal demise was formalized in 1973 .
 The ideology of globalisation would seem to run counter to such a proposal . The idea of globalising runs counter to the idea of the globalisation of globalised trade .
 The conference held in New Flampshire in 1944 has been a major influence on the economic character of the world .
 The International Monetary Fund was formed in 1944 at the Bretton Woods Conference . It came into formal existence in 1945 with 29 member countries and the goal of reconstructing the international payment system . A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 As of 2010, the fund had XDR476 billion, about US$755 billion at then-current exchange rates . The fund was worth about $755 billion .
 The Great Depression of the 1930s had an enormous impact on the advanced industrialized states . The Depression was the largest economic downturn in the world .
 In the U.S. and Europe agricultural prices fell, unemployment skyrocketed, banks closed leaving people penniless, factories stood idle, and international trade collapsed . In the United States and Europe .
 Increases in the level of production needed to fight the war stimulated economic growth, put people back to work, and money into circulation . Increases in production helped boost the economy .
 The goals were to stabilize the value of money and promote international trade . The goals of the money were to stabilise the value and promote the international community .
 IMF aims to promote international monetary cooperation and facilitate the expansion and balanced growth of international trade . Objectives of IMF are to promote and maintain high levels of employment and avoid competitive exchange rate depreciation .
 The Board of Governors consists of one governor and one alternate governor for each member country . Organization A Project of CSS Writing Club is a project of CSS writing club .
 The Board normally meets once a year and is responsible for electing or appointing executive directors to the Executive Board . The Board is responsible to elect or appoint executive directors .
 The original mandate of the IMF was achieved primarily by linking the world's currencies to the American dollar . Each member has a number of basic votes . The IMF was formed in 1973 .
 It helped to bring a degree of predictability to the international economy . It also helped to provide a clear idea of the actual value of different currencies, it says .
 The par value system lasted until the early 1970s, when the United States decided it could no longer afford to allow countries to convert their U.S. dollars into gold . The United States no longer allowed the use of par value systems in the 1970s .
 The IMF survived because the need for monetary stability became more crucial in the absence of fixed exchange rates . In fact, the IMF survived . The need for currency stability became even more crucial, says the IMF .
 The U.N. continues to promote monetary stability and trade, but increasingly its role is to assist countries that are in the midst of financial crisis .
 IMF works to foster global growth and economic stability by providing policy, advice and financing to members . The IMF provides alternate sources of financing for members .
 It shifted to examining the economic policies of countries with IMF loan agreements to determine if a shortage of capital was due to economic fluctuations or economic policy .
 IMF now manages economic policy rather than just exchange rates . IMF's role became a lot more active because of its role in managing economic policy . IMF has become more active in recent years .
 Cutting expenditures, also known as austerity, is austerity . Devaluation of currencies, Trade liberalisation, or lifting import and export restrictions etc.
 These macroeconomic reforms can include debt reduction strategies, privatization policies, and cuts in public spending . These policies can include privatization policies and public spending cuts .
 SAPs are regarded as particularly iniquitous by some observers . It is for this reason that some observers say SAPs should not be allowed to be SAPs . SAPs have been criticised for their lack of transparency .
 Some economists suggest that the world economy would function better without SAPs . Many of its SAPs exacerbate crises rather than alleviate them .
 The challenge is to ensure that a balance is struck between good economic management and human needs, says IMF chief . IMF chief: The challenge will be to ensure a balance between good management and good human needs .
 The IMF is only one of many international organisations, and it is a generalist institution that deals only with macroeconomic issues . Its core areas of concern in developing countries are very narrow .
 Greater voting power to developing countries so they can have a greater say . More votes needed for developing countries to have greater say in voting .
 World Bank provides loans to developing countries for capital programs . The World Bank is an international financial institution that provides loans for developing countries .
 The IBRD was the original arm of the World Bank that was responsible for the reconstruction of post-war Europe . The World Bank is responsible for reconstruction of Europe .
 These loans come in the form of ""credits,"" and are essentially interest-free . The loans come from loans that can be taken out of the bank account .
 They offer a 10-year grace period and hold a maturity of 35 years to 40 years . They offer 10 years of maturity and offer a maturity period of 35-40 years .
 Sometimes as a nation develops, it requires more aid to work its way through the development process . Sometimes more aid is needed to help develop a nation that needs more help .
 The globalization of market forces, vigorously promoted by the World Bank, creates greater inequality . The World Bank is vigorously promoting the growth of the world's largest economy .
 World Bank gets most of its capital by selling bonds to wealthy investors . The World Bank has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 The United Nations was established to preserve peace between states after the Second World War . The U.N. was established in 1945 to preserve world peace between warring nations .
 In a number of ways, the institutions of the United Nations reflected lessons learned from its predecessor, the League of Nations . The U.N. institutions reflect lessons from its predecessors .
 They also reflect demands to address the needs and interests of people, as well as the needs of states, states . The proposals reflect demands for people's rights and the state's interests .
 The tensions between these various demands are a key feature of UN development . UN development is a key part of the UN development process .
 Winston Churchill met with President Roosevelt two years after the outbreak of the Second World War . Churchill and Roosevelt met in 1940 . Churchill met in the U.S. at the White House in Washington, DC .
 They sought peace, freedom, collaboration, and security between states, overseen by a wider and permanent system of general security . Apart from the defeat of Nazi Germany, they sought peace between states .
 In 1945, 51 states met at the United Nations Conference in San Francisco to debate the terms of the UN Charter . The UN Charter was created by the United States in 1945 .
 UN aims to maintain international peace, to develop friendly relations among states, to cooperate internationally in solving international problems . UN also promotes respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
 The United Nations Charter was intended to provide a comprehensive set of prescription on conflict resolution and the use of force . Aims and Articles of the Charter include the UN Charter of Peacekeeping .
 On the one hand there were provisions for settling disputes between States, and the prescriptions as to when force could or could be used .
 On the other was the intended capability of the United Nations itself to provide collective security, if necessary, by enforcing the peace . The U.N. itself was intended to provide the capability of providing collective security .
 Chapter VI of the Charter indicates the appropriate methods of settling international disputes . The Security Council gives the Security Council certain powers in relation to these . Chapter VI is based on the UN Charter of Human Rights .
 The only time that all member states meet together is in the General Assembly . The General Assembly is the only time the nations meet together .
 The UN can debate any issue it chooses, adopt Resolutions with a two-thirds majority . It can also help elect members of other UN bodies, and vote on the UN budget .
 Ultimately, whatever power it has depends on its moral authority as a reflection of global opinion . Ultimately, the power of the U.S. government depends on the moral authority of its actions .
 Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America, Western Europe, and Oceania . Europe . Latin America . Europe. Asia . Europe, Asia and Latin America. Europe. Europe . Asia .
 Decisions of the Council have to be accepted by a majority of members, and must include the P5, each of which is able to veto a decision . Decisions are made by the Council, which has the power of vetoes .
 Cold war and decolonization process discouraged more active involvement by the U.N. within states . Great powers used vetoes to prevent more active participation in the UN system .
 Peacekeeping was designed to prevent superpowers intervening in conflicts that might then escalate into a direct confrontation between them . It also developed the practice of peacekeeping, which was in part designed to stop the superpowers from intervening .
 The Security Council has primary responsibility, under the United Nations Charter, for the maintenance of international peace and security . Role of the Security Council is to maintain international peace, security .
 The Security Council monitors the work of UN Peacekeeping operations on an ongoing basis . The Council holds dedicated Security Council sessions to discuss specific operations .
 The Council alone has the power to take decisions which Member States are obligated to implement . While other organs of the UN make recommendations to Member States, other organs make recommendations .
 By the mid-1990s the UN had become involved in maintaining international peace and security by resisting aggression between states, by attempting to resolve disputes within states (civil wars) and by focusing on conditions within states .
 Several Programmes and Funds were created in response to Global Conferences . Several programs and funds were created to respond to the global conferences .
 In committees, cafes, bars, lounges and galleries, diplomats often meet informally and so daily . Diplomats often meet and happen to chat informally with each other .
 In such relaxed atmosphere, occasionally new ideas and approaches emerge . Sometimes new ideas emerge, which sometimes lead to a fuller appreciation of opposite viewpoints .
 Let us remember that all big events or achievements have small beginnings . But, let us remember, that all of the world's biggest achievements have started very small .
 SSOD-I had some limited success in as much as it adopted a consensual resolution pointing to the grave danger arising from escalating arms race and urging immediate steps towards global disarmament . Some success was achieved in the three special disarmament sessions held in the United States .
 Closely related to the problem of decolonization is the issue of fundamental freedom or human rights . Human rights are important in decolonizing the continent .
 The UN has issued the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and several Covenants on Civil, political and economic rights . Surely, in this field, this field of rights has been established .
 There is the problem of having to raise a sufficiently strong and trained peace-keeping force to be used as and when an emergency arises .
 The Shastri-Sirimavo Agreement 1965, the Simla Agreement 1972 and the Farakka Accord 1977, were bilaterally negotiated . In all these cases, disputes has either lingered on or has been set along three major landmarks in conflict resolution or the pacific,
 Tajikistan had experienced difficulties during its transition period . The Organization had received every kind of support from the Organization, enabling the country to embark on the road to democratic development, it said .
 Tajikistan was contributing to fight against terrorism and extremism, organized crime, arms smuggling, and human trafficking, says Tajikstan . The country is contributing to the fight against organized crime and terrorism, he says .
 The country's police officers were participating in the joint peacekeeping operation of the U.N. and the African Union in Darfur .
 The Drug Control Agency had been established with United Nations support . The agency continued to play an important role in fighting illicit drug trafficking, officials said .
 Prevention of illicit drug trafficking should be an integral part of the fight against terrorism . The money earned from illicit drug trade was being channelled to finance the acts of terror .
 Afghanistan is one of the most important countries in the world . Afghanistan is a key ally of the Afghan government, says the PM . The Afghan government is expanding good neighbourly relations with Afghanistan .
 His country also believed that the Joint Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear programme would contribute to strengthening regional peace, he said .
 The Rwandan genocide of 1994 details the gross inability of the U.N. to carry out its sworn duty to maintain peace and security . Rwanda's genocide was the first genocide of its kind in 1994 .
 In 1993, UN peacekeeping forces entered the nation, attempted to secure the capital and enable humanitarian aid . UN peacekeepers entered the country to try and secure the country's capital . The country was invaded by the U.N. in 1993 .
 The peacekeeping forces were not authorized to use military manoeuvres to achieve these goals . Peacekeeping forces are not allowed to use these manoeuvres on their own . The peacekeepers are not permitted to use such manoeuvres .
 In January 1994, a cable was sent from the Canadian Force Commander to the UN headquarters detailing the imminent threat of genocide by Hutu mobs on Tutsi minorities . In January of 1994, the Canadian force commander sent a cable to the United Nations .
 The Security Council never received the cable, and the notice was largely ignored . The cable was sent to the Security Council, but it was ignored .
 Seeing that defeat was imminent, the government funded the Janjaweed, a group of Arabs . The government funded them to fight back against the government's defeat .
 By 2005, the Janjaweed were carrying out attacks on populated villages using artillery and helicopters, prompting condemnation by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan . By 2005 they had carried out attacks against populated villages .
 Despite this condemnation, the UN did not enter Sudan, instead urging members of the African Union to intervene . The UN has condemned the Sudanese government's actions in Sudan .
 The Cold War exemplifies the failure behind the United Nations Charter . The U.N. Charter was designed to prevent the Cold War from becoming a superpower .
 In 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was established, binding to all nations, along with the Convention Against Genocide Against Genocide . The Universal Declaration was established .
 Civic rights were virtually non-existent and Stalin continued to rule with an iron fist . The Soviet Union was a stateless state of Soviet Russia in the early years of the Cold War .
 The Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 . They practiced an extreme form of Communism, as dictated by their borderline-psychotic leader Pol Pot .
 In 1979, the Vietnamese army invaded Cambodia to oust the Khmer Rouge and end the massacre . A new government was put in place in Cambodia after the massacre in 1979 . The Vietnamese army then invaded Cambodia and ended the massacre and a new government .
 The United Nations refused to recognize this new government because it was backed by Vietnam, which had recently ended a decade-long conflict with the United States . Shockingly, the U.N. did not recognize this government .
 U.N. designated Srebrenica a safe-zone in 1993 . After ethnic cleansing campaign led by Serbs, the Serbs targeted the Bosniaks, a largely Muslim community .
 As many as 7,800 Bosniaks were killed by Serbian soldiers, mainly due to an ill-equipped and unprepared UN force . Serbian soldiers were killed mainly due largely to a lack of UN forces .
 Five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council enjoy the luxury of veto power . When a permanent member vetoes a vote, the resolution cannot be adopted .
 UNSC attempted to evoke chapter VII sanctions from the UN Charter to intervene and prevent genocide in Syria . Most recent example of a veto came when the UNSC tried to evoke Chapter VII sanctions . UNSC has been unable to invoke chapter VII of UN Charter .
 The vetoes by China and Russia halted any international intervention and rendered the UN hapless . The UN was forced to rely on the vetoes of Russia and China to stop it from intervening .
 In the final months of the war between LTTE and Sri Lankan army, the opposing sides fought in the heavily populated northeast coastline . The area was a designated safe zone for opposing sides .
 Independent experts urged the Human Rights Council of the UN to investigate claims of war crimes . The United Nations made no attempts to intervene on behalf of the civilian population . The UN did not intervene in the fight against the Syrian government .
 Despite this treaty, nuclear stockpiles remain high, and numerous nations continue to develop these devastating weapons . Nuclear stockpiles are still high despite the treaty .
 The United Nations condemned the action, but failed to take any further action . The U.N. did not take further action against the action .
 These terrorist acts continued throughout the remainder of the twentieth century, with no reaction from the UN . A simple condemnation was as far as the UN would go .
 Italy is proud to be a leading country in the training of security forces in Iraq . Italy had taken a primary role in the working group to counteract financing to Da'esh . Italy was proud of its role in training Iraqi security forces .
 Masood Khan questions if these developments are a precursor to another global crisis or even a war . Khan: 'Terrorism remains a potent threat to international peace and security'
 The Charter of the UN is based on the principles of sovereignty and non-intervention in the internal affairs of states . The Charter is based in principle of sovereignty . The UN has been accused of trying to intervene in its internal affairs .
 The UN is unable to respond effectively to armed conflict that blurs the line between civil and interstate war . The UN says it is 'unable' to respond to the situation in Syria and Syria .
 Proposals put forward to make the organization more representative of the changing balance of power in world politics .
 The P5 represent the victors of the Second World War rather than the most important states of the twenty-first century . For example, the P5 represents the winners of World War II .
 An effective instrument that could bring an aggressor country to justice was needed, he urged . The Russian Federation had used its veto twice during the Security Council's consideration of his country .
 The veto power should not become an act of grace and pardon for a crime, says Sen. John McCain . "The veto power is not a matter of grace," he says .
 Fie welcomed the French Government's initiative to restrain veto use . Fie supported an enlargement of the Council's membership and improvement of its working methods .
 The ideals and principles of the United Nations were being threatened around the world. Indeed, the ideals of the U.N. are being threatened . The U.S. should not be allowed to be seen as a threat to its principles, he said .
 It was crucial that the Organization be adapted to today's realities and that it step up its efforts to tackle the underlying causes — not just the symptoms — of the crisis .
 It must also improve its work in prevention and mediation in order to save lives, it says . The government must improve work in preventing and mediation, it adds .
 In the twentyfirst century, the world would need a strong and reformed Organization. In the 20th century, it would need to be strong, he says . The Organization of the World Organization would be a strong force in the world's future .
 Milos Zeman, President of the Czech Republic, stressed that words and declarations would never fully eradicate terrorism . Zeman: Words and declarations won't ever fully eradicate that scourge .
 He proposed coordinated action under the umbrella of the Council with the activation of the ""sleeping structures"" of the United Nations . Instead he proposed coordinated action under the umbrella of the Council . The United Nations has not responded to the allegations .
 The United Nations is a criminal enterprise in which no moral nation should ever participate, let alone perpetuate, said Tom DeWeese, one of the U.S. leading advocates of individual liberty . Conclusion: The U.N. should not be involved in any of the world's most
 The long labour of peace is an undertaking for every nation and in this effort none of us can remain unaligned . The long endeavour of peace must be undertaken by every nation, says President Obama .
 The International Court of Justice plays an immense role in the growth and implementation of International law . i. ii. The court of justice plays an important role in international law. i.i.C.J. plays a vital part in the development of international law in the world. i
 The World Court is a creation of a multi-lateral treaty . It is also known as the ""World Court"" and is also a creation .
 The International Court of Justice is one of the six organs of the United Nations . The court of justice is based in Geneva, Switzerland, Geneva, Geneva .
 The ICJ is composed of 15 judges elected to nine year terms by the UN General Assembly and the UN Security Council . ICJ members are elected by the United Nations and the United States .
 Article 93 of the UN Charter states that all the state parties to the UN charter are automatically parties to Court's statute . It is stated under Article 93, that . all the . state parties in the . UN Charter are automatically party to the court's statute, according to Article 93 .
 Advisory opinion is a function of the Court open only to specified United Nations bodies and agencies . An advisory opinion is an advisory opinion of the court .
 In principle, the Court's advisory opinions are only consultative in character, though they are influential and widely respected . The Court's advice is only consulted, but widely respected, in principle .
 Article 93 also provides the right to be the parties of the Court if they wish to and willing to be bound by the jurisdiction of the court . Non-member states can also be parties to the Court, article 93 provides for non-member member states .
 Switzerland used this method to become the party of the Court in 1948 . Switzerland used it to become a party to the Supreme Court .
 Article 34, paragraph 1 of the Statute of ICJ states that only state may be parties in cases before the Court. iv iv. iv. 1 of Article 34 states only state can be parties to a case before the ICJ. Article 34 says only state must be party to
 The Court has the jurisdiction over the states when the states accept the jurisdiction and willing to be bound by the jurisdiction . The court has jurisdiction when the state accepts the jurisdiction of the court .
 The first jurisdiction is the power to decide on the legal dispute which submitted by the states . It is the first jurisdiction to decide the outcome of the dispute .
 The Court has the power to settle the dispute when parties agree to submit to the Court . This kind of power is called contentious jurisdictione. vi. The power of the Court is known as contentious jurisdiction. vi .
 The Court gives advisory opinion to the UN organ such as Security Council or General Assembly when they need legal advice from the Court . For example, it advises the Security Council on legal advice .
 World Health Organization request for an advisory opinion on the legality of the use of nuclear weapons by a state during armed conflict . 4) The ICJ and the Security Council relationship are key to the ICJ's success .
 ICJ doesn't have the power to enforce the parties of dispute to comply with the judgment . ICJ can't enforce the order to comply the judgment. ICJ has no power to impose the order .
 This job is transfer to the Security Council if the parties fail to perform the obligation incumbent upon it under a judgment rendered by the Court . The job is transferred to the security Council if it fails to meet the obligations incumbent on it .
 The initial request for an advisory opinion by the ICJ was put forward by the World Health Organization on 3 September 1993 . The ICJ did not render an opinion on this request because the WHO was Ultra Vires . i.ii. i. v. The WHO requested that the IC
 Another request was presented by the United Nations General Assembly in December 1994 which was accepted by the Court in January 1995 . Later another request was given by the U.N. General Assembly which accepted by Court in 1995 .
 The General Assembly or the Security Council has the power to request advisory opinion from the ICJ under Article 96 of the UN Charter . The ICJ has a right to hear the opinion of the General Assembly .
 The opinion provides one of the few authoritative judicial decisions concerning the legality under international law of the use or the threatened use of nuclear weapons . V. V. The opinions provide one of only few authoritative decisions on the legality of nuclear arms .
 There is no substantive theory or concrete debate over the issue of use, possession and legality of nuclear weapons . Previously, there was no substantive theorizing about the issue .
 ICJ gave a detailed opinion regarding nuclear weapons . It was after the request made by the UNGA, the ICJ said .
 International lawyers from different states were called upon to put forward the arguments concerning nuclear weapons . Apart from the 15 sitting judges, 15 sat judges were asked to give evidence .
 The use of nuclear weapons posed a threat to life as under article 6 of International Covenant on Civil, Political Rights . vii. vii . Article 6 of the Covenant on civil, political Rights is under article of article 6 .
 The debate over this still continues and no conclusive decision has yet been given on its usage . Thus, the debate over the use of it continues .
 Reform of Jurisdiction; This character of non-compulsory jurisdiction over the state is because of the principle of sovereignty iv. iv. Reform . iv. Reformed of Jurisability iv. Proposal of the State of the Union .
 The problem of enforcement arises when the Security Council can't issue a resolution, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The problem is when the council cannot issue the resolution . He says the resolution is a matter of enforcement .
 In order to issue the resolution, 9 votes of Security Council member are needed . For substantive matter such a matter such as enforcement of ICJ judgment, all permanent member need to vote without veto of anyone . ii. All permanent member of the Security Council must vote on the issue without veto
 At the UN General Assembly session in 2000 the Member States adopted a Millennium Declaration, which sets out an ambitious plan of reform aiming to gear the Organisation . The Millennium Declaration was adopted by the UN in 2000 .
 The document envisages a reform and strengthening of the General Assembly, the Security Council, ECOSOC and the Secretariat, i.ii. It also envisages reform of the United Nations' General Assembly .
 An expanded format of the Security Council with more permanent members would logically result in calls for the 'reservation' of seats on the ICJ bench for the members concerned . i. ii. More permanent members of the council would logically lead to calls for a more permanent seat on the bench
 The justices of the International Court are elected for a term of 9 years and according to Article 13 of the Statute may be re-elected . Article 13 states that the justices may be elected to re-election .
 Every three years one-third of the justices are elected simultaneously by the General Assembly and the Security Council . The Supreme Court is one of the highest chambers in the world .
 Re-election campaigns place judges wishing to obtain a second or a third nine-year tenure in a vulnerable position and raise challenges for the Court's independence . There is a need for debate on reforming its working methods, including by means of establishing individual chambers .
 The second category of reform proposals does not require amending or supplementing the Charter or Statute . The other category includes procedural matters and working methods . The proposals do not need to be amended or supplement the Charter .
 V setting up an open-ended working group within the UN General Assembly to be tasked with discussing and drafting recommendations on Court reform . V. launching, at a later stage, of intergovernmental negotiations on ICJ reform at UN level on the basis of the model underlying the current intergovernmental
 Idea of regional cooperation was discussed in three meetings in 1947, 1950, 1954 and 1954 . Framework for regional cooperation in South Asia was made by the late president of Bangladesh in 1980 .
 The SAARC Secretariat was established in Kathmandu on 16 January 1987 . It was inaugurated by Late King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah of Nepal .
 He is assisted by the Professional and the General Services Staff . Divisions are assigned to Directors on deputation from Member States . There are also a number of functional units called Divisions .
 On 16 July 2001, Russia and the PRC, signed the Treaty of Good-Neighbourliness and Friendly Cooperation . On June 15, 2001, the Declaration of Shanghai Cooperation Organization was signed .
 A Framework Agreement to enhance economic cooperation was signed by the SCO member states on September 23, 2003 . The SCO is one of the most powerful economies in the world .
 The PRC's Premier proposed a long-term objective to establish a free trade area in the SCO . Other more immediate measures would be taken to improve the flow of goods in the region .
 Kazakhstan also suggested an SCO folk dance festival to take place in 2008, in Astana . Kazakhstan has also suggested a festival in 2008 in the city of Astana.
 Uzbekistan asked the United States to leave the K-2 air base . Shortly afterwards, Uzbekistan also asked the U.S. out of the base .
 The Association of Southeast Asian Nations is a geo-political and economic organization of ten countries located in Southeast Asia . It was formed on 8 August 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand . ASEAN DEFENCE INDUSTRY A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 Since then, membership has expanded to include Brunei, Burma, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam . The country has also expanded to Brunei and Burma .
 The sea area of ASEAN is about three times larger than its land counterpart . Sea area is three times bigger than the land area of the continent .
 If ASEAN were a single entity, it would rank as the ninth largest economy in the world, behind the United States, China, Japan, Germany, France, Brazil, Brazil and Italy . In 2010, its combined nominal GDP had grown to US$1. trillion .
 ASEAN was preceded by an organisation called the Association of Southeast Asia, commonly called ASA . ASA was an alliance consisting of the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand that was formed in 1961 . Asean was formed from the Philippines to Malaysia and the Philippines .
 Five foreign ministers Adam Malik of Indonesia, Narciso Ramos of the Philippines, Abdul Razak of Malaysia, S Rajaratnam of Singapore, and Thanat Khoman of Thailand are considered the organisation's Founding Fathers . Adam Malik is Indonesia's first foreign minister .
 Papua New Guinea was accorded Observer status in 1976 and Special Observers status in 1981 . Papua New Guamanian has been granted Special Observer status .
 ASEAN embarked on a program of economic cooperation following the Bali Summit of 1976 . AASEAN has been a part of the world's largest economic community .
 Thai proposal for a regional free trade area was revived in 1991 . This floundered in the mid-1980s and was only revived around 1991 due to a Thai proposal .
 The bloc grew when Brunei Darussalam became the sixth member on 8 January 1984, barely a week after gaining independence on 1 January . Brunei was the first member of the bloc when it was formed in 1984 .
 Cambodia was to have joined together with Laos and Burma, but was deferred due to the country's internal political struggle . The country was to join with Laos, Burma and Burma in a joint military alliance .
 The country later joined on 30 April 1999, following the stabilisation of its government . The country joined the European Union in 1999, after it was stabilised .
 Malaysia proposed the creation of an East Asia Economic Caucus in 1990 . It was intended to counterbalance the growing influence of the United States in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and in the Asian region as a whole .
 This proposal failed, however, because of heavy opposition from the United States and Japan . This proposal was rejected by the U.S. and Japan, which opposed it .
 ASEAN Plus Three was created in 1997 . Despite this failure, member states continued to work for further integration . AASEAN Plus 3 was created by the end of the decade .
 On 15 December 1995, the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty was signed . The treaty was signed with the intention of turning Southeast Asia into a nuclear-weapon-free zone . It was signed in 1995 .
 The treaty took effect on 28 March 1997 after all but one of the member states have ratified it . All but one member state have ratified the treaty .
 It became fully effective on 21 June 2001, after the Philippines ratified it, effectively banning all nuclear weapons in the region . The Philippines ratified the ban in 2001 .
 It is achieved while ASEAN seeks a more vigorous role in Asian and global affairs at a time when the international system is experiencing a seismic shift," he added .
 The Republic of China has been excluded since the establishment of the ARF . Issues regarding the Taiwan Strait are not discussed at ARF meetings nor stated in ARF Chairman's Statements . Issues are neither discussed at the meetings or stated in the Chairman's statements .
 The ASEAN Plus Three is a meeting between China, China, Japan, and South Korea . The meeting is primarily held during each ASEan Summit . Asean Plus Three meetings are primarily held at each summit .
 Meeting about FTA among them will be held at end of 2012 . Until now China, Japan and South Korea have not yet formed Free Trade Area . Meeting will take place in end of year .
 The Asia-Europe Meeting is an informal dialogue process initiated in 1996 with the intention of strengthening cooperation between the countries of Europe and Asia, especially members of the EU and ASEAN .
 Meeting also appoints a representative to sit on the governing board of Asia-Europe Foundation . Asia-European Foundation is a socio-cultural organization associated with Meeting .
 ASEAN has emphasised regional cooperation in the ""three pillars"", which are security, sociocultural integration, and economic integration . Asean-russian summit is an annual meeting between . leaders of member states and the President of Russia .
 The regional grouping has made the most progress in economic integration by creating an ASEAN Economic Community by 2015 . Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 This economic growth was greater than the average Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation economic growth, which was 2.83 percent . This growth is greater than that of the region's average growth of 2.84 percent .
 The latecomers have not fully met the AFTA's obligations, but they are officially considered part of the agreement as they were required to sign the agreement upon entry into ASEAN . They were given longer time frames in which to meet the tariff reduction obligations . They are given longer
 The content of the portal currently consists of subjects ranging from security to culinary . In the future it will also touch tourist sites and local culture .
 ASEAN Framework Agreement on Trade in Services was adopted in December 1995 . Agreement on trade in services was adopted at the ASEan Summit in Bangkok in 1995 .
 Under AFAS, ASEAN Member States enter into successive rounds of negotiations to liberalise trade in services . The aim of submitting increasingly higher levels of commitments is to submit increasingly higher level commitments .
 The negotiations result in commitments that are set forth in schedules of specific commitments annexed to the Framework Agreement . Negotiations result in specific commitments .
 These schedules are often referred to as packages of services commitments . These schedules often refer to packages of service commitments . They are often called packages of commitments .
 The ASEAN Single Aviation Market will introduce an open-sky arrangement to the region by 2015 . The market is proposed by the ASEan Air Transport Working Group .
 ASEAN currency pool consists of contribution $38. billion each by China and Japan, $19. billion by South Korea and totally $24 billion by all of AseAN members . The total currency pool was $120 billion in 2009 .
 A key component has also newly been added, with the establishment of a surveillance unit . A surveillance unit has also been established .
 It will perform a key regional surveillance function as part of the $120 billion of Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation currency swap facility that was established by Finance Minister and Central Bank Governors of ASEAN countries plus China, Japan and South Korea .
 European Union and U.S. has debt problems, while Japan should make tsunami recovery . European Union, United States have debt problems . Japan should recover from tsunami recovery, says Japan's president .
 China who helped Asia lead the global post-2008 recovery still grapples with 3-years high inflation . China's 3-year high inflation rate is still a problem .
 In the long term all of the problems will give negative impact to ASEAN indirectly . So, in the long-term, all of these problems will affect the region, he says .
 There are possibility to push some programs of ASEAN Economic Community before 2015 . There are possibilities of pushing some programs before 2015, say officials .
 With free visa among ASEAN countries, a huge intra-ASEAN travel occurred . Intra-asean travel is on the right track to establish an ASEan Community in the years to come .
 The organization hosts cultural activities in an attempt to further integrate the region . Cultural activities are hosted by the organization .
 These include sports and educational activities as well as writing awards . The winner of each award will be announced at the end of the year .
 Asean media cooperation was started by China with ASEAN in 1991 . China became a dialogue partner in 1996 and is now a key member of the ASEan community .
 AMC establishes partnerships between SEAN news media, and cooperate on information sharing, photo swapping, technical cooperation, exchange programs, facilitating joint coverage and exchange of news footage .
 AUN/SEED-Net is mainly supported by the Japanese Government through the Japan International Cooperation A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 The Write Award is a literary award given to Southeast Asian poets and writers annually since 1979 . It is the first literary award to be given in Southeast Asian poetry and poetry .
 The award is either given for a specific work or as a recognition of an author's lifetime achievement . It is either a recognition for a work or for a lifetime achievement.
 Works that are honoured vary and have included poetry, short stories, novels, plays, folklore as well as scholarly and religious works . Works that have been honoured vary .
 ASAIHL or the Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning is a nongovernmental organization founded in 1956 . The organization strives to strengthen higher learning institutions, especially in teaching, research, and public service, with the intention of cultivating a sense of regional identity and interd
 It covers accommodation, food, medical benefits & accident insurance, school fees, and examination fees . School fees, accommodation, and medical benefits and accident insurance are included .
 The Southeast Asian Games, commonly known as the SEA Games, is a biennial multi-sport event involving participants from the current 11 countries of Southeast Asia . The event is held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia .
 The games is under regulation of the Southeast Asian Games Federation with supervision by the International Olympic Committee and the Olympic Council of Asia . The games will be held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Indonesia .
 The ASEAN Para Games is a biennial multi-sport event held after every Southeast Asian Games for athletes with physical disabilities . The event is held in the region every year . It is the first biennial event to be held in Southeast Asia for the first time .
 The games are participated by the 11 countries located in Southeast Asia . The 11 countries participate in the Southeast Asia games .
 The Games are patterned after the Paralympic Games . Games are played by physically challenged athletes with mobility disabilities, visual disabilities .
 The FESPIC Games, also known as the Far East and South Pacific Games for the persons with disability, was the biggest multi-sports games in Asia and the South Pacific region . The games were held in a bid to attract people with disability .
 The 2010 Asian Para Games will debut shortly after the conclusion of the 16th Asian Games . The 2010 Games will use the same facilities and venue made disability-accessible .
 The inaugural Asian Para Games is the parallel event for athletes with physical disabilities . It is a multi-sport event held every four years after every Asian Games . The inaugural event will be held in 2015 .
 The ASEAN Football Championship is a biennial Football competition organised by the ASEan Football Federation, accredited by FIFA and contested by the national teams of Southeast Asia nations . Football championship A Project of CSS Writing Club .
 ASEAN Foreign ministers at Lombok meeting agreed bid to host the FIFA World Cup in 2030 as a single entity . As a result of a meeting, they agreed to bid for the tournament in 2030 .
 Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand have established defense industries . ASEAN defense industry is a key component of the region's defense industry . The region has established defense industry in the past .
 A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT .
 Charter of Fundamental Rights from 2000 made legally binding . Pillars merged to 1 legal person to be merged to one legal person . Union per se to be party to treaties .
 Lisbon treaty, 2009 ■ A secession clause ■ More double majority voting to new areas of policy in the European Council and the Council of Ministers, from 2014 on .
 National parliaments engaged ■ by expanding scrutiny-time of legislation and enabling them to jointly compel the Commission to review or withdraw legislation . The legislation will be reviewed or withdrawn by the Commission of the Commission .
 The EU is actively involved in the negotiation of the treaty changes . It defines the EU's policy agenda and strategies .
 Parliament uses this to decide whether to approve the Commission's handling of the budget . The Parliament will then decide whether or not to approve this budget .
 The Union has legislated in areas such as extradition, family law, asylum law, and criminal justice . This cooperation had to be developed with the advent of open borders through the Schengen Agreement and associated cross border crime .
 The European Commissions Humanitarian Aid Office, or ""ECHO", provides humanitarian aid from the EU to developing countries . The European Commission provides humanitarian assistance to developing nations . The ECHRO is based in the Netherlands, Belgium and Norway .
 European Economic Community's core objectives were; ■ the development of a common market, subsequently renamed the single market, and a customs union . Such regions are primarily located in the states of central and southern Europe .
 The single market involves the free circulation of goods, capital, people and services within the EU . The customs union involves the application of a common external tariff on all goods entering the market . Once goods have been admitted into the market they cannot be subjected to customs duties .
 The creation of a European single currency became an official objective of the European Economic Community in 1969 . Monitory union was the first step towards a single currency .
 The Common Agricultural Policy is one of the oldest policies of the European Community . Agriculture was one of its core aims of the EU's agricultural policy .
 The policy has the objectives of increasing agricultural production, providing certainty in food supplies, ensuring a high quality of life for farmers, stabilising markets, and ensuring reasonable prices .
 Agriculture expenditure will move away from subsidy payments linked to specific produce . Instead of direct payments based on farm size, agriculture expenditure will be based on size of farms .
 The Erasmus Programme is a university exchange programme which began in 1987 . It is one of the world's largest and most successful exchange programmes in the world .
 In its first 20 years it has supported international exchange opportunities for well over 1. million university and college students . The Bologna process the EU is supporting comparable standards and compatible degrees across Europe .
 31. million were born outside the EU and 16. million born in another EU member state . Of these, 31.million were born in the EU, 16.million born in other EU member states .
 The European Parliament provides translation into all languages for documents and its plenary sessions . The European parliament provides translation in all languages . The EU Parliament is a member of the European Parliament .
 EU is a secular body with no formal connection to any religion . EU is secular body but has no formal link to religion . The EU is not a religious body .