 Americans fear that Castro will establish a Soviet-friendly regime just 90 miles off the Florida coast . Most Cubans initially celebrate Castro's victory over the unpopular, corrupt Batista .
 Fidel Castro hires PR firm to coordinate charm offensive to reassure Americans that new Cuban government poses no threat to the U.S. New Cuban leader Fidel Castro tours the United States .
 President Dwight Eisenhower refuses to meet with Castro . Castro receives some positive coverage in the U.S. press .
 Fidel Castro negotiates a trade agreement with the Soviet Union, allowing Cuba to import Soviet oil . Cuba and the United States Sever Ties in 1960 .
 Cuba's refineries, all owned by American corporations, refuse to process Soviet crude . Castro retaliates by nationalizing the refineries . Castro: "It's a war of revenge"
 Castro's seizure of this American property leads to the severing of diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba . Castro seized the property in Cuba . The seizure of the property led to the United States severing diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Eisenhower administration cuts Cuba's sugar quota, depriving Cuba of the opportunity to sell 7 million tons of sugar in the American market .
 Castro threatens to nationalize all American-owned property in Cuba in retaliation . Castro threatens nationalization of U.S.-owned properties in Cuba . Castro also threatens to take over Cuba's oil fields .
OPEC was founded by Iraq, Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Saudi Arabia . OPEC was formed in 1960 to coordinate petroleum production and pricing . OPEC is the world's largest group of countries .
 Fidel Castro follows through on his threat to nationalize all American-owned property in Cuba . Castro followed through on threat of nationalization of all U.S.-owned properties .
 Lands and businesses worth more than $850 million become the property of the Cuban government . Lands, businesses worth $850m are now the government's property .
 The Eisenhower administration has allowed a ""missile gap"" to develop between the United States and the Soviet Union . John F Kennedy, a Democratic Senator from Massachusetts, argues that the Eisenhower administration allowed the ""Missile Gap""
 He claims that the Soviets are outpacing the United States in missile production . If elected, he says he will reverse this gap if elected .
 Democratic Senator John F Kennedy of Massachusetts is elected president of the United States in 1960 . Republican Vice President Richard Nixon narrowly defeats Democratic Senator Richard F Kennedy .
 President John F Kennedy was inaugurated on January 20, 1961 . JFK's inaugural address shows his idealism and idealism .
 Even while demonstrating his commitment to the Cold War by promising that he will not shrink from defending freedom, he also promises to be open to cooperation .
 The Alliance for Progress is a massive program of economic aid for the Western Hemisphere . The program was similar to the earlier Marshall Plan for Western Europe .
 Kennedy hopes the Alliance will generate economic growth and social progress in the developing nations of Latin America . Kennedy hopes it will inspire allegiance to the United States while making communism less attractive .
 President Kennedy establishes the Peace Corps to send idealistic young Americans to aid developing countries around the world .
 Kennedy hopes the organization will create positive feelings towards the U.S. in Africa and Asia . Kennedy hopes to undermine the appeal of anti-American revolutionary movements in Africa .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara proposes the strategy of ""no cities/counterforce" which would target Soviet military bases instead of cities in order to lower the number of potential casualties .
 USSR's Yuri Gagarin becomes the first man in space in 1961 . He successfully completed one orbit around earth in his Vostok 1 spacecraft .
 CIA-organized force of anti-Castro Cuban exiles attempts to invade Cuba, landing at a place called the Bay of Pigs . CIA-organized force lands at the site .
 Rather than toppling Castro's government, the invasion is quickly crushed by Cuba's armed forces . Instead of toppling the government, it is quickly crushing by the armed forces.
 East Germany closes border between East and West Berlin to cut off East Germans' flight to the more prosperous West . East Germans is isolated in 1961 .
 East Germany builds the Berlin wall, dividing East and West Berlin . East Germany built the wall in 1961 .
 The wall separates families, cuts off workers from jobs, and devastates Berliners on both sides . The wall was the most powerful symbol of the oppression of Eastern Europe under Soviet domination .
 Checkpoint Charlie was one of the few border crossings remaining between East and West Berlin following East Germany's closure of the border . American and Soviet tanks face off for two days at two days .
 American general Lucius Clay sends in diplomats to test the East German response . East German police violate an agreement allowing free transport of diplomats across Berlin's sectors .
 Russian bomber drops the Tsar bomb, the largest nuclear weapon ever detonated, in a test over the Arctic Ocean .
 The 57-megaton Tsar bomb is thousands of times more powerful than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945 . The 57 megatoms Tsar bombs were dropped by the Soviet Union at the hands of the Tsar Tsar .
 President Kennedy initiates the CIA's Operation Mongoose, authorizing covert attempts to overthrow Fidel Castro's communist regime in Cuba . Nov 30, 1961, President Kennedy initiated the operation .
 Operation Mongoose is a failure and pushes Castro closer to the Soviet Union . Castro's move pushes him closer to Soviet Union than he would otherwise have been .
 President John F Kennedy rejects advice from military advisors to launch an immediate attack on Cuba . President Kennedy rejected the advice from his advisors to attack Cuba .
 President Kennedy goes on national television to announce the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba and the imposition of an American ""quarantine"" or naval blockade around Cuba .
 Kennedy begins negotiations with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, largely leaving Cuban leader Fidel Castro out of the loop . Kennedy begins talks with Soviet premier Khrushchevitch, leaving Cuba's Castro out the loop.
 The deal is kept secret from the public, which believes that Kennedy has won his victory through pure resolve rather than through negotiation . The deal has been kept secret .
 The United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain sign the Limited Test Ban Treaty . The treaty bans atmospheric nuclear tests in hopes of slowing the arms race and protecting against fallout .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson assumes the presidency after the assassination of President John F Kennedy . Johnson assumed the presidency in 1963 .
 Valentina Vladimirovna Tereshkova makes the first flight by a woman in space . Valentina was a Soviet cosmonaut in 1963 . She was the first woman to travel to space .
 The American and Soviet governments set up a telephone hotline to ensure that the two country's leaders will always be able to establish direct communications during future Cold War crises .
 Ngo Dinh Diem, a corrupt and unpopular ruler, is killed in a military coup carried out with U.S. approval . The coup took place in 1963 .
 Instead of improving the situation, Diem's murder plunges South Vietnam even deeper into crisis . The murder of Diem has plunged the country into a deeper crisis .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara develops the idea of Mutual Assured Destruction . McNamara: In a world in which both the U.S. and USSR possess enough nuclear weapons to wipe each other off the map, both sides' fears of nuclear retaliation will prevent either from ever using the weapons
 Critics decry McNamara's nuclear ""balance of terror"" policy as mad . McNamara believes his policy will help maintain a stable nuclear world .
 North Vietnamese attack American ships that have strayed near Vietnamese waters . Incident occurred in the Tonkin Gulf, off the coast of Vietnam, in 1964 .
 The ""Gulf of Tonkin Incident"" gives the Johnson administration a pretext to justify sending American troops to intervene in Vietnam . The incident was a pretext for the U.S. intervention into Vietnam .
 Communist China detonates its first successful atomic bomb in 1964 . Communist China detonated the first successful nuclear bomb in China .
 Lyndon B Johnson crushes Republican Barry Goldwater to win a second term as president . The 1964 election was a landslide victory for Democrats .
 Mao Zedong initiates the Cultural Revolution, which aims to rid Chinese society of bourgeois elements . The Cultural Revolution aims to renew support for revolutionary communism . The revolution began in 1966 .
 Some Chinese students launch the Red Guards, an anarchic and sometimes violent student movement against party leaders and intellectuals who do not fully support Mao and his policies . In support, some Chinese students start the Red Guard, a student movement .
 China comes close to civil war with massive purges of intellectuals and political opponents . China's political opponents have been purged in recent years .
 Estimates of the number of people killed in the Cultural Revolution range from 500,000 to 3 million . The Cultural Revolution took place in China in 1960s and 1970s .
 Cultural Revolution lasts a decade and brings higher education in China to a halt . The Cultural Revolution lasted 10 years and ended with a halt to higher education .
 Israel battles Egypt in the Six Day War . Israel was defeated by Egypt in 1967 .
 Israeli forces seize Sinai and the Gaza Strip from Egypt, the West Bank and East Jerursalem from Jordan, and the Golan Heights from Syria . Israeli forces also seize Sinai, Gaza Strip and West Bank from Egypt .
 The United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1968 . The U.S. and the Soviet Union signed the treaty .
 The treaty gives the United Nations' International Atomic Energy Agency the job of inspecting nuclear facilities . The treaty also gives the IAEA the power to inspect nuclear facilities.
 Nixon Doctrine states that the United States will continue to lend support to its allies with money and weaponry, but will largely leave them responsible for manning their own defenses .
 Josip Tito of Yugoslavia and Nicolae Ceausescu of Romania visit Dubcek to show their support . Students in Poland and Yugoslavia protest in sympathy with Czechoslovakia . Students protest in support of the government .
 Czech people soon demand even greater reforms, beyond those proposed by Dubcek's government . The Czech people will soon demand more reforms, the Czech Republic's president says . Dubceka's government has been criticized for its proposed reforms .
 Dubcek, who counsels moderation, finds himself divided from other influential leaders . Dubceks: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next, but I'm sure it's a good idea"
 Soviet forces invade Czechoslovakia, crushing the Prague Spring . Soviet forces crush Prague Spring in 1968 . Prague Spring was a major uprising in Czechoslovak history .
 Czech leaders are flown to Moscow, where they are forced to renounce their earlier reforms, leading to the reintroduction of censorship . The Czech Republic is forced to reinstate censorship in order to keep its censorship policies .
 The Brezhnev Doctrine justifies repressing the Prague Spring reformers in Czechoslovakia . The Soviet Union can intervene in any Soviet-bloc nation if communist rule there is threatened . The doctrine states that no socialist state can adopt policies endangering international socialism .
 Meeting in Helsinki, Finland, initiates first phase of a Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty . Treaty freezing both sides' number of ballistic missile launchers at current levels .
 In Chile, leftist Salvador Allende heads a political coalition supported by both the Chilean socialist and communist parties . Sep 4, 1970, Allende becomes President of Chile .
 Allende is freely elected president, putting Marxists in power by democratic means . Despite CIA attempts to weaken his support, Allende was democratically elected president .
 Allende nationalizes the country's vital copper industry, gives free milk to schoolchildren, and begins to put the economy under state control . The Chilean leader nationalizes copper industry and puts economy under control .
 The Cienfuegos Crisis begins when an American U-2 spy plane spots a submarine base in Cuba . The crisis began when the U.S. spy plane spotted the base .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger chooses to handle the issue with quiet diplomacy . Kissinger chose to deal with the issue in quiet diplomacy rather than public speaking . Kissinger: "It is a matter of national security"
 The Soviet Union and West Germany agree to build an oil pipeline between the two nations . The Soviet-German pipeline was built in 1970s .
 West German leader Willy Brandt's strategy of showing openness to working with the Soviets in order to build better relations with Soviet-controlled East Germany . These negotiations were part of a West German strategy to show openness to the Soviets .
 USSR and West Germany agree to normalize relations between the two nations . The Moscow Treaty was signed in 1970 . The treaty was signed by West Germany and USSR .
 Polish army violently puts down strikes of protesting workers in Gdansk, Poland . Dec 20, 1970Polish army violently put down strikes in Poland's capital .
 U.S. and USSR sign the Antiballistic Missile Treaty . Treaty limits anti-ballistic missile systems . Treaty could potentially defend against missiles carrying nuclear weapons . May 26, 1972 .
 East German leader Walter Ulbricht is forced out of power and replaced by Erich Honecker . Erich is more open to détente with the West .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger secretly visited Beijing to open up diplomatic relations with communist China . Kissinger secretly toured Asia, secretly visiting Beijing .
 The Four Power Agreement on Berlin resolves critical issues created during the occupation of Germany in 1945 . The agreement was reached in 1971 .
 The Western powers agree to recognize East Berlin as the capital of East Germany . The Soviets agree to improve access between East and West Berlin . The West and the Soviets agreed to improve the access to East Berlin .
 Nixon travels to China and meets Chinese leader Mao Zedong . Nixon traveled to China in 1972 to open the doors to China .
 Treaty gives East Germany de facto recognition of its statehood and borders but not de jure recognition . Treaty was signed in 1972 . Treaty signed by West and East Germany .
 West German leader Willy Brandt is willing to recognize that East Germany operates as a sovereign state in practice . But he is not willing to legally define East Germany as a separate from the German nation .
 Brandt adopts this stance because he hopes for the eventual reunification of Germany . Brandt says he hopes that reunification will be achieved in Germany .
 East and West Germany exchange permanent representatives rather than ambassadors . De facto recognition plays out in East-West Germany's exchange of permanent representatives .
 Richard Nixon travels to the USSR for a summit with Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev in the Kremlin . Nixon traveled to the Soviet Union in 1972 for the first time since 1968 . Nixon's visit to the Kremlin marked the beginning of the Détente era .
 Neither side seeks an advantage at the expense of the other . They agree to seek a policy of détente, neither seeking to gain an advantage .
 The signing of the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty by the U.S. and USSR in Moscow heralds the beginning of détente .
 Treaty freezes the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles held by each country for five years . Treaty freezes number of missiles held each country’s number of ICB missiles held . Treaty also freezes number number of nuclear missiles held in each country .
 The treaty also shows an acceptance of equal strategic arsenals . Both the U.S. and USSR realize that they each will continue to have a large number of weapons .
 Richard Nixon is re-elected president of the United States in 1972 . Nixon crushed George McGovern in the presidential election of 1972 .
 Paris Peace Treaty establishes a ceasefire in Vietnam . The Paris peace treaty established a ceasefire between Vietnam and Vietnam .
 In Chile, the military bombs the presidential palace, overthrowing the elected left-wing government of Salvador Allende, who is either murdered or commits suicide . The coup overthrowing Allende overthrows the elected government .
 Egyptian and Syrian troops, using Soviet tanks, cross the Suez Canal to launch a surprise attack against Israel on the Jewish Yom Kippur holiday . The war began on October 6, 1973 in Egypt, Syria and Syria .
 Israel requests arms from the United States, and the Americans attempt to send them . European countries refuse to let the Americans use air bases on their soil for this purpose .
 Egyptian President Anwar Sadat temporarily regains the territory his country lost in the Six-Day War of 1967 . Sadat will not then accept a ceasefire, continuing the war .
 Israeli forces recover from initial setbacks, counterattacking to retake land captured by Egypt . Israeli forces counterattacked to retake the land captured .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger puts America's nuclear weapons on DEFCON III, unprecedented level of high-alert . Kissinger puts the nation's nuclear arsenal on the highest-alert level in history . Kissinger: America is on the brink of a nuclear war .
 U.N. Security Council Resolution 338 calls for a ceasefire to end the Yom Kippur War . U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev called for a cease-fire .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries imposes an oil embargo on the United States and other Western powers . The embargo was in retaliation for their support of Israel during the Yom Kippur War .
 Egypt and Israel begin peace talks to end the Yom Kippur War . Egyptian and Israeli talks begin in 1973 to end Israel-Egypt conflict .
 Leaders from both countries meet at Kilometer 101, a point of passage between Cairo and the Suez Canal . Kilometer is a point-point-passing point of the two nations located between Egypt and the canal .
 An agreement ending the Yom Kippur War is reached between Egypt and Israel . The U.S. resumes diplomatic relations with Egypt .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries continues its oil embargo against the United States . American oil prices skyrocket by 400% in 1974 .
 President Gerald Ford and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev meet in Vladivostok to sign accords limiting offensive nuclear weapons . President Ford signed the accords in 1974 .
 This lays the groundwork for another Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty . The treaty will further restrict the arms held by both nations .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ends oil embargo against U.S. Mar 17, 1974 . Oil embargo against the United States ends .
 1975 marks the high point of détente between the U.S. and Soviet Union . Dec 19, 1975 was the Cold War's high point .
 The Vietnam War is over, China is America's friend, and relations between East and West Germany are improving . U.S. and USSR have made a number of agreements to slow the nuclear arms race .
 The Cold War seems to have stabilized, with reduced tensions on both sides . Cold War has stabilized, but tensions remain high in both countries .