 In the year 1962, Soviet and American tensions are at an all-time high . The Soviet Union assembles nuclear warheads on Cuban soil, just miles off the coast of Florida .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union and John F Kennedy, the President of the United States engaged in dozens of heated debates and conversations involving Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro, the Prime Minister of Cuba .
 When Kennedy decides to implement a blockade on Cuba, he is well aware that he will be confronting Soviet supply ships in the process . When Kennedy decided to implement the blockade, he was well aware of the situation .
 Soviet officials began to build naval units specialized in the art of nuclear war . All were engaged in surrounding the island of Cuba with supplies and attempting to break through the American blockade .
 The Soviet Union explains to Cuba the nature of the blockade, revealing the unwillingness of either commander to strike first . The blockade was revealed to Cuba by the Soviets .
 Mikoyan states, “The United States was screaming about the blockade, but there was no real blockade.” The U.S. was “screaming about the U.K. blockade,” but there were no real ones, he says .
 The influence of Cuba was highlighted primarily in Soviet military donations and construction of nuclear warheads on Cuban land . Then it was revealed that the Soviet Union built offensive and defensive structures built by the Soviets .
 In the resolution terms and removal of Soviet nuclear arms from Cuba, the influence Cuba played in defusing and resolving widespread national tensions was illustrated . Cuba's influence in the removal of nuclear arms was illustrated in the resolution .
 President Kennedy told the public that there was a series of offensive missile sites on the island of Cuba, which had been placed there by the Soviet Union . Kennedy's address was one of the most daunting presidential addresses during the Cold War .
 Kennedy went on to inform his audience that the Soviet Union had been ordered to remove all the missiles from Cuba and a quarantine had been placed on the island . The Soviet Union was told to remove the missiles and quarantine was placed on Cuba .
 Recently declassified information shows plans of an invasion, the assassination of Fidel Castro and the installation of a favorable government in Havana since November of 1961 .
 This validates Nikita Khrushchev’s, Soviet Premier, claim that the missiles were purely for Cuba's defense . The missiles were launched in Cuba in the 1960s .
 It is the event when the two superpowers are coming closest to a nuclear conflict . The event is when they come closest to the brink of a nuclear nuclear war .
 It is the event which is causing the two superpowers to come closer for a nuclear conflict . The event is believed to be leading to the possibility of a nuclear war .
 The United States wanted to contain communism while the Soviet Union wanted to spread it, causing conflict . The U.S. wanted to stop the spread of communism, but the Soviets wanted to keep it alive .
 The Cuban missile crisis began when Fidel Castro began a revolution to overthrow the Cuban government . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Castro regime .
 This conflict gave rise to a renewed stance on international negotiations and diplomacy with these nations and their political leaders under the global spotlight for the entire process . The conflict in Iraq and Syria has led to renewed international diplomacy .
 President Kennedy advised Americans about the nearness of the rockets, he disclosed his choice to order a maritime barricade around Cuba . He made it clear the United States was set up to utilize military constrain just if it 's vital .
 Numerous individuals dreaded the world was on the precarious edge of atomic war . Besides, numerous individuals feared the world would be on the edge of nuclear war. Besides, many people feared atomic war.
 The Cold War was a war of ideologies, fueled by U.S. fear of Communist expansion into the Western hemisphere . U.N. feared Communist expansion of the Western Hemisphere .
 The USSR’s alliance with Cuba was seen as a communist ‘invasion’ and met with panic . The USSR and Cuba were seen as an 'invasion' by the USSR .
 The U.S. and USSR began building arsenals of nuclear weapons at the end of WWII . The Soviets believed they were trailing the United States in the nuclear arms race . The United States and the Soviet Union began building their arsenals .
 This crisis involved 2 superpowers, the United States, The Soviet Union and the Island of Cuba . The U.S. and Cuba were at the center of the crisis .
 A revolution that began in 1953 was led by Fidel Castro to overthrow the U.S. backed dictator Batista . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution that overthrew Batista in 1953 .
 Support equipment left the Soviet Union for Cuba . President Fidel Castro allowed the weapons to be deployed to Cuba .
 The U-2 overflights were part of a broad continuing effort to monitor and contain Cuba . They were the U.S. efforts to intercept Cuba's communist regime .