 Our Man in Mexico tells the remarkable story of CIA station chief and what he really thought of JFK .
 Mary Ferrell.org, has the largest online collection of JFK assassination records and the most concise guides to the JFK debate . Click on the cover image to buy it now .
 Make your voice heard by participating in calls to action on our Action page . Join us on the Action page to make sure you know what you think about .
 Suggest content for our Research page, or email us with news items and links to useful resources and information .
 LeMay's comment reflected a widespread belief in the United States military and intelligence circles that JFK’s foreign policy posed a threat to U.S. national security . LeMay said JFK's foreign policy was a threat .
 The comment was recorded on the White House recording system on Oct. 22, 1962 . It was recorded in 1962 .
 They planned to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack against the United States as soon as an American attack on Cuba began . The U.S. planned to attack Cuba in response to an American strike .
 Thanks for posting the transcript. Read it here . Read it again .
 I beg to differ with Mr Robert Morrow regarding the direction for where the coup originated . Therefore, Mr Morrow should not have been involved in the coup, he says .
 Kennedy pursued a two-tract policy regarding both Vietnam and Cuba . He presided over policy that conveyed, to military leaders and the CIA, Vietnam and Cuban were not worth sending in U.S. military combat units .
 Hard liners wanted to ‘nuke’ both the Soviet Union and Cuba, as a solution to the current Cold War conflicts . It is duly noted there were pervasive, truculent mindsets among hard liners who wanted to 'nuke' both the . Soviet Union
 History has proven JFK correct in their assessments of contrived CIA conflicts, and operational abuses .
 Robert Mahew worked for the CIA in the 1980s and '90s for the mafia . He worked with Myer Lansky, Santos Trafficante, Carlos Marcello and Sam “Momo” Giancana .
 The enduring core of the active Castro assassination mob group was Johnny Roselli and Santos Trafficante . There were other Mafiosi involved, but the United States mob already was operating under a Commission .
 Trafficante is suspected of having his people inside Operation Mongoose and in Cuba, as mob heroin may still have been coming through Cuba’s outlying areas .
 Mexico City’s ELINT Programs, and ZR/RIFLE, the Executive Action program, are Mexico City's ELINT programs . The ELINT program is based in Mexico City .
 Even after being exiled to Italy, Harvey maintained his “friendship” with mobster Johnny Roselli, who Harvey kept as a liaison to ZR/Rifle and Operation Mongoose . Roselli was Harvey's liaison to Operation Mongoose .
 The same people who planned and participated in the Bay of Pigs, then moved on to Vietnam, had just such information . After all, the same people planned to invade Vietnam, then went to Vietnam . After the war, the people who did so had a lot of information .
 They witnessed Kennedy’s alleged vacillation regarding military action in Cuba, and decided this would not happen in Vietnam . They decided not to take action in Vietnam, and instead chose to focus on Cuba .
 Currently, illicit drug sales in North America are estimated, yearly, at $90 billion dollars .
 LeMay was a fascist and almost certainly a psychopath/sociopath and the two are not unrelated . LeMay may have been a fascist .
 General McClelland began with a typical military base system and then let brains and technology run their course . He then started with a standard base system, then let it run its course .
 The first radio station in the U.S. was founded in 1937 . She was a member of the US Air Force Command .
 The mistake was described as the worst security breech in his four years at the White House . Salinger said, “When he called Gen. Salinger, the mistake was the worst. ever’s”
 John Elroy McCaw, worked on OSS Special Projects known as operations Aphrodite, Simmons, and Javaman . McCaw worked for the OSS in the 1960s .
 In 1942, Thompson edited a magazine for air force intelligence . Major Maitland A Edey was a major in the British Army .
 What people need to realize, consider the USS Liberty, the role of Permindex and the figures that make up board .
 The principal cities of the Soviet Union would be destroyed . Similarly, the principal cities in the USSR would also be destroyed. The Soviet Union was destroyed .
 The lady asked if there were any place where she could take her children and grandchildren to safety . General would, of course, at the first alert be inside the top-secret underground hideout .
 CIA/military/shadow government rage over Cuba policy was a far, far bigger reason for the JFK assassination than Vietnam policy . JFK research has concluded that the CIA and military rage over Vietnam policy was far bigger than Vietnam .
 Some of the Cold Warrior quotes, which in retrospect from what we know now, seem pretty stupid, even dangerously stupid . Here are some more of the quotes, and some of them are pretty stupid .
 “We locked Castro’s communism into Latin America and threw away the key to its removal,” Goldwater said . “The key to the removal of communism is not to be removed from Latin America,’ he said .
 Most members of Kennedy’s team had no military or diplomatic experience whatsoever . Most of the Kennedy team members were not military, diplomatic experience .
 Hunt, along with LBJ and Hoover, has long been a prime suspect in the JFK assassination . Hunt and LBJ have long been prime suspects in the assassination of JFK .
 Byrd was a founder of the Civil Air Patrol which had such members as David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald and a young Barry Seal . Byrd was also a member of the Air Patrol, which had members of the CIA drug smuggler and pilot Barry Seal who later became a legendary CIA drug
 Byrd was both an oil man and a military contractor . Byrd's company received a large military contract in early, 1964 . Byrd was an oilman and a defense contractor .
 Billie Sol Estes admits planning murders with LBJ, Cliff Carter and Malcolm Wallace . Estes is still alive today today in 2012, still alive in 2012 .
 LBJ said in early 1961 “Get rid of him” referring to Marshall and the need to murder him . LBJ: “I want to kill him. He’s a man,” he said in 1961 .
 Hunt later gave $1 million to Curtis LeMay and supported him when he ran for VP under the American Independent ticket with George Wallace . Hunt later supported LeMay when he was running for VP with Wallace in 1968 .
 Byrd later wrote an autobiography “I’m An Endangered Species” in which he does not mention the JFK assasination . Byrd did not mention JFK in his autobiography .
 Byrd later had the so-called “sniper’s window’ of the 6th floor of the TSBD removed as a memento . Byrd later removed the window from the building .
 Col. Edward Lansdale, an Air Force general with a deep CIA background was photographed 5 feet west of the TSBD on 11/22/63 . Col. Lansdale was identified by both his peers Col. Col. Ed Lansdale and his fellow Air Force officers . Lansdale
 Charles Cabell was an Air Force General who was appointed deputy director of the CIA in 1963 . Cabell served as the CIA's Deputy Director of Operations .
 Charles Cabell’s brother was Earl Cabell, the Mayor of Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination . Charles was the mayor of Dallas when JFK was assassinated . Charles and Earl were brothers of Dallas Mayor Earl and Mayor Charles .
 Texas oil men and military contractors hated both JFK and Robert Kennedy with a white hot passion . Pretty much all those Air Force men mentioned and those Texas oilmen hated JFK .
 It includes recorded snippets of discussion that took place in the White House during those tense days . The White House was in the midst of a tense week of tension .
 Kennedy replies, "Well, you’re right there with me…” Kennedy replies .
 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam . Email: Email: This site's address does not include the content of this article . Use the following image to help people with disabilities .