 The successful and determinedly civilian orchestration of the great panoply of persuasion that was brought to bear on the Soviets in the Caribbean seemed to herald an era where vastly expanded power, blessedly, had become a useful, useful, and rational instrument of American policy .
 The triumphant position of the U.S. in the aftermath of the Cuban Crisis reinforced the longstanding American hope that a stable international order could be sustained if it were underwritten by America's readiness to employ effective force .
 In the early 1960s, a new nexus between force and order seemed, to the crisis managers, clearly to exist . But in the early 60s, the new nexus seemed to be clearly to existence . In the 1960s it seemed to exist, but then again, it was not
 The union promised no less than the achievement of a stable, liberal international regime . It was predicated on ample reserves of American power directed by a confident, sophisticated national security elite .
 There was no need for deterrence to come to any kind of unlimited test since limited coercion could form an unmistakable and undeniable politico-military grammar . Only limited coercion can form an undeniable political and military grammar .
 If force could be made a discrete instrument of bargaining, the inner dynamic of Soviet expansionism could be tamed and defeated without incommensurate dangers . If force was made a bargaining instrument, it could be used to tame and defeat the USSR .
 The Cuban missile crisis seemed to offer the promise of the sterile and fruitless Kabuki of diplomacy, replete with archaic conference halls and interminable discussion, could be replaced by the management centre, the telex, and rapid-fire .
 From the mid-seventeenth century to the onset of the twentieth century, war and peace were ambiguous concepts, defined as much by legal artifacts as by the empirical reality of the battlefield . The Clausewitzian Heritage .
 Wars began with declarations and ultimatums, and they ended with treaties and conferences . Wars started with declarations, ultimatum and treaties, but ended with conferences and treaties .
 Short of war, there was an abundance of military manoeuvres and demonstrations of intent that were undertaken without much public concern . The British government was not in touch with the public during the Cold War .
 European publics were largely unaware, illinformed, and disengaged from war . European public was largely unaware and ill-informed of the conflict .
 The worst parts of most wars were fought at sea or in outposts distant from the capital . The worst part of the wars was fought in sea or at sea .
 Battles might be intense, but all those lost belonged to the largely professional armies and navies . All those who lost were professional armies or navies, not professional armies .
 From the Treaty of Westphalia to the onset of the Napoleonic War, capitals and courts were rarely at risk . From the beginning of the War to the start of the 18th century, the courts were never at risk of a major loss .
 "The consequence of defeat, in contradistinction to earlier practices, was neither slavery, slaughter, nor forcible conversion," he said .
 Gains or losses were summed up in the form of military alliances, dynastic marriages, or overseas colonies . Gaining or losses are summed up and parsed out in the way of the wars .
 By the middle of the eighteenth century, there had emerged a kind of 'international society' of resonant interests . By the end of the 18th century, it had emerged that this kind of society had emerged .
 In this 'classic' international 'system, the familiar palliatives of diplomatic adjustment were well tolerated . The 'classic system' was well tolerated by the British government in the 1980s .
 In the end, diplomats settled up at the bargaining table what soldiers had determined on the battlefield . Diplomats settled up what they had determined in the battle .
 To Clausewitz, the warrior and diplomat had a kind of regulatory synergy . Voltaire sniffed that it was not worth worrying about a few 'miserable acres of snow' when he ceded Canada after the Seven Years War .
 One will only fight until some modest quid pro quo had been acquired, and a moderate effort should suffice for that . A moderate effort will suffice, and that's what's needed to be achieved, he says .
 The enemy's reasoning will be much the same . " e must be willing to wage such minimal wars which consist in merely threatening the enemy with negotiations held in reserve"
 Clausewitz's great fear was that war would become 'pointless and devoid of sense' - a 'thing unto itself' Clausewitz feared war would be a 'things unto itself', and war was a 'something unto itself .
 Once war compelled animosities to become too intense, it lost its integration with the broader world of statecraft . The U.S. has lost its place in the world of diplomacy and diplomacy in the past .
 If war were left to the generals or left to its own inner expansive logic, then war's political nature would be suffused . War's politics would also be suffored by the power of the generals, says David Cameron .
 By the end of the nineteenth century, war could consume not just professional armies, but great sections of whole societies as well . War could consume whole societies, as well as professional armies . War was the beginning of the modern age of war .
 "Once war began to approach its terrible and absolute form, the only remaining rationale for its employment was to defeat the cause of war itself," says President Obama .
 Peace would be durable only if dictated unconditionally after crushing the enemy, says President Obama . Peace would only be if it was decided after crushing an enemy, Obama says .
 The demand for total victory was not so much the expression of political philosophy as a reflex reaction to total war . It was not a political philosophy, it was an expression of total victory . The demand was not political philosophy but a reaction to war .
 Eisenhower Administration had given atomic weapons a central place in the U.S. by the mid-1950s .
 Nuclear weapons challenged even by those who depended on them as excessive . Yet nuclear weapons were challenged as excessive by those in need of them .
 "No matter . . . how certain that within 24 hours we could destroy Kuibyshev and Moscow and Leningrad and Baku and all the other places . . I want you to carry this question home with you," he said .
 I repeat, there is no victory in any war except . . . through our dedication . . to avoid it . I repeat. There is no . victory in . any war . through . our dedication to avoiding it, he says .
 Not that many elements of any given Soviet challenge could be depicted as deserving of the threat, in return, of atomic destruction .
 Atomic weapons would have an effect disproportionate to any normal valuation as a policy objective . Atomic weapons could have a disproportionate effect on the economy, experts say . The U.S. government says it is considering the possibility of using nuclear weapons .
 Atomic victory did not mean bending an enemy to one's will, or even destroying his army . Atomic victory didn't mean bending the enemy's will or destroying his armies, he said .
 It was not 'politics by other means', but what the Nuremberg lawyers spoke of when they wrote the laws of genocide . It was what they said of the genocide laws, but what they meant when they were drafted .
 Once the Soviets achieved a kind of nominal strategic nuclear parity; war, defined in terms of nuclear weapons, was a coin too fearful in consequence to be redeemed . War, defined as war, was defined as a coin that was too fearful to be redeemable .
 There was a fear that nuclear weapons would embolden the Soviets . Yet, while nuclear weapons might paralyse one side, they might embolden one side .
 If the Soviet bloc can present its challenges in less than all out form, it may gain a crucial advantage . It can be argued that fear of all-out war is bound to be mutual, . . . But . . if the Soviet blockies can present their challenges in . less
 'Every move on its part will pose the appalling dilemma of whether we are willing to commit suicide to prevent encroachments' 'No one of which seems to threaten our existence directly, but which may be a step on the road to our ultimate destruction' 'We may be willing to
 The Depreciation of Diplomacy and The New Strategists . Western negotiation with totalitarian regimes had reaped only more demands . Diplomacy has been replaced by the new strategic approach .
 Hitler found the final 'no' coming from Munich's 'worms' just as unconvincing as all the others . Finally, when the West said 'no — no more', Hitler found that he had to listen to the West's 'worm'
 The incandescent image of Chamberlain and his folded umbrella burned with idectic certainty in the collective memory of American policy-makers . Chamberlain's image of his umbrella is still a central part of the U.S. policy-making .
 The rejection of armed action contribute to the most ghastly human phenomena, says the writer . Armed action is a form of form of terrorism, he says .
 War was viewed as the only way to deal with world order . War was not as Catch-22 or Mash or even Patton . It was seen as a way of dealing with the world order, but as a necessary solution .
 The sad spectacle of Munich might have meant, it could have been overcome, one supposes, had not Roosevelt's wartime diplomacy been discredited as well . But whatever the sad spectacle might have been meant, Munich might still be overcome .
 If it was their business to lay the foundation for a firm peace, then there too there was failure . The British government failed to make peace a priority in the Middle East .
 Diplomats accused of deserting U.S. interests for those of our adversaries . Diplomats who had been in Asia when Chaing was forced to flee from Mao's troops .
 To Indiana Republican Senator William Jenner, General Marshall was a 'front man for traitors . . Senator Jenner called him a 'living lie' and a 'stooge' to the White House .
 The diplomat's function was to bring 'intelligence and tact to the conduct of official relations' in order to 'harmonize' divergent national interests . The diplomat was tasked with bringing 'intelligence' and 'tact' to 'harmonize national interests'
 The sum of treaties derived by negotiation formed a tissue of 'positive' international law . The sum was formed of 'treaty treaties derived from negotiation'
 International law, and relationships it implied, made international society more predictable and hence more orderly . International law was made to make international society predictable and more orderly. International law is a model of international society .
 By the late 1940s, diplomacy had become not so much a method of ameliorating the clash of interests as a self-defeating vestige of an ancient and irrelevant civility . Diplomacy had become an outdated and irrelevant vestige, writes David Cameron .
 Meetings were believed to be little more than venues for mean-spirited propaganda, or complex traps to lure good-willed Western innocents . But meetings believed to have little more to do with propaganda .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles asked one of his aides if he might not be satisfied if the Soviet Foreign Secretary would accept free elections and the reunification of Germany . Dulles was asked if he would be satisfied with the Soviet foreign secretary accepting free elections .
 There was belief that one could get agreements of a type with the Soviets, yet these could hardly be more than truces . Of course, there was a belief that there could be an agreement of some kind with the Soviet Union .
 Henry Kissinger wrote, In any negotiation, it is understood that force is the ultimate recourse . As Henry Kissinger said, "In any negotiations, force is a key factor"
 It is the art of diplomacy to keep the threat potential, to keep its extent indeterminate, and to commit it only as a last resort . Diplomacy is to keep threat potential potential 'indeterminate and to keep it indeterminant'
 "For once power has been made actual, negotiations in the proper sense, cease," says President Obama . "Once power is made actual," he says .
 A threat to use force which proves unavailing, does not return the negotiation to the point before the threat was made, it is claimed . A threat of force is not always successful in negotiations, it has been claimed .
 It destroys the bargaining position altogether for it is a confession not of finite power, but of impotence . It is not a confession that it is not of infinite power, it is of impotence for it .
 To the 'new strategists',34 the great given was that while classic diplomacy had no real utility, functional diplomacy had developed . A kind of functional diplomacy35 had developed wherein adversaries would bargain with each other through the mechanism of graduated increments of military force .
 This odd 'vicious' 'diplomacy of violence' gave a perverse and pernicious twist to the ancient practices of official 'gentlemen' who directed their energies toward the search for settlements .
 'The power to hurt is bargaining power' whose 'only purpose, unless sport or revenue, must be to influence somebody's behavior to coerce his behavior' 'To be coercive, violence has to be anticipated,' says former State Department official Thomas Schelling .
 As soon as the Soviets acquired deliverable strategic weapons, in the mid-1950s, Eisenhower began to indicate that he was willing, for his part, to move toward a settlement . To exploit it, is diplomacy — vicious diplomacy .
 As he told the Soviets at Geneva in 1955, ' it was that wars began where diplomacy fails, diplomacy must begin because war has failed'39 But diplomacy was not the Eisenhower Administration's long suit .
 Dulles had cooperated with McCarthy in 'cleaning out' the State Department . Dulles cooperated in the effort to clean up the State Dept. Dulles' State Department.
 Dulles was, as Eisenhower had noted, 'a sort of international prosecuting attorney' more than he was a classic statesman . Dulles had been a sort of 'international prosecuting attorney', more than a classic stateman .
 The Kennedy team, perhaps with the exception of the President himself, also had a low regard for the diplomatic enterprise . Secretary of State Dean Rusk was the nominal embodiment of the State Department .
 Rusk felt he had the ear of the President, and bore in silence the scorn of those 'gossips' who later committed their opinions of him to paper . Rusk, in turn, felt, along with his great tutor, General George Marshall, abused a public trust for
 Rusk garnered general disdain from Kennedy's entourage and was the object of many jokes . And Rusk bore with 'too much composure . . . criticism aimed at the frequent sterility of the State Department bureaucracy'
 Kennedy was on his way to Palm Beach, Florida, promising an outsized aid grant . Kennedy promised an "outsize . . . of outsized . . the aid grant"
 'inscrutability inadequate as a principle of life', says Professor Schlesinger . But, he says, the State seemed as if it had been denatured .
 The professional foreign service was criticized as an insipid swamp of diplomatic gobbledygook . Foreign service is criticized as a swamp of diplomacy gobbledy-speak .
 The Foreign Service personnel system was said to engender only bromides instead of action-filled recommendations that the Kennedy team was looking for . Kennedy team wanted to find a way to improve the Foreign Service .
 'I think we need to smile less and be tougher', says Kennedy . 'We need to be tougher and smile less,' he says . Kennedy took matters into his own hands, creating ad hoc alternatives to what the professionals suggested .
 The President appointed and received ambassadors on his own initiative and encouraged U.S. ambassadors to report directly to him . The President appoints and receives ambassadors on own initiative .
 Kennedy kept Rusk on long after the painful burlesques had begun to ride the cocktail circuit . Kennedy was his own Secretary of State, and some speculated that that that was why he kept him on .
 Just because a country had 'gone communist, didn't mean it couldn't be gotten back', he once said . He once said: 'Just because a . country had gone communist didn't mean  it couldn’t be . gotten back'
 Kennedy and McNamara grappled with the problem of central deterrence at a time when it was clear that the use of strategic weapons could be suicidal . Yet much of American defence planning focused on somehow actually using nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy, urged on by Eisenhower, focused on the Laotian problem in 1961 . New President was startled to discover that the Joint Chiefs seemed obsessed with nuclear weapons .
 At least 60,000 (and perhaps 160,000) United States troops, armed with tactical nuclear weapons, were to be brought in through two airports . Robert Kennedy recalled the meetings on Laos, in 1961, when the military unanimously recommended sending in at least 60-000 .
 The representative said we would then have to destroy Hanoi and possibly use nuclear weapons . The representative told us that the government would have to use a nuclear weapon to destroy Vietnam .
 The President sought to make it appear as if an armed solution might be necessary, while simultaneously striving to engineer, through diplomacy, a well-veiled exit from an unsupportable position, and to mask that retreat as a kind of personal victory .
 All sides covertly and liberally violated the agreement, but the Laotian issue nearly disappeared from the headlines . All sides secretly violated the deal .
 Kennedy had finessed the matter entirely by dint of exploring the distance of Laos from the concerns of most Americans with the help of court scribes . Kennedy had firmed up the issue entirely by . dinting of exploring . distance from Laos from most Americans .
 If retreats were to happen elsewhere, the next time they would have to be even more befogged than had been Harriman's discussions in Geneva on the Laotian question .
 It would be best of all, of course, if events were said to have unfolded as a result of an American determination to use force .
 Kennedy Administration was preoccupied by the issue of proportioning appropriate responses to military tests . Kennedy Administration preoccupied with the issue .
 Tuchman's two-fold lesson drawn from the onset of World War I was that military planners should not be allowed to remain autonomous from the world of the statesmen . The Kennedy Administration was not prepared to be grabbed at the forelock by military machines, and the Kennedy team were
 Even though Cuba and other geographic 'threats' consumed inordinate amounts of time, they were 'side issues', peripheral to the real centre of American concerns . Cuba's European context .
 The only defence of Europe must be the thinning reed of nuclear deterrence . Without German manpower, the only defence must be a thinning defence of the continent .
 Without a dense German defence in depth — even though that defence risked the potential loss of 80 per cent of the German 'substance' — the defence of the rest of Europe was almost inconceivable . The defence of Europe is 'almost inconceivable' without such a dense defence in
 The Soviets could only be stopped from making a determined thrust continuing to the English Channel by a barrier of German manpower . Nuclear weapons might deter a Soviet invasion, but the Germans could only stop it .
 The emotional pivot of the German question rested in the exposed occupied enclave of Berlin . Berlin was the emotional pivot for the German Question .
 After Dulles died, Eisenhower determined to seek a peaceful solution to the Berlin crisis . Eisenhower was spurred by Khrushchev's periodic deadlines and threats, but was spurred, to be sure .
 The Vienna meeting went badly, as a startled young President encountered a bullying Khrushchev . The meeting was the first time the two leaders had met in Vienna .
 Khrushchev reaffirmed his deadline for an accommodation over Berlin as December . The deadline for a deal was set for December .
 East German troops began to tear up the streets at the western edge of the divide that separated the Soviet zone of Berlin from the occupying Western allies .
 By 26 October 1961, American tanks faced Soviet tanks on the Friedrichstrasse, nearly muzzle to muzzle . The battle was nearly muzzle-to-mouthed .
 Kennedy himself estimated the chances of nuclear war at 20 per cent . A senior Soviet official in Berlin at the time said that if the American tanks had 'followed the orders given to them and those orders were to destroy the Berlin wall — our tanks would then open fire'
 Three and a half billion dollars were allocated to civilian defence . Household radiation detectors and national air raid siren system were among the items allocated .
 The first step in ending the crisis came with an apparent Soviet tactical retreat . The Soviet Union's apparent tactical retreat was seen as a tactical retreat.
 Khrushchev said: 'So let's give them one' 'Let's give the Russians a chance' 'I'm going to give them a chance,' he said .
 Khrushchev then announced that he would not seek a peace treaty with his East German subordinates because the Western powers had showed 'understanding' East Germany seemed to have been securely imprisoned, he said .
 A month before the missiles were discovered in Cuba, a special KGB liaison from the Soviet Embassy, told Bobby Kennedy that there would be no Soviet defensive missiles in Cuba .
 President Kennedy disturbed by the audacity of the move much more than he was bothered by the arithmetic of mutual atomic damage . President Kennedy was disturbed by audacity .
 "The sum of the Soviet action constituted both a national and personal test," says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin . "It was a national test. It was a test for the nation," says Putin .
 A shift from the 'missile gap in reverse' of the year before to a position where, as Kennedy fretted, 'they look like they're coequal with us', was bound to be unsettling . deterrence rests as much on a psychological relationship as it does on the balance of
 If the Soviets had succeeded in keeping their missiles in Cuba, 'it would have politically changed the balance of power' Kennedy summed up the experience in public .
 McNamara had, well before the crisis, abandoned 'static' measures of nuclear advantage . 'Static' measures had to be reckoned in terms of raw megatonnage delivered to an ever more expansive list of targets . It would have appeared to, and appearances contribute to reality', McN
 'bean counting' was somewhat surreal and its impact was largely 'psychological', as one of the participants in the Excomm deliberations put it . Undoubtedly this 'bean count' was surreal and the impact of it was largely psychological .
 U.S. analysts at the time said the 24 MRBMs and some 12 to 16 IRBMs discovered in Cuba had raised the number of targets the Soviets could lethally cover in the United States by 40 per cent .
 On the merits of what was known, the missiles severely eroded the possibility of an unanswered U.S. first strike against the Soviets . The missiles were likely to be used in a first strike, the author says. The missiles could have prevented an unanswered first strike .
 The Secretary of Defense believed, before the crisis, that a disarming first strike was a chimera . This had been something central to U.S. Air Force planners, but was not critical in the mind of the secretary of defense, he says .
 The missiles gave the Soviets some of the leverage they had lost when the missile gap had been revealed as a myth the year before . Clearly, however, in their own terms, the missiles seemed to give the Soviets a greater leverage . The missiles were seen as giving the Soviets more of the
 In October 1962, Kennedy said to his advisors, 'I should have said . . that we don't care. That's what I should have done,' he said . Kennedy said in 1962 .
 "When we said we're not going to [tolerate them] and then they go ahead with it, then we do nothing, then . . Our risks increase. But when we . said we . didn't tolerate them, then they went ahead and do it, and then
 "I just think it's just a question of . . . a political struggle as much as military' issue," he says .
 If there was a Soviet response, then the Soviet Union would be struck as well, presumably with a disarming atomic first strike . The U.S. would then be struck by a nuclear first strike, the author says . If there were no response, there would be a first strike
 Most of the Excomm felt that if Cuba were invaded, the Soviets would be forced to move in an area where the Russians had an equivalent preponderance, and where the U.S. had a equivalent exposure . Most seemed to feel that if the Soviets were invaded they would be
 Robert Kennedy's memoirs have it that the invasion was expected 'by Monday or Tuesday', 29 or 30 October . An invasion was 'expected' to take place by 'Monday or Tuesday'
 It is possible that an invasion could have been mounted, and that the Soviets suffered high casualties, and a significant strategic and political loss, might not really have done much . Some analysts and some of the participants in the crisis now maintain .
 Some in the Excomm were willing to 'write off an attack on Turkey' if a Soviet attack were confined to the Jupiter sites . Some in Excomm believed the attack would be limited to only Jupiter sites, rather than Turkey .
 If allied forces in Berlin were squeezed, it raised prospects so frightening that McNamara said he was not 'prepared to address' them . McNamara: 'I'm not prepared to address them. But if allied forces were squeezed it raised prospect so frightening'
 By 27 October, the Excomm had become convinced that whatever the missiles' ultimate strategic meaning, their symbolic meaning was both unmistakable and no longer tolerable . The Excomm became convinced that . whatever the missile's ultimate strategic . meaning, it was not enough .
 The longer missiles stay on in Cuba, the more irretrievable the situation would become, the longer they stay . The longer the missiles stay in Cuba would become more likely to break up the situation, the president says .
 The longer operational missiles were in place, the more certain it was that they changed the Soviet bargaining position vis-a-vis the U.S. The longer they were there, the longer they would change the Soviet negotiating position . The missiles diminished the standing of the United States in the
 If the crisis persisted, the majority in Excomm feared that the extant high-voltage stasis could not be sustained . Further, if the crisis persists, if . the majority of Excomm . feared that if the . current high voltage stasis were not sustained, they feared that
 Shooting could start anywhere, and then the U.S. would have put in jeopardy not just its control of events, but control of the rhythm of combat as well . The United States would have been in jeopardy if it started shooting .
 Chiefs and Chairman Maxwell Taylor were clear in their recommendation in favour of a strike no later than Monday . The military would start to lose its edge, as planes and men wore down under the strain of peak readiness . With each surveillance, moreover, more planes and pilots were exposed to hazards .
 The consensus that the crisis had to be resolved within 48 hours was further crystallized by the receipt of two quite different messages from the government . The consensus is that the government must find a way to resolve the crisis in 48 hours .
 The first was a rambling private letter, offering to exchange missiles for a promise that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . The first offered to exchange the missiles in exchange for an offer that the United States would not invasion Cuba .
 It mentioned the obsolete, but nonetheless recently operational, US missiles in Turkey, near the Soviet border . The missiles are in Turkey near the border .
 An Air Force U-2 surveillance flight was shot down over Cuba with the loss of a pilot . Soon after the second message was in hand, an Air Force .
 Reconnaissance planes would scour the island in runs spaced at two-hour intervals . The planes would search the island at two hours a day .
 The President was hardly compelled by the logic of targeting a few of the offending Soviet-manned anti-aircraft batteries .
 The momentum of events, it was clear in the Excomm discussions, pointed to striking Soviet surface-to-air missiles, said Russian President Vladimir Putin . The momentum was clear, said Putin's spokesman .
 Joint Chiefs wanted an all-out co-ordinated air strike launched on Cuba 'right away' But agreed to a limited, single strike first, with the understanding that if another attack on US aircraft occurred, then there would be a thoroughgoing extirpation of the offending SAM
 Secretary Rusk, on contemplating the reaction of the 'Hawks' to the news of the downed U-2, found his eyes brimming with tears .
 This made a 'token' Soviet counterforce, a 'damage limiting' strike against military targets, seem far-fetched .
 Whether or not the Soviets understood or knew U.S. targeting plans, there was pressure on Khrushchev to act . The Soviets were pressured to act by the United States .
 Khrushchev was more 'Normal' than he thought nuclear weapons could not just be an instrument of bluff . He would have assumed that American thinking would be tracking an equivalent line of thought . McNamara and Bundy would claim that there had been little likelihood that the SIOP would ever become
 Clearly, most of the participants in those events found them harrowing . The events were harrowing, but some of the people involved in them found it harrowing .
 American intelligence learned that their premier informant, Colonel Olaeg Penkovsky, had been arrested on 22 October . American intelligence had learned that the premier informant in the country had been captured .
 The Soviets might have inferred that the information relayed by Penkovsky to the United States verified that the U.S. had sufficient nuclear punch to exercise the Chiefs' preferred first SIOP option, a devastating first strike .
 Orders to cease the U-2 flights near the Soviet borders were either not received or ignored . U.2 flights were either ignored or not received .
 In one 'Strangelove' incident, an authorized U-2 entered Soviet airspace . The U.2 entered the Soviet airspace in one of the world's most famous U.S. aircraft .
 The U-2's SOS alerted Galena Air Force base in Alaska and a group of American fighter aircraft rose to escort the errant plane back to base .
 Most of the actions relevant to this alert would have been picked up in due course . But the Soviets must have been puzzled by the bravura with which these moves were broadcast .
 "Unprecedented intensification of peacetime readiness for war was effected openly so that the Soviets could pick the message up and be suitably daunted," says the British Prime Minister .
 Some analysts took this as preparation for war, notwithstanding the fact that none of the Soviet strategic forces within the Soviet Union had been put on alert . An Atlas ICBM was test-launched from Vandenberg on 26 October 1962 .
 The missile that was tested sat side by side with others that were fully loaded, already on alert . The missile was tested alongside others that sat side-by-side with others on alert, already .
 At the least, the test flight might well have appeared as a nuclear 'stray' had the Soviets been able to observe it . The test flight may well have been a 'missile' test flight .
 At the most, it could have been seen, like the wandering U-2, as a precursor to an all-out attack . At the least, it was seen as an indication of an imminent attack .
 At the height of the crisis, at least one CIA covert action team was roaming Cuba . At the time of the Cuban crisis, the CIA was in control of Cuba .
 Operation Mongoose activities were suspended, apparently only as an afterthought, on 30 October 1962, by Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was president of the State of the Union in 1962 .
 CIA-sponsored unit decided, on its own authority, to blow up a factory on 8 November . The factory was blown up by a factory owned by the CIA, a source says .
 Cuban units were reported to be vulnerable to rifle fire, vulnerable as they were . If they had attempted to kill Castro or his associates, or if they had killed any of the high Soviet officials on the island at the time .
 The main instrument of control of the tempo of pressure was the blockade run by the Navy . The blockade was the main instrument, the Navy.
 If you and your deputy will go to your offices, the Navy will run the blockade . The Navy has been running blockades since the days of John Paul Jones . The blockade has been in place since then .
 All six submarines near the quarantined area were shadowed by the British Navy .
 One sub was 'surfaced', unknown to the Excomm, by a lowlevel depth charge and disabled . The sub was disabled by a 'low-level' depth charge .
 The Soviets were not informed of where the quarantined area was supposed to have been in any case, until 27 October 1962 'Black Saturday' when George Ball suggested to the President that they be notified .
 In the wake of the crisis' successful resolution, innate self-confidence suffused the profound relief of the moment . The Jupiters in the aftermath of the successful resolution .
 The national security group, ExComm, who had handled the Cuba material, code-named, meaningfully, 'Elite', felt that they had mastered the merger of politics and force . ExComm felt they had masterminded the merger .
 National security managers occupy a narrow circle with few apprentices and still fewer fully accredited practitioners . The country's national security managers are in a tight circle, with only a few apprenticeships .
 Both in scope and depth, the President and his advisors had a decisive edge over the President alone . But the Excomm conversations hardly show a cool delineation of alternatives or a deliberate dissection of well-gamed actions .
 There were reports that one assistant secretary was so disconcerted and fatigued that he drove into a tree at 4 am. There were also reports that he was so fatigued he had to drive to a tree .
 NATO trade deal could be embarrassment within NATO and opening to right-wing critics . Trade deal could look reasonable at home and overseas, but could also be embarrassing .
 To his largest group of advisors he wanted to appear as resolute as possible . He wanted to be resolute about his decision .
 Only at the eleventh hour, and then only to a small circle of intimates, was Kennedy willing to show some of the flexibility he had apparently come up with on his own .
 Not known to this 'mini' Excomm, however, was the approach that Bobby had made to Ambassador Dobrynin regarding a swap of the Jupiters for the missiles in Cuba .
 Rusk and President Kennedy took further measures to end the crisis via a quid pro quo . Then, very late that night, President Kennedy and Rusk agreed to give Rusk a deal to end crisis .
 The Secretary was empowered to authorize, on a signal, the UN Secretary-General to announce in public the offer of an exchange of the United States missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba . It was a complex game.
 Khrushchev had asked his brother to see if Ambassador Dobrynin would accept a 'private understanding' with the President to exchange the Jupiters for missiles, and to offer publicly to guarantee that the Cubans would be free from American invasion .
 Formally there was to be a 'no invasion' pledge in return for removal of missiles . Formally, the pledge was made to remove the missiles in exchange for removing them .
 If Khrushchev rejected Bobby's offer, the President was prepared to go forward with the offer of a public trade .
 Khrushchev responded via Moscow radio, accepting Robert Kennedy's offer without mentioning the imminent withdrawal of the Jupiters . Kennedy was thus saved from the ignominy of having to make his eagerness to initiate a public swap known to most of his advisors for 25 years .
 The crisis was portrayed as a 'test of will' that highlighted the Soviet transgression of the political-nuclear status quo . Crisis was portrayed by the Soviet Union as a test of will .
 Chroniclers of the 1960s claimed that the Soviets merely capitulated . The chroniclers of that era claimed that it was a capitulation . Now historians say the Soviets simply capitulated to the West .
 New national security managers proliferated after Cuba routed those who had most favoured negotiations . One result of the misleading way in which the crisis legend was retold was that the new national security .
 In front of each other, the Excomm members were afraid of being sullied by the taint of 'Munich' The Excomm was afraid of sounding anything less than bold . The ExComm members fear of being 'sullied'
 Only the 'cautious and 'hawkish' Rusk could think it 'easier on us' to propose the swap . Kennedy seems to have told his brother to take to the Soviets informally days before .
 This one gets talked about less than the others because of the power of the Munich stigma and because it sounds a lot less courageous . This one is less courageous than the other, because it's less courageous, and it's not more courageous .
 A 'moderate' in these terms was limited to suggesting limited violence . A moderate would be considered a moderate by the U.S. State Department .
 The military's enthusiasm for preemptive attacks on the Soviet Union, and Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay's wish to attack Cuba, drew great scorn from the Kennedy national security consiglieri .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Lyman Lemnitzer briefed Kennedy on Vietnam . He pointed not to the Mekong Delta, but to the Yangtze Valley . The Yang Valley is the source of the Vietnam War .
 In sum, the military were not just dangerous, they were fools . Whatever the extent of 'failures' in the Cuban crisis, those failures were adjudged to be the result of incomplete control exercised over a rather loutish military .
 The conclusion was clear that the professional military posed most of the risks, or exacerbated them . The professional military either posed most or exacerbated those risks, the report says .
 The military, however, was fighting the war and had the data and personal experience that was crucial . The military was fighting for the sake of the war, but the data was important .
 Bad relations meant the civilians and the soldiers were less likely to work together to develop good strategy . Bad relations between civilians and soldiers meant bad relations between the two sides were common .
 It enabled them to make strategy of a sort without help from the generals, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Sub-nuclear, and indeed subconventional, violence could, in the right admixture, could be useful overseas and supportable at home . Subconventional violence could be helpful overseas and supported at home, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Later, these confident assumptions were placed on a vast testing ground in South-East Asia . The tests were later placed in a vast test ground in the region .
 At least people like Helmut Schmidt and Dennis Healey have a chance to rise through government positions with some experience and expertise under their belts .
 Many of them had great success in military organizations, serving with heroism and distinction . Many of the men served with great success .
 Bundy had worked on the planning for D-Day with Admiral Kirk and General Bradley . Bundy had been in charge of planning for the invasion of Normandy . Bundy died in June 1944 in a POW-era POW POW POW camp .
 When things were winding down in Europe, he transferred to the infantry in order to be in on the invasion of Japan . He transferred from the infantry to be part of the invasion .
 McNamara was an air force planner in the war . He worked with Robert Lovett to bring the latest life-saving business management techniques to supplying and supporting the air force . McNamara worked with Lovett in the War .
 Hilsman, a West Point graduate, was a guerrilla fighter with Mosby in the Burma theatre . He was a member of Mosby's Burma theatre team .
 The Kennedy national security clique's evident disdain for the military did not stem from a 'know nothing' ignorance of armed force, but from their belief that they had mastered the secret of avoiding the Hobson's choices presented by nuclear war .
 All those theories abstracted from the 'pauses, 'squeezes', 'signals' and 'messages' that were adduced from the blockade, the nuclear alerts, the mobilizations, and mobilizations in SAC — about the transmittal of 'political
 The once ebullient quintessential crisis manager, Robert McNamara, told his old associates in a kind of coda to the crisis managing craft that there ought to be a 'law' that 'it is impossible to predict with a high degree of confidence what the effects of the use
 'You can't manage crises; it's a dangerous metaphor, because it's misleading', he says . The Cuban missile crisis revived the sense of the American mission .
 The symbolic or 'psychological capital' of deterrence rested on the notion of resolve . One way to demonstrate political will was through the assertion of conventional force . After all, the symbolic . 'Psychological capital of deterrence rests on the idea of resolve; and one way .
 A successful use of armed force could demonstrate 'resolve' without the threat of organizing a nuclear holocaust . The U.S. could use force to demonstrate resolve without threat of a nuclear war .
 After Cuba, success in limited war became even more of an imperative . So, after Cuba, after . Cuba, a success in . limited war .
 In this hidden debate, there was strong incentive . . for the civilian leaders to demonstrate that success was possible in Indochina without the need either to compromise the Cold War objectives or to threaten to use nuclear 1 01 weapons .
 The underlying assumptions of the planners of limited war were as old as the cold war . Of course, the underlying assumptions were as well as the Cuban crisis, they say .
 Truman's Manichean presentation of a bitter bipolar global confrontation where a gain to one party would necessarily be a loss to the other . They dated from Truman's 'Manichean' presentation of the confrontation . The gains to one part of the U.S. would be necessarily a
 Later, a world with diverse centres of power, with elements of superpower co-operation, would not be so congenial to a military remedy . Later, the world would be less easily demonstrable, with gains and losses less easily visible .
 A multipolar world would be less hospitable to the belief that the only options available to policymakers were either military force or retreat, says John Defterios .
 A militarized vision of diplomacy had been tested in Vietnam and found wanting . But such a development was to come about only after a militarized . vision was tested in the Vietnam and failed .
 As the cold war fades, it is unclear whether the old twin of force, the diplomat, can be rehabilitated . The diplomat is a key figure in the Cold War era .
 In a world made more traditional by the collapse of the leading revolutionary faith, surely nuclear crisis will not have its old salience, nor will nuclear weapons compel us in the same directions . But in a world now made more traditionally, surely .
 The long-neglected temporizing repertoire of the statesmen — the conference chamber and the treaty — may once again restore a balance to the unnatural 50-year union of the warrior to the diplomat . The treaty may restore balance between the warrior and diplomat .
 Francois de Callier's definition is from his De la manièrede negocier avec les Souverins, published in 1716 .
 De Callier was the basic Western handbook on the subject well into the twentieth century . It was published in the early 1900s and was published more than 100 years later .
 Kennan's private views were always more complex than his most oft-quoted analysis . Kennan: "Kennan's views are always more complicated than his often quoted analysis" Kennan was often misunderstood for his views .
 Henry Kissinger's academic corpus has been at the heart of his academic corpus . Kissinger's work has been published by Kissinger's former colleagues . Kissinger is a Nobel Peace Prize winner and author of Kissinger's biography .
 Arthur Krock, Memoirs, Sixty Years on the Firing Line, 431. In Arthur's Memoir, Krock tells all about his career in the military .
 De Calliers was Louis XIV's Cabinet Secretary, and a diplomat of long experience . He wrote this in 1716, and he was a diplomat .
 Henry A Kissinger, 'The Congress of Vienna', World Politics, July 1956, Vol. viii, 277. Henry A. Kissinger was speaking at the World Politics Congress in Vienna, Vienna, in 1956 . Kissinger: "The Congress is Vienna. It is Vienna"
 The phrase is that of James King, who circulated several influential manuscripts on the subject .
 Osgood had read King's manuscripts, but failed to credit them, to King's dismay . Osgood's manuscripts were found in King's collection .
 Rusk was unknown to Kennedy; they had met only once, briefly, briefly . Kennedy felt early on that Rusk had served him ill by not questioning plans for the Bay of Pigs more strongly .
 Schlesinger dates Rusk's exclusion from the Kennedy inner circle from this time . Rusk was excluded from Kennedy's inner circle, Schlesberger says .
 Rusk may have had a 'nervous breakdown' during the Cuban crisis, whereas we now know that Rusk played a serious and potentially critical role in the resolution of the crisis .
 The impression was that the preferred goal was 160,000 troops equipped with tactical nuclear weapons . The impression is that this is not the only goal for the Iraqi forces .
 Eisenhower's 'hidden' distrust of massive retaliation, but his record seems to show him as much of a 'brinksman' as Dulles on more than a few occasions .
 See some of the still unanswered questions on this incident which are raised in James A Nathan, 'A Fragile Detente', Military Affairs, Oct.75.75 .
 The Chiefs and their chairman, Maxwell Taylor, took the military threat seriously . The Chiefs took the threat quite seriously, says Maxwell Taylor .
 Executive Committee of the President was an ad hoc group assembled at short notice . The Executive Committee was assembled by short notice and assembled by the President .
 It consisted of about 15 people, most with high-level responsibilities . It was the first time it had been in charge of a large group of people .
 Raymond Garthoff, 'Memo on the Military Significance of the Soviet Missiles Bases in Cuba', Department of State, 27 Oct.62, declassified 20 Nov.81.81 . The State Department declassified the declassified document .
 Marc Trachtenberg has found a revealing transcript of an interview with Air Force General Bruce K Holloway . Air Force general says SIOP is 'one place I can certainly say something nice about Mr McNamara'
 Sagan , 'SIOP-62', International Security, 49, emphasis in the original . Sagan .
 American strategic planning evolved from manufacturing 'a smoking radiating ruin' at the end of two hours to attempting to 'withold cities' and perhaps other targets as well .
 To the Soviets, the sheer number of U.S. strategic weapons aloft or on alert pointed to the inexorable conclusion that if there were to be an American nuclear assault on the Soviet Union, its limits would make no difference to the Soviet recipients .
 Bundy believes Kennedy would not have ordered an air strike or an invasion . Bundy believes that even if Khrushchev had rejected all the proposals on the table, Kennedy would have not ordered a strike or invasion .
 Rusk and Sorenson, arguably the two who best knew the President's mind on this matter, hold a different view . Rusk: "I'm not sure what happened to the President, but I'm sure he was right"
 Recently, there was yet another purported revelation that would indicate that the crisis was even closer than anybody had suspected . The crisis is even more likely to occur than anyone had suspected before .
 Grbikov's information was, however, not just startling, but in contradiction to the recollection of other, and seemingly better informed, participants . Grbkov: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised"
 The Soviets seemed to have made no preparations at all for nuclear conflict; see Sorenson, Kennedy, 713 .
 Anderson, it is important to note, has maintained that there is a substantial amount of fiction in this account . Anderson: Anderson maintains that there are a substantial substantial factories in this account. Anderson: There is a considerable amount of fictional fiction in this
 There is some ambiguity as to whether U.S. actions disabled the Soviet sub that was observed being towed back from the area, or whether the sub simply broke down . According to Scott Sagan, there is no clear if the sub broke down or was disabled .
 Halper's book is a gold-mine of first-rate analysis and eclectic learning even though, perforce, much of the information has been superseded by the release of documents in the 1980s and early 1990s .
 Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost The Cold War (forthcoming) meet for details of this meeting . Lebow, Gross Stein and Stein will discuss the Cold War in a new book .
 The letter was revealed for the first time at the Hawk's Cay Conference, Rusk to Blight, 25 Feb.87; Welch, 131.87 .
 Ambassador Dobrynin has contended, according to one second-hand report, that the initial overture was made by Robert Kennedy on Wednesday 24th . Robert Kennedy is said to have made the overture on Wednesday, July 24th, in an attempt to woo the Russian president .
 Talking notes recently discovered in the Kennedy Library indicate that the range of desiderata asked by Robert included Soviet restraint of Cuba in the western hemisphere .
 U.S. House Appropriations Committee, Department of Defense Appropriations for 1964, 88 Cong., 1 Sess., 1963, pt. i, 57. United States House of Representatives: 1964,    - 1963 .
 The article 'In a Time of Crisis' appeared on 8 Dec.62, and was written by Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett .
 It could well have been Bobby, instead of his brother Jack, who spoke despairingly of Stevenson . Bobby's brother Jack was a member of the family .
 McNamara made this point twice in four days — once at the opening of the retrospective and once as it closed see ibid., 13. The seriousness about this is apparent when one notes that McNamara .