 Most historians agree that the world has never come closer to nuclear war than it did during a thirteen-day period in October 1962 . The revelation that the Soviet Union had stationed several medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba led to the threat of nuclear war .
 This lesson will examine how this crisis developed, how the Kennedy administration chose to respond, and how the situation was resolved . This lesson examines how the crisis developed and how it was ultimately resolved .
 Learning Objectives Evaluate the Soviet Union's justification for placing missiles in Cuba . Learn how Soviet Union justified the decision to place missiles there .
 Analyze the competing perspectives within the U.S. and the Soviet Union regarding how to respond to the threat in Cuba . Analyze how the United States and Soviet Union responded to the Cuban threat .
 President Kennedy's decision to ""quarantine"" Cuba compares it to other Cold War era policies . Evaluate the decision to quarantine Cuba and compare it to others .
 Analyze correspondence and diplomatic maneuvers used by the U.S. and Soviet Union . Analyze the correspondence and diplomacy of the two countries .
 In September 1962, U.S. spy planes flying over Cuba discovered the presence of Soviet-made medium-range nuclear missiles on the island . This is a history lesson in the United States History and Social Studies .
 The result, played out through the month of October, was the most serious foreign policy crisis of the Kennedy White House-indeed, probably the most . The result of the crisis was probably the worst foreign policy crises of the Cold War .
 Cuba was a mere ninety miles from the coast of Florida, and missiles could easily strike targets in the United States as far north as Cincinnati, and as far west as San Antonio-and with minimal warning time .
 Kennedy felt that American prestige was on the line; as recently as September 4 he had given a speech in which he warned the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, against placing any such weapons in Cuba .
 That Khrushchev had done so in spite of this warning seemed to demand a response . That was a response to a warning from the Soviet Union, it seemed .
 CIA formally presented its findings to President Kennedy and his ""ExComm"" on October 16 . The CIA presented the findings to the president and his ex-Commitors .
 The group considered a range of options for responding to the challenge, including launching an all-out invasion of Cuba . The group also considered opening face-to-face negotiations with the Soviets .
 In the end they settled on a blockade of the Cuban coast- although for purposes of international law it was referred to as a ""quarantine"" rather than a blockade .
 Until the missile sites have been dismantled United States warships would stop and search all ships approaching the island for equipment related to the missiles . Until the sites had been dismantled, the U.S. warships would search for items related to missiles .
 Those that were found to be carrying such equipment would be turned back .
 U.S. warships immediately began stopping Soviet vessels bound for Cuban shores . Kennedy announced his decision in a radio broadcast on October 22, 1962 .
 For the next several days it seemed that the world hovered on the brink of a nuclear war, while feverish negotiations continued between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The world seemed to be on the verge of nuclear war .
 The Soviets agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba in return for promises from the U.S. not to invade Cuba . The Soviets also agreed to pressure NATO into withdrawing its medium-range missiles from Turkey .
 Fidel Castro felt betrayed by the Soviet leadership, since he had not been consulted at all on the settlement . Fidel Castro, the pro-Soviet president of Cuba, was not consulted on the deal .
 Leaders in both the U.S. and the Soviet Union seemed genuinely rattled at how close they had come to nuclear conflict . More importantly, leaders in both countries were genuinely rattled .
 In the months ahead they agreed to the installation of a telephone ""hotline"" connecting the White House and the Kremlin . The line will allow for instantaneous negotiation between the two .
 The two sides began the first steps toward limiting the nuclear arms race, working toward a treaty . The treaty was signed in August 1963, banning above-ground testing of nuclear weapons .
 Historical events and developments shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts . Evaluate how historical events and . developments were shaped by . unique circumstances and . broader historical context .
 Use questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance of their actions changes over time and shaped by the historical context .
 Analyze complex and interacting factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras . Find out what factors influenced people's perspectives during different eras . Use this article to help students understand historical perspectives .
 Distinguish between long-term causes and triggering events in developing a historical argument . Distinguishing between long and short causes and trigger events is a key part of the argument .
 Integrate evidence from multiple relevant historical sources into a reasoned argument about the past . Integrate historical sources and interpretations into a rational argument about past .
 The episode includes original television reports, photographs and maps of missiles in Cuba . It includes interviews with those who were living in Cuba and working in the U.S. government at the time .
 Kennedy made the statement on September 4, 1962, warning the Soviets against placing missiles in Cuba . Kennedy warned the Soviets not to do so in 1962 .
 Most of the documents were presented to Kennedy in his briefings during the early days of the crisis . The CIA presented the documents to Kennedy during his briefings .
 As CIA analysts, students' job is to draft a memorandum for the president . They must explain to him why the presence of these missiles presents a threat to U.S. national security .
 Days of Decision Now will put students into the role of President Kennedy through the use of the interactive exercise . Students have determined that the presence of the missiles constitutes a threat to national security, the second activity will put them, either individually or in groups, into the President Kennedy role .
 They will be presented with a menu of possible options, and then have the opportunity to consult with advisers before choosing one of the options . They will then be given the chance to consult advisers before deciding what they want .
 By scrolling over the photograph of Kennedy and his cabinet, the names of certain advisers will appear . The names of some advisers will also appear .
 By clicking on a name a brief list of statements by that individual will appear at the bottom of the screen . Clicking on the name of an individual to view a list of their statements .
 Students should next read the ""Special Intelligence Estimate"" prepared by the CIA . This will appear when the "Intelligence Estimate" tab is clicked . After they have done this, students should also read the CIA's "Special Intelligence"
 Students should make a decision regarding how to respond to the missiles in Cuba . Click on the option that most closely resembles their choice .
 This will produce a brief narrative explaining whether or not this was also the decision reached by the president, and why or not . This will also explain why or why not .
 Once students have completed the exercise, teachers should conduct a class discussion about why they chose the options they did .
 Kennedy's actual response will be revealed at the end of the activity . After they have done so, the class will move on to the third activity .
 By October 22 President Kennedy had made his decision; it was now time to announce it to the world . Kennedy's "Quarantine" speech was broadcast on October 22, 1963 .
 For the third activity students will read the text of Kennedy's radio and television address to the nation, in which he announced the ""quarantine"" of Cuba . Students will also learn how Kennedy announced the 'quarantine' of Cuba.
 Located at the same site is an audio version of the document, which teachers might wish to have students listen to . The audio version is also available on the site .
 Teachers may wish to conclude this activity with a class discussion of the speech; i.e., whether Kennedy made the right choice, what its implications were, and how effective the speech was in conveying the seriousness of the situation .
 On October 22, Kennedy revealed to the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that he was aware of missiles in Cuba . The crisis began in earnest on that day, October 22 .
 U.S. warships began stopping Soviet vessels off the Cuban coast . The result was a week of furious negotiation between the two sides .
 In the fourth and final activity students will read excerpts from the following seven documents . Students will read the correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev in which they negotiated a deal for the removal of missiles .
 Soviet citizens on what was taking place in Cuba and how the decisions being made in Washington, D.C. might affect those in the Soviet Union . Unique to this excerpt is inclusion of the perspectives of Soviet citizens .
 Teachers might select students to read particular sections aloud in class . Alternatively teachers might select pupils to read certain sections of the book .
 Students can discuss how the events in the film compared to what they have learned in this lesson . Afterward students can discuss what they've learned from the film .
 For one historian's take on the film, see ""Thirteen Days' Doesn't Add Up,"" located at the EDSITEment-reviewed resource History Matters .
 In the wake of the crisis Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed that some more efficient means of communications had to be found between Washington and Moscow in order to prevent future crises from escalating .
 This led to the installation of a ""hotline" in which the President of the United States could pick up a telephone and be immediately connected with his counterpart in the Soviet Union, or vice versa . The President and Soviet President of both countries were connected by a telephone .
 It might be worth asking why both sides might, as the result of the crisis, have considered this to be important .
 Students will look back at correspondence between JFK and Khrushchev . It took place over a seven-day period .
 Teachers might also wish to have students construct a timeline of the events surrounding the crisis .