 "We&amp;apos;re sorry. We've sent you an email to reset your password" "We've been sorry. You've been sent an email saying you need to log in at this time if you need immediate access"
 Alamy images are available to buy and sell on Alamy.com . Share your images with your team and customers . Use this Alamy image to help people find the perfect place to purchase them .
 Find the right content for your market. Use the lightbox to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport.com .
 President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for the Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba in the White House Oval Office in October 1962 .
 Adlai Stevenson's photo of Cuban missile site with CIA captions shown to the UN by the U.S. in 1962 . The photo was taken at the site of a Cuban missile base .
 Photograph of a missile launch site in San Cristobal, Cuba . U.S. State Department photo taken in 1962 .
 U.S. reconnaissance photo of Soviet missile site at Mariel Naval Port, Cuba, November 8, 1962 . United States reconnaissance photo was taken in 1962 .
 U.S. President Barack Obama's announcement on Wednesday to normalize relations with Cuba welcomed by younger Cuban-Americans . Younger exiles have increasingly pushed for change and vote Democrat in growing numbers .
 Within 3 days, the launching area is completed, as well as the location of 2 lauching areas and the building of another missile . The launch area is complete, as is the location and location of the second missile .
 October 17, 1962 Cuba Photograph United States Air Force Cuban missiles crisis . The U.S. Air Force was involved in the Cuban missile crisis .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara answers questions on the Cuban situation at a press conference, Washington, DC, 10/23/1962 . McNamara was secretary of defense at the time .
 Image used in the Secretary of Defense's Press Briefing, 6 February 1963 .
 Russian mediumrange ballistic missile launch site 2, San Cristobal, Cuba, was launched in November 1962 . The launch site was a launch site for a Soviet-made medium range ballistic missile .
 Pierre Salinger, press secretary to President John F Kennedy, held a press conference on the Cuban crisis . Salinger was President Kennedy's press secretary during the crisis .
 President John F Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, . Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara and White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger in the Cabinet Office in October 1962, at a meeting of EXCOMM .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy made a televised speech to the nation about the blockade of Cuba, 24 October 1962 .
 Low altitude aerial photograph made over a portion of the Remedios-area military camp in Cuba on 25 October 1962, showing a Soviet FROG missile with transporter and launcher, 130mm rocket launchers, SU-100 assault guns, T-54 tanks, and other weapons .
 The engine from the USAF Lockheed U-2F aircraft shot down over Cuba on 27 October 1962 . Museum of the Revolution, Havana, Cuba, Cuba is home to the U.2F .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy signs Cuba Quarantine Proclamation at his desk in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, DC .
 President John F Kennedy addresses the nation from the Oval Office on 22 October 1962 with regard to the threat from Soviet missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy was speaking to the nation about the threat of Soviet missiles .
 U.S. reconnaissance photo 23 October showing ballistic missile under construction in the San Cristobal area . United States reconnaissance photo . 23 October showed ballistic missile construction in San Cristo .
 President John F Kennedy meets with Soviet officials in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, DC on October 18, 1962 . Soviet Deputy Minister Vladimir S Seyemenov, Ambassador of the USSR Anatoly Washington, D.C.
 Steven Culp as Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Bruce Greenwood as President John F Kennedy . Kevin Costner as Special Assistant to the President . Bruce Greenwood played President John Kennedy in the role of President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy meeting with Anastas Mikoyan on 29 November 1962 . Abbie Rowe met with President Kennedy in 1962 . Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 The exhibition of the Soviet weapon devoted to memory of the Caribbean Crisis (Cuban missi Cuba) Cuba. Cuba. The exhibition is dedicated to the memory of that crisis . Cuba.
 President John F Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara in the Cabinet Office in October 1962 . EXCOMM to discuss the crisis in Cuba .
 October 18, 1962 Soviet ambassador to the US, Anatoly F Dobrynin and Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko talked with President Kennedy at the White House, Washington, D.C. during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Map of Northern America showing the full range of nuclear missiles under construction in Cuba, used during the Cuban crisis .
 A major retrospective of the legendary British photographer Sir Don McCullin has been launched in London this week .
 McCullin is one of Britain’s greatest living photographers . McCullin has captured images of conflict from around the world including Vietnam, Northern Ireland, Lebanon and Biafra .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara attended Kennedy's funeral .
 The exhibition of the Soviet weapon devoted to memory of the Caribbean Crisis Cuba. Cuba .
 The world was much closer to a nuclear holocaust during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis than governments new, former U.S. and Russian officials and military officers say . The event marks the 40th anniversary of the most dangerous moment of the Cold War era .
 Arthur Schlesinger, a former John F Kennedy Administration aide and historian and historian, said 'I h . Of the meetings, Schlesingers, a . former John . F Kennedy . Administration aide said: 'I am not sure what I will do next'
 Washington, District of Columbia, USA. 29th Oct. 1962. Washington, DC .
 McNamara is part of a U.S. delegation participating in a gathering to talk about the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . McNamara was a member of a United States delegation to discuss the crisis .
 Former Kennedy administration Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara is greeted by Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez as he arrives in Havana, Cuba, October 10, 2002 . McNamara arrived in Havana in 2002 .
 Arthur Schlesinger, former special counsel to President Kennedy talks with Sidney Lawford Mckelvy, member of family Kennedy, outside bunker housing where Russian missiles were kept .
 You can share a link to your portfolio page by clicking on 'Share this portfolio\' underneath your bio . Your portfolio page will display your images and you can personalise it by adding a bio, profile photo and cover image .