 President Kennedy: Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small .
 The emphasis is not so much on any supposed intrinsic evil characterizing the S.U. as some students suggested and as a subsequent President claimed . Instead, the emphasis is on the contrast between the U.S.’s reckless behavior in the immediate situation and its own quite cautious
 The nations of Latin America have never previously been subjected to a potential nuclear threat . In that sense missiles in Cuba add to an already clear and present danger .
 Aggressive conduct, if allowed to grow unchecked and unchallenged, ultimately leads to war, says U.S. President Barack Obama . "Aggressive conduct" if allowed unchecked, "will lead to war," says Obama .
 JFK is not dismissing Premier Khrushchev as a “mere irritant or fanatic” — someone who has control over nuclear weapons is not a ‘mere” anything . JFK was speaking to students at the time of his visit to Moscow .
 JFK is attributing a considerable measure of prudence and rationality to Khrushchev, which implies that he can be expected to back down . The United States does not demand too much — rather than risk general war .
 To halt this offensive build-up, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . Take-Home: Answers and Discussion page 3 .
 The Foreign Minister of the Organization of American States in their communiqué of October 3 rejected secrecy on such matters in this Hemisphere .
 I have directed the Armed Forces to prepare for any eventuality and I trust that in the interests of both the Cuban people and the Soviet technicians at the sites, the hazards of continuing this threat will be recognized .
 It was not a zero-sum but a Generic Bargaining (or Chicken) Game, in which one outcome is worst for both players . "Chicken" Game" is a generic Bargaining Game, with one outcome worst for each player .
 JFK asserts that the history of the U.S.-U.S. nuclear relationship entailed tacit coordination on a “precarious status quo” JFK says this certainly was not a pure coordination game . JFK: The history of nuclear relations with the United States is not a
 Choosing initially did not precluding using or subsequently; however, it would necessarily entail losing the advantage of surprise and also risked giving the S.U. the time and incentive to make pre-emptive commitment to hold on to the missiles the best they could . Choosing initial did
 A Political Analysis” pertaining directly to the JFK speech . Meanwhile secrecy was collapsing rapidly. Meanwhile secrecy in the U.S. government was collapsing .
 News stories written on Sunday evening reported an ‘air of crisis’ in the capital . News stories reported an air of crisis in the city .
 Excom got one scare when it was announced that Gromyko (still in the U.S. still in the United States) was to make an important statement at 3:30 Monday afternoon .
 It prepared a short statement announcing the blockade, which was to be released if Gromyko disclosed the Soviet operation, in order to recoup the initiative as best possible .
 Foreign Minister only wanted to give a farewell speech as he left the country . It turned out that the Foreign Minister was only giving the speech to the media .
 The nature and timing of the disclosure was designed so as to gain a maximum of both impact and support . The nature of this disclosure and timing was designed to gain maximum support and impact .
 Special efforts were made to obtain the greatest possible consent from allies and Latin American countries, including Latin American nations . Special efforts made to get the approval of the project .
 Dean Acheson was dispatched to Paris to inform President de Gaulle personally . Achesons was sent to inform the French president of the situation .
 Richard Goodwin went off to the annual Alliance for Progress meeting in Mexico City, where many OAS officials would be Monday evening . Richard Goodwin attended the OAS meeting .
 Answers and Discussion page 6 to that time the President met with Congressional leaders, disclosing everything . Page 6 is about the President's meeting with congressional leaders .
 At 6 PM Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin was called into Secretary Rusk's office, informed of everything, and presented with a personal message for Premier Khrushchev . The Soviet ambassador was given the message by the Soviet Premier, who died at the age of 55 .
 A mass briefing was conducted in the State Department auditorium for diplomats from forty-six allied and friendly nations . Simultaneously a mass briefing of diplomats was held in the auditorium .
 He called the Soviet missiles “offensive,” retaining the distinction that he had introduced earlier and could hardly drop now . The Soviet missiles are still considered "offensive"
 He directed his speech entirely against the Soviet Union, treating Cuba as a mere pawn in the conflict . Cuba was the only country Cuba was actually fighting for .
 He noted Soviet deceptions, specifically the September 11 statement and Gromyko’s assurances, each of which he quoted .
 He then announced United States actions, clearly indicating that more would follow if necessary . He then indicated that the U.S. would follow .
 At the same point he again suggested that further, more violent, action might follow . At the time, he said that further violence could follow .
 The quarantine had two purposes, McNamara says . Secretary McNamara made clear at a news conference later Monday night .
 First, it was designed to deter, or if necessary physically prevent, the introduction of additional strategic weapons into Cuba . Second, it would be designed to prevent, or . if necessary, the . introduction of extra strategic weapons .
 The U.S. is trying to establish a pattern of irresistible momentum and visible willingness to run high risks until the weapons already in Cuba were removed . Second and more importantly, it was designed to establish an irresistible United States .
 It gave the Soviets time to reconsider their action; it permitted them to comply without having to back down before a specific ultimatum . The U.S. government gave the Soviet Union time to consider its actions; it gave it time to comply .
 During the open crisis, the U.S. successfully communicated its determination to see the missiles removed, short of outright capitulation . The Soviet Union successfully communicated their willingness to remove the missiles . The United States successfully communicated that the missiles would be removed .
 The Soviet Union missed the United States' purposeful signals that strategic weapons in Cuba would not be tolerated . The U.S. sent a warning to the Soviet Union that it would not tolerate its presence in Cuba .
 The American warning was blurred by the domestic political context it which it was made . One reason for this is that the American warning is blurred .
 The burden of President Kennedy's news conference remarks of September 4 and 11 was to restrain and reprimand the domestic opposition . The risk of intervention was stressed; the warning to the international opposition was perfunctory by comparison .
 This suggests what is likely to be a general problem for a democratic nation, especially the U.S. This suggests a problem for the United States, which speaks with many voices for diverse purposes .
 When it is resolved to respond in a certain contingency, it may be unable to communicate its intent effectively . The government may be at risk of failing to communicate effectively effectively .
 With respect to inadvertent signals, one would suppose retrospectively that the Soviet Union might have picked up sufficient signals between October 16 and 22 to move to pre-empt the planned American initiative .
 Open society excels in at producing noise that can hide hidden signals . Open society may not be good at damping down inadvertent signals, but it excels at hiding them . An open society is good at hiding signals, not dampening them, it says .
 When the crisis looked most grim to American policy-makers , this may have been due only to delay in receiving a message .
 One result of the crisis was the establishment of the “hot line,” permitting instantaneous private communication . The ‘hot line’ was established after the crisis .
 How a hot line would have affected the course of the Cuban crisis is hard to say, but it should be pointed out that it only facilitates communication . A hot line could have been used to help Cuban dissidents .
 It transmits with equal efficiency all sorts of messages, including threats and deceptions, says CNN.com.com .
 Thomas Schelling's brilliant book, The Strategy of Conflict, provides one useful basis for a partial analysis and understanding of the Cuban missile crisis .
 In certain respects the contestants were employing the kind of tactics he discusses, especially in the matter of getting in the first strong commitment . In some respects, the contestants used the same tactics as he discusses .
 The Soviet Union conducted its operation in Cuba secretly and hurriedly (somewhat competitive values) in order to present the United States with a fait accompli .
 Once the bases had been completed and revealed to the world, the Soviet Union presumably would have had an even stronger incentive to keep them . Perhaps it would have been reluctant even to attempt to remove them from the U.S.
 The U.S. wanted to make an effective but not unnecessarily dangerous commitment to remove the missiles before the bases were completed . Conversely, once the United States discovered the Soviet operation, it wanted to remove them .
 There was a race to make the first public commitment, and the U.S. had the critical advantage of knowing it was in such a race . The United States was in the lead in the race to be the first to make a public commitment .
 The second, dramatic instance of the “first commitment” tactic involved the nuclear warning contained in President Kennedy's speech of October 22 . President Kennedy warned the U.S. on October 22, 1962 .
 Khrushchev had incentive to keep missiles under Soviet control and, if possible, his personal control . It made it reckless for him to threaten to do otherwise .
 If Khrushchev had already announced that he had turned control of the missiles over to the Cuban government, it would have become reckless or pointless for Kennedy to make the threat that he did . Conversely, if Khrushiev had already said that he'd turned control over to Cuba, Kennedy
 The Cuban crisis suggests that other factors — including other types of strategic moves — that Schelling does not emphasize can also be of critical importance . However, I believe that .
 In a crisis it is important not only to be able to threaten your opponent but also to reassure your opponent . This is especially true in the case of a crisis .
 The success of American policy depended to a considerable extent on the ability of the U.S. to assure the Soviet Union as to the limited nature of its objectives, historian says .
 The Soviet Union would have been less ready to retreat if it had not been persuaded that the U.S. would not press its initiative further and would not make further demands . The United States would not seek total Soviet withdrawal from Cuba, the elimination of the Castro government .
 The Soviet accommodation was also facilitated by the American willingness to go along with Khrushchev’s “no invasion – no need for missiles” rationale . The U.S. also went along with the ‘no invasion’ rationale .
 The strategic moves that Schelling finds interesting are the ones that are “interesting” from a theoretical point of view, in particular threats made credible by more or less irrevocable commitments .
 There is something fascinating about the idea that it may be wise to reduce one's own discretion in a conflict situation . And indeed there is a fascinating idea about reducing one's discretion in conflict .
 You may want to use such tactics in, for example, an experimental game situation . You may also want to play in an experimental situation .
 Your opponent may not even notice or understand the ingenious way in which you have committed yourself . In which case you can run through the game again, you can play it again .
 In international politics in the nuclear age, however, one cannot conduct foreign policy in this experimental frame of mind, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "In international politics ... one can't conduct foreign . policy in the . nuclear age"
 "It is too risky; the scope, if not the probability, of potential disaster is too great," says President Obama . "It's too risky. It is too dangerous," he says .
 The types of strategic moves to which Schelling gives most attention are not those that are most commonly employed in international politics, even — perhaps especially — in crises . In summary, Schelling's strategic moves are not that of those most commonly used in politics .
 Schelling is useful and perhaps necessary for a thoughtful analysis of the Cuban Crisis, but he is not sufficient . He is useful but not sufficient for a serious analysis of what happened .
 The crises is divided into three phases on the basis of the information available to the participants . The crises are divided into . three phases of the crisis .
 The first two phases are ‘played’ under conditions of imperfect information, the first two are “played” under imperfect information .
 In the first phase, the Soviet Union begins installing missiles in Cuba, but the U.S. does not know about this . The first phase is the first stage, installing missiles, in Cuba . The United States is not aware of this .
 In the second phase, the United States knows what the S.U. is doing but the U.S. does not know . The United States has “found out’s actions’, but the United.S., U.K. knows what it is doing