 A third-world country, Cuba was not to be a threat to any major powers of the world in the mid-Twentieth Century . Cuba was a third world country, but not a major threat to major powers in the world .
 The Domino Theory said that if a state whose government lay in fragility fell to communism, other similarly circumstanced states in the region would follow . However, the existing foreign policy of the United States of massive retaliation, derived from the Domino theory, stated that it would be the
 President Eisenhower’s Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, would require military action and a magnificent display of arms to squander any communist forces . This massive retaliation would be a massive retaliation, from President Eisenhower's Secretary of state .
 President Eisenhower gave the Central Intelligence Agency authority to begin training Cuban political refugees, residing in southern Florida, to fight in a guerilla manner . President Eisenhower responded by giving the CIA authority to train Cuban refugees .
 President Kennedy wanted the Cuban government, the U.S. population, and the rest of the world to think that this invasion was believably led by Cuban rebels2. President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy demanded a different invasion plan of the C.I.A.’s design . President Kennedy insisted on a new invasion plan for the U.S.
 On April 4, he would approve a plan on a less crowded beach with a more easily defendable cover-up that the U.S. was not involved . The plan would be approved on April 4 .
 Operation Zapata, or more commonly known as the Bay of Pigs, would be known as 'Operation Zapata' This plan would have included the capture of the U.S. President George W. Bush .
 This incident would fail, and result in the capture or deaths of every member of Brigade 2506 . This would be the first attempt to capture or kill all of the members of the brigade 2506.
 The success of this invasion relied upon the indigenous Cuban people rising up in support of the invading anti-Castro Cubans . The success relied upon this success of the invasion relied on the indigenous people .
 The ill-conceived coup d'etat failed miserably. This, as well as a perceived air support from the United States Air Force did not happen . This, along with a perceived U.S. Air Force support, did not .
 Khrushchev’s impression of Kennedy as a weak-willed child would be solidified after this military blunder of the U.S. The United States. would be the first to make a mistake .
 The incident would also encourage Khrushchev’s thought that the Soviet Union could become dominant over the United States . The incident confirmed the fears of Cubans that the U.S. government was hell bent on wrecking havoc on the defenseless country .
 Khrushchev began to covertly send materials to construct nuclear arms to Cuba in 1962 . Following the Bay of Pigs fiasco, he began sending materials to Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s reasoning behind the latter was that if he could intimidate President Kennedy in Cuba long enough, the distraction would be 2 The Sixties . Premier Khrushchev was hoping to intimidate the President Kennedy long enough .
 Khrushchev removed the capitalistic enclave within his satellite state, East Germany, from East Germany . First broadcast June 5, 2014, on the set .
 Berlin was, strategically, more vital to the Soviet Union than a sole communist island in the Caribbean . Berlin was more important to the Soviets than a single communist island .
 By placing emphasis on Cuba, Khrushchev effectively halted any U.S. action in East Germany during the Kennedy Administration . Following the Berlin Crisis of 1961, the U.K. stopped any action against East Germany .
 By the summer of 1962, the Soviet Union was sending what appeared to be transportation ships to Latin America . The ships were seen in the early months of the year .
 Operation Anadyr was meant to assist the Cubans in construction of nuclear missile launch sites . In actuality, the Soviets were sending infantry to assist with construction of the sites .
 According to Sergei Khrushchev, the Soviets learned that their missiles would be severely inferior to the Jupiter missiles the U.S. possessed in Turkey . The Soviets learned from the Soviets that their missile technology would be inferior to their Jupiter missiles .
 This fact only served as fuel for the Soviet cause to have insurance against what was, in their eyes, an imminent U.S. attack .
 Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied agricultural delegates to Havana as part of the red herring that allowed the Soviets to physically step foot on the island without U.S. detection . The Soviets were able to enter Cuba without United States detection .
 The massive cover up was called “maskirovka” by the Soviets, and entailed the use of denial and deceit to serve as a means to an end . This massive cover-up was known as “Maskirov’s” in the Soviet
 During the same summer, the United States announced, through legislation in Congress, that PHIBRIGLEX-62, a major military exercise, would be conducted in the Caribbean . The exercise would take place during the summer of 2013 .
 Castro believed this was the early stages of a second U.S. invasion of Cuba . Castro was outraged, and believed this to be a second United States invasion . Castro believed it was the beginning of a U.N. invasion .
 The reason for the military exercise on the part of the U.S. was in effect, to prove or prove or 3 Frankel, Max. Frankel .
 Director John McCone himself briefed President Kennedy on a theory that the Soviets might be constructing missiles with nuclear capabilities on Cuba’s northern shores .
 On September 15, the first Soviet missiles reached Cuba at the port of Mariel4.4 . The first Soviet missile strike was carried out in Cuba .
 MRBMs were installed to the east and west of Havana, with plans for IRBMs to also be installed to west . Plans for the west also planned to install an IRBM to be installed in Havana .
 On October 7, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado spoke at a United Nations General Assembly, in which he stated that Cuba was in the possession of “inevitable weapons” The United States largely ignored the threat .
 Eight cans of film taken by U-2 spy planes by the U.S. military in the Caribbean were sent to the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington . The discovery of arms was made in 1962 .
 The cans of film revealed two nuclear missile launch sites on the island of Cuba . The possibility of the sites being used in Cuba could be used to launch missiles .
 The following day, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy informed President Kennedy of the presence of nuclear arms aimed at the U.S. from the island of Cuba .
 President Kennedy’s immediate reaction was to keep the impending crisis quiet, for two reasons . President Kennedy's immediate reaction to the crisis was to quiet the news .
 He had to act not as that of a president, but as a father, he said . He said: 'I'm not a president but a father. I'm a father'
 In private, he told his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, that the two of them had enjoyed a good life . He told Robert Kennedy that he and Robert Kennedy had enjoyed good life together . In private he said he and his brother enjoyed a "good life"
 President Kennedy made the decision to not brief the American public until a viable plan was in place, as not to arouse certain panic . President Kennedy decided not to brief the public until there was no viable plan in place .
 President Kennedy had assured the U.S. public that “he would not allow the Soviets to install offensive weapons in Cuba”9.9. President Kennedy assured the American public that he would not . allow the Soviet Union to install . offensive weapons . in Cuba .
 President Kennedy wanted to regain the upper hand in the cold war against Nikita Khrushchev . The premier calling the president's bluff did nothing to aid Kennedy’s cause .
 1962 was a year of midterm elections for the United States. Additionally, 1962 was the year of midterms for the U.S. Congress .
 If President Kennedy could not entertain the American public with his ability to effectively handle the Soviets, candidates like his own brother, Ted Kennedy, of the same party, would not be elected .
 President Kennedy recognized that if he called out Premier Khrushchev’s efforts in Cuba, the Soviet Union would be revealed . Most notably, President Kennedy was able to do so without revealing the Soviets' efforts .
 If that happened, the events that followed would be out of Kennedy’s control . Kennedy: "If that happened it would have been out of the control"
 President Kennedy’s call as to how to handle the inevitable conflict was President Kennedy's call . With the fate of his party, and more importantly, the country, in his hands, it was his call . The fate of the country was in the president's hands .
 Attorney General Kennedy suggested a full-scale invasion of Cuba once more . Attorney General Robert Kennedy suggested invasion of the island nation . Kennedy: "It's a war of war with Cuba"
 A second invasion was, in fact, in the planning stages of the U.S. military, under the name of Operation Ortsac . The second invasion of Iraq was in fact planned for the United States in the 1980s and 1990s .
 President Kennedy wished not to have another blunder involving the island of Cuba, especially when the fate of the world could be in his hands . President Kennedy, however, wishes not to .
 Kennedy wanted to slow down the crisis down, allowing himself and his cabinet time to think . Kennedy said he wanted to allow the crisis to take its own time and think .
 In a way, the decision to implement the blockade was actually the first move towards a compromise with the Soviet Union . The blockade was called a “quarantine” to soften the wording to be less militaristic .
 President Kennedy notified the American people of the threat that both Castro and Khrushchev’s regimes were placing, not only on the United States, but on the world as a whole . Kennedy had been briefed on the presence of Soviet missiles .
 President Kennedy promised to “quarantine” Cuba (promising that no Soviet ships bound for Cuba would be allowed through a United States Naval blockade) and his retort that any action taken by the Soviet Union or Cuba through use of missile launch would be met with 10 The S
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . JFK Museum . Kennedy Library . Kennedy Museum . Museum .
 The United States Air Force’s defense readiness was upgraded to Defcon 2 . Air Force bombers circled American airspace . The U.S. Air Force's defense readiness has been upgraded .
 On October 24, Khrushchev’s response letter stated that the president's naval blockade was a “pirate act” and that the Soviet ships inbound were instructed to ignore it . On October 25, the Soviet Union was ordered to ignore the blockade .
 ExComm met several times a day from the span of October 16 to October 28, 1962 . Negotiations and Compromise met several days a day between the two sides .
 The secret service was “braced for an evacuation of key personnel by helicopter” if nuclear war was imminent, according to former agent on Jackie Kennedy’s detail, Clint Hill14 .
 Feklisov asked Scali to speak to U.S. officials regarding a solution to the crisis, not involving full-scale nuclear armageddon . Scali: A solution not involving nuclear arms Armageddon is not a solution .
 Scali delivered the message to the necessary high-up officials in the White House the same day15. Scali, did, in fact, deliver the message .
 The crisis came to its climax when the first few Soviet ships came into the view of the American blockade around the Caribbean islands .
 The situation in Cuba had begun to collapse, as two additional R-12 launch sites that had been in construction would be completed and operational . The situation had been beginning to collapse as two more launch sites had been completed .
 United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson requested to the ExComm that the quarantine be lifted in exchange that the Soviets stop the 13 O'Reilly, Bill, and Martin DuGard . The quarantine was lifted in return for the Soviets stopping the 13 .
 McCone, Bundy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk all opposed this idea immediately . Bundy and Rusk opposed the idea immediately.
 According to Soviet records, a decision had been made the previous day, October 25 . The decision was made the day before the Soviet Union made a decision .
 The Soviet infantry stationed at the missile launch sites would be instructed to begin dismantling the missiles17. In addition to this, the Soviet infantry would also be told to dismantle the missiles .
 At 6:00 PM in Washington, a personalized letter from Premier Khrushchev arrived to President Kennedy . The letter prompted by the meeting with Scali and Feklisov . President Kennedy received the letter in Washington .
 The letter opened the door to compromise, as it, in a somewhat discombobulated fashion, asked for negotiations to begin . The letter opens the door for compromise, and asks for negotiations .
 President Kennedy did not lift the blockade following Khrushchev’s letter . However, he did allow him time to act . President Kennedy allowed time to lift blockade, but not lift it .
 Khrushchev had not mobilized the Soviet army to full alert, perhaps due to his belief that President Kennedy was bluffing about retaliating if Soviet ships passed quarantine .
 Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy from the Soviet Union to Kennedy . Unknown to the public was the letter that was sent to Kennedy in 1962 .
 The letter said that Soviet Union ships bound for Cuba were not carrying weapons . The letter also said that the Soviet Union ship was not carrying any weapons .
 The United States in return would make a statement that it would not invade Cuba . The U.S. would also agree to a statement of support for Cuba in exchange for Cuba's sovereignty .
 The secret negotiation allowed the Soviet Union to agree to dismantle the missiles in Cuba if the U.S. agreed to dismantle their missile in Turkey . The secret deal was made with the United States and the Soviets in Cuba .
 In 1963, President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev established the MoscowWashington hotline . The hotline was a direct communication system between the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. and the Kremlin in Moscow, Russia .
 This shift toward a lessening of the tumultuous relations between the Soviet Union and the United States served as a precursor to the period of detente . The countries were beginning to gradually learn how to coexist, despite their socioeconomic and political differences .
 The Modern Era, ABC-CLIO, 2018, Accessed January 7, 2018. World History.com: "The Modern Era"
 Photographs taken by United States intelligence of the Port of Mariel and the presence of nuclear-capable weapons . Used in Appendix A to demonstrate the photographs taken by U.S. intelligence .
 Castro describes his interpretation and the Cubans’ reasoning behind installing medium and intermediate range missiles from the Soviet Union . In the release, Castro describes the Cuban government’s decision to install missiles .
 A photograph of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba, taken during a U-2 reconnaissance flight in 1962, was taken by U.2 .
 Used in Appendix A to show the photographic evidence of missile launch sites .
 Names like McNamara, Gribkov, and even Castro are present in the transcriptions . Names such as McNamara and Castro are mentioned in the transcripts .
 A memorandum addressed to the news editors of the United States that briefed said editors on how to handle coverage of the missile presence in October 1962 .
 Clint Hill describes his witnessing of historic events in U.S. history of the mid-Twentieth Century from a unique perspective . Hill was in charge of the “Jackie Kennedy and children’s” detail, Clint Hill .
 Hill illustrates an observer’s view of the crisis as it unfolded; one of panic and ignorance, and blind trust in the government trying to save his family's lives . Hill illustrates a panic and naivety in the face of the government .
 Khrushchev's telegram to the White House described as ‘rambling and emotional’ The telegram left the United States with the initial feeling that a compromise might be found . Khrushchchev sent the telegram that left the U.S. with an initial feeling
 Khrushchev discusses how the Soviet Union saw the American Empire as dangerous and why the Soviets felt the necessity to be prepared for an American instigation . The Soviet Union was prepared for a possible instigation by the U.S.
 President Kennedy addressed the presence of weapons with nuclear capabilities on the island of Cuba . An audio recording of the memorandum was released by President Kennedy that addressed the situation .
 This offered a unique and specific perspective in that of someone not existentially angry at the United States, but rather terrified that they were in fact the “villains” of the crisis . This offer a unique perspective of someone who is terrified of the U.S.
 Online database chronicles the events of October 1962 through the eyes of both the U.S. government and the general public . An online database that went in depth, chronicling the events .
 Used during the initial phases of research to find general knowledge on the topic . Used in the initial stages of research .
 Max Frankel gathered notes on events leading up to the crisis from both Soviet and American perspectives . The book was used to gather notes from both sides of the war .
 Kremlin and White House policies in 1962 . Quotes are based on the policies derived from the policies of the Kremlin and the White House .
 A biographic piece that depicts the relationships between presidents and former presidents of the United States . This book went in depth on the crisis and how both President Kennedy responded to the crisis . Kennedy sought advice from former presidents Truman and Eisenhower .
 This magazine issue was released as a special edition as a joint effort by TIME and LIFE magazines to commemorate the 100th birthday of John F Kennedy . This issue is a special issue of TIME magazine magazine .
 President Kennedy used the ExComm to assist him during the crisis . Articles in the magazine give broad overviews of the crisis as it unfolded and how it unfolded .
 Torch Magazine highlights how the Soviet Union acted throughout Premier Khrushchev’s regime and why their thoughts could perceivably be justified . A source that gives perspective of the citizens of Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Written by someone who was a child when the Cuban Revolution occurred, this online article chronicles the events of the mid Twentieth Century involving the U.S. and Latin America from the perspective of a child in Ft.A.
 The article offers details on how close, both physically and symbolically, the island was and continues to be with southern Florida . The article also offers details of the island's relationship with Florida .
 A biographical novel that discusses the presidency of John F Kennedy in its entirety . This book chronicles the events of October 1962 from within both the White House and the Grand Kremlin Palace .
 A detailed online article by The Atlantic that discusses the entirety of the crisis and discusses U.S.-Soviet relations prior to and following the events of October 1962 .
 The, at times, opinionated article argues various points, such as that the Soviets were justified in believing that the U.S. wanted to topple the Cuban government . The article argues that the United States was justified in trying to topple Cuba .
 A CNN miniseries that aired in 2014, this episode of a multi-part documentary that encompassed the atmosphere of the 1960s as a whole delves into the tenuous relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States during said decade .
 A biography written about the former Attorney General of the United States and brother of President John F Kennedy, this book tells the story of the life of Robert F Kennedy . The book is written by Robert F. Kennedy, a former attorney general and brother to President Kennedy .
 This issue of TIME magazine was released as a special edition to commemorate the 100th birthday of President John F Kennedy .
 Portions of the issue cover the events of October 1962 to give an overview of the events . Portions cover the crisis in a broad sense, to give a broad overview of events .
 Used to facilitate a basic structure for how my historical paper would be organized . Used to help facilitate structure for historical paper .