 U.S. missiles in Turkey are of no military value, President Obama says . He later acknowledges that such missiles are not of any military value .
 There is a further, unindexed reference to TJ.S, pressure on the British govt. to frustrate the repeated elections won by Cheddi Jagan.
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy had intended to write the history of his own administration . Kennedy had planned to write his own history of the administration .
 "No one else will ever be able to achieve the central, the presidential, perspective on these years," says President Obama . Obama's presidency will be remembered for his "central perspective"
 Even the official closest to Kennedy, then the U.S. president, was surprised at the variety of issues he had not known about before .
 A presidential associate inevitably tends to overrate the significance of the things he does know about, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "A presidential associate, moreover, always overrates the importance of things he doesn't know about"
 The presidential p erspective on this administration is now tragically and irretrievably lost . Grace Tully, who was Franklin D Roosevelt's personal secretary, acutely observed of the books written by the men around F.D.R. Roosevelt .
 I said I understood he did not want us to keep full accounts of anything . I said that I had understood he . understood he wanted us to . keep full records of anything, he said . He said he understood he had understood that he wanted to .
 CIA and Joint Chiefs chiefs have a record of their work together . The Joint Chiefs have their own record, and the CIA has its own .
 Stevenson took Kennedy into his 3tudy for a private talk . When they arrived, Stevenson took them to a private room .
 This was just after the Soviet Union had shot down the CIA's U-2 plane engaged in photographic reconnaissance over Russia . The two men agreed in their assessment of what they regarded as a bungled administration response to the incident .
 When Kennedy first met James Mlchener, he said, I've always liked your Fires of Spring, " foregoing the inevitable Tales af the South Pacific" When tie net Eugene Burdick, he mentioned The_ iTinth.' wave , not Tfae""~Ugly
 Stevenson had pointed out that Kennedy would need to be brought promptly up to date on the main problems of foreign policy if elected . Perhaps he should make provision now for a report to be delivered right after the election .
 He displayed absolute assurance about his capacity to do the job; and he had a hard and sure instinct about bow to get what he wanted . He displayed confidence about his ability to do it; .
 The will to ooramand and the will to victory were visible and unbeatable, says Kennedy . Kennedy's will to win was visible, unbeatable and visible in Kennedy's life .
 Kennedy had to an exceptional degree the gift of friendship and, in consequence, a great diversity of friends . Part of his gift was to give each the sense that be alone had a clue to the mystery .
 The friends came in layers the Choate and Harvard friends, the friends from the Navy, the social friends from Palm Beach and Newport . Each layer considered itself closest to the center of the conversation .
 When he entered politics, it came to mean moral courage the courage to which he later dedicated his Profiles, the courage of a man who does what he must in spite of personal consequences . The courage which, he said, 'is the basis of all human morality'
 We are a new generation which science and technology and the change in world forces are going to require us to face entirely new problems which will require new solutions . We are the new generation of people who will need to face new problems, says the president .
 Avoid self-righteousness like the devil nothing is so self-blinding, "" Liddell .art was addressing these remakrs to statesmen; they work just as well for historians .
 For all the presumed coolness on the surface, he~had an instinctive tendency to put himself into the skins of others . Kennedy rarely lost sight of other people's motives and problems, says historian .
 At a neighboring table, a man obviously drunk, began in a low but penetrating voice to direct a stream of unprintable comment at him . The comment was directed at the man, who was obviously drunk .
 Kennedy's companions raised their own voices in the hope that he would not hear, but to frio avail, they did not hear . Kennedy's friends raised their voices in an attempt to get him to hear .
 On Wednesday night after the elecfcicn he relaxed at dinner I with several friends . He relaxes at dinner he had with friends .
 The gropp fell into an animated discus of what the President-elect should do first . The groopp fell into a discus. sion .
 One guest suggested that he fire J Edgar Hoover of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, another that he . fire Allen W Dulles of the Central Intelligence Agency . Another suggested that J. Edgar Hoover be fired .
 Kennedy, listening with apparent interest, egged his friends on when “when ‘they opened their papers the next morning, they were therefore a little irritated to read a Kennedy announcement that Hoover and Dulles were , staying in their jobs .
 Kennedy relaxed at dinner night after the election night after election . Kennedy's Methods Political. Kennedy's methods political. Kennedy .
 The gropp fell into an an an im ated discus fhn* 1 h 1, fM &t he ^, r2Si o eafc ' eleet s kould do first . The discus fell into a pool of water .
 The discussiai concentrated on points of crisis, especially on the mounting difficulties in Laos . Laos is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Herter, the retiring Secretary of State added that he did not think that the Soviet bloc intended a maior war in Southeast Asia but that they would continue to make trouble up to the brink . Herter said that he didn't think that ""the Soviet bloc"" intended a major war
 Herter recommended the U.S. convince the communists of our intention to defend Laos . At the same time trvinc to persuade our allies to move with us in concert, Herter said .
 If a political setcoulBn o tBe pranged in Laos, then this country must intervene . lsenhower added that Laos was the key to all Southeast Asia .
 If the communists took Laos, they would bring ""unbelievable pressure” on Thai land, Cambodia and Cambodia, Vietnam . The communists would bring ‘unrealistic pressure’ on Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam .
 Laos, Laos, he said with solemnity, was so important that, if it reached the point where we could not persuade others to act with us, then he would be willing, ""as a last desperate hope, to intervene unilaterally"
 He wondered for a moment why communist soldiers always seemed to have better morale than the soldiers ""representing the democratic forces""; evidently there was something about ""the communist philospphy' which gave their supporters ""a certain inspiration and a certain dedication"
 Kennedy said it would be fatal to per* cor ™ unlsts an Y P a rt in a new Laotian regime, citing the Experience or Uhl na and the Marshall mission* Kennedy, listening quietly, finally asked how long it would take to put an ■American
 The President-elect prepared himself with great care, and the two men talked by themselves for seventy-five minutes before walking arm-in-arm into the Cabinet Room . Clifford and Persons were waiting for Persons to arrive .
 Eisen hower, who had previously called Kennedy a ""young whippersnapper "" was overwhelmed by Senator Kennedy's understanding of the world problems, the depth of his questions, his grasp of the issues and the keenness of his mind .
 The subsequent rapport between the two principals assisted the transition process . The two principals had a rapport between each other during the transition .
 Kennedy was concerned throughout not to assume responsibility until he assumed power . But Kennedy was worried throughout that he would not assume responsibility for his actions until he took power .
 Eisenhower administration did not try to inveigle Kennedy into underwriting its policies . Eisenhower administration didn't try to pressure Kennedy to underwrite its policies, he says .
 There were exceptions, however most notably when K obert Anderson, the outgoing Secretary of the Treasury, wanted a Kennedy man to go with him to Bonn and discuss the gold problem with the Germans .
 Kennedy instead asked Paul Nitze to receive Anderson's report on his return . Kennedy asked him to report Anderson's return to Washington .
 The State Department sought Kennedy's advance approval of a proposal for &. b© submit tod to th© Dosoubsr me 6 1 i ng of the North . Similarly the State. Department sought the approval of the proposal for . multilateral nuclsar foPc
 Kennedy declined to speak with the NATO Director of G.I. Atlantic Council, PaulHenri Spaak . Kennedy again declined, instead asking Nitze and David Bruce to talk quietly with Spaak, Spaak.
 Eisenhower administration terminated diplomatic relations with Castro regime early in January . Kennedy informed but took no part in the decision . Kennedy was informed but did not participate in decision .
 Cuban men picked up 14-year-old Cuban girls and tossed coins to make men scramble in the gutter . "My fellow countrymen reeled through the streets, picking up 14 year-old girls and tossing coins," he says .
 The stimulus to raw material prices provided first by the Second World War and later by the Korean War made it easy to argue that Latin America had no basic economic problems . Latin America's economy has been hit hard by the World War .
 The Elsenhower administration was able to relax in the comfortable doctrine that private investment by itself would bring about development in Latin America . The way to enable private investment to do its job was to back governments which would foster a favorable investment climate by leaving private business alone, guaranteeing investors .
 President Eisenhower awarded the Legion of Merit to dictators like Perez Jimenez of Venezuela and Manuel Odria of Peru . This meant, of course, right-wing governments; and it was this thesis, rather than an innate preference for dictatorships, was the thesis .
 The insistence on monetary stability before all else received the ardent support of the international Monetary Fund . The IMF imposed deflation on a number of Latin American states as the condition for IMF loans .
 The theory of development as an act of immaculate private conception was founded, among other things, on a considerable ignorance of bhe history of economic development in the United States itself .
 When what economists unhappily term 'social overhead capital* or 'infrastructure* is the great need, public investment becomes a necessity, since private capital will not go into these areas of low return . When private capital won't go to these areas, it is a necessity .
 Washington's insistence on fiscal purity was perhaps unseemly on the part of a naticn which had financed so much of its own development by Inflation, wildcat paper money and bonds sold to foreign investors and subsequently repudiated .
 The policy of the fifties not only violated our own national practice; it was also manifestly inadequate to the problems of Latin America . It reinforced the cherished conviction that the essense of the United States purpose was economic imperialism .
 Its result had been to place our position in extreme jeopardy throughout the hemisphere . Its result was the result of the result being placed under extreme jeopardy . It had been placed in danger throughout the world .
 The rise of Fidel Castro in Cuba in Cuba was transforming a failure of policy into a threat to security . And the rise of the Castro regime was transforming the failure of foreign policy into an issue of security, he says .
 ThBs was the situation which the President feared and into which he was not asking McGovern and me to look into . The President feared the situation, he said, and was not looking into it .
 The shift to laissez faire was more puzzling, though it was in part a response to the economic orthodoxy of the Eisenhower administration and the International Monetary Fund . The shift was part of the response to an economic orthodoxy .
 When we met with Alvaro Carlos Alsogaray, the Minister of Economy, he thundered at us ^cross the conference table about the virtues of his ‘free enterprise policies .
 Prondizi was skeptical about Pood for Peace and, indeed, about 'social investment' in general . He was skeptical of the idea, but he said it was a good idea to do so .
 This was a common Latin reaction to the program launched in i960 at Bogota . Social Progress *und and increased investment in housing, education and other forms of welfare .
 Prondizi argued that development required hard capital investment in heavy industry . If this were done, the new wealth produced would take care of the social problems .
 A continentwide program of basic economic growth, he said, was the only way to save the hemisphere from communism . He said a continentwide economic growth program was needed to save communism .
 Jorge Luis Borges should be receiving $60 a month as director of the Biblioteca Hacional less, as he bitterly remarked, than a street cleaner . It seemed characteristic thht the remarkable writer, Borges, whom I had been particularly eager to meet, should be
 In general, the government appeared weary and lacking imagination or energy . The government appeared to be lacking energy or imagination .
 When we went on to Brazil, the contrast was spectacular, tinder tinder Juscelino Kubitschek, the retiring president . The sheer momentum of growth had charged the nation with a certain economic dynamism . The contrast is spectacular .
 Brazil could show as a result not only inordinate inflation and inordinate graft but a solid increase in its industrial base and national output . Yet Brazil, while defying the orthodoxies of public finance and defrauding the International Monetary Fund, defrauds the international Monetary Fund .
 Wild as it all was, it somehow seemed better than the stagnation of Argentina . But one wondered whether a middle course might not be possible .
 "Of course, I have had my disagreements with and disappointments over some of the things we have done," he says . "I have had some disagreements with ... but I am very proud of what I have achieved," he adds .
 The main trouble does not lie in the United States; It lies in Latin America, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The source of othe difficulty is that the haves in Latin America do not realize that their day is over . The problem is that they don't realize that they have to wait for their day to come to an end .
 The process of revoluation in Bolivia had begun haltingly with the MNR uprising of 1943 . The MNR returned to power in 1932 and, during the presidency of Victor Paz Estenssoro, carried through one of the few genuine social transformations .
 Eisenhower administration gave Bolivia more grant aid than any other country in the hemisphere about £±xgS $150 million . Bolivians were exempt from the government's nationalization of tin mines .
 This aid, however, had produced little in the way of economic stimulus or other visible result . This aid has produced little economic stimulus .
 Much of the money had gone for direct budgetary support; the rest for technical assistance . Much of it had gone to direct budget support; much of it was for technical support .
 In I960 the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs actually told the House Eoseign Affairs Committee with regard to a projected development program, "We had to tell the Bolivian Government that they couldn't put their money into it"
 Paz Estenssoro, whose second term as president had recently begun, was now struggling to get his poor and isolated nation moiing again . Estrensoro's second term was recently begun .
 The visitor to the Presidential Palace in La paz must pass by the lamppost where the corpse of President Villaroel dangled in 1946 . Paz Estenssoro may now must today must today from his exile in Peru .
 The great need in Latin America, he said, was to incorporate the poor people into both the money economy and the political society . He said the great need is to include the poor into the political and money economy .
 Too much of Latin America lingered in a quasifeudal state, with the very poor, and especially the Indians, living under the domination of a landed oligarchy which thought it was ruling by divine right .
 The longer the oligarchs resist change, Paz said, the more violent revolution would be when it came . Paz: "The oligarchs resisted change, the longer the longer it would be"
 Peru and Ecuador, he added, are particularly near the point of social explosion . Peru, Ecuador and Peru, he said, were particularly near to the point . Ecuador is particularly close to a social explosion, he warned .
 Even a Republican administration in Washington had provided the margin of financial support which had saved the Bolivian Revolution from disaster . I responded that many North Americans agreed with this analysis .
 Kennedy administration could be depended on to look on revolution with sympathy, but not so when revolution meant dictatorship, repression and the entry of alien forces into the hemisphere . The Kennedy administration looked on revolution as a healthy social change .
 The leaders of the Bolivian government surety bore a particular responsibility to maintain the integrity of their revolution . Bolivians must maintain their revolution, says the president of Bolivia .
 The coml83 munists have made themselves the advocates of the just demands of the workers and peasants . They have been made themselves advocates of just demands .
 He gloomily admitted that they might try to take over Bolivia as they had taken over Cuba . The communists proved especially successful in winning adherents and forcing issues, he said .
 Three hard weeks at Buenos Aires convinced Dillon that Washington’s diagnosis of the hemisphere was badly wrong . Dillon: ‘Three hard weeks’ convinced him that Washington was wrong . The U.S. needs to work with Argentina and other Latin American nations.
 In one hut a baby, lying helplessly in his* mother* s arms, was dying of measles . In another hut, a baby lay dying in his mother's arms . The baby died of measles.
 The rest of the fanily of seven S ^ tting on th,e dlrt floor eating a hopeless meal of beans and farina . When McGovern and I entered, they looked up apathetically, except for a ’ naked baby, perhaps eighteen months old,
 "He was covered with scabs and pockmarks, and we were reluctant to touch him," says the author of the book . He was covered in scabs, and covered in pock marks .
 A cameraman, who had come along in order to record evidence of need, kept flashing pictures of this terrible scene . Furtado was realistic in his assessment of possibilities .
 Seeing no present hope of doing anything in the semi-arid zone, he was concentrating on the sugar lands . The sugar lands are the mainstay of the project .
 An emergency food program, he said, would do nop good; it might even disturb the existing dietary balance which kept the people marginally alive . He said emergency food programs would not do good; they would disturb existing dietary balances .
 If you give them food and do nothing to change their i way of life, they will only work less . If you do nothing, you will only be able to work less, they say . Give them food, do nothing and change their way of living .
 As we drove through the desperate countryside, Furtado discussed women as the index of the state of development .
 After nine hours in the hinterland, we returned, tired and depressed, to Recife, Brazil . We spent nine hours exploring the countryside before heading back to Brazil .
 As we got out of the car, an enameled Brazilian girl came out in high heels and a chic Paris dress .
 During the fifties the American Embassy regarded him with mistrust as a Marxist, even possibly a communist . During the 1950s he was regarded by the U.S. Embassy as a Communist .
 In 1961 Furtado seemed to see the problem of the northeast as a personal race between himself and the agitator Francisco Juliao . Juliao was organizing the peasants in Ligas Camponeses and urging them to seize the land .
 McGovern and I was both appalled by the magnitude of the problem and impressed by the initiatives which Brazil had already taken . McGovern: 'We were both appalled and impressed'
 The struggle of the invisible Latin America to join the twentieth century is confronting the U.S. with a crisis one which, if ignored, might end by transforming the southern half of the hemisphere into a boiling and angry Gina .
 A world at once fascinating and appalling in its internal contrasts, where a highly polished nineteenth century civiliation coexisted with unimaginable primitivism and squalor . Here was a world where a surging passion for modernization now threatened to sweep both aside .
 Three illegal changes of regime had taken place in the last thirty years but with deep pride in their more than a century of independence . Here were free republics with meager traditions of stability or continuity .
 Half of the western hemisphere would mock U.S. leadership before the world if it turned against us, he says . But if we could work effectively with Its people, it might provide the world a model in the processes of democratic development .
 Fidel Castro was the passionate leader of the Dub an Revolution, behind him the inarticulate woes of generations, and behind him too the thrust of communism from beyond the hemisphere . Here was the new young President of the United States, whose accession to power had already awakened fresh hope
 The democratic left In Latin America had turned decisively against Castro, writes Julian Zelizer . Castro would increasingly appear as the symbol not of social revolution but of Soviet penetration, he writes .
 If the U.S. were not ready to offer an affirmative program for democratic modernization, new Castros would undoubtedly rise across the continent . None1 theless, if the United States were not . ready to . offer a program for . democratic modernization . The United States is not ready
 John Moors Cabot fought in 1953 for a hemisphere program of economic assistance and social reform . Cabot was Assistant Secretary of State for Inter£ American Affairs . He fought for the hemisphere program .
 Cabot, discouraged, resigned to return to the field . But George Humphrey and his Treasury Departemtn denounced the whole idea, and Cabot resigned . Cabot was discouraged .
 His successor, Henry Holland, better fitted the DullesHumphrey mood . A doctrinaire apostle of ‘free enteru prise,* he passionately opposed, for example. He passionately opposed the idea of free entry .
 U.S. loans to public undertakings in Latin America . He feared that, if the progI ressive democrats came to power, they would curtail the power and disturb the confidence of businessmen .
 H 0 px an d tried to keep Romulo Betancourt from finding refuge in Puerto Rico . It was not the first time he had been allowed to leave Puerto Rico to find refuge in the US .
 Rubottom, Jr., Jr., is a Foreign Service officer of temperate but cautious views . He says he is concerned about the impact of the U.S. on the Middle East . Rubottoms is a foreign Service officer .
 Kennedy urged that Latin America be given a new priority in U.S. foreign policy . In a speech in Puerto Rico at the end of 1958, a few days before Fidel Castro entered Havana, Kennedy urged .
 Adolf Berle played a key role in the creation of the Good Neighbor policy . Berle had served Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of State and as ambassador to Brazil .
 More than anyone else, Berle provided the link between the Good-Neighbor policy and the Alliance for Progress . Berle was a key figure in the Good Neighbour policy .
 His experience in Brazil, where he helped in I 9 I 4. to set off the train of events leading to the overthrow of hhe Vargas dictatorship, convinced him that the Good Neighbor policy kbh could not survive as a diplomatic and Juridical policy alone .
 The principle of absolute nonintervention, he felt, did not exhaust the policy . It could only be the first phase in its unfolding, he said . The principle was not exhausting the policy, he added .
 If Good Neighborism did not mean a set of democratic ideas, it would be no more than a policy of sanctifying economic stagnation and political tyranny . This evolution of the Good Neighbor policy, Berle well understood, required the emergence in Latin America of political leaders and parties committed to democratic
 Berle made it his business to keep in close touch with Latin American democrats . Berle worked closely with Luis Munoz Marin, the remarkable governor of Puerto Rico .
 Together they developed a network of unofficial relationships with the partidos populates of Latin America . Together, they developed an informal network of informal relationships with Latin American communities .
 Kennedy, whose friendship with Munoz began with the Puerto Rican trip of 1958, fell heir to Munoz's ideas and relationships . Munoz and Kennedy's friendship began with Puerto Rican trips of 1958 .
 After graduating from Harvard Law School in 1958, came to Washington as law clerk to Justice Frankfurter . He was certainly driving and often impatient; those whom whom he overrode called him arrogant .
 He soon proved himself more skilled in writing for Kennedy than anyone but Sorenson . He also showed himself able to take on any subject, however new and complicated, with rapidity and peecision .
 Its significance, however, lay in the new elements it brought into official thinking . Its significance was in the fact that it brought in new elements of thinking .
 It was not just a military response as the Pentagon believed, or just an economic response, as some Latin Americans believed, but a combination of both . It saw the communist threat as requir197 Ing not just military response .
 Besides military containment, it urged the systematic and semiofficial promotion of democratic political parties . It also stressed the stress on economic development through country development plans . The country's development plans were also stressed .
 Kennedy's task force program carried out beyond Kennedy's Tampa speech or Dillon's Social Progress Trust Fund . These elements carried out the task force's program beyond the Tampa speech .
 If the recommendations were accepted, the goal of the U.S. would be not just a limited program of social development envisaged at Bogota but a long-term program of national and continental development, shielded against communist disruption .
 This view did not prevail In all parts of the executive branch. This view didn't prevail in all parts . This view was not the same view .
 A preference for right-wing governments had been implicit in the policy of the early Eisenhower years . The evolution of the Castro regime in Cuba had persuaded some, especially in the armed services, that the .right-wing alternative should now become the .explicit object of United States policy .
 The Cuban experience, it was argued, proved that the U.S. could never retain control of a Latin American revolution . It was argued that the United States could never keep control of the revolution, no matter how plausible .
 As for attempts to avert revolution through pressure for reform, this would alienate those who held the real power the oligarchy (more favorably known as the 'producing classes* or 'those commanding capital resources') and the military . This would open the door to incompetent liberals who would bring about
 The conclusion was that we should oppose revolution and reform in Latin America and concentrate on helping our 'tested friends' those who gave us economic privileges, military facilities and votes in the U.N.
 "If we did not support our true friends, we would only convince Latin America that our friendship was not worth having," says President Obama . "We are not going to be friends with Latin America if we do not support their true friends," he says .
 It was idle to say that a policy of permanent counterrevolution would not work; military support and antiguerrilla training would not . U.S. backing would keep any friendly regime in power, and the resulting social stability would attract investment .
 Eventually Americans might become capable of self-government . Eventually the ^atin Americans might be able to self-governors . Eventually they might be capable of government .
 Thebe was a sophisticated case for this policy, and it was made during his visits to Washington by a brilliant former diplomat, John Davies, Jr., who had been drummed out of the Foreign Service by John Foster Dulles . Davies was now running a furniture factory in Feru.
 Progressive civilian governments tended to be unstable and soft . Military governments were comparatively stable and provided security necessary for economic growth . The U.S. military government was comparatively stable in the 1980s .
 The military who really produced development were rare in Latin America . This argument, impressive in the abstract, was perhaps less satisfactory when it got down to cases, he says .
 In Washington the case for the right-wing alternative seemed to proceed less from thoughtful analysis of the conditions of growth than from unthinking satisfaction with the existing social order . In Washington, the case seems to be less from a thoughtful analysis .
 During the Second World War the U.S. armed services began to become acquainted with Latin America . The United States became involved in Latin America during World War II .
 Our officers naturally associated with members of the oligarchy, who spoke English and invited them to parties, and they naturally developed a fellow feeling, for their brother officers .
 War Department argued that military relations with Latin American governments should be enlarged in the interests of the security of the U.S. After the war, the War Department said .
 Truman proposed under Pentagon pressure and over the State Departments objections to standardize military organization, training methods, and equipment . In 19 ^)6 Truman proposed a standardized military organization and training methods throughout the hemisphere .
 In the wake of this policy came a program of arms exports to Latin American countries, arms exports have been exported .
 This program was reinforced by the Pentagon's chronic need to dispose of obsolescent weapons and thereby acquire credits against which new ones could be purchased . The Pentagon's need to sell old weapons is reinforced by its need to buy new ones .
 The U.S. military fell into the habit of conducting their own direct relations with their Latin American counterparts, training them in United States at schools, sending them on tours of United States military installations and welcoming their arms missions in Washington .
 The original rationale for all this was the supposed need to protect o the long coastlines of the Americas from foreign attack . This was supposed to protect them from foreign attacks . But the original rationale was to protect the Americas' long coastline .
 In time the notion of a flotilla crossing the ocean to invade Latin America began to lose what thin semblance of probability it might ever have had . The Pentagon began to cast about for new missions to justify its incestuous relations with the military of Latin America .
 By 1961 anti-submarine warfare and counterinsurgency were the favorite candidates . By 1961 the U.S. Navy was focused on anti-marine warfare, counter-surgency .
 D a tin American military naturally responded with delight to all overtures and even, in the case of anti-submarine warfare, played off the U.S. Navy against the United States Air Force to get the best possible weapons deal .
 U.S. military aid gave the recipient governments prestige and power . United States military aid was given to the recipients of the aid .
 Such gestures were somehow inconsistent with the spirit of the task force report, the report said . Such gestures would be "inappropriate with the Spirit of the report," the report says .
 For their part, democratic Latin American leaders began to use the United States arms program as a means of warding off right-wing coups, appeasing their own military and purchasing time for social reform .
 Frondizi hoped to placate bis generals and admirals by backing their requests for U.S. arms . He ruled on the sufferance of the Argentine military .
 Even Betancourt, confronted by Castro, Trujillo and internal unrest, was determined to make sure of his own army by getting his generals the arms they wanted .
 Brazil, Peru, Chile and Argentina devoting a quarter or more of their annual expenditures to military purposes . Argentina, Chile, Argentina, Peru and Peru all spend a quarter of annual expenditures on military .
 By lg6l the special interests of the military were threating to distort U.S. policy much as the specill interests of business had distorted policy thirty-five years earlier . The special interests were threatening to distort the United States policy .
 Even in the Eisenhower administration, the counterrevolutionary case had been a minority view, and in the new administration it had even less hope . Still, even in . Eisenhower administration,. still, it had . less hope, but in the . new administration .
 Pressure for a revival of the policy stirred beneath the surface . Nonetheless, pressure for a revived policy is still on the rise .
 He had opposed the decision of the Eisenhower administration to support OAS sanctions against Trujillo . He took every opportunity to advocate full support for all anti-communifet regimes .
 For men of Burke’s persuasion, talk of an alliance for progress could only seem bleeding-heart, do-good globaloney . But for men of . Burke's persuasion, such talk of a . progress for progress seems only to seem bleeding heart-hearted . globaloney,
 Berle comprehended also, in another part of his nature, the shadowy world of intrigue, conspiracy and violence . For Berle, with all his ardor for democracy and development, he comprehended, also, a shadowy world .
 He had an extensive knowledge of communist movements . He had a vivid apprehension of communist dangers .
 This ability to combine awareness of the communifet threat with a belief in social revolution was possibly one reason why Kennedy asked Berle to join the administration . This ability of combining awareness and social revolution may have been one reason for Kennedy to join Berle's administration .
 Kennedy fully understood this was, indeed, the mainspring of all his thinking about Latin America . For Kennedy, with all its pretensions to realism, the militant anti-revolutionary line represented the policy most likely to strengthen the communists .
 He believed that a policy of social idealism was the only true realism for the U.S. He said it was necessary to maintain contact with a continent seized by the course of revolutionary change .
 Mann had played a useful role in helping move hemisphere phlicy forward in Eisenhower years . Mann had an old Latin American hand's skepticism about the grandiose schemes of the Hew Frontiersmen . He was a good bureaucrat ^and ready to go along .
 We are disturbed at the thought of imitating methods which pursue their economic objectives at the cost of fundamental human freedoms . We are also disturbed by the thought that imitating economic methods cost human freedoms, we say .
 Let us once again transform the American continent into a vast crucible of revolutionary ideas and efforts, a tribute to the power of the creative energies of free men and women . Let us become an example to all the world that liberty and progress walk hand in hand .
 One found still a measure of doubt and cynicism and cynicism, but most people were deeply moved . One found that most people are deeply moved by the film .
 The Venezuelan Ambassador took my arm and said urgently, Y, We have not heard such words since franklin Roosevelt . We have been here since Franklin Roosevelt . The Venezuelan ambassador took his arm .
 In the thirties idealism was sometimes declared, even when it did not exist . In the sixties, it was sometimes deprivated, even though it was the dominant motive. In the 1960s, idealism became more prominent .
 Most had some profession or skill to which they could always return; but ordinarily they used it as a springboard for general meddling . Most of them had some . skill or skill, which they used to . always return, but ordinarily used it to . general meddling; they often used it
 Kennedy resisted pressures toward specialization; he wanted a group of all-purpose men to whom he could toss anything . Eisenhower wanted a staff with clearly defined functions, Kennedy said .
 Dick Goodwin, though younger than the average, was the archetypal Hew Frontiersman . Goodwin was a younger man, but he was also a veteran journalist . Goodwin died at the age of 92 on Sunday, October 8, at the hands of a doctor .
 His two years in the Army had been too late for the war, even though he'd been there for two years . He had gone to war in Korea, but was too late to get to Korea .
 One could not deny a sense of Hew Frontier autointoxication one felt it oneself . Hew Frontier was the name of the first time the name was changed to 'Hew Frontier'
 The pleasures of power, so long untasted, were now being happily devoured by the President . The pleasure of power was now being devoured the chauffeur-driven limousines, the special telephones, the top secret documents, the personal aides, personal aides .
 The verbosity, I have suggested, was marked only in comparison with the muteness of the Eisenhower days . But the rest was true enough, especially in these first heady weeks, the president said .
 On personalities, an instinctive commitment to the Establishment, was tempered by a respect for intelligence wherever he could find it . On personalities he was committed to personalities, he was so superb a product .
 He never appeared tired; he was always ready to assume responsibility . His subordinates could detect strain only when rare flashes of impatience and sharpness of tone disturbed his usually invincible urbanity .
 "One felt that he was forever sustained by those two qualities so indispensable for success in government" "A deep commitment to the public service and a large instinct for power," he said .
 Jean-Paul Sartre and C Wright Mills, who visited Cuba in 1959-60, proclaimed that the revolution was a peasant uprising caused by conditions of intolerable pverty, and despair in a wretchedly underdeveloped country .
 In fact, as more careful writers like Theodore Draper and Hugh Thomas have pointed out, Cuba was hardly in so hopeless a shape . Cuba was not in such a hopeless shape, but it was in a better shape, they say .
 It was a test of Eisenhower theory that unhampered private investment was the road to salvation . It was, indeed, the perfest test of the Eisenhower theory .
 It stood fourth among Latin American nations in per capita income, fifth in manufacturing, first in distribution of automobiles and radios .
 It ranked near the top in education, literacy, social services and urbanization . The country ranked in the country's highest ranking in education and literacy .
 These aggregate statistics concealed shocking disparities in the distribution of wealth, especially as between city and countryside and between white and Negro .
 There was enough wealth about to reveal to all how agreebble wealth might be . There was too much wealth to reveal .
 The statistics also along with the popularity of Havana cigars concealed the extent to which the Cuban economy depended on a single industry, sugar . Sugar was at the mercy of world markets but was then in a state of decline .
 Cuba had serious economic problems and, compared to the United States, a low standard of living, it was quite well off compared to Haiti or Bolivia . Still, if Cuba was well off, it would be better off than Haiti, Bolivia or Haiti .
 The immediate motives behind the revolution were as much political as economic . The revolutionaries themselves were members of the middle class rather than peasants or workers .
 Cuba's history as an Independent republic had been a drama of acute and chronic political frustration . Cuba’s history as a . Independent republic . had been an acute and . chronic political . frustration . A 1000 DATS POLITICAL P.216/7 .
 One crowd after another had come to power on promises of progress and regeneration only to go out in orgies of graft and plunder . One of the most corrupt governments in the world has been in power for decades, says Labour leader Nick Clegg .
 Carlos Prio Socarras had presided over a genial regime of social reform and political corruption until Batista overthrew him in 1952 . He once said that he was a terrible president .
 This feeling of political and social disgust produced a passion for change, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This feeling of social disgust led to a passionate desire for change"
 In its origins, the Cuban Revolution was led by professional men and lntellectuals . The revolution was subsidized by businessmen and owners .
 At the start of 1957 Castro had been the leader of a beleaguered band of a dozen men hiding out in the hills . At the end of 1958 he entered Havana in triumph. At the beginning of 1957 he was the leader .
 At the moment of victory, his own force numbered less than two thousand men . He did this, not because he defeated Batista’s if.,000 soldiers on the battlefield, but because of the withdrawal of support from the Batista government .
 The Havana underground, brilliantly organized by a radical young engineer named Manuel Ray, completed the work Castro had begun in the Sierra Maestra . Castro's underground underground was organized by Ray, a young engineer .
 He later said that he hid radical views in order to hold the anti-Batista coalition together . Later said that this was probably true, and this is probably true .
 Though a radical, there is no conclusive evidence that he was then a Sommunist or even a Marxist-Leninist . But, though radical, he was not a Marxist or even Marxist Marxist .
 In 1943 Batista appointed to his cabinet the first avowed Communists ever to hold cabinet posts in any American government . One of them Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was in Castro's government twenty years later . In 1943, Batista had appointed the first openly Communist cabinet posts .
 Even when t he Communists broke with Bitlsta, they continued to condemn Castro as bourgeois"" and a ""putschist,"" adolescent and irrespopsible" The Communists continued to call Castro a bourgeois and adolescent . Even when they broke with the Communist Party, they condemned Castro
 He was, above all, a political opportunist a man with a firai will and an extraordinary ambition . He was a man who was with a firm will and extraordinary ambition, he says .
 Javier Felipe Pazos vea, ""Cuba ’Long Live the Revolution’ ' "" New Republic , November 3 7 1962 . He thought in terms of winning power and keeping it,""° "" u Javier Fazos Vea .
 Fidel’s younger brother Raul and Guevara, who had long had close relations with the Communists, no doubt helped move Fidel in this direction . Fidel's younger brother, Fidel, also had close ties with the Communist Party .
 Communists offered him the means of keeping power and using it . Now that he had won his power, he had to keep it and use it, he said . He said: "Now that he has won his . power, now that he . had won it, it was offered him
 The State Department grew obsessed with the problem of getting American citizens proper indemnification for expropriated land and business . Havana construed this as the anticipated enmity of American business to Cuban reform .
 Bonsai still advocated a policy of moderation in order to make it more difficult for Castro to rush to the other side . But he still advocates moderation in making it harder for the Castro to take action .
 Others in Washington especially Vice-President Nixon, who had met Castro during hi 3 Washington visit, distrusted him from the start . Nixon wanted a more aggressive policy .
 Julio A Amoedo, the Argentine ambassador to Havana and a personal friend of Castro's, as the intermediary . Julio A. Amoido, the former ambassador to Cuba, was the Argentine Ambassador to Havana .
 There appears to be still another attempt in March through Rufo Lopez Fresquet . There is also another attempt to win the title .
 President Dorticos rejected this last U.S. overture . On the morning of March 17, I960, he said .
 Lopez Fresquet responded that he had remained as Finance Minister only on the assumption that the Cuban government wanted to compose its diffenences with Washington . If Castro thought no reconciliation possible, then, he wanted to resign, he said . Lopez Fresquette said he had stayed on the job
 Eisenhower agreed to a recommendation from the CIA to train a force of Cuban exiles for possible use against Caatro . On the same day in Washington in Washington, President Eisenhower agreed .
 Washington still declined to use the weapons of economic pressure which lay so easily in hand . But Washington still chose not to use .
 It was not until July I960, long after Castro had effected the substantial communization of the government, army and labor movement and had negotiated economic agreements with Russia and China, that the U.S. took public action .
 The suspension of the balance of Cuba's I960 sugar quota (that same quota which Guevara had already denounced in March as ""economic slavery”) was the conclusion, and not the cause, of Castro* 3 hostility .
 Washington finally broke off diplomatic relations with Havana in 1961 . Diplomatic relations were finally broken off because of Castro's demand that the staff of the Havana Embassy be reduced to eleven people in forty-eight hours .
 He made his most extenddd statement in a speech at Cincinnati in early October .
 He began by appearing to adopt the thesi3 that the ^ate Department should have listened to its pro-Batista ambassadors and recognized the revolution as a communist conspiracy .
 Kennddy did not regard SarV^rriith as an oracle on Cuba . SarVriith was an amiable gentleman and old friend from ^alm Beach, Kenndy said .
 He had remarked at Hyannis Port in August that the American Ambassador was the secondmost important man in Cuba .
 The more substantial part of the Cincinnati speech and the part which I believe more faithfully reflected Kennedy’s views condemned the Eisenhower policy toward Cuba on quite different grounds . Smith also made his remark about ""the second most important man in Cuba"" publicly, stimulating President Dorticos of
 Neither Kennedy nor his staff knew about the secret Cuban army in Guatemala, and they had no enterprise of this sort in mind .
 Nixon assumed that the briefing covered operations as well as intelligence . Allen Dulles had briefed Kennedy about Cuba, but Nixon assumed it covered operations .
 He concluded that Kennedy was trying to claim credit for the idea and that the secrecy of the project was now in jeopardy . The helater said Kennedy was now trying to take credit for hhe idea .
 President Obama's focus was with an affirmative program for Latin America rather than with Cuba . Immediately after the election, his concern was with Latin America .
 President Obama asked John Sharon for estimates of the effectiveness of the trade embargo against Cuba . He asked Sharon to consider the possibility of a rapprochement between the two countries .
 Dulles and Richard Bissell of CIA informed him about the Guatemalan project . Pour days later Dulles informed him of the project .
 By the end of 1959 Miami was&live with anti-Castro political activity of an unorganized and feckless sort . Miami was & live with a growing number of anti-Cubist political activities .
 Every time two or three refugees gathered together a new union or movimiento was likely to emerge . Every time a refugee group gathers together, a new movement likely will emerge .
 The political leaders of this second migration were men who had served neither Batista nor Castro . They were characteristically identified with the old Cuba of the traditional parties, of progressive intent and ineffectual performance .
 Some were decent men; others were racketeers who had found fL politics a lucrative way of life . FL politics is a lucrative business in the U.S.
 They wanted the restoration of political 'democracy* as they had known it before Batista, but they saw no need for far-reaching social change . They wanted to restore 'democracy' as well as restore it to its pre-Batista roots .
 Their objectives aere compatible with the interests of North -American investors and with the prejudices of the Eisenhower administration . The Eisenhower administration. Their objectives .
 If this had not been the case, they would gladly have modifi eels ji ilia their objectives . They were men long habituated to automatic deference to the United States .
 In June five leading groups were cajoled into forming the Prente Revolucionario Democratico . Five leading groups have been cajoling into forming a party of five .
 Three of the five members of the new committee represented pre-Batista Cuba . Manuel Antonio de Varona declared that the post-Castro government would restore properties seized by the Castro regime to their U.S and Cuban owners .
 The other two members of the Prente had briefly served the revolutionary government . The other members had briefly been involved in the revolution .
 The political criteria laid down by the CIA in Washington and demanded by most members of othe Frente were abandoned in the rush . Most members of the Democratic Party abandoned the political criteria .
 Bender gave particular authority to a dubious figure in Miami named Joaquin Sanjenis, who favored men of the Cubam right . Bender also gave authority to the right in Miami, Cuba .
 Men who took part in the revolution had a natural hatred of officers who had served Batista . Men who had taken part in revolution had 'natural hatred' of Batista officers .
 American advisers were impatient of what they regarded as political quibbling . The American advisers, on the other hand, were impatient with the British government .
 Pepe San Roman had received training at Port Belvoir and Fort Benning in the U.S. He was eelied on to follow orders by the British government .
 It is true that mofct of the Batistianos were so called because they had once been in Batista's army, not because they now want to return Batista to power . It was true that .
 Cubans selected by the U.S. advisers to command the Brigade command are not popular with the rank and file . But this did not make the Cubans chosen by the United States advisers any more popular . The Brigade is based in Cuba, Cuba's capital, Havana .
 In spite of the optimistic reports rendered to CIA in Washington about the splendid morale in the camp, discontent increased . In addition to the optimism reports, the camp's morale increased .
 I¥ is hard to disentangle' all thekotives behind this demonstration; but it seems clear that the mutineers had the support of the Frente . The mutineer's actions are likely to be seen as a political move by the government .
 At this poijit, the United States advisers intervened on behalf of the officers . At this point, the U.S. advisers intervened in the incident .
 A hundred of the Cubans refused to accept this decision and insisted on seeing representatives of the Frente . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Most agreed to rejoin the Brigade, but a few still held out . When promised a visit from the Frente, most agreed to return to the Brigade .
 A new report in early March, they dropped the point about External support and hinged victory on the capacity of the assault to produce anti-Castro action behind the lines .
 From the viewpoint of the Joint Chiefs, then, the Cuban resistance was indispensable to success . The Joint Chiefs say it was essential to success in the Cuban war .
 U.S. could see no other way short of United States intervention by which an invasion force of a thousand Cubans, no matter how well trained and equipped, could overcome 200,000 men of Castro's army and militia .
 Dulles: "Don't forget thfet we have a disposal problem. As Dulles said at the March 11 meeting, "Don’t forget we have to dispose problem"
 If transfer to the U.S. was out, demobilization on the spot would create even greater difficulties . Demobilization would create greater difficulties for the soldiers in the United States .
 The Cubans themselves were determined I 1 to go back to their homeland, and they might well forcibly resist efforts to take away their arms and equipment .
 Even if fj the Brigade were successfully disbanded, its members would disperse, disappointed and resentful all over Latin America, they would tell where they had been and what they had done, thereby exposing CIA operations . The Brigade would tell what they did and where they were doing .
 Dulles: This could only result, in discrediting Washington, disheartening Latin Ameriaan opponents of Castro . Dulles kept emphasizing, in . emphasizing that this could only . result, Dulles said . in . discredited Washington, and encouraging the Fidelistas in
 Disbandment might produce pro-Castro revolutions all around the Caribbean . Disbandments might also lead to pro- Castro revolutions around the world .
 CIA men argued, now introducing a new idea, a provisional government could be flown in; and . A 1000 DAYS BAY OP PIGS Government in Exile PP237/8 .
 If the invaders could sustain themselves for ten days or two weeks, this government could receive recognition as the government of Cuba . Cuba's government could be recognized as the Cuban government .
 Once this was done, the new government could request United States aid, though this aid was carefully defined as ""logistic"" and therefore presumably excluded military intervention .
 CIA planners envisaged a continuous build-up and enlargement of the perimeter around the beachhead over a long period . The scheme envisaged victory by attrition rather than by rebellion .
 As the Invaders strengthened their position, this, along with their command of the skies and the acceptance of the new government by other American republics, would produce a steady withdrawal of civil support from Castro and his eventual collapse .
 Trinidad was near enough the Escambray for false (the invaders to disappear into the hills) And, if by any {chance {chance the attack failed, Trinidad was . near enough . The attack was not successful .
 CIA said Castro was about to receive jet airplanes from the Soviet Union along with Cuban pilots trained in Czechoslovakia to fly them . Once the MIGs arrived, an amphibious landing would turn into a slaughter, the CIA said .
 After June 1, it would take the U.S. Marines and Air Force to overthrow Castro . It would take them to overthrow the Castro regime .
 If a purely Cuban invasion were ever to take place, it would take place in the next few weeks . The Cuban invasion had to be in place within a few weeks if it happened .
 The Idea sounded plausible enough, t hepimememorandum suggested, if one excluded everything but Cuba . But, as soon as the focus was enlarged to include the rest of the hemisphere and the rest . of the . world, arguments against the decision gained strength .
 Above all, ""this would be your.""’f ir’st dramatic foreign policy initiative," says Obama . "This would be the first dramatic change in policy," he says .
 At one stroke you would dissipate all the extraordinary good will which has been rising toward the new Administration through the world, says Obama .
 Richard Bissell was a man of high character and remarkable intellectual gifts . Bissell had known as an economist in the Marshall Plan before he turned to intelligence work .
 His mind was swift and penetrating, and he had an unsurpassed talent for lucid analysis and fluent exposition . A few years before he had conceived and fought through the plan of IT2 flights over the Soviet Union . The plan was perhaps the greatest intelligence coup since the war .
 He had committed himself for the past year to the Cuban project with equal intensity . He was committed to the project with equally intensity .
 Bissell, pointer in hand, would explain how the invasion would work or discourse on the relative merits of alternative landing sites . Yet he recognized the strength of his commitment and, with characteristic honesty, warned us to discount his bias .
 Both Dulles and Bissell were at a disadvantage in having to persuade a skeptical new administration about the virtues of a new proposal . The proposal was nurtured in the hospitable bosom of a previous government aproposal .
 This cast them in the role less of analysts than of advocates, and it led them to accept progressive modifications so long as the expedition in some form remained . Perhaps they too unconsciously supposed that, once the operation began to unfold, it would not be permitted to fail .
 It was only later that I learned about the Anzio concept; it certainly did not come across clearly in the w hite House meetings .
 Obviously no one expected the invasion to galvanise the unarmed and unorganized into rising against Castro at the moment of disembarkation .
 The invasion plan assumed that the successful occupation of an enlarged beachhead area would incite organized uprisings armed members of the Cuban resistance . But the invasion plan, as understood by the President and the Joint Chiefs, did assume that .
 On the other hand, if we did have to send U.S. troops to Laos to fight communism, we could hardly ignore communism I ninety miles off Florida, he says .
 Laos and Cuba were tied up with each other, j though it was hard to know how one would affect the other . Laos, Cuba and Cuba have ties to each other but it's unclear how one might affect one another .
 Dulles convinced that if the Cubans were ever to be sent against Castro they had to go now . Dulles and Bissell redoubled efforts at persuasion at persuasion .
 Dulles told Kennedy that he felt much more confident about success than he had ever been in the case of Guatemala . Dulles said he was more confident in Guatemala than ever before .
 CIA concentrated particularly in the meetings on trying to show that, even if the expedition failed, the cost would not be excesUndersive . CIA concentrated efforts to show the cost of the expedition would be not excesive .
 The operation would hopefully appear as part of the traditional ebb and flow of revolution and counterre volution in the Caribbean . Tf the operation were truly '^CubanTzed’,'1 'it"" .
 If worst came to worst, the invaders were beaten on the beaches, then, Dulles and Bissell said, they could easily ""melt away into the mountains"
 This might have been true at Trinidad, which lay near the foothills of (the Escambray) and it was more true of the Bay of Higs than of hhe other two alternative sites proposed .
 CIA exposition was less than candid in implying that the Brigade had undergone guerrilla training . The Brigade's training had substantially ended five months earlier .
 The Escambray Mountains lay eighty miles from the Bay of pigs, across a hopeless tangle of swamps and jungles . I don’t think we fully realized that the Escambay Mountains lie eighty miles .
 CIA agents in Guatemala were saying nothing to the Cubans about this last resort of flight to the hills, apparently fearing to lower their morale . And no one knew (until Haynes Johnson interviewed the survivors) that the survivors were not told .
 Dean Rusk listened inscrutqbly through the discussions, confining himself to gentle warnings about possible excesses . Chester Bowles was horrified by what he heard but reluctant to speak out in his chief's absence . On March 31 he gave Rusk a strong memorandum apposing the
 Rusk reassured Bowles, leaving him with the impression that the project was being whittled down into a guerrilla infiltration, and filed the memorandum away .
 It would commit us to the heavy responsibility of making a success of post-Castro Cuba, says President Obama .
 This point will not be lost on the rest of the world nor on our own consciences. This is not the case for us, but it is a matter of principle . This point is not only lost to the world, but also to our conscience .
 The Alliance for Progress provided a solid basis for insulating the rest of the hemisphere from Castro . Castro was a key figure in the Cuban revolution .
 For the Cuban exiles, an imaginative approach could find a more productive use of their talents than invading their homeland . Ag for the Cuban Exiles, for example, could find an imaginative way to use their talents .
 President returned from Palm Beach more militant than when he had left . Yet he returned from the trip with a more militant record .
 This meeting was held at the State ^apartment in a small conference room beside Rusk's office . Rusk was the only person in the room .
 Kennedy started asking people around the table what they thought . Affcep i the usual routine: persuasive expositions by the CIA, mild disclaimers by Rusk and penetrating questions by the President Kennedy . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I think about it. I'm sure
 Fulbright, speaking in an emphatic and incredulous way, denounced the whole idea . Fulbright: "I don't believe in the idea. Fulbright is an idiot" Fulbright said .
 It would compromise our moral posit icn in the world, it would make it impossible for us to protest treaty violations by the Communists . It would be impossible to protest the Communist Party's violations of treaty .
 He gave a brave, old-fashioned American speech, honorable, sensible and strong . "He left everyone in the room, except me and perhaps the President, wholly unmoved," he said .
 Mann said he would have opposed it at the start, but, now that it had gone so far, it should be carried through . Mann said that he was opposed to the idea at the beginning but should it be carried out .
 Berle wanted the men to be put into Cuba but did not insist on a major production . Berle said he wanted them put in Cuba but didn't insist on major production of the film .
 Kennedy once again wanted to know what could be done in the way of quiet infiltration as against the beachhead assault . Kennedy asked for information on quiet infiltration .
 The meeting fell into discussion before the round of the table was completed .
 A 1000 DAYS BAY OP PIGS is Schlesinger' s Political Morality . Schlesingers' s political Morality is a terrible idea for the invasion of America .
 This was not because the notion of sponsoring an exile attempt to overthrow Castro seemed intolerable in itself . This was because of the idea of sponsoring a bid to overthrow the Castro regime . This is not because it seemed intolerable to the Castro family .
 Other naticns would sympathize with David rather than Goliath . Seeing no justification for intervention, other naticn sympathizes with David .
 A prolonged civil war in Cuba between the Castro regime and an exile army backed by the Bnited States, thenSmemorandum went on, would open us to damaging attack in the United Nations and elsewhere around the globe . Russians would enlist volunteers in Jose Marti and probably even
 Nothing more depressing in the whole series of meetings than to watch a collection of officials, some of them holdovers from the previous administration, contentedly prepare to sacrifice the world's growing faith in the new American 1 resident in order to defend interests .
 Dean Rusk suggested that someone other than the President make the final decision and do so in his absence someone could be sacrificed if things went wrong . Rusk was almost alone in recognizing this problem; but his solution was the curious one of suggesting that someone else be the President .
 White House staff who sat in Cabinet failed in their job of protecting the President . Just as the representatives of the State Department failed in defending the diplomatic interests of the nation .
 The desire to prove to the CIA and the Joint Chiefs that they were not soft-headed idealists but were really tough guys, too, Influenced State* s representatives at the cabinet table . I could not help feeling . feeling that the desire . to prove . that they . were
 More than once I left meetings in the Cabinet Room fearful that only two of the regulars present were against the operation; but I thought the President was the other . I kept hoping that he would avail himself of his own escape clause .
 He said, n You know, I've reserved the right to stop this thing up to 2ip hours before the landing, he said .
 This change reflects the now buoyant CIA i&nphasis on the ease of escaping from the beaches into the hills . This change reflected the fact that the CIA now has a strong presence in the area .
 By this time we've been offered a sort of all-purpose operation guaranteed to work, win or lose . By the time we were offered this kind of operation, it had become a routine routine .
 If it failed of its maximum hope a mass uprising leading to the overthrow of the regime it would at least attain its minimum objective supply and reinforcement for the guerrillas already on the island .
 Dick had not attended the Cuba sessions, but we had talked constantly about the problem . Dick had been in touch with Dick for years, but he had not gone to Cuba .
 Goodwin expressed strong doubts about the Cuban operation . Later that morning before departing for an economic conference in Latin America he went to see Rusk Rusk . Goodwin expressed doubts that the operation was successful .
 Goodwin urged me to send Rusk a copy of my memorandum to the President and follow it up by a personal visit . Goodwin: "Goodwin was impressed with Rusk's visit to the White House . Rusk was a good friend of Rusk, a good ally of the President
 When I set forth my own doubts on Saturday, the Secretary listened quietly and somewhat mournfully, the secretary listened . The Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said, "I'm not sure what's going to happen"
 He said he had for some time been wanting to draw a balance sheet on the priject . Finally he said he planned to do it over the weekend and would try to talk with the President on Monday .
 He reverted to a suggestion with thich he had startled the Joint Chiefs during one of the meetings .
 The operation fan out from Guantanamo with the prospect of retreating to the base in case of failure . This was that the operation fanout from Guantanamo . The operation was planned for the U.S. base in Guantanamo .
 They are willing to put the president's head on the block, but they recoil from the idea of doing anything that might risk Guantanamo . They are not willing to risk Guantanamo, they say. They recoil from doing anything whihh might risk it .
 He felt he had successfully pared it down from a grandiose amphibious assault to a mass infiltration . So far as the operation itself was concerned, he felt, as he told me that afternoon, that he'd successfully pare it down . He felt, he said, that
 The cost, both military and political, of failure was now Underreduced to a tolerable level . Accepting the CIA assurances about the escape hatch, he supposed that the cost was now under-reduced . He supposed that .
 He was impressed by the fact that three members of the Cuban Revolutionary Council had sons in the Brigade . The exile leaders themselves obviously believed that the expedition would succeed .
 Cubans were already trained and equipped and wanted to return to Cuba on their own, says Cuban president . He had to choose whether to disband a group of brave and idealistic Cubans, or to permit them to go ahead .
 The President saw mine no obligation to protect the Castro regime from democratic Cubans . He decided that if the Cubans wished to make the try on the categorical understanding that there would be no direct United States military support, he would help them do so .
 If the expedition succeeded, the overthrow of Castro would greatly strengthen democratic prospects in the hemisphere . If he called it off, he would forever be haunted by the feeling that his scruples had preserved Castro in power .
 The decision resulted from the fact thbt he had been in office only seventyseven days .
 He had not had the time or opportunity to test the inherited instrumentalities of government . He said he had not been able to test government's role in government .
 He could not know which of his advisers were competent and which were not, he said . He said they did not know him or each other well enough to raise hard questions with force .
 "Massed and caparisoned authority of his senior officials in the realm of foreign policy and defense was unanimous for going ahead," the president said .
 The director of the Central Intelligence Agency advocated the adventure . The Joflint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense approved its military aspects . Secretary of State approved its political aspects .
 Kennedy: "I have no hesitation in overruling them. They all spoke with the sacerdotal prerogative of men vested with a unique understanding of arcane matters, ""if someone comes in to tell me this or that about the minimum wage bill"
 You always assume that military and intelligence people have some secret skill not available to ordinary mortals . But you can't assume that they have any secret skill, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The only opposition came from Fulbright and myself (he knew nothing of Bowles's memorandum to Rusk, nor did he know that Edward R Marrow, the new director of the United States information Agency, was also deeply opposed).
 Had one senior adviser opposed the adventure, Kennedy would have canceled it, he says . Kennedy would've canceled it .
 He had the enormous confidence in his own luck. One further factor no doubt influenced him . He also had the confidence of his luck .
 He had won the nomination and the election against all the odds in the book . But he had already won the presidential nomination and election against the odds .
 Despite hime&lf, even this dispassionate and skeptical man may have been affected by the soaring euphoria .
 On the following Tuesday the Robert ^ennedys gave a party to celebrate Ethel's birthday . Ethel died in 1953 .
 It was a large, lively, uproarious affair, overrun with guests, skits, children and dogs . It was overrun by guests and skits .
 President said, "You may be right or you may be wrong, but the President has made his mind up. Finally he said, ""You may have been right or . you may not be wrong. But the President made his decision up."
 Our purpose was to persuade him to give the Council's program social and economic content . We asked him to explain the program's social, economic content to us .
 Council draft was filled with impassioned appedls to the foreign investor, the private banker, the dispossessed property owner, but had very little to say to the worker, the farmer or the Negro . We pointed out that the Council draft .
 Council must reassure Cubans that it has no intention of de~ s-fcryww stroying the social and economic gains of the last two years . We suggested that the council must reassure them that it had no intention .
 A few days ago leter Gilbert Harrison of the New Republic sent over the galleys of a pseudonymous piece called ""Our Men in Miami,"" asking whether these was any reason/ why it should not be published .
 Karl Meyer wrote a devastating account of CIA activities among refugees . Meyer's account was accurate and devastating, he says .
 Defeated by the moralissue, I handed the article to the President, who instantly read it and expressed the hope that it could be stopped . The President also expressed the hopes that it was stopped .
 Harrison accepted the suggestion and without question accepted it was a patriotic act which left him oddly uncomfortable . Harrison accepted it and it was an act of patriotism which left me oddly uncomfortable.
 Turner Catledge, the managing editor, called James Heston, who was in his weekend retreat in Virginia, to ask his advice . Heston was in Virginia at the weekend to discuss his weekend weekend retreat .
 Heston counseled against publication; either the story would alert Castro, in which case the T jme s would be responsible for casualties on the beach, or else the expedition would be canceled . Heston advised against publication .
 This was another patriotic act, but I have wondered whether, if the press had behaved irresponsibly, it would not have spared the country a disaster . This was a patriotic act; but in retrospect, I've wondered whether it would have saved the country .
 President Obama said the press should be prepared to censor itself in the interests of national security . He made his only misstep in a speech before the American Newspaper Publishers Association .
 Kennedy understood this better than anybody and needed no prodding . A 1000 DAYS Kennedy Political Morality p. p • H62 Kennedy . Kennedy political Morality . Kennedy was a political genius .
 The basic issue in Cuba is not one between the U.S. and Cuba, It is between the Cubans themselves,” says President Obama . The meeting on April 12 was preceded by a strange incident whose significance even today remains indecipherable to me .
 Former Soviet Embassy counselor Oeorgi Kornienko asked for immediate appointment . He said: "I received a request from Oeorgei KORNienko, the counselor of the Soviet Embassy"
 A sharp-eyed, moon-faced man appeared, speaking fluent but somewhat formal English . He spoke to the man speaking fluent, formal English.
 He said he did not fully understand the policy of the United States toward Latin America and especially toward C u ba .
 I doubted whether the Soviet Union would accept such developments in the case of Poland with the same detachment he now urged on me . I suggested that he might understand if he were to transfer recent events in Havana to, say, Warsaw .
 By Soviet standards, he should be more impressed by American patience than by A m eri.
 After additiai al inconclusive talk, Kornienko asked whether we excluded the possibility of further negotiation with Castro . Castro was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Kornienko doubted whether Castro would regard internal Cuban questions as negotiable . He said Castro would not have considered internal Cuban issues a non-negotiable issue .
 He then asked what sort of action Washington might take as evidence of a serious desire to negotiate . He asked what kind of action the U.S. might take to show it is willing to engage in negotiations .
 Speaking in the same spirit of fantasy which he had earlier invoked, I inquired whether he thought that the Castro regime would offer the Revolutionary Council equal freedom of political action . I asked whether Castro regime offered equal freedom to political action.
 I came to know Kornienko better in time; we used to lunch together at irregular intervals until he returned to Moscow at the end of 1963 . These luncheons were never very productive. He says .
 Kornienko is an exceedingly intelligent and entirely immovable defender of the current Soviet brief, whatever it might be . He rarely showed any inclination to talk apart from it .
 His talk was marked by a total absence of warnings or threats . His attitude seemed one of polite curiosity. His talk seemed to be marked by an absence of threats or threats.
 His visit must have been either exploratory or, more probably, diversionist; for he had nothing positive to suggest . His visit to the UK was not a good idea .
 "I promptly informed the President and Rusk of the meeting. In any case, I promptly informed [the president] of the matter," he said .
 Diplomatically, the obvious presumption is that Kornienko was asking for an explanation of what was up . The U.S. was generally aware something was up and it was interested in it, he says .
 Everyone knows, Miro said, that the United Spates behind the expedition . Miro: "Everyone knows, that that . Everyone knows that . That is behind the mission."
 Berle then said that it could not succeed without an internal uprising, and that, if one came, we would provide the democratic Cubans with the things necessary to make it successful, he said .
 Once the provisional government is established on the beachhead, we would offer all aid short of U.S. troops, the UK would offer .
 Mj.ro said that 10,000 Cubans would immediately align themselves with the invading forces . The news comes from a source in Cuba, which has a history of anti-government sentiment .
 Miro told his colleagues and later claimed publicly that Berle had promised the support of 10,000 droops . I reproduce this part of the confersation from notes made at the time because Miro .
 Miro’s knowledge of English or the translation was sadly at fault . Either Miro or the translator was at fault for the translation .
 My observations have increased my confidence in the ability of this force to accomplish not only combat missions, but also the ultimate objective, the overthrow of Castro . A 1000 p .267 DAYS Advisers Military .
 Brigade and battalion commanders now know all details of the plan and ape enthusiastic . The Brigade and Battalion commanders are now aware of all the details .
 CIA operatives in the field and their military colleagues were a different breed, if, at least, the Cubans themselves are to be believed . The top CIA officials Dulles, Bussell, and Barnes were civilized and responsible men; but the CIA operatives .
 As zero hour approached, the American advisers told them again (or so they later informed Haynes johnson)^that their Brigade would not be the only unit in the invasion .
 They received the impression that after seventy-two hours they could count on United Skates military and air support . They were given the impression they were able to count on the United Skate military support .
 Kennedy was concerned about the UN aspect of the Cuban operation . Kennedy told the Cabinet Room he wished Stesrenson to be fully informed of the truth .
 In preparation for the debate, Tracy Barnes and Tracy Barnes had a long talk with Sevenson on April 8 .
 U.S. Secretary of State Clinton made clear that he disapproved of the plan, regretted that he had been given no opportunity tq&omment .
 If it was national policy, he was prepared to make out the besg possible case . But if it is national policy he would make out a possible case.
 Raul Roa, the Cuban foreign minister, succeeded in advancing the Quban item, scheduled for Monday, to an emergency session of the Uu political Committee that afternoon .
 In Washington Harlan Cleveland tried to ascertain the facts about the strike . The strike was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Cleveland passed this information on to Sfcsrvenson . Word promptly and definitely came back that it was the work of genuine defectors . Cleveland passed on the information to the team .
 A s Stevenson spoke, someone handed him p,272 a piece of press ticker containing what appeared to be corroborative detail . Stevenson read further parts of the CIA cover story into the record .
 The 'needtoknow' standard had simply left the Bureau oi International Organization Affairs and most of the Rureau of InterAmerican Affairs . Ed Murrow and the USIA were left out of the operation .
 Rusk seems to have confused the phony defector at Key ^est with the authentic defect_or at Jacksonville . Rusk himself, however, seems for a while, confused the fake defector with the real defector in Jacksonville .
 Key West plane was part of the CiA plot, he says . It was not until late Saturday afternoon that he understood that the plane was the target of the plot .
 Dean Rusk said the American people are entitled to know whether the U.S. is intervening in Cuba or intend to do so in the future . Rusk told a press conference later thfct morning that the American public is entitled to a full investigation .
 Khrushchev denounced the invasion and pledged ""all necessary assistance"" to Castro . Khrushchev's diplomatic note came in from an angry diplomatic note from the Kremlin .
 Dulles is a legendary figure, and it's hard to operate with legendany figures . Dulles: "It was a great loss to me, but I'm not afraid to work with him"
 I must have someone there with whom I can be in complete and Intimate contact someone from whom I know I will be getting the exact pitch. I must also have someone at whom I . can . in complete contact someone . knows he will be able to get the . exact pitch pitch
 By Fiday, however, the morning papers were filled with what purported to be ‘inside 1 stories about the Cuba decision’ by the president .
 An impulse for self-preservation was apparently tempting sane of the participants in those meetings in the Cabinet Room to put out versions of the episode ascribing everyone but themselves .
 Kennedy summoned Rusk, Salinger, Bundy, Bundy and Sorensen to breakfast in the Mansion . Kennedy had called a ten o'clock press conference .
 The President remarked acidly that the role of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was notably neglected in several stories an omission which, by Washington exegesis, pointed to the Pentagon as the source .
 "There is only one person in the clear - that's Bill Pulbright," says Pulbright . Then he added, with unusual emphasis, that's "Bill Pulbright" Pulbright.
 He probably would have been converted if he had attended more of the meetings, he says . And he probably would also have attended more meetings .
 The President said that he could not understand how men like Dulles and Bissell, so intelligent and so experienced, could have been so wrong . Nothing could be done about CIA immediately, he said. They were talking about the CIA, he added .
 President Bush kept Dulles at the top of the CIA . Republicans would be disinclined to attack the administration over the failure, he says .
 U e felt that he now knew certain soft spots in his administration, especially the CIA and the Joint Chiefs, especially in the CIA, he said .
 British intelligence estimates showed that Cuban people were still predominantly behind Castro . David Orrasby: 'No likelihood at this point of mass defections or insurrections'
 The commission, perhaps because two of its members had been architects of the project, construed its mandate narrowly . Its mandate was to think up a new interdepartmental agency to coordinate future cold war ventures .
 Taylor report focused on the problems of eopiing with guerrilla warfare . The State Department successfully opposed this idea .
 Too much comment on the Bay of Pigs has fallen into the fallacy of Douglas Southall Freeman, who once wrote a long chapter analysing the reasons for Lee's defeat at Gettysburg without mentioning the fact that the Union was there too .
 Fidel Castro turned out to be a far more formidable foe and in command of a far better organized regime than anyone had supposed . For the reality was th&t Fidel Castro was a far stronger foe than anyone expected .
 His police eliminated any chance of sabotage or rebellion behind the lines . He said: "His police eliminated every chance of sabotaging or rebellion."
 He himself never panicked; and if faults were chargeable to him, they were his overestimate of the strength of the invasion and undue caution in pressing the ground attack against the beachhead .
 One reason Washington miscalculated Castro, of course, was a series of failures in our own intelligence . w e e regarded him ad an hysteric. Castro was a hysteric, but the U.S. intelligence failed to see him .
 If there were no Intervention, then only an internal uprising could have overthrown Castro . Internal uprising/ would have required both an intact underground and a far more potent political purpose than any which animated the CIA project . And there were tactical errors .
 If it was to be a covert operation for which we could plausibly disclaim repponsibility, it should have been, at most, a guerrilla infiltration . It should have, at least, been a guerrilla infiltration, says author .
 Once it grew into a conventional .295 amphibious invasion, it wa3 clearly beyond the limits of disownability . Once It grew into an .295 Amphibation invasion, It wa3 .
 Unless we were prepared to back it to the hilt, it should have been abandoned, says David Cameron . 'It should be abandoned,' he says .
 All of us, the £ resident most of all, went through this sequence of thoughts again and again in the months to come .
 The President reserved his innermost thoughts and, in the end, blamed only himself . But he was a human being and not totally free of resentment .
 The Joint Chiefs disappointed him most for their cursory review of the military plans, he says . He says .
 I think he had made up his mind at once that, when things settled down, they would have to go . About Dulles and Bissell he said little. I think that he had decided to go.
 The first lesson was never to rely on the experts. He regretted this becao.se he liked them both .
 He now knew that he would have to broaden the range of his advice, make greater use of generalists in whoffi he had personal confidence and remake every great decision .
 He understood that the prestige of the presidential office had been lightly regarded by men whose primary loyalty was not to him or his administration . He understood too that he understood that .
 Thereafter he took care to make sure that the presidential interest would be represented in the large decisions, he said . Thereafter, he took steps to ensure that the interests of the president were represented .
 He turned from the people he had inherited in government to people he'd brought in himself . He turned to those who he had worked with longest, knew best and trusted most .
 Neither* Robert Kennedy nor Ted Sorensen had taken part in the meetings in the Cabinet Room . Both were at his right hand at every subsequent moment of crisis for the rest of his Presidency .
 Dick Goodwin is charged with responsibility for the next steps in policy toward Cuba and the exiles . He charged Dick Goodwin with responsibility . Dick Goodwin will be responsible for next steps toward Cuba .
 Maxwell Taylor was President Obama's personal adviser on military affairs until he could make him Chief of Staff . He chose Maxwell Taylor as his personal adviser until the time came when he could be made chief of staff .
 Kennedy had, in the main, stayed kloof from the DAC Debates, he sas clearly aligned with the Ste venson-Harriman-Bowles position . A sharp critic of the tendency to suppose that all problems had military solutions, he was a strong advocate of
 His reactions in I960 to the shooting down of the U-2 over the Soviet Union and to the Quemoy-Matsu issue showed his dislike for rigid interpretations of the cold war .
 He did not suppose that the United States had it within its power to work overnight changed in the Soviet Union . But he didn't suppose either that the U.S. could change the situation overnight .
 He favored a policy of reasoned firmness accompanied by a determination to explore all possibilities of reasonable accommodations . He said: "I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm glad to say 'yes'"
 Khrushchev had given up on Elsenhower after the U-2 incident and the collapse of the Paris summit in Hay I960 . He seized several opportunities to semaphore his hopes for Kennedy .
 World wars and local wars he/categorically rejected as leading directly or progressively to nuclear holocaust . World wars he and others rejected as having a direct or progressively leading directly to nuclear war . He also rejected the idea of a nuclear war in the future .
 He defined ""national-liberation wars"" as those ""which began as uprisings of colonial peoples against their oppressors developed into guerrilla wars"
 He named Cuba, Vietnam and Algeria as examples of examples . He added that the ""multiplying of 0 the forces of the national-liberation movement"" in recent years stemmed from the opening of the new front against American imperlalisih in Latin America .
 Khrushchev's January speech made emphatic the point often expressed by Eisenhower during his Presidency the impossibility of total nuclear war as an intrument of rational policy . As for ""peaceful coexistence,"" this was a form of intense economic, political and ideological struggle between the proletariat and
 He had no illusions about the difficulties of his quest. McNamara was determined to succeed in his quest .
 The Department had already balked, thwarted, exposed and broken a success/ion of able men imprudent enough to accept appointment as Secretary . The Department of Justice has already been broken, thwarted and broken, by President Obama .
 McNamara had a successful relationship with Jerome Wiesner who had fought hard through the fif I ties to improve the state of American defense . His work on the Gaither committee of 19^7 had prepared the ground for McNamara' s reconstruction of strategy now .
 McGeorge Bundy also kept an alert eye on the evolution of defense policy . Carl Kaysen, an economist who united cogency as a debater and intrepidity, joined the National Security Council staff .
 McNamara, Wiesner, Bundy and I Eaysen worked well together . i f i'hey gave the .resident confidence that he was in a position to . conI trol national strategy . McNamara and Bundy worked together .
 Later that day, when Nixon saw the President and urged an invasion of Cuba, he also urged ""a commitment of American air power"" to Laos . According to Nixon's recollection, Kennedy re- plied, M I rjust don't think we ought to get involved in Laos,
 I don't see how we can make any move in Laos, which is 5000 miles away, if we don't make a move in Cuba . Cuba is only 90 miles away . Laos is only 5000 miles from the UK .
 Reports reaching Washington on Wednesday, April 26, said the Pathet Lau were attacking in force, as if to overrun, the country before the cease-fire could take effect . But fighting did not cease; and, according to reports reaching Washington, it was reported to be continuing .
 On Thursday the National Security Counsil held a long and confused session . The National Security Council held a lengthy session on Thursday .
 Walt Rostow has told me that it was the worst White House meeting he attended in the entire Kennedy administration . Rostow told me it was a worst meeting he ever attended in Kennedy administration. Rostow said it was one of the worst meetings he had attended .
 Rostow and the Laos task force, supported by Barriman who was now on a trip of inspection in Laos, still urged a limited commitment of American troops to the Mekong valley . Rostow: "A limited commitment to American troops is still needed in Laos"
 The Joint Chiefs declined to guarantee the success of the operation, even with the 60,000 men they had recommended a month before . But the Joint Chiefs had been chastened by the Bay of Pigs .
 Participants in the meeting found it hard to make out what the Chiefs were trying to say . The Chiefs held a press conference at the end of the meeting .
 The military were so divided that Vice-President Johnson proposed that they put their views in writing in order to clarify their differences . The military was divided so much that Johnson proposed putting their views together in writing .
 The President, it is said, later received seven memoranda, from the four Chiefs of Staff and three service secretaries .
 The military proved ono more satisfactory in explaining the pro.338 posals they were prepared to make . The military proves more satisfactory than the military .
 The President_ was appalled at the sketchy nature of American military planning for Laos the lack of detail and the unanswered questions . The President was appalled .
 Kennedy discovered that the airstrips could only be used by day and that it would take a week or so for troops to reach them overland . Kennedy, after interrogation, discovered that he had to wait for a week to reach the airstrip .
 He then asked what would happen if the Pathet Lao allowed the troops to land for two days and then attacked . He then said what would be the worst if the troops were allowed to land in two days .
 For all their differences, the military left a predominant impression that they did not want ground troops at all unless they could send at least 140,000 men equipped with tactical nuclear weapons . The military left the impression that the military did not .
 By now, the Pentagon was developin g what would become its standard line in Southeast Asia . The Pentagon was developing an opposition to limited intervention except on the impossible condition that the President agreed in advance to every further step they deemed sequential, including, on occasion, nuclear bombing of Hano
 General Lemnitzer outlined the processes by which each American action would provoke a Chinese counteraction, provoking an even more drastic American response, he said . The National Security Council was briefed on the process by the U.S. and China .
 It soon began to look to the ^hite House as if they were taking care to build a record which would permit them to say that, whatever the President did, he acted against their advice .
 This had not yet been identified as a tactic, howevet, and in April 1961 their opposition to limited intervention had a powerful effect . In April 1961, the British government was in the grip of the White House in Washington .
 He added that if we intervened anywhere in Southeast Asia, we must be prepared to use nuclear weapons if the Chinese en ter in force . He said we must also be prepared for use of nuclear weapons against China .
 There always remained the difficulty of Justifying intervention against communism in Laos while rejecting it against Communism in Cuba . And there always remained a difficulty of justifying intervention .
 President said, ""if it hadn’t been for Cuba, we might be about to intervene in Laos."" ¥aving a sheaf of cables from Lemnitzer, he added, ""l might have taken this advice seriously"
 He had, I believe, been prepared to undertake limited intervention in Laos before the Bay of Pigs, and he did not altogether exclude it now . He said he was prepared to engage in limited intervention .
 Kennedy made quiet but hard scoring military preparations, let the Russians know about them and let them mine kno'w . 'at the same time that there was an honorable alternative to fighting,' he said .
 This was a first experiment in Kennedy diplomacy under pressure, and it was marked by restraint of manner, .toughness of intention and care to leave the adversary a way of escape without loss o£~ face" Ivhruahchev, for his part, found himself involved with
 He retreated to negotation, confident that history would deliver what opposition had denied . But he did not want war, and, once he believed that Kennedy would fight if pushed too far, he retreated .
 Senator Kennedy had repeatedly emphasized the gravity of the stakes in Berlin . Ag a Senator Kennedy said he had repeatedly stressed the importance of the crisis in Germany .
 Kennedy himself used to wonder later what had gone wrong in the spring of 1961 . Kennedy himself, with characteristic detachment, used to question later what went wrong in 1961 .
 He thought the March and May messages calling for an increased American defense effort might have sounded too threatening . He thought at times that the messages might have been too threatening, he said .
 It is possible that the acceleration of the Minuteman and Polaris programs had unintended effects in Moscow . Kuznetsov had warned Wiesner and Rostow at the Pugwash meeting, the Russian leaders now saw no choice but to match the build-up .
 In addition, Harriman in his March debut as roving ambassador^had said that ""all discussions in Berlin must begin from the start. In addition to that, he also said that all discussions must begin in Berlin .
 Soviet signals were not, seen from Washington, very encouraging . Yet at the same time the Soviet signal was not very encouraging, says CNN.com .
 Khrushchev's truculent speech of January preceded Kennedy’s defense messages by many weeks . His decision to move against West Berlin had ample explanation in his own problems and ambitions . Kennedy's defense messages were delayed by weeks .
 As for the President, he saw no sense in meeting Khrushchev unless something of substance was likely to result . The President was visiting the Soviet Union at the time of his visit .
 The Attorney Beneral made this point to the Soviet Ambassador, he was givaa to understand that progress was entirely conceivable on Laos and on the test ban .
 The President was attracted by the meeting as offering an opportunity to define the framework for future AmericanSoviet relations . Beyond these specific problems, the meeting offered a chance to define future American relations .
 Kennedy saw the world as in a state of uncontrollable change, rushing in directions no one could foresee . Kennedy: "The world is in an uncontrollable state of change" Kennedy died at the age of 50 at the hands of President Kennedy .
 The equilibrium of force, he believed, was now roughly in balance between the United States and the Soviet Unicn . The overriding need, he felt, was to prevent direct confrontations between Russian and American power in the chaotic time ahead .
 He intended to propose, in effect, a standstill in the cold war so that neither great nuclear state, in the inevitable competition around the planet, would find itself committed to actions which would risk its essential security, threaten the existing balance of force .
 De Gaulle commented that Khrushchev had been threatening action on Berlin and laying down six-month deadlines for two and a half years . De Gaulles commented that the threat had been made to Berlin and laid down six months deadlines for 2.5 years .
 President Obama would have done 30 already if he planned to go to war over Berlin, he would have had 30 already . Barely if he wanted to go on war, it would have been more than a decade .
 He recalled his own remark to Khrushchev that, while it was too bad that Berlin was situated in the Soviet zone, it wasn't too bad it was in the zone .
 P.35I there was there it was, and its future could be solved only within a framework of general detente and disarmament . The future of the U.S. and Russia could only be solved through detente, disarmament and detente relations .
 Kennedy said the problem was whether Khrushchev really believed in the firmness of the west . De Gaulle added that the west could not win a military victory in Berlin . Kennedy said that fighting around Berlin would mean a general war .
 Khrushchev must understand that, if necessary, we would go to nuclear war, Kennedy said . Kennedy: We must make our policy clear by action, Kennedy told the Soviet Union . We would go nuclear war if necessary .
 He was going to Vienna, above all, so that he and Khrushchev could understand each other's purposes and interests and therefore avoid the ""serious miscalculations 1 ' which had produced the earlier wars of the century . He said: "Above all, we were going to
 In the last analysis, the General said, what counted for every man was himself and his own judgment . The General said: "What counted for each man was his own judgement"
 The question was how two great nations, with different social systems, confronting each other across the world, could avoid head-on collision in an era of great change .
 The Soviet Union, he said, had tried for a long time to develop friendly relations with the U.S. He added that the Soviet Union had tried to establish friendly relations .
 It refused to do so at the expense of other peoples because it would not bring peace, it says . But it refused to be at expense of others .
 America must understand that communism has won its right to grow and develop, says George W. Bush . "Communist has won his right to growth and develop," he says .
 The premise of John Foster Dulles's policy had been the liquidation of communism . This philosophy could never lead to good relations, he says . Dulles' policy was to liquidate communism, but this philosophy never led to a good relationship .
 Khrushchev said he would not hope to persuade the president of the merits of communism . He would not expect the President to waste time trying to convert him to capitalism, he said .
 De facto recognition of the existence of communism was indispensable . But de facto recognition was indispensable to the Soviet Union, he says .
 Kennedy observed courteously that Americans were impressed by the economic achievement of the Soviet Union . It was' a source of satisfaction to the whole world, Kennedy said .
 It was not that the democracies were trying to eliminate communism in areas under communist control, but that the communists wanted to eliminate free systems in areas associated with the west, he said .
 It is impossible, he said, for the S ov iet Union to implant its policy in other states . It was impossible for the U.S. to implant such a policy, he added .
 All the Soviet Union claimed was that communism would triumph; this was not propaganda but a scientific analysis of social development . The Soviet Union's claim was based on social development, rather than propaganda .
 Conmiunism was superseding capitalism today as capitalism had superseded feudalism in the past, says the author of the book . capitalism supersed feudalism today, he says .
 Changes in social systems were bound to cone, but they would be brought about only by the will of the people themselves, says the author . Changes in the social system were bound for cone, he says .
 The Communists believed in their systems, as the President believed in his . The Communists' belief system was similar to that of Vladimir Putin's .
 The Soviet desire for general and complete disarmament proved its intention not to resort to arms . The Soviet Union wanted to disarmament and wanted to avoid arms .
 YHien communist minorities seized control against the popular will, the Chairman regarded this as historical inevitability; we did not . This brought our two natioss into conflict, obiricn sly we mum could not avoid disagreement, but we could avoid the direct confrontation of our military
 "Our interest here was to make _ clear why we were concerned about what we called inevitability," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This led Khrushchev into a sententious discourse on intellectual freedom, he said . This led him into a discourse on the issue of intellectual freedom . The Soviet Union was overthrown in 1968 .
 The Inquisition burned people but could not burn their ideas, and eventually the ideas prevailed . The Inquisition had burned people, but eventually they prevailed .
 If not , communism would win; but which would be a victory of ideas, not of arms . If not, communism would have won, he would have been victorious .
 Khrushchev said sharply that he hoped he had misjudged this remark . Kennedy responded that the two powers shared the obligation to conduct the competition of ideas without involving vital national interests .
 Did he mean that communism should exist only in countries already communist and that, if it developed elsewhere, the United States would be in conflict with the Soviet Unions? This view was incorrect; and, if that was really the Hay the U.S. thought, conflict could not be
 The only rule was that arms should not be propagated by arms nor by intervention in the internal affairs of other countries, the president said .
 He could guarantee fehat the Soviet Union would never impose ideas by war . But he could guarantee that it would not be imposed by war, he said .
 Kennedy quoted Mao Emex Tse-tung’s remark that power came out of the end of the rifle . Kennedy quoted the remark as a quote from Mao Em Ex-Mao . Kennedy quotes Mao's remark as an example of Mao's wisdom .
 Khrushchev blandly denied that Mao ever said this; Mao was a Marxist, and Marxists were against war . Mao was against war, and Mao was Marxist, he said, and was against it . Mao died in 1968, but the war was not over .
 "The greatest danger was the miscalculation by one power of the interests and policy of another," he said . "Greatest danger was miscalculating by one . power of one power ... another."
 It was a vague term, he said, and it suggested to him that -America wanted the Soviet Union to sit like a schoolboy with hands on the top of the desk . It suggested to be the case of America wanting to sit down like a desk boy .
 The Soviet Union held its ideas in high esteem and declined to guarantee that they would stop at the Russian frontier . It declined to say if its ideas would stop stopping at the border .
 He did not understand the American theory of what Russia had to do to maintain the peace, he said . "He didn't understand the U.S. theory of maintaining the peace," he added .
 The Soviet Union was going to defend its vital interests, whether or not the U.S. regarded such acts as miscalculations . It did not want war, but it would not be intimidated either . The Soviet Russia would not want to war but not war; it did not
 Of course war would be fatal; both sides would lose equally and be punished equally . War would have been fatal if both sides lost equally and were punished equally, says the author .
 The west should put the word "miscalculation" into cold storage, for it3 use did not impress the S ov i e t Union at all .
 Kennedy: By "miscalculation" he meant the difficulty of predicting what any country might do next . Kennedy: "Miscalculation is difficult to predict what will happen"
 The United States itself had made misjudgements, as when it failed to foresee Chinese intervention in the Korean War . The U.S. failed to anticipate Chinese intervention, as did the U.N. in the 1950s .
 The purpose of the meeting, as he saw it, was to introduce precision into each side’s assessments and thereby minimize the risks of misjudgement, he said .
 Khruschev retreating to jolliness, commented that, if the meeting succeeded, the expenses of bringing it about would be well justified .
 If it failed, not only would the money be wasted, but the hopes of the people of the world would be betrayed . If the money was wasted, it would be wasted and the people's hopes would also be betrayed, he says .
 Khrushchev had not given way before Kennedy’s reasonableness, nor Kennedy before . Kennedy had given way, not before, before his intransigence . The conversation had been civil but tough, but tough . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev had two medals on his chest, Kennedy asked what they were . Noticing two medals, Kennedy said they were the two Soviet Union medals . Kennedy: "I don't know what it is"
 The American president observed, perhaps a trifle grimly, ""l hope you keep them," he said . The president said, perhaps perhaps a little grimly: "l hope they keep them"
 He himself had miscalculated about the Bay of Rigs, he says . As for miscalculation, every leader had to make judgments .
 He had to estimate what the Soviet Union would do, just as Khrushchev had to do about the U.S. He said, "I had to . estimate what would happen"
 If we could only reduce the margin of uncertainty in such calculations, then our two nations might survive the period of competition without nuclear war .
 It was really the U.S. which caused revolution by backing reactionary governments . Look at Iran, look at Cuba. It's really the United States which caused revolutions, he says .
 Fidel Castro was not a Communist, but U.S. policy was making him one, he says . Fidel Castro is not a communist, but American policy made him a Communist . Castro was a leader of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba .
 Khrushchev himself had not been born a Communist; the capitalists had converted him to them . He was converted to a Communist by the capitalists .
 Kennedy’s assumption that revolution was the consequence of intervention was dangerous . Kennedy assumed that revolution would be the result of intervention, he said .
 It was the United States which had set the precedent for intervention . And, after all, it was the U.S. which had already set the precedents .
 Kennedy disclaimed any brief for Batista . As for Iran, if the Shah did not improve conditions for the people, change would be inevitable, he says .
 The Castro regime was objectionable, not because it expelled American monopolies, but because it offered communism a base in the western hemisphere . Castro's regime was objected to because it allowed the Castro regime to expand into the West .
 The United States did not object to the Marxist government s of Guinea or Mali . The U.S. didn't object to Guinea's Marxist government . Guinea and Mali's governments were Marxist .
 If governments ruled in the interest of wealthy minorities, of course they were doomed . But social changes must take place peacefully and must not involve the prestige or commitments of America and Bussia .
 The P at he t Lao had certain advantages; they received supplies and manpower from Vietnam; moreover, they stood for change . The P.I.T. Lao received supplies from Vietnam .
 Kennedy noted that he himself had been electped President as an advocate of change . Kennedy said that he had been elected President as a candidate for change .
 The solution was to let a neutral and independent Laos decide its own future; and the problem was to make the ceasefire work by setting up a verification mechanism for its verification .
 Khrushchev was displaying no great interest in Laos, preferring to revert to the question of reactionary regimes . The former Soviet Union president was in Laos at the time of his visit .
 Our two sides differed, he said, in our understanding of what popular or anti-popular movements were . The two sides differ in understanding of the movements were, he added .
 We should both agree not to interfere and to leave it to the people of the country . We should not interfere with the government, we should leave the issue to the public, he says .
 The worst thing for the U.S. to do, he warned, was to start guerrilla warfare against / regimes it did not p,36ii like . No undertaking was more hopeless than guerrilla action instigated from outside and not supported by the people .
 Khrushchev: Each side had enough power to destroy the other . He did not know whether the balance of power was exact, but no matter; each side was powerful enough to destroy other .
 The U.S. supported colonial powers, as in Africa, and then was surprised when the people turned against it . But the United States was surprised by the people turning against it in Africa .
 Kennedy pointed out that the United States had backed liberation movements in Africa . He hoped that the number of independent African states would increase . Kennedy said that the U.S. hoped that Africa would become independent states .
 Khrushchev replied that the U.S. policy was uneven, its voice timid, he said . Khrushchevitch replied that it was uneven and the American policy was timid . He said that the United States had to be careful of its own policy .
 Kennedy brought up Khruschchev* s pledge to support wars of national liberation in his speech of January 6 . Kennedy: "I am proud to be able to stand by my country and my people"
 Obviously both nations were helping groups in other countries . Was this noninterference? Was this notinterference .
 The pboblem, while we backed our respective movements, was not to clash ourselves . We backed each other, but not each other .
 Tsars denied the revolutionary American republic recognition fob twenty-six years as an Illegitimate regime . The Tsars had denied the . revolutionary American . republic recognition .
 The realistic policy for the U.S. would be to recognize China and admit it to the United Nations . The U.N. should admit China to the world's most populous nation, the author says .
 Kennedy made the point about preserving the balance of power . Kennedy made once again hhe point about the existing balance-of-power .
 The entry of addition al nations into the communist camp, the loss of Taiwan such developments would alter the equilibrium . Such developments would change the equilibrium.
 If some African country were to go communist, it might add a few drops to the bucket of communist power . The balance of power was conceived as a bucket on each side .
 Any attempt to stop it from outside would bring about a chain reaction and possibly war . But it would also be an expression of the popular will; and any attempt . would also bring about war . Any attempt . to stop . from outside of the outside would . bring about . a chain
 Kennedy responded with equal force that, so far as Washington wa 3 concerned, countries with varied social systems could pursue independent policies, like India, Burma, Yugoslavia . Kennedy responded to Washington's concern that so far, Washington was concerned .
 Roland should join the west. But changes which altered the balance of world power were different . Perhaps the Russians might agree if, perhaps, the Russians agreed if, for example, Roland should .
 Kennedy felt in it time, Kennedy added, to discuss Laos and the test ban in detail . Kennedy said he felt in time to discuss the ban in Laos .
 Khrushchev affected outrage over Kennedy's reference to Poland, contending that Poland's electoral system was more democratic than that of the U.S. He said Poland's elections were democratic, where parties existed only to deceive people .
 Khrushchev said he must doubt whether the U.S. really wanted peaceful coexistence' or was seeking a pretext for war . As for preserving the existing balance, if this were the premise of American policy, he said he would doubt if the United States really wanted peace .
 The U.S. might occupy Crimea on the claim that this improved its strategic position, he says . After all, he said, the United States might not occupy Crimea . The United States may occupy Crimea, he added .
 For Kennedy the status quo was the existing balance of international force . For Kennedy, that was not the case for the U.S. military .
 This did not all mean that he wanted to freeze the world in its social mold . This does not mean he wants to freeze it in his social mold, he said .
 He believed internal political and institutional change to be both inevitable and desirable . He said he believed internal change was inevitable, desirable .
 His hope was that it would take place without transferring power from one block to the other and therefore without making either side feel threatened and constrained to resist change by force . But he hopes it would happen without making any of the blocks feel threatened .
 For Khrushchev, the status quo was something very different; it was in essence the communist revolution in progress across the world . For Khruschev, on the other hand, it was something different; for Khruschchev, that was something that was in progress .
 From this perspective Kennedy’s conception of a global standstill was an attempt not to support o but to alter the status quo; it was an attack on hhe revolutionary process itself . From this . perspective Kennedy's conception of . a global . standstill is an attempt to alter
 Lenin's idea of a dynamic or potential status quo was, of course, deeply imbeded in Leninist analysis . This idea was deeply in-deeply imbedded in Lenin's analysis .
 Khrushchev complained to w illiam Benton that Kennedy had bypassed the real problem . Reminiscing about Vienna three years later, Khrushvic complained about the Vienna incident .
 Kennedy felt that the offer of a standstill was worth the effort . Kennedy nevertheless felt that he had to make the standstill . Kennedy: "It's a good thing that you have to standstill"
 Though Kennedy held his own, he was fighting on his opponent's familiar terrain . Kennedy held up his own .
 He might have done better to seek the realm of concrete fact, bhe pragmatic rather than ideological debating ground, and concentrate .
 Khrushchev came to Vienna ready -to collaborate on Laos and on nothing else . For the rest of the rest, he hoped to unnerve Kennedy and force hit into concessions . The rest of his visit to Vienna was just to get a few concessions .
 The President began by saying that, if they couldn't agree on everything, at least they might be able to agree on Laos . The President also said that, despite their differences, they might agree on the Laos .
 "Here after all was a land without strategic importance to either side but in which the United States had treaty commitments. Here after all . The United States has treaty commitments .
 Khrushchev responded that the Soviet Union had no desire to assume responsibilities in remote geographical areas . Khrushchevsvs. responded that he did not want to assume responsibility for remote geographical regions .
 It was in Laos only at the request of s ouvanna Phouma and the legitimate government, it was only in Laos .
 Khrushchev said the policy stemmed from delusions of grandeur, from megalomania . Khruschev said it was a sign of megalomancy . The policy was "delusional delusions of greateur," Khruski said .
 America was so rich and powerful that it asserted rights for itself and denied rights to others . America is so rich that it asserts rights for its own people and denied others, says author .
 The Soviet Union did not agree and would not desist from helping other peoples to win their independence . The USSR did not want to stop helping other nations to win independence .
 If America really wanted to normalize the situation and avoid confrontations, it must renounce its claim to special rights . The U.S. should not claim to be granted special rights, the author says .
 Kennedy responded that the commitments had been made before he became President . Kennedy said that why they were undertaken was not an issue here .
 Whatever had happened in the past, the issue now is to decrease commitments on both sides and get a neutral and independent Laos . Laos is now an independent and neutral state of mind .
 Khrushchev doubted whether these commitments were altogether a legacy . Kennedy had put the American military advisers into uniform and had ordered a landing of Marines, but no such order had been issued . Kennedy said that, though there had been speculation about sending Marines, no such . order was issued,
 The west, he added, was better than the Communists in making this kind of refined threat . If the United States sent in Marines, another Korea or worse would result, he said .
 As for the Soviet Union, it would exert every effort to influence the Laotian forces to establish a neutral government . The Soviet Union would guarantee to exert its influence to influence Laotians .
 The next question was the teat ban . SksxnxxtxjaKKxtiLHHXMHHXkkKxt® Add TEST BAN P-369 P-370 P.371 P-371 .
 The Soviet Union considered three inspections a year sufficient; any more would constitute espionage . Khrushchev began to inspect suspicious events to be inspected .
 The Soviet Union had originally been ready to accept a commission chaired by a representative of the United Nations . As for the control mechanism, the Soviet Union was originally ready for a U.N. panel .
 N 0 w. w, after the unneutral behavior of the UN in the Congo, this was no longer possible . The UN has been criticized for its actions in the country .
 The only fair way was to establish a body made up of representatives of the three world groups the Communists, the neutrals and the western states . The body should be empowered to adopt only decisions agreed upon by all .
 Khrushchev: Work of other international organizations should be organized along similar lines . The work of other organizations should also be organized, he said .
 Khrushchev: Test ban had little importance by itself; it must be linked with general and complete disarmament . In any case, the test ban was linked with the general disarmament, he said . The test ban is little important by itself by itself, he added .
 If the west would accept the Soviet disarmament plan, then the S OV i e t t U n ion would drop the troika and the requirement for unanimity and agree to any controls .
 Kennedy asked if Khrushchev really thought it impossible to find any neutral between the U.S. and the Soviet o Union . Kennedy asked whether Khrrushchev thought any neutral would be found between the two .
 After this unsatisfactory discussion, they turned to Berlin . Kennedy answered that he wished it were Berlin .
 Khrushchev displayed his greatest animation and intensity . The former Soviet leader was still stopping short of bluster .
 It was 16 years after the end of the war, there was still no peace settlement . It was still 16 years later, and there was no peace agreement .
 Khrushchev said he wanted to reach agreement with the west on a treaty . If the U.S. refused, the Soviet Union would sign the treaty alone . The Soviet Union signed the treaty with the United States .
 This act would end the state of war and cancel all existing com-"" mi tments, including occupation rights, administrative institutions and rights of access . The act would also cancel the status of occupation rights and administrative institutions .
 There would be no interference with its internal affairs or its communications, though agreement on access would have to be reached with the Democratic Republic . No interference would be allowed to interfere with the country's internal affairs .
 Kennedy thanked him for stating the case so frankly, came back with equal frankness . Kennedy, thanking him for his frankness, said: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 This discussion, he said, raised not only legal questions but practical facts which affect American security . This discussion raised questions about legal questions and practical facts, he added .
 They were not talking about Laos any longer; Berlin was of primary and vital concern to the U.S. The United States was not interested in Laos any more . Berlin was a primary concern for the United States.
 "We fought our way there, and our continuing presence rested on contractual rights," says author . "I fought my way there," she says .
 If we allowed ourselves to be expelled, American pledges and commitments would ever after be regarded as scraps of paper . American pledges, commitments would never be regarded by American citizens, he says .
 He had not become President of the U.S. to acquiesce in the isolation of his country any more than J.feirusbchev would acquiesce to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev said that he understood this to mean the United States did not want a treaty . The U.S. did not agree to a treaty with the Soviet Union . Khrushchev said he understood that this meant the treaty would not be possible .
 Kennedy declared that the invocation of national security could mean that Americans would wish to go on to Moscow too, since that would improve their strategic position . Misinterpreting Kennedy again, he declared that he could be mistaken for Americans .
 Kennedy responded sharply that the -Americans did not wish to go anywhere, just to stay where they were . Kennedy responded that the Americans wanted to stay in the United States .
 No doubt the current situation in Berlin was not satisfactory, but conditions were unsatisfactory all over . This was not the time to upset the world balance of power, says the British Prime Minister .
 Khrushchev certainly would not accept a similar shift in favor of the west . Khrushchev would not have accepted a comparable shift in favour of the West .
 An he wanted to do was to trahquilize the situation in the mofet dangerous spot in the world . An he . wanted to . trahqilize . the situation, he said .
 The Soviet Union wanted to perform an operation to excise this thorn, this ulcer without prejudicing interests on either side . "The Soviet Union was trying to perform a ... operation to ... excise ... this thorn," the Soviet Union said .
 Any infringement of the sovereignty of East Germany would be regarded as open aggression wihh all its consequences . And thereafter any infringement of East German sovereignty would be considered open aggression . East Germany was ruled by the West at the beginning of the 1950s .
 Kennedy said the United States opposed any military buildup in West Germany which might threaten the Soviet Union . Kennedy said that the U.S. opposed any . military buildup . which might . threaten the . Soviet . Union .
 Khrushchev's proposal would bring about a basic change in the world situation overnight . But Khrushchev's proposal wouldn't change the situation overnight, he says .
 He had not come to Vienna for this, he had come to the hope of improving relations . He had hoped to improve relations with the Austrian capital .
 The United States could not accept the abrogation by one nation of the fournation agreement . The U.S. would not accept that one nation abrogated the agreement, President Obama said .
 Khrushchev waved aside as without juridical foundation and recalled Roosevelt's remark at Yalta that U.S. troops would leave Europe after two years . Roosevelt said that American troops would be out of Europe in two years, Khrushchchev said .
 If the U.S. tried to maintain its present position after a treaty, this would violate the sovereignty of East Germany and of the coramunifet camp as a whole . But, if the United States tried to keep its current position after treaty, it would violate East Germany
 Once the Berlin question is out of the way, the road would be clear for an improvement of relations . The Berlin question would be the way to improve relations between the two countries, he says .
 In any case, the Soviet Union intended to sign the treaty by the end of 1961 . The treaty was intended to be signed by the Soviets in 1961 .
 If America wanted war over Berlin, there was nothing the Soviet Union could do about it . U.S. could not go to war with the Soviets, it would be impossible to stop .
 President Obama should sign the treaty right away, get it over; that's what the Pentagon had wanted . Maybe he should sign it right away . That's what he wanted .
 It was not quite a tirade; it was too controlled and hard and therefore the more menacing . It's not quite the tirade, but it's too controlled, hard and menacing .
 Kennedy replied that the United States did not wish, to precipitate a crisis . Kennedy said that the U.S. did not want, but wanted to prevent a crisis in the world .
 If the U.S. surrendered to the Soviet demand, it would not be regarded as a serious country any longer . The United States would no longer be considered a serious nation any longer.
 After all the United States itself had signed a unilateral peace treaty with Japan . The U.S. had already signed an agreement with Japan.
 The Soviet Union was determined to go ahead, and responsibility for subsequent violations of German sovereignty would be heavy . Bast Bast would be the first time the Soviet Union violated German sovereignty .
 Kennedy replied that the U.S. did not wish to deprive the Soviet Union of its ties in Eastern Europe . The United States would not submit to the loss of Its own ties in Western Europe, Kennedy said .
 Hejiad not assumed office to accept arrangements totally inimical to American interests . p .373 in’between, they had snatches of private talk. p.373 .
 Khrushchev said (see that he had read Kennedy's defense message) that he thought that in conse385) quence the Soviet Union should perhaps increase its land forces and artillery . The Soviet Union responded .
 Khrushchev himself announced a suspension of 373 Soviet military spending in July, citing Kennedy's call for a larger A ne rian defense effort .
 Chip Bohlen: 'Hard* and 'soft*' should be removed from the language of Soviet policy toward the Soviet Union . 'Hard and soft' would clarify more than anything, he says .
 "I had to see the President shortly before luncheon about other matters," she says . "I'm not going to see him again," she adds .
 As we finished, I handed him the memorandum, saying that he might want to look at it that afternoon on his way to Hyannis Port, where he had scheduled a meeting on Berlin the next day with Rusk, McNamara and General Taylor .
 Acheson* s paper was far too narrowly directed to military problems, he said . Berlin planning must be brought back into balance, he added .
 If we sit silent, or confine ourselves to rebutting S 0 yi e t contentions, we permit Khrushchev to establish the framework of .tix&MKKX discussion . If we sat silent, we allow the fram^ework of discussion .
 As we do this, we in effect invite him to demand from us a definition of the guarantees we would find acceptable . As we ask him to ask him a i definition of what guarantees we find acceptable, we can expect .
 This casts the U.S. as rigid and unreasonable and puts us on the political defensive . This, of course, casts the United States as rigid, unreasonable and putting us on a defensive .
 The paper indicates no relationship between the proposed military action and larger political objectives .
 It defines an immediate casus belli . But it does not state any political objective o t her than p re sent access procedures for which we are prepared to incinerate the world .
 It Is essential to elaborate the cause for which we are prepared to go to nuclean war. It is essential for us to elaborate. The cause for this is to be explained. We must not go to war. We need to be ready to go for nucleans war.
 P.381 While we were agitating the political side, McGeorge Bundy and Kissinger were bringing the President comparable questions about the state of military planning . Kissinger was bringing up comparable questions to the President .
 McNamara had informed the White H 0 use early in May th&t existing plans in case of trouble in Berlin assumed almost immediate resort to nuclear war . McNamara told the White House that the use of nuclear weapons would be almost immediate use in Berlin .
 Bundy commended on the dangerous rigidity of the strategic war plan, pointing out that it left the President littl choice as to how he would face his moment of thermonuclear truth . Bundy now commends on the 'dangerous rigidity' of the plan .
 Bundy suggested thfet Kennedy remand the war plan to McNamara for review and revision . Bundy suggested that the plan be re-evaluated by McNamara . Bundy: "The war plan should be reviewed and revised"
 At the Hyannis Port meeting on Jluly 8 the President made his dissatisfaction with the state of planning abundantly clear .
 On the diplomatic side he decided to ask Acheson to try his hand at a ""political program for Berlin" and instructed Rusk to produce a negotiat389 ing prospectus . Rusk was asked to produce the prospectus for Berlin .
 On the military side, he asked McNamara f or a platl which would pemmit non-nuclear resistance on a scale sufficient to indicate our determination and to provide the communists time for second thoughts and negotiation before everything billowed up in nuclear war .
 The State and Defense papers were to be delivered within ten days . The meeting laid out the lines of battle within the -American government for the rest of the summer .
 At first, Kennedy gained little ground/ When the National Security Council met on Berlin on July 13, Rusk reaffirmed the Acheson argument that we should not negotiate until the crisis became more acute .
 Acheson himself, supported by Lyndon Johnson, now argued strongly for a proclamation of national emergency . Lyndon Johnson .
 This declaration became the symbol of the drastic reaction to the crisis . It implied an immediate expansion of the armed forces, an increase in the defense budget of perhaps $5 billion, standyby price and wage controls .
 Though the proclamation wuld legally facilitate the calling up of reserves, its essential purpose was psychological . The proclamation was intended to encourage the call-up of reserves but it was intended for psychological reasons .
 Only a response of this order, Acheson argued"", could deter Khrushchev from irretrievable steps . Achesons argued that the order could make the American peonle understand the gravity of the crisis .
 Kissinger's view was that Khrushchev would not accept a reasonable proposal, Kissinger said . Kissinger: "This was an argument for rather than against our taking the initiative" Kissinger: 'This was a reason for us to take the initiative'
 A n y other course wouTd see us "jockeyed into a position of refusing diplomatic solutions,"" and, when we finally agreed to discussion, as we inevitably must, it would seem an American defeat .
 Diplomacy was the ""necessary corollary to the build-up," Kissinger concluded . Kissinger concluded that diplomacy was a necessary corollory to the building-up .
 If we declared the emergency now, we used up a measure which would be more effective if taken as a response to clear-cut Soviet provocation . Moreover, if we declared it now, it would be better to respond to clear Soviet provocation, he says .
 Sorensen feared it would also arouse those at home and abroad who are fearful of 'rash' and 'triggerhappy* actions by the U.S.
 Kennedy said only "fools" could cling to the idea of victory in a nuclear war . Only ""fools,"" Kennedy said, "can cling to idea of winning in a war"
 He still hoped to arrive at a point where both the Soviet Union and the U.S. would accept the premise that the only alternatives were authentic negotiation or mutual annihilation .
 He rejected the program of national mobilization and sought the beginnings of careful negotiation . He did not wish to drive the crisis beyond the point of no return, he said .
 Ted Sorensen prepared a draft for a Berlin speech along these lines, and Kennedy began to work it over . Kennedy was working on the draft for the speech .
 TV cables were installed in the presidential office, and the president made his report to the people . Then on the night of July 25 television cables were . The president's report was made to the public .
 "We do not intend to leave it to others to choose and monopolize the forum and the frsmfework of discussion," he said . But, if our military posture had to be defensive, "our diplomatic posture need not be."
 We o were determined to search for peace ""in formal or informal meetings. We are determined to find peace in formal and informal meetings"
 Press played up military points and almost ignored passages about negotiation . But for some reason, the press made it appear a triumph for the hard line .
 He happened to be at Sochi conferring with John J MeCloy about disarmament . He was at Sochi at the moment to be conferring on disarmament disarmament.
 On the day before the speech, he was in a jolly mood, comparing the exchange of diplomatic notes to kicking a football back and forth . He said it would probably continue until a treaty was signed and the Soviet Union kicked a different kind of ball .
 The next day he told MeCloy that the U.S. had declared preliminary war on the Soviet Union . He told the next day that the United States had declared war on Russia .
 Kfarushchev said the capitalist world had lost confidence in its xfe capacity to triumph by peaceful means . This confirmed the thesis of his January speech, he said . The capitalist world has lost confidence, he added .
 The President, he added, seemed a reasonable young man, filled with energy and doubtless wishing to display that energy . But, if war occurred, he would be the last president .
 Khrushchev concluded, he still believed in the ^resident's good sense . Howevsjp: "I still believe in the Soviet Union"
 After thunderstorms, people cooled off, thought problems over and resumed human shape . After thunderstorm, people cool off and think problems over, resumed normal life .
 Khrushchev's tone was considerably higher-pitched than Kennedy's . The two speeches bore curious resemblances of the sort which led the President to invoke the mirror metaphor in discussing S ov 3_ e t pronouncements .
 Kennedy, having launched his military build-up, now tried to set his diplomatic offensive in motion . Kennedy was trying to set up his own diplomatic offensive against Russia .
 He had been pressing the State Department to prepare negotiating positions ever since the Hyannis port meeting, but it was uphill work . The State Department has been preparing negotiating positions since the meeting .
 This was in part because of the very genuine intellectual difficulty of devising a proposal . This was part of the real intellectual difficulty in devising an idea .
 Acheson himself, in response to the President’s request, made his own recommendations . The President asked for the recommendations, and Achesons responded .
 He suggested western foreign ministers be called together at the end of August to concert a stand . He suggested that the western foreign minister be called to a stand against the idea .
 As for the content of our negotiating position, Acheson offered in effect a dressed-up version of the status quo . As for . the content . of the . content of . our negotiating . position, we would like to see an end to the . status quo. As for
 Acheson' s ideas were more helpful to . regard to procedure than to substance, says historian . "Acheson was more helpful with regard to . procedure than substance," he says. "I think Achesons' ideas are more helpful than substance"
 He disapproved of the conciliatory passages in the President's speeches, and some of his characteristically slashing comments had got back to Kennedy . Kennedy regretted them, not because they were critical, but because he did not feel, any more than he had after the Bay of Pigs,
 Bundy, McNamara and Taylor all thought that the meeting of western foreign ministers should take place as soon as possible . Kennedy agreed, and the meeting was agreed .
 Rusk went to Paris in August to work out a negotiating strategy with western counterparts . Rusk has been in Paris since August, working out a deal with the world's three western leaders . He says he hopes to reach an agreement with the French government .
 The hope was to find enough agreement to justify inviting the Soviet Union to a four-power conference . The Soviet Union would be invited to join the conference .
 The French remain flatly hostile to the whole P* 39U idea . But the Americans still had no solid position to propose, and the U.S. has no solid proposal .
 De Gaulle soon wrote to Kennedy that the opening of negotiations would be considered immediately as a prelude to the abandonment, at least gradually, of Berlin and as a sort of notice of our surrender .
 Russia is preparing to carry out drastic action against the Ukraine crisis . Russia has invited the UK to discuss the crisis, but it was not invited to discuss it .
 The Wall For the Berlin crisis was having its most spectacular effect in Bast Germanv itself . The wall was having the greatest effect on Bast German v. Berlin itself .
 The Beg refugee exodus was growing every day in July . Over thirty” thousand fled to West Berlin in July alone . Over 30”000 refugees fled to the city in July.
 The Bast German regime imposed new measures intended to restrict the flight, but the effect was only to increase it . Toward the end of the month the new measures were imposed by the German regime .
 A few people began to speculate about further communist countermeasures . Ln Washington, D.C. was a few years ago .
 In a television interview ofl July 30 Senator Fulbright remarked, ""I don't understand why the Bast Germans' don't 1 1 close their ' b or deiHce' In August the RreaTd'ent observed that Khrushchev would have to do something internally
 Eastern E u rope was a vital interest for Khrushchev, and he p could not stand by and let it trickle away . Eastern E.U. rope was an important interest for the Soviet Union .
 President Obama can get the alliance to move if he tries to do anything about West Berlin but not if he just does something about East Berlin . But it wasnot a vital interest for the U.S. But the United States.
 East German troops and police occupied most of the crossing-points on the East Berlin side of the dividing line . They tore up the streets and installed roadblocks and barbed-wire barricades in East Berlin .
 The State Department and the CIA were surprised by the action . The test-of-will thesis had diverted attention too long from the local problems of East Germany .
 The construction of a concrete wall did not begin until August 17, and movement between the sectors continued for several days after that . A number of crossing-points remained open .
 For all Washington could tell on the thirteenth, the intention might have been to control rather than to end the refugee flow . This hardly was a reason for invading the eastern sector and thereby inviting retaliation and risking war .
 The Wall might represent the unfolding of an unalterable Soviet plan, based on a conviction of American irresolution, to drive the west out of Berlin . Xet the possibility remained that the intention might be far more sinister 1 that the Wall might be .
 Kennedy, remarking that there was one chance out of five of a nuclear exchange, instantly mobilized the resources of government . Kennedy: "There is one chance of five" of a nuke attack .
 U.S. military build-up is the most effective response to North Korea's nuclear crisis, says U.N. expert . U.K. rejected some countermeasures, like cutting off interzonal trade, as too drastic and others as trivial .
 It took four days four interminable days before the protest was delivered in Moscow . The protest took place in west Berlin but west Berlin was not so far as concerned .
 The apparent American impassivity not unnaturally alarmed the West Berliners . Mayor l ' d illy Brandt wrote Kennedy condemning the feeble western reaction and proposing a series of more stringent responses .
 He_did not suggest anything like the dispatch of troops into East Berlin to dismantle the barriers . He_ did not, however, suggest anything .
 Brandt's letter, reinforced by cables from our Minister in Berlin, made it clear that some American reaction more specific than the general military build-up was necessary to sustain the morale of / West Berlin .
 President Kennedy decided to send Vice-President Johnson to carry his answer to Brandt . Kennedy therefore decided to carry out his answer and signify to the Russians that Berlin was an ultimate American commitment .
 The Wall remained, a shabby obscenity straggling across the face of the city . I P.398 3 mine Underlined mine .
 In retrospect it seems to have been a defensive rather than an aggressive action . In retrospect, it seems that it was a defensive move rather than aggressive .
 It represented a solution, at considerable political cost, of the problem which, more perhaps, had led Khrushchev to reppen the Berlin question earlier in the year .
 Wall secured the most immediate B 0V iet interest in Berlin . By stanching the blood-flow from Bast Germany, the Wall secured most immediate interest .
 Kennedy’ 3 determination to rebuild the military power of the west had shown Khrushchev that he could not obtain his maximum objectives by bluff . Kennedy had shown that he had to show that he was not bluffing in order to achieve his objectives .
 The ""'■'•all, by achieving his minimum objective, released him from the necessity of forcing the issue to a showdown . Now the ""' ■'All," by achieving the minimum objective of winning, he has achieved his goal of winning the battle .
 This was not, however, fully perceived at the time . The Crisis Fades Aaay was not fully perceived as the time it occurred .
 It is hard now to recall the forebodings of the late summer of 1961, to evoke again the pessimism that shrouded the government . The government was overthrown in the summer of that year .
 George Kennan came back from Belgrade for a few days early in August . ”l am expendable, I have no further official career, and I am goigg to do everything I can to prevent a war,” he said .
 'We both known how tenuous a relation there is between a man’s intentions and the consequences of his acts' 'We have known that there is a tenuous relationship between intentions and consequences'
 There is no presumption more terrifying than that of those who would blow up the world on the basis of their personal judgment of a transient situation . The presumption is terrifying, says the author .
 I do not ""propose to let the future of mankind be settled, or ended, by a gropp of men operating on the basis of limited perspectives and short-run calculations," he said .
 When Rusk commented to the President on September 5 that Mosc ow was showing little in t""e re s't' In^^£ 0 ^Tag[o^~ge^eH^re 2 TIec[ grimly,"" it Isn’t t t t
 Given this apparent Soviet desperation , the w hite House group regarded it as more urgent 'than e ve r to sp""ee~d The military build-up and at the same time to exhaust every diplomatic recourse before Armageddon . Given this .
 On August lip, Bundy reported to the ^resident unanimity in his immediate staff for the view that we should take a clear initiative for negotiation within the next week or ten days . Bundy reported the day after the first crossing-points were closed, Bundy said . Bundy: "We should
 The possibility of a revolt in East Germany constituted a further argument for seizing the initiative, the author says . The possibility was further an argument for the government to seize the initiative .
 The State Department, he added, prefers to keep things within the four-power process . State Department is more cautious about U.S. action, he said .
 Bundy suggests a public deadline might be the only way to galvanize the lumbering machinery into action . Bundy: "A public deadline is the only thing that might galvanize a lumbering machine into action" Bundy: A public deadline could galvanize action .
 Someone in Clay's headquarters had sent him an emotional draft filled with denunciations of communist perfidy and promises of Atn er i can deliverance .
 There was no point, he said, in kidding anybody, no point in exciting emotions beyond the possibility of satisfaction . "There is no point," he said .
 In early 1962 each side tabled its P r °P 03al3 ^ a succession of Rusk-Gromyko talks . The talks were part of a series of talks between Russia and Ukraine .
 It seemed probable that Khrushchev did not want the gap bridged the s ”r. of 1961 ttat he o™ 1 * “»* wpSFtto ss within the existing equilibrium of military force.” The gap was not bridged .
 Khrushchev wanted "" Communist” Berlin* rather than end of problem it made for him, and later missile crisis as outgrowth of Berlin crisis . The frustrations of the summer over Berlin brought the Bresident's discontent with his Department of State to a climax .
 One muddle after another the Department's acquiescence in the Bay of Pigs, the fecklessness of its recommendations after the disaster . The State Departemtn was not yet an instrumentality fully and promptly responsive to presidential purpose, he says .
 II Bureaucratization was only part of the explanation for State's malaise when Kennedy came to office . The State of the U.S. suffered from a lack of statecraft in the 1960s .
 The other part was the shock of McCarthy or rather the readiness of Dulles, as Secretary of State, to yield up Foreign Service officers to Mccarthyism .
 The Dulles period was a time of distress and humiliation for the professionals, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "The Dulles era was a period of distress, humiliation for professionals"
 These years saw the expulsion of experienced and independent-minded diplomats, like John Davies, ^r., and the exile of others, like Charles B 0 hlen. These years were the years when diplomats were expelled .
 Circumspection had always eased the path to advancement in the Service; now it became a requirement for survival . Circumulation had always ease the path of advancement . Now it has become a requirement of survival .
 The McCarthy era, by demonstrating the peril of dangerous thoughts, elevated conformism into a conditioned reflex . McCarthy era was a reminder of the dangers of the McCarthy era . "Conformism" is a conditioned reaction to conformism .
 Career men stopped telling Washington what they really thought and consecrated themselves to the cliches of the cold war . Career men instead of telling Washington they thought .
 Davies: "Many cautious mediocrities rose to the top of the B e p V i C e C e" along with those most uncritically committed to the coldwar view of the world . Davies: Some did this more skillfully than others, and the result was that
 No one was more annoyed by this fidelity to the past, or more poignant in expressing his annoyance, than Galbraith . "No one is more annoyed than that," he said .
 In Western Europe after the Bay of Pigs one ambassadpr after another asked me what in hell had happened . "In Western Europe it was perplexed and aguish," he says .
 On his return I called for the cable files and found that Washington had confined itself to sending around bland official explanations . Washington had limited itself to send bland official 1 explanations 1 couched in language suitable for public release .
 "We were never able to persuade State to level with its own embassies on this matter. Even though the Attorney General interested himself in the problem, we were . Even though . The Attorney General . interested himself, we . never . persuaded State to issue a statement .
 Galbraith sent a crisp cable to the Department suggesting that in the future the confidential communications of the State Department not be used for purposes of ""internal bemusement" State Department .
 The Bay of figs provided Kennedy the warning and confirmed his temperamental instinct to reach deep inside State, defense and the CIA in order to catch hold of policies before these policies made his choices for him .
 Cuba and Laos had already provided examples of the readiness of the CIA operatives in the field to go off on policies of their own .
 This was only the most spectacular expression of the steady growth of the CIA in the 1950s . The CIA was only one of the most successful CIA operations in the world in the 1960s .
 The CIA had outstripped the State Department in the quality of its personnel, partly because it paid higher salaries . Allen Dulles's de finance of McCarthy enabled it to attract and hold abler men .
 CIA had almost as many people under official cover overseas as State . CIA officers outnumbered those from State in the political sections of the embassies .
 Often the CIA station chief had been in the country longer than the ambassador, had more money at his disposal and exerted more influence . The CIA had its own political desks and military staffs .
 CIA declined to clear its clandestine intelligence operations either with the State Department in Washington or with the ambassador in the field . While covert political operations were cleared with State, this was sometimes done after the operation had almost reached the point beyond which the CIA could not easily be recalled .
 The coincidence that one Dulles brother was head of State and another the head of the CIA had resulted in practical independence for the Agency . Allen Dulles could clear things with Foster without clearing them with Foster' Department .
 The lucky success in Guatemala has stirred dangerous P.428 longs for adventure in CIA breasts . P.G.428 is a dangerous Pfc.428 .
 None of this is to suggest that the CIA constituted, in the title of a popular expose, an ""invisible government'' or that its influence was al_ways, or often, reactionary and sinister .
 "In my experience its leadership was politically enlightened and sophisticated," he said . "In the experience it was politically ... sophisticated," the author said .
 CIA representatives took a more liberal line in White House meetings than their counterparts from State Department . H 0 t seldom CIA representatives take more liberal lines in meetings than State Dept. counterparts .
 A great deal of CIA energy went to the support of the anti-Communist left around the world political parties, trade unions and other undertakings . None the less, it had acquired a power which, however beneficial its exercise often might be, blocked state Department control over the conduct of
 The Agency itself suffered from doubt and gloom after Cuba, and it feared that drastic measures would cause total demoralization . The Agency was feared to be demoralizing .
 It was revised and approved by the Advisory Committee on Science and Technology . It was adopted by the DAC, with Kennedy's specific endorsement, on December 5, 1959 .
 Harold Stassen's valiant efforts during his time as disarmament negotiator, he says . America's policy remained formalistic, like the B ov ov i s t»s dedicated to developing positions, not for negotiation, but for propaganda .
 The United States had nominally accepted ""general and complete dis armament "" in the 1959 UN resolution, even if our actual proposals before and after had suggested that we were interested only in partial measures and unwilling to go the distance . After all, the United States .
 Mr President must be to make sure that you yourself are genuinely for general and’ complete disarmament. Your first decision, Mr President says . Mr Obama must be for general disarmament .
 Only total disarmament will save the world from the horror of nuclear war as well as the mounting expenses of the arras race, writes David Frum . Total disarmament is the only way to avoid nuclear war .
 "Your basic decision must be to identify yourself with a new approach to disarmament," says President Obama . "You can't wait to see if you want to disarm yourself," says Obama .
 Kennedy listened with interest but also with a slight tinge of skepticism . Kennedy listened to the General Assembly strategy for the U.S. Kennedy listened closely with interest .
 With his profoundly realistic mind, he saw little present chance of significant progress . Therefore looked to disarmament primarily as a measure of political warfare .
 He said he understood the importance of the disarmament drive . Now he well understood the ""propaganda"" importance of disarmament .
 This casual remark stung Stevenson; he seemed seized by an anguished feeling that Kennedy did not really care about disarmament at all . Stevenson seemed seized for an instant as if he seemed to be seized on the feeling . He seemed seized upon the instant .
 Stevenson returned to the attack, telling the President in effect that he just had to have faith . While Cleveland and I, both anxious to keep our principals together, watched a little helplessly .
 McCloy and Dean opposed this on the ground that we would gain nothing and might restrict our own freedom of action . For a moment, cTeveland argued that resumption itself should be brought before the Security Council .
 It would look hypocritical for us to take the question to the Security Council if we have already decided to resume testing . It would be hypocritical if we were already considering testing again, he says .
 "This decision, of course, was based on a belief in the reality of world opinion," she says . "This is based on the fact that world opinion is very different"
 On September the day he ordered the resumption of our own underground tests, he called in Rusk, Stesrenson, Cleveland, Bundy, Bundy and Sorensen to consider what he might say .
 For a while we discussed Berlin, the President rattling off a series of ideas which might eonsititute part of a negotiating position .
 Stevenson urged that he hold a special press conference to emphasise his interest in Berlin negotiations and unveil the new Ameriaan disarmament plan . Stevenson feared that the S.O. Union might respond to the Kennedy-Macillan note on an atmospheric test ban by talking ones more about
 The Russians made two tests after our note calling for a ban on atmospheric testing . The Russians tested two times after we called for an end to atmospheric testing ban .
 He has had a succession of apparent victories space . Cuba, Cuba, the thirteenth of A ugu st (the Berlin Wall) , though I don't myself regard this as a Soviet victory .
 I'm not saying that it was the right decision^ Who the hell knows-1 But it is the decision which has been taken. The decision was taken.
 Note that here again Schlesinger ignores Kennedy's mobilization of the National Guard . Note that this is not the first time Kennedy has mobilized the Guard .
 Kennedy; Berlin; Rational Guard; mobilization; Reserves or Reserves; or Army, Militarv.v. Kennedy; . Berlin; . Rational Guard or mobilization; mobilization or mobilization .
 In a journalist, such omissions would be inexcusable in . In .^ historian, they can be only a deception and a misrepresentation, deliberate and in full awareness of its significance . in . ^ historian, he says, in this case, it can only be a deception
 If Red China comes into the UK during our first year in town, your first year and mine, they’ll run us both out. It really doesn't make any sense the idea that Taiwan represents China, But, if we lost this fight, if . we lose this fight
 It will be an election j year; but we can delay admission of Red China till after the election . We can delay the admission of the country's most populous nation until after that election .
 As far as this year as concerned, you must do everything you can to keep them out . S 0 far from this year's end as well as the end of the year .
 I'm going to send a new letter to Chiang Kai-shek, based on what is good for us, not what's good for Formosa . I'm not going to write to him, but to send him a letter based on the good of Formosa, he says
 We’ll get Cabot Lodge to talk to Luce A dlai, I Roy Howard and Waiter Judd . We'll talk to Cabot Lodges to talk about Luce and Howard . We also need to talk with the Waiter who served as a waiter .
 T 0 install a triumvirate, he said, would be to "" entrench the ^o'lWar in the headmine quarters of peace .
 Yor ""a nuclear disaster, spread by wind and water and fear, could well ""engulf the great and the small, the rich and the poor, the committed jj and the uncommitted alike," says Yor Yor .
 Over the next week we began work on the President's UN speech . A 1000 DAYS Advisers Advisers Schlesinger | P . ii .
 Some ofous questioned whether this was really a contradiction, for obviously disarmament negotiatio ns would be predicated on the resolution of the I Berlin crisis . But others ofous | questioned whether it was really an . contradiction .
 Secretary KcNsmara, wh6 had not examined it with care before the meeting, quickly ponfeived its imperfections and abandoned it as a basis for argument . When wa met. to consider it at the State Department, Secretary. obviously not examined .
 One defense official made an impassioned case for the resumption of atmospheric testing .
 McGeorge Bundy replied that he was against tests for the sake of psychological warfare . Bundy insisted on the principle that we never test in the atmosphere unless required by military necessity to do so .
 National Security Council debate led to conclusion that Wiesner was essentially right . President: "Wiesner is essentially right. The President is right"
 Yet one began to notice an unconscious hardening through the government, as if a final decision had been made . The government began to be hardening, as though it had already made a decision to take action .
 Kennedy said he "hates the idea of resuming atmospheric tests" He said: "Personally I hate the idea . I hate it"
 It's going to be damned hard to stave off the pressure, especially when the news gets out that the big Soviet explosion was relatively clean . But it will be hard to keep pressure on the government, especially after the news comes out .
 It was evident that the current series would not by itself enable Khrushchev to reverse the balance of nuclear power . The current series of the series is not enough to reverse nuclear power, says author .
 If the Russians were to conduct a new series while the U.S. refrained from atmospheric testing, the next one might well put them in the lead .
 Without the treaty we had no assurance that, having completed one sequence, Soviet scientists and generals would not demand another and another . We could, in other words, "eat 1 ' one s oviet round but not two" without the treaty .
 President Kennedy loathed the idea of atmospheric tests, any president who stood aside and allowed the enemy to achieve nuclear superiority would have taken a risk in the face of his constitutional obligations .
 President discussed the problem with Harold Macmillan in Bermuda on December 21 . This, I believe, was the president's state of mind when he discussed the issue .
 If these horrible weapons were not fired off, it would be a hopeless economic waste . If they were, they would, be k90 the end of civilization. If they weren't fired off .
 Many nations in a few years would begin to acquire their own simpler bombs . The United States and / the Soviet Union were having this sophisticated competition .
 Berlin, Macmillan said, seemed to him small beer compared to the destruction of humanity . Berlin, Berlin, he said, was "small beer" compared to humanity's destruction . Berlin seemed to be a 'small beer' compared to war, he added .
 Kennedy: "You and I could not sit in an ordinary little room four days before Christmas and talk about these terrible things without doing domething about it" Kennedy: You and I, he said to Kennedy with emotion, could not talk about it without doing something .
 Perhaps you and I, he told Kennedy, should meet at the summit with Khrushchev and really push for disarmament, he said . w e might fail, but we would have lost only a few months, Kennedy said .
 Macmillan added that, after reading Russian novels and everything else he could find about Russia, he felt that they might come around . He added that after reading everything he could read about Russia he felt they might .
 The Russians were halfway between Europe and Asia and watching the rise of China with foreboding . Russia was halfway between Asia and Europe and watched the rise in China .
 The west thought of them as enormously different, but their economic and social structure was not that alien . The west had thought they were enormously different but they were not that .
 Children of the ruling class were going to elite schools, as o they did in Britain . After all, mines and railroads were nationalized through most of Western Muroppe .
 Without yielding, could we not provide time to allow the forces o of humanity to exert their influence? Macmillan was eloquent, and Kennedy was moved. Without yielding . Without yielding. Could we not allow time?
 The problem, 'he pointed out, was what would happen in 1961]. if the Russians continued to test and the west didn't, he said . The problem would happen if the west did not, he added . 'The problem is that the west would not be able to stop testing
 Prime Minister asked that final decision be postponed to permit one last try at disarmament . Even though he was himself a ""great anti-tester , 1 he saw no alternative but to prepare for resumption and, if there was no progress, to resume .
 Kennedy replied that a new effort would only enable the Russians to stall things for many more months . Kennedy: New effort will only enable Russia to stall the Russians for years more .
 Russia could get ready for a new series of tests a year from now, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia would be no better a year later, says Putin's spokesman .
 He asked whether Macmillan would agree to atmospheric tests on Christmas Island if the situation did not change . He concluded later in the day by asking whether he would accept atmospheric tests .
 Macmillan responded that this was a decision for the cabinet; but Britain and A me rica were partners, we were in this together . He only wished that the announcement would seem less a threat than a hope .
 In a deeply personal letter to Kennedy, the Prime Minister argued that resumption would probably lead the Russians to carry out their next series . We would be forced to do the same; the contest would intensify; and, as the burden of the race mounted, one side or the other,
 There would be no way of preventing the spread of nuclear we aeons to non-nuclear states, he said .
 If this capacity for destruction ended up in the hands of dictators, reactionaries, revolutionaries, madmen around the world, then sooner or later, possibly by the end of 0 this P.493 century, the great crime would be committed .
 It would seem to any ordinary person, MacMillan continued that humanity was setting out on a path at once so fantastic and so ret’ rograde, so spphisticated and so barbarous, as to be almost incredible .
 It might be, he concluded, that we were condemned, like the heroes of the old Greek tragedies, to an ineluctable fate from which there was no escape .
 The situation demanded a supreme effort to break the deadlock, he says . But in his view, he said the situation needed a 'supreme effort' to break it .
 Khrushchev proposed that the impending eighteen-power disarmament meeting be a final try for freneral disarmament, a test ban treaty and an agreement not to transfer nuclear weapons or information to non-nuclear powers .
 J-he Macmillan letter contained certain ambiguities . But, on the whole, it was not o the things one did in one's life that one regretted but rather the opportunities .
 It did not make clear whether the use of Christmas Island was conditioned on a disarmament conference at the summit, or whether the resumption of atmospheric testing was dependent on the conference's failure .
 It did make clear in moving language both the extent of Macmillan's anxiety and the magnitude of the decision which confronted us .
 Adlai Stevenson: 'It would be unfortunate and could be tragic if we were to give the Brim© Minister a dusty answer' But ths_State D epar t ment was considerably less moved .
 On January B undy and I went over to Busk's office to examine State ' s cdraft reply reply . On January 2nd, we met Busk in his office to look at the reply .
 It was an evasive, bureaucratic screed, falling so far below Macmillan in styjle and tone as to be unresponsive . It was a 'bureaucratic screed' falling so low that it was unresponsive to the public .
 Rusk, however, agreed that the answer should not be perfunctory . Rusk: "What an attitude toward the major ally* ) Rusk agreed that an answer to the question should not have been perfunatory .
 President's State of the Union message redirected attention to the idea of a test ban confined to the atmosphere . Hn the meantime, a debate arising from the President's S.E. message had redirected attention .
 Early drafts promised one last try for such a ban before we resumed testing above ground . At Kennedy's instruction, the early drafts promised a last try .
 The president eventually reduced it to agenerality about breaking the log jam on disarmament and nuclear tests . But this thought had aroused such distress that the president reduced It to Agenerality .
 The Russians accepted the ban for two or three years and then found a pretest to break it . The ban would probably work to our advantage, whether accepted or refused by the Soviet Union .
 If they tood advantage of the ban to prepare secretly for new tests, we might lose nearly a year in the technology race . If they take advantage, they might be able to take advantage .
 McNaughton has proposed a number of political and legal devices to help make the ban stock . The ban is meant to guard against this, he says .
 In the White House Carl Kaysen after a careful analysis concluded that an atmospheric ban would not pose unacceptable military risks and might well lead to new and striking gains in arms control . In the U.S. it would be impossible to ban the atmospheric ban, he said .
 This debate was not simply a disagreement between virtuous antitesters and wicked big-bomb men . It was a disagreement over whether the U.S. government should bomb the world's biggest bomb .
 A wholjry intelligent case for atmospheric resumption existed, Robert Komer of the tJ hifce House made it in comments on the Kaysen-Schle singer position .
 If this were so, then they would not appreciate the value of stable deterrence until they grasped the futility of the arms race . The U.S. should not have to rely on arms race arms race to deter Russia and China .
 D.C. encouraged Moscow to think it might possibly overtake us in nuclear power . The Russians would have less incentive to consider other ways of insuring their security .
 There might be no_ other way to drive home to Moscow the strat egic realities of o the nuclear age . U.S. might signal to the Russians a reluctance to use them, perhaps in a time of crisis over Berlin and southeast Asia .
 In February Kennedy received an analysis of the s oviet tests by a panel of leading scientists . Their report disclosed a highly advanced nuclear technology, with new designs and techniques, including some unknown to the west .
 Deen 'laid for a new series which might enable the Soviet Union to develop bombs whose yield pef we&ght of explosive would be somewhat higher than ours', he said .
 With a heavy heart, he decided that we would have to resume atmospheric testing . He decided that he decided to resume testing .
 He made it clear he wanted low-yield detonations concentrated in short periods . As for the tests themselves, he said he wanted them to take place in short bursts .
 The next question was when the world should be notified . In the next months he spent a goad deal of time reviewing and revising the proposals .
 Kennedy at first thought, and Macmillan concurred, that announcement should be J until after the eighteen-nation Disarmament had met in Geneva . This would, mean sometime sometime sometime in April .
 Note also how careful ^chlesinger is to avoid showing that from the USSR point of view they at least could consider they were pushed to do. this, especially because the United States had done considerably more testing which gave it a scientific if not a military advantage .
 At the same time, the ^resident wanted to rescue Macmillan' s . s . osuggestion for a new disarmament initiative .
 Opposition had arisen to the proposal that we make one more offer of an atmospheric test ban before resuming our own tests, partly because it provided no insurance against secret preparations and thus against another surprise Soviet series .
 The President has declared his readiness to trade off atmospheric series for a comprehensive test ban treaty . The President therefore decided to declare his readiness .
 Hugh Gaitskell visited Washington filled with enthusiasm for Kennedy . Hugh had just come back from a visit to Washington filled in enthusiasm .
 The President had provided him with a full technical briefing on the testing matter something which the British government had curiously never given him p and Gaitskell agreed that the United States had no choice but to go ahead .
 Kennedy later told me that Gaitskell's argument for resumption to the Geneva disarmament talks had strengthened his determination to try once more for the Geneva treaty, but also convinced him that he should not allow the Disarmament Committee to begin its work under the illusion that the United States
 Prime Minister still hoped somehow to stafe o ff Ame ric an resumpt ion, Ij Underana Kennedy's mess age came as a shock .
 In particular, it would once aga__in offer a comprehensive test ban treaty .
 Both Macmillan and Khrushchev would think it fitting to meet at Geneva to sign the final treaty . That action would be 'a monumental step toward peace', he said .
 It would not be a proposal as acceptable to much of the rest of the world as that of the USSR for complete disarmament, and ultimatum, which no government of a major power could accept with confidence in its survival .
 April 25, as dawn breaks over Christmas Island, the U.S. began a new round of tests in the atmosphere . The United States began a series of tests on Christmas Island .
 The rogue elephant was loose again, and neither Kennedy nor Macmillan was content to let him rampage unchecked . Disarmament and the defense budget were the subject of a major debate in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev quote dated by nothing but a ""then"", referring to an unidentified time during the 3-4 year period . Note that the quote is dated by only a "then" quote .
 The Russians put forward a plan demanding abolition in the first sisia&E stage of all means of deg livering nuclear weaoons, as well as of all foreign bases . The Russians continued to oppose any serious verification of i 0.498 anything except weapons destroyed until / the
 'Overkill* idea that each side was compulsively j, engaged in piling up more and more nuclear bombs justified, at least I Underin its more nightmarish form . Nor I W as the 'overkill' idea of each side being compulsively . committed to piling up
 New expenditure mbe went, not to increase stockpiles, but replacement, modernization of weapons systems . Research into new weaoons and maintenance of a higher state of alert .
 Loru Snow*s fantasy of I960 acquiring more validity each passing minute . The vast effort, in the United States at leasi., to improve fail-safe controls was reducing the probability of the Dr. Dr. Snow's I960 .
 In short, if there was an arms race, neither side was galloping as fast or as frantically as it could . I \ >:-99 mine mine mine .
 The experience of the spring and summer of 19 6l had convinced him"" that running fas ter i n the race would only provoke his opponent to run faster too and thereby increase the stMn without necessarily altering the gap”
 The budget was the most effective means of signaling t o the Soviet Union our intentions, according to Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 The USSR would certainly do something about any U.S. missile increase, the author says . And compare the following sentence with the preceding paragraphs .
 After cutting down the original Ai r Force missile demands considerably, he perhaps felt he could not do more without risking public conflict with the Joint ■i Chiefs and the vociferous B_70 lobby in Congress .
 The ^resident went along with the policy of multiplying Polaris and Minutej man missiles/ ¥ithin the magnitudes of the budget the ^resident, of course, retained a series of choices about weapons systems .
 This > counterforce ' strategy required us to have the capacity to hold in reserve, even after a massive surprise attack, sufficient striking power to destroy enemy society if driven to it . This would give an opponent the strongest imaginable incentive to refrain from striking our own cities .
 At the same time McNamara reorganized | the control . system so that, instead of investing all striking power in a single presidential push button, the command structure could retain . the ability to respond in a number of ways besides blowing uo the world, 2/ 1/ Imagine this
 The USSR lacked intellectual comprehension of the meaning of nuclear plenty"", they had a ""cultural lag"", and they did not understand ""the strategic realities of the nuclear age”, i Zj Does this not osay what yhe United States has always denied, that the president
 The ICBM had been on only for five years i n the United States and hardly at all in the world , fc hat 'pre vl ous"" ""military experience h_ ing oo he lp this analysis .
 Everything existed in the shadow world of pure theory; . nor could the electronic computers of the systems analysts program the political realities weighing"" on policy makers .
 "Deterrence was in the end not a mathematical but a psychological problem. Moreover, deterrence was not only mathematical but psychological problem," he said .
 An this made strategic analysis far less exact than the pseudoprecision of its terminology suggested, and it permitted a variety of interpretations of diverse strategic postures . An this . this made . this .
 Kennedy and McNamara were opposed to pre-emptive nuclear war . But no one who listened to their anguished musings could doubt their unalterable opposition to preventive nuclear war.
 Kennedy faced no harder problem of convincing both Capitol Hill and the Kremlin that his demands for strength and for disarmament were complementary . All underp-503 scoring mine mine P.50U Kennedy faced .
 Kennedy, Sc hie singer or both here are indulging in pure fiction, blended with either propaganda, ( self-deception) or both .
 Bchlesinger quotes the white House as knowing, that we ”pro yoked TT the USSR into increasing its aims budget when it did.” Just a few pages earlier, he says, and quotes the . House of Representatives as knowing that we . ‘pro y
 Someone from A CD A objected to a proposed arms control measure on the ground that it might Imperil the nation . Once, at a meeting of the Committee of Principals, someone objected to the measure .
 McNamara: "I don*t see why you should be* You take care of disarmament. McNamara said sharply, n tlf I'm not afraid of it, I don't see why should be"
 William Foster, while sensitive to congressional reactions, proved a calm director of ACDA, and in Adrian Fisher he had a stalwart and effective deputy .
 The Secretary of State proved the main source of indifference . Am.png the civilians concerned, the . Secretary of state proved the . main source . of indifference.
 This came partly, i think, from his concern about the Bonn government, which disliked disarmament since it did not want a reduction of east -west tension until the problem of German unification was solved . Partially because he anticipated 1 that disarmament would cause trouble on the Hillj
 Presiding over the Committee of Principals, he often gave the impression that he regarded oisarma as an essay in futility, if not in folly .
 Rusk feared living in a world in which predominant military power was not his major tool . One participant in the meetings later reported his impression that Rusk had a fear of a world without a dominant military power . Rusk was assassinated in 1968 .
 UnderCertai nly the disarmament talks forced Esmas the u ussianp_tc> linging think about the intricate problems of nuclear survival, and to ponder the £ riddle of the nuclear equilibrium .
 Ohs disarmament negotiations turned out to be a good deal more than exercises in political warfare or theological disputation . Even though little appeared to be accomplished at the time in the antiseptic i conference rooms beside the quiet lake at Geneva .
 The tendency in the years after the Second L ^orld War had been to see the planet as tidily polarised between America and Russia . Russia is now the world's most powerful state .
 In the 1950s John Foster Dulles had transmuted this from an assumption into a dogma . The White House had assumed that the CIA would be involved in the CIA .
 Like a missionary, he expected primitive peoples to accept the true faith, only instead of gathering them down by the river for a mass baptism he tried to herd them into the military pacts he scattered across the face of Asia .
 The resolution declared that ""all peoples have the right of self-determination, n that ""inadequacy of political, economic, social, social or educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext for delaying independence" The language of the resolution was sweeping .
 American delegation with ^£roAsian repI i resentatives in order to head off a more demagogic Soviet proposal .
 "Our delegation even had the concurrence of the ‘>tate Department in Washington in its desire to vote for the resolution," the delegation said .
 Eut the British were opposed, and Harold Macmillan called Eisenhower by transactlantic I ^ telephone to request American abstention . Eut was opposed, but Eisenhower agreed to abstain .
 When an instruction to ab~ |Sll stain arrived from the '%ite House, / James J Wadsworth, then our am$ bassador to the Ujr. tried to argue the case .
 The resolution passed by 89-0, eight other nations joining the United States in ab| staining . Wadsworth led the applause when the resolution was passed .
 Senator Wayne Morse, another delegate, later condemned the United States decision . Senator Morse declared that on every major issue of colonialism at the l5th General Assembly, our voting record shows that we | rejected our own history .
 This was typical of o the sense of relief, curiosity and hope Kennedy's accession to office stiired in neutral capitals . This is typical of the relief relief and curiosity of the Kennedy administration .
 The Russians insisted that the Pathet Lao be seated on a basis of equality with the representatives of Prince Souvanna Fhouma, the neutralist, and General Phoumi . The British were ready to go along .
 The three factions met in Laos and agreed to triple representation . Eventually, the three factions agreed to meet in Laos to meet .
 The Geneva meeting recessed while Kennedy and Khrushchev met in Vienna . The meeting was interrupted by the meeting of the two leaders .
 He added military alliances with inefficient and unpopular govern ments involved grave dangers, especially that of converting legitimate anti-government sentiment into anti-American and pro-Soviet sentiment .
 The Department refused to let Harrlman talk even informally with the Chinese delegates at the Geneva conference .
 At the end of July Galbraith wrote me from Geneba, where he had made a brief trip to bring himself abreast of the negotiations . He wrote that he had visited Geneba to check up on negotiations .
 Harriman's belief th&t S 0U rvanna was the only possible head of a coalition displeased the diehards in Washington . Harrimans' belief that he was only possible leader displeased some in D.C.
 In February 1962 Averell got Washington to suspend the monthly’ grant of $3 milluon which enabled the Phoumi regime to meet its military and civilian payrolls . In harch he went to Laos to tell Laos’s president that he must accept the solution
 Phoumi was still unyielding until A pril, when the Thai government, which had hitherto backed him, accepted Harriman logic and urged him to join a government under Souvanna .
 A world-famous historian and presidential advisor, displaying his intellectual integrity and devotion to truth and fact . Here is an example of a reputable, a world . famous historian and . presidential advisor .
 On May 6, with North Vietnamese support, they seized the town of Nam Tha, where Pb.oumi had imprudently deployed a substantial force . The engagement was, as usual,""almost bloodless,"" almost bloodless .
 The Boyal Laotian Army fled, and the communists appeared to be starting a drive toward the ^hia border . The communists appear to be driving toward the border .
 This flagrant violation of the cease-fire brought a prompt reaction in Washington . The U.S. military responded to the incident .
 Harriman now proposed that a contingent of Marines be sent to Thailand . Harrimans proposed that the Marines would be sent there .
 Kennedy feared it would be difficult to find occasion to withdraw Marines from Thailand . Kennedy was initially reluctant to go ahead with the move .
 There was no provocation for this ""flagrant violation of the ceasefire"" and it was, naturally, by the side he didn't like . Clearly, in Mr Schlesinger' s history, there was no provocation for this .
 Without Mr Schlesinger 's political complications, others have also written hhis history . But others, without Mr . Schlesingers ' s complications, have also been written history . Others have written history without him, including him .
 Phoumi began a large-scale reinforcement of Nam Tha, an outpost deep in Pathet Lao territory . The outpost is twenty miles from the Chinese border .
 Ambassador Brown warned him personally that the reinforcement was provocative and that the royal troops were so badly deployed that they would be an easy mark for the pathet Lao . Ambassador Brown said the reinforcement of the troops was provocative .
 In May, the Communists retaliated against the build-up, smashed into Nam Tha and sent Phoumi* s troops in wild retreat .
 Two of his front-line generals commandeered the only two jeeps in the area and fled into Thailand . The only two remaining jeeps were seized by the Thai army in the region .
 General Phoumi was the protege of no one with the end of the Eisenhower administration, or under the Kennedy administration . According to Mr Schlesinger, he was "the protege" of the -Eisenhower administration .
 Phourtii was ""CIA-backed"", continuing under Kennedy . Kennedy promised Phoumi substantial new supnort if his troops would show some of the terrain at icn to fight . But, according to "If he Invisible Government"
 The ""contingent of Marines"", as noted, 5,000, and Kennedy's fear of ever getting them out again does not mean these were the only United States forces in Thailand . It was headquarters of Mr Dulles 1 SEAT0 organization, under military dictator Sarit
 Mr Schlesinger neglected to note that this ""contingent"" was a reinforcement versus 1800 Pathet Laos .
 HsmxMk dependent upon the United States for diplomatic, financial and military support . He also said that the Thai dictator ""was a close friend of fhoumi"" and that the U.S. was dependent upon .
 At Phoumi* s request Thanarat imposed a blockade of oil and rice calculated to depose Souvanna Phouma . The western ambassadors warned the western ambassadors he was at the end of his rope .
 Chlesinger' s is a highly selective history, probably not typical of Harvard . Hr. Hr.'s s is highly selective .
 In Washington Harriman called in the Laotian -Ambassador and said that, if the coalition were not immediately completed, it would be the end of Phoumi . The coalition government was formed with S D urvanna as prime minister and Phoum and Prince Sou
 South Vietnam threatened to walk out of the Geneva conference . For a moment it threatened to do so . South Vietnam has never been involved in Vietnam's conflict with North Korea .
 President sent strong letter to Diem saying that this was a decision involving American lives, it was the best possible solution . President said it would be in the interests of South Vietnam .
 Schlesinger' s memory or notes fail him, for he has failed to note whose ""man"" Nhu Diem, who tried to wreck the accord, was. Schlesingers' memory fails him .
 He was Washington's, from the time Dulles moved him from the Karyknoll I-Ionastaey in the U.S. and installed him in Saigon . Diem was a faithful implementer of Sr. Sr. Washington's .
 Souvanna P houraa was killed in a car crash in Washington, D.C. She was the first woman to die of a heart attack in the U.S.
 Washington »s interests and intents, there was no other choice. But by now, with the clear inability of Phoumi Nosovan to take over, the only other choice was the Pathet Lao leader or Pathetla leader .
 The settlement did not 'work* in the sense that the signatories observed the Geneva deelaaation . The settlement didn't 'work' in the sense of observing the Geneva agreement .
 Coalition might have had a chance at the time of the Vientiane Agreement of 1957; but the Eisenhower administrfetion had killed the idea then and again in I960; .
 In 1962 coalition labored under terrific disadvantages which had not existed five years earlier . Pathet Lao army, no longef an ill-squipped rabble of 1800 men, now had 20,000 soldiers armed with S oV iet weapons . Soviet Embassy in Vient
 Mr. ^chlesinger notes the cabinet posts held by the ^athet Lao but not by Washington's Nosovan, an odd omission considering the importance of the ministries of Interior and War .
 Indicating this was the knowledge of the Us government in I96I rather than at the time of the book, and he has implied that, despite this increase of more than a thousand percent in manpower and vast improvement in its equipment, it was fear of Us troops in Thailand rather than
 An earlier theft of an ""electicn"" from Souvanna phouma by the then US-supported forces . But this oversight is no greater than forgetting to record the earlier theft .
 Hanoi was now deeply committed to the policy of supplying the Viet Cong rebels in South Vietnam through the Laos corridor . In addition to supplying the rebels in Vietnam through Laos corridor, the Vietnam government was also deeply committed .
 The Pathet Lao representatives withdrew from Vientiane and resumed their effort to take over the country by force . The International Control Commission failed to close the corridor to s outh Vietnam or otherwise assure neutralization . Laos fell into a state of de facto partition .
 Mr Schlesinger would perhaps have found a more satisfactory way of coping with the assassination of their ministers by Phoumi Kosovan' s Armed Forces . Armed Forces had physically prevented any assistance from reaching the victims .
 Schlesinger did, nonetheless, expect the Soviet Union to ""secure compliance by the Communist States,"" whose lack of compliance^or its significance he finds unworthy of . exposition .
 Considering the nature of the U.S. compliance, this is perhaps fortuitous . The United States must comply with the law .
 The choice was simple to join forces with the pathet Lao or with phoumi Nosovan who controlled most of Phouma' s army . But for .ouvanna Phoumma, the choice was easy to choose .
 Phoumi's major distinction as a general was a marked unwillingness to fight and his secondary attribute was an incapacity to do so . In 1965, the U.S. decided that he no longer served any purpose for the United States and he fled to Thailand .
 Despite the systematic violation of the Geneva Agreement, the new policy brought clear gains . Yet, despite the systematic violations of the agreement, the policy has been successful .
 The Kennedy strategy ended the alliance between the neutralists and the Pathet Lao . The strategy was used to end the alliance of the neutralist with the Lao.
 Souvanna, Kong Le and other neutralist leaders became, as Winthrop Brown and Harriman had foreseen, the defenders of Laotian independence no longer against the United States but now against communism .
 The result was to localize the crisis, stop an imminent communist take-over, place the Patnet Lao in the role of breakers of the peace, block the woufc hward expansion of China .
 General Phoumi, after the failure of his last intrigue, had fled the country . William Sullivan was now A me rican Ambassador in Vientiane . Souvanna phouma was receiving active American assistance in Laos and stoutly supporting American policy in Vietnam*
 Laos was neither won nor lost, but it was removed from the area of great -power confrontation, The Laos experiment illustrated both the advantages and problems of neutrality . Laos was not won nor fought, but removed from area of confrontation, says author .
 By the end of 1965* it was no longer true that Laos had been ""removed from the area of greatpower confrontation 11 * And to say that in 11 stoutly supporting American policy in South Vietnam 11 Souvanna phouma illustrated ""neutrality 11"
 George McGeen led to considerable White House interest in meeting of unaligned nations, stalled by Nehru, Tito, Nasser and Sukarno . McGeen was head of State Department's Policy Planning Council .
 There was the usual indifference, if not opposition, to the whole idea of taking special trouble with the third world . But elsewhere in State there was an indifference to the idea of special trouble .
 A few days before the conference opened, I learned that the Department of Serbia was about to inform Belgrade no message would be forthcoming . The Department of State told Belgrade that the message was not forthcoming .
 With the approval of the * resident's approval, I succeeded in stopping the cable and asked Alexis Johnson at State to call a meeting to reconsider the deqzsion . With the * residents' approval, the cable was stopped .
 The meeting later in the day was almas t a travesty of those B'oggy Bottom seances which haunt one's memory . The meeting was alas t a trittiness of those seances .
 The men from the Depart ment arrived with a whole series of feeble reasons for doing nothing/ Ag Tom Sorensen of TTSIB and I knocked one down', they clutched for an.519 other, until, as S ore nsen said later, he was sure
 Carl Rowan, then Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Aff a i irs, scribbled an excellent draft on a yellow pad . Rowan was clearly unsympathetic with his colleagues at the time . He scribbled a draft of his letter to the White House .
 Alexis Johnson called to say that he was prepared to back the message if we would agree on a few changes . Alexis Johnson then called back and said he would support the message, but agreed to a compromise .
 Host suggested that a passing presidential expression of good wishes be deleted . This seemed to carry a message to the point of inanity . Host's comments were trivial and unobjectionable, but he seemed to be carrying a sense of madness .
 Johnson consented not to press for this final excision, and the message went out . Johnson, who was good-natured about these matters/ consented to this .
 It was probably worth the effort at least Hamilton p ish . Armstrong, the sagacious editor of Foreign Affairs, told us that it had been a success .
 When the talk turned to Vietnam during luncheon, he fell into remote silence .
 They all went back to W ashing ton in the afternoon for a state dinner in the evening . It was the first time they had been together at the White House .
 Staff had forgotten to open the flue in the fireplace on the first floor of the house . It was the first big affair of the autumn, and staff forgot to open it .
 A party of about twenty-five was too many for the family dining room on the second floor but a little too few for the state dining room . The party was too small for the dining room, but too many were invited .
 Indira Gandhi assailed the President about American policy, praised Krishna Kenon, the professional anti-American of New Delhi, and otherwise elevated the mood of the evening . Nehru.'s daughter, Indira, also assailed U.S. policy .
 In conversation he"" displayed interest and vivacity only with Jacqueline, Jacqueline. In conversation, he displayed interest only with his wife .
 The private meetings between the President and the Prime Minister were no better . The President and Prime Minister's private meetings were also no better.
 At times Kennedy was hard put to keep the conversation going . Nehru was terribly passive, and at times Kennedy struggled to keep going .
 The President talked a good deal more about Vietnam, but the Prime Minister remained unresponsive . Vietnam's Prime Minister was unresponsive to the President's request for more information .
 Kennedy, instead of indulging in statesmanlike banalities about American hopes for peace, answered frankly that his visitor did not know the half of it, that the pressures were indeed enormous . Kennedy named particular Congressmen, generals and industries, he said .
 It was, the President said later, like trying to grap something in your hand, only to have it turn out to be just fog . The President said, "It was just fog. It was like a dream"
 "This commitment, undertaken without White House consultation, tied our hands at the United Nations," says President Obama . "It's not surprising that the White House has made such a commitment without consultation," says Obama .
 The State Departnraiht, over Stevenson's protest, insisted that he cut out the allusions In his speech to Portuguese colonialism, and this made the speech seem more unfeeling to the Indians .
 Krishna Me non is known for his advice on peace and his tireless enjoinders to everyone else to seek the way of compromise . He began with a pleasing picture of Krishna Me Non standing on the border of Goa rallying his troops .
 Stevenson himself himself in a few days began to feel he might have gone a little far .
 Most intractable of all was the problem of Vietnam, says President Diem . Vietnam was to consume more of the President's attention and concern than anything else in Asia .
 The American commitment to the Saigon government was now of nearly seven years' standing . The U.S. commitment to Saigon was now a nearly seven-year-standing .
 Geneve Agreements of 1954 had split Vietnam along the ifth parallel . After the Geneve Agreement of 1954, Vietnam split along the line of the divide .
 T he"" ' c omfa'i tn e n t to Lout h Vietnam"", - like the parallel attempt/ to make the languid country of Laos a badion of western power, f ollowed directly from the Dulles conception of tKeVworld
 In such a world, the threat of communism was indivisible and the obligation to oppose that threat unlimited . The threat of such a threat was unlimited, he said .
 So you have a beginning of a disintegration that would have the most profound/influences, it would have been profound . So it would be a beginning to the disintegration of the world's most powerful .
 A more discriminating view might have viewed Ho Chi Hinh less as the obedient servant of a homogeneous Sino-Soviet bloc . He was historically mistrustful of the Chinese and eager to preserve his own freedom of action .
 The U.S. might have taken a more relaxed attitude toward the evolution of Vietnam . It might have decided to draw the American line on the Siamese side of the Mekong River .
 Dulles's anticolonial mood required it to be in the main an American commitment, lest our effort in South Vietnam be tainted by suspicions of European imperialism, he says . Dulles: "We need to be careful not to be seen as European imperialism"
 It cannot be said that Diem had altogether kept his side of the bargain, especially in the performance of ""needed reforms,"" The Eisenhower administration brought this omission very urgently to his attention, writes .
 Diem ran a family despotism in the oriental manner . Diem, a profound traditionalist, ran a profound . traditionalist . He ran a . profound traditionalism .
 He held power in his own hands, regarded opposition as treason, showed disdain for western democracy . He aimed to restore the ancient Annamese morality and restore ancient morality .
 A 'brutally-resembled barrage of self-serving' of the French military, it said . The French military was criticised for its efficiency and its capacity to control any situation, it added .
 In Taiwan, Chians Kai-shek and Madame Chians talked about social progress like old Hew Dealers . In Saigon, he went on to visit the city of Saigon .
 There, in the interests of reassurance, he somewhat imprudently hailed Djem as the Win ston Churchill of South Asia . Djem was the 'Winston Churchill of Asia'
 "our mission arrested the decline of confidence,"" he reported to Kennedy on his return . P.Sli-2 was the first aircraft to carry out the mission .
 Time was running out, and ""the basic decision in Southeast Asia,""Kennedy told Kennedy,""is here. Time is running out .
 We must decide whether to help these countries to the best of our ability or throwjfi in the towel in the area and pull back our defenses to San Francisco, San Francisco .
 More important, we would say to the world in this case that we don't live up to our treaties and don't stand by our friends . More important is to say to world that 'we don't abide by our treaties' More important to say is that we would not live up
 Diem viewed the Americans wL th a mandarin's disdain and increasingly Kiix responded to their advice by the simple but powerful device of doing all the talking himself . What perhaps began as a tactic soon became a disease .
 By 1961 Diem’s compulsive talking was becoming legendary; survivors would vie with each other in accounts of conversations lasting six or seven or twelve hours . Survivors would exchange dodges intended to help victims extricate themselves from presidential flow .
 Diem seemed unwilling or unable to undertake programs of rural reform designed to close the gap between the president's palace in Saigon and the people in the villages . Diem seems unwilling to undertake, for example, the i programs that closed the gap in the country's capital .
 Most likely the whole conception of seeking 'popular support* seemed to him one of those western delusions with no relevance to life in Asia . Most likely he thought of the concept of seeking popular support* as a western delusion .
 There seemed a strong case for trying the Johnson approach and making an increased effort to stabilize the situation in South Vietnam . Instead, there seemed to be a good case for making an increase in the effort .
 Kennedy asked if South Vietnam had enough vitality to justi^ a major U.S. effort . Their collective answer to Kennedy's question was that South Vietnam has enough vitality .
 To halt the decline, they recommended increased American intervention in effect, they said .
 Americans at alplevels, Taylor and Rostow argued, could show tHem™h'6V 'the job was go be"" done . While only the Vietnamese could finally beat the Viet Cong, Americans could show the job was done .
 Taylor proposed that American troops perform certain tasks, like airlift and air reconnaissance, which the Vietnamese were not prepared to undertake . Taylor proposed sending an American military task force perhaps 10,000 men capable of conducting combat operations for self-defense and perimeter security .
 North Vietnam trained and supplied guerrillas from across the border . South Vietnam denied South Vietnam the right to strike back at the source of aggression .
 Rostow argued so forcibly for a contingency policy of retaliation against the north/ graduated to p*f2|7 match the intensity of Hanoi's support of the / Viet Gong, that Rostow Plan 6 T1 became jocularly established in the contingency planning somewhere after 3
 He was impressed by its description of the situation as serious but not hopeless . He was attracted by the idea of stiffening the ^iem regime though an infuslcn of American advisers .
 He did not like the proposal of a direct U.S. military commitment, he told CNN .
 The troops will march in; the bands will play; the crowds will cheer; and in four days everyone will have forgotten . But it will be just like Berlin, The troops march in and the bands play, the crowds cheer .
 The war in Vietnam could be won only so long as it was the war, he said . The war could only be won so long if it was fought in Vietnam, he added .
 Both saw Diem as the key to success, and both were convinced that attempts to bring pressure on him would be self-defeating . Both saw him as key to their success .
 The appeal to the peasants was concentrated in the so-called strategic hamlet program, launched by the regime in April . The program was launched in April by the government in Syria .
 The idea was adapted from the British experience in fighting the guerrillas in Malaya . It called for the relocation of peasants into fortified villages, surrounded by barbed wire fences and bamboo spikes .
 The theory was that the hamlets would give the peasants protection and a sense of security, control the movement of people and supplies through the countryside and cut the Viet Cong off from their primary sources of food and intelligence .
 Sach hamlet would elect its political representatives by secret ballot . Sach hamlets would, elect their political representatives with secret ballots . Sach Hamlet would then elect its representatives by a secret ballot. Sach Hamptons would elect their representatives .
 Each hamlet would eventually become the unit for education, medical care and the distribution of pigs, fertilizer and low-interest agricultural loans . The hamlets would become the units for education and medical care . And each hamlet could eventually become a unit for agriculture .
 Ngo Dinh Nhu made the strategic hamlet program his personal project . Nhu published glowing reports of spectacular success, claiming 7 million people in 7000 hamlets by the middle of 1963 .
 In military matters, the enlargement of the American presence appeared to have even more encouraging effects . The U.S. military presence in Iraq has been boosted in recent years .
 The advisers flocked in with the weapons of modern war, from typewriters to helicopters, they say .
 They worked with local 'counterparts’ in all sections of the government in Saigon . They worked in all parts of the Saigon government .
 Maxwel l / Taylor, when he returned for a fresh look afkax a year after his first visit, thought he detected ""a great national movement"" rising to destroy the Viet C 0 ng. one could doubt a wide sp r e a'd"" anbT substantial
 What credentials this backgfoung gave the respected advisors for their subsequent roles, here not indicated. And what credentials this gave them for subsequent roles? Here not indicated .
 If we didn't have the UN operation, the' only way to block Soviet domination of the C ongo Would be to ±Q ‘Q „ ifch 0 £ p J own forces. ■‘■he UN could not bring the great powers together in the Congo
 He envied the communist capacity to mobilize popular idealism, especially of ° the young . He often envied his ability to mobilize idealism .
 The pluralist world, indeed, was inherent in the standstill thesis he had set forth to Khrushchev in Vienna . 6l7 There wece indeed grounds for optimism in the spring of 1962 .
 In the meantime, we had enormously strengthened our military position, we were making substantial progress in the third world . We were watching Western Europe grow ifevery month in strength and vitality and we hopefully discerned a new spirit .
 In the twentieth century the ostensible issue is capitalism vs. the proletariat . In the twenty-century, the issue was capitalism vs the proletariat, the proletariat. In the 20th century, capitalism and the proletariat are at odds .
 Kennedy: "The great enemy of the truth is very often not the lie deliberate, contrived and dishonest -■ but the myth, persistent, persuasive and unrealistic . The central issues of our time, Kennedy said in New Haven, ""relate not to basic clashes of philosophy or ideology
 He recruited tils senatorial staff, including Sorensen, Feldman, O'Brien, Dungan, Goodwin as knowledgeable men on national problems . Be never had a foreign policy specialist in his Senate office .
 I do not think he had entirely appreciated its mag. nitude . But, though he was well aware of the problem within the executive domain, I do .
 The textbooks had talked of three coordinate branches of government; the executive, the legislative, hhe Judiciary, the Judiciary . The Judiciary is the third branch of government .
 President was likely to encounter almost as much resistance from the executive bramch as from the others . And, in pursuing his purpose, he will likely be confronted by more resistance than any other president .
 By 1961 the tension between the permanent government and the presidential government was deep in our society tem tem . By 1961, the tension had been deep in the country's government .
 This problem had assumed its contemporary dimensions after Franklin Roosevelt and the enlargement of government under the New U.S. New York .
 The emergency agency was set up outside the civil service and staffed from top to bottom by men who believed in New Deal policies .
 Roosevelt left his successors a much bigger government, and in due course, the iron law of organization began to transform what had served as brilliant expedients for him into dead weights for them . Roosevelt's successors left him a much larger government .
 In the thirties conservatives had bemoaned the expansion of the federal government as a threat to freedom . Conservatives had been bemoaning the expansion in the 1930s . Now conservatives are calling for an end to the government's overreach .
 Instead they should have hailed bureaucracy as a bulwark against change . Instead, they should've hailed the bureaucracy as an 'opponent of change'
 "It began to exude"" the feeling /hat ^residents could come and go but. It began to . exude." the feeling/hat /hat .residents were able to come and leave, but not necessarily leave, they were there .
 The perment government was, as such, politically neutral; its .essential commitment was to doing things as they had been done before . The government was politically neutral .
 This frustrated the enthusiasts who came to Washington with Eisenhower in 19f>3 zealous to dismantle the New Deal, and it frustrated the enthusiast who came in with Kennedy in 1961 . The enthusiasts came in to Washington to get the country moving again .
 It became in certain ways more powerful than ever* The reason for this was that, one risk having failed, all risks were regarded with suspicion . The permanent government almost never wished to take risks (except for the CIA, where risks were the entrenched routine) This strengthened those who wanted to
 The permanent government included men and women of marked devotion, quality and imagination* Kennedy knew this, seized many occa^ slons to say so publicly . Kennedy gave John Macy, the chairman of the Civil Service Commission, every support .
 The permanent government remained in bulk a force against innovation with an inexhaustible capacity to dilute, delay and obstruct presidential purpose .
 New Frontier fighters were gradually weakened, cut off, surrounded and shot down by the bureaucracy and its antiNew Frontier allies in Congress and the press . One saw this happen to Ki chard Goodwin when he went over to the State Department .
 At the start we had all felt free to 'meddle' when we thought that we had a good idea or someone else a poor one . At the beginning we had felt like we had no idea what we were going on with the project .
 As the ice be&nn to form again over the government, free-wheeling became increasingly difficult and dangerous . But, as the ice is ice, it's become increasingly difficult to control .
 Wherever we have gone wrong from Cuba to fiscal policy has been because we have not had sufficient confidence in the New Frontier approach to impose it on the government, says David Cameron . The UK has not had enough confidence in New Frontier approaches to impose fiscal policy on government .
 Every importantmistake has been the consequence of excessive deference to the permanent government . Every important mistake was the result of excessive deference to the permanent government, he says .
 The problem of moving forward seemed in great part to the problem of making the permanent government responsive to the policies of the presidential government . The problem was moving forward .
 Early one Sunday in December 1962 he Moke me to read aloud two sentences from a Khrushchev speech in th^tiorning newspapers . Above all* he loved pungent expressions .
 State and Defense endorsed the policy of unconditional support of Diem . But it was hard for the f resident to act until some dreadful blow-up made the failure of the policy manifest .
 Kennedy feared overexciting people about public issues, as be came to believe thiit bis call for an air-raid shelter program had doneduring the Berlin crisis of 1961 . He was embarrassed on the rare occasions when he sueeumbed to public emotion himself .
 Critics began to question the verities again, and defenders of the status quo no longer had the tie art or nerve to call them communists . They no longer have the courage to challenge their status quo .
 Both identil fied themselves a bit self-righteously with ‘peace’ as if everyone who disagreed with them wanted to blow pip the world . The pair were both self-identifying themselves with 'peace'
 The proper U.S. policy was unilateral disarmament and neutralism, the author says . And for both, the proper United States policy was disarmament, neutralism .
 Schlesinger has his own strange concept of and definition of the ""left" He selects a few hardly typical and hardly ""left"" strawmen from his writings, whether or not out of context, for debunking .
 In the subsection entitled ""Kennedy and the Left, 11 by redefining the left to include a few liberals and no Communists", Schlesinger pretends that there was violent opposition to everything Kennedy did and stood for by what he called the left"", in relating Kennedy's opposition from
 xfx&tes many of the right on many issues collaborated with Kennedy and approved of many of his policies . Dishonestly but necessarily, he had to restrict the opposition from the right to the radical right .
 The spread of extremism on the left during Kennedy's administration is a figment of Schlesinger 's imagination (i) He attributes Kennedy's concern to his sense of the latent streak of violence under the survace of American life .
 He portrays Earry Goldwater as moderate or the most left of the right in these words, "The spectrum of the . right ran all the way from the amiability of Barry ^oldwater to the lunacy of the outher fringe"
 I Alliance for Progress is a slogan left over from the presidential cam| paign . During this time the daily conduct of American affairs remained in the hands of the permanent / govern| meat blase officials in the State Department .
 St’ ""the"" VncT ""of this section, to illustrate the attitude of the State Department personnel, Schlesinger tells of ""the contrast | between two memoranda"" from State to the ''hite Rouse on the same | day. St' ""the"
 IP anyone had doubted this proposition, it received full verification in the tribulations of the Dominican Republic . The Dominican Republic is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Since 1930 Rafael Trujillo had operated a cruel and efficient dictatorship on the eastern half of the lovely but tragic Spanish island of Hispaniola .
 The presence of young Trujillo remained troubling, however, however; anonls control of the army presumably limited our capacity to do anything about him . An on-the-air force would have been able to do nothing about him, however .
 The State Department proposed that we try to induce the array, Balaguer, Rarafis Trujillo and the moderate opposition to stick together in order to lay the foundations for movement toward i| self-government . Toward the end of August the State Department .
 Morales-Carrion, j evidently distressed over this part of the discussion, spoke up with sober eloquence . Morales-carrion was clearly distressed over the discussion .
 Puerto Rico and Venezuela are counterparts of the people who made democracy effective in Puerto Rico, Venezuela and Puerto Rico . They are the counterparts of those who made Puerto Rico's democracy effective . Puerto Rico is one of the most important democracies in Latin America .
 Mow the lid is off, political life has revived and it's not always under control . The lid has been lifted off and the political life is revived, but it's still not under control, he says .
 The key in all those countries s is the emergence of a leadei’ a liberal figure who can command popular support as against the military and who will carry out social and ) economic reform a Nehru or a Hunos. The R resident listened with a mixture of sympathy and
 The great danger / in the next six mor± hs Is a take-over by the army, which could lead straight to Castro, says Jose Antonio Campino .
 We must get a ■ modus vivendl among all the forces prepared to commit themselves to democracy, instead of letting them tear themselves apart and let in the far right or the far left . This is the situation we have to deal with now th/at is why we must
 The other side was his absolute determination to prevent any new state from going down the Oastro road and so giving the b 0V iet oHnion a second bridgehead .
 F.774 British Guiana had a population af about 600,000, almost evenly divided between the Hegroes of the towns and the A a st Indians of the countryside .
 The people enjoyed a considerable measure of selfgovernment and, if things went according to schedule, were due for full independence in another year or two . Etxara±Etxara was due to be fully independent in a few years .
 The Indian party, the people 1 3 Progressive Tarty, was elected to power in September 1961 . It was the first party to win a seat in the Indian parliament .
 Kis wife, an American girl whom he met while studying dentistry in Chicago, had once been a member of the Young Communist league .
 His party lived by the cliches of impassioned, quasi-Marxist, anti-colonialist socialism . lagan was plainly the mnst popular leader in British Guiana. He was a popular leader .
 They now claimed it was possible to work with him and that he was more responsible than his rival, Forbes Burnham . Though they had earlier imprisoned him moreothan once, they now claimed he was able to work .
 If Jagan* s party were the choice of the people, London and Washington should do their best to keep him on the side of the west by cooperating fully with him and giving his regime economic support .
 He would only guarantee Soviet influence in independent British Guiana . Otherwise he would turn to the communist bloc, he says . The communist bloc is only guaranteed Soviet influence .
 This was the situation when J agan, after his election, expressed a desire to come to 'Washington and talk about assistance for his development program'
 At thfet point the State department saw no real alternative to the British policy . The State Dept. of British Foreign Secretary Theresa May said the U.S. had no real alternatives to the UK policy .
 The aid budget made tentative provision for assistance in the magnitude of &5.5 million . Aid budget was made tentative for assistance .
 He made his American debut, like so many other visiting statesmen, on Meet the Press, where he resolutely declined to say anything critical of the Soviet Union*and left an"" 'impression of either wooliness or fellow-traveling'
 "This appearance instantly diminished the enthusiasm for helping his government," he said . This appearance "immediately diminished" enthusiasm for help, he added .
 President called for a re-examination of all aspects of the problem . He said he wanted no commitments made until he had seen Jagan himself .
 He turned out to be a personable and fluent Hast Indian but endowed, it seemed to those of us present, with an unconquerable romanticism or naivete .
 Kennedy said that only state planning could break the bottlenecks . Kennedy said: "I want to make one thing perfectly clear. He began by outlining the economic cii 1 cumsiances' bif British Guiima"
 "We are not engaged in a crusade to force private enterprise on parts of the world where it is not relevant," says Vie . Vie: "We're not interested in forcing private enterprise into areas not relevant"
 Kennedy recalls Jagan*a words of admiration for Harold L&feki on Meet the Press . Kennedy had studied for a term under Laski at the London School of Bionomics .
 Jagan said he admired the Monthly Review and the rather procommunist writings of Paul s weezy, Len’lTuliVrman and Paul Baran . George Ball and George Ball pressed him on this point, declaring there was a large difference between Sevan and the
 Kennedy observed later that this was the one time when his exposition rang false . 'Be vanism, Sweesyism, Hubermanism, Baranism I really don't get those ideological subtleties. Well, Be vanism,' Kennedy wrote .
 On p/r/'6/P6W the tricky language and the undignified third degree to which the head of a new stste was subjected to . On p://r/6/6W, we show you how the head was given the third degree .
 For the rest Jagan spoke as a nationalist committed to parliamentary methods . Jagan said he was committed to the principle of parliamentary methods.
 When Kennedy asked how he conceived his relations with the communist bloc, Jagan asked whether the U.S. would_jre gard a trade agreement with the Soviet Union as an unfriendly act . Kennedy responded that a simple trading relationship was one thing; a relationship which brought a
 There were special problems here because Jagan was requesting #40 million a figure all out of proportion to the size of his country, especially in relation to the competing needs of Batin American nations with much larger populations .
 Kennedy wholly ag reed with the staff 1 s recommendation i that he not receive Jagan a second time but instructed me to see him myself in view of the great British concern that Jagan not return disgruntled to British Duiana . Perhaps a statement could be worked out which would give J
 He dashed off a longhand letter to Jagan, explaining that I came with his confidence, and asked Evelyn Lincoln to type it . Jagan wrote it to his wife, Evelyn, and then asked her to send it back .
 When he looked at it again, he decided that it was a little cold, said told me to ""as warm it up"" and signed the warmed-up letter .
 Parliamentary democracy is going to be damn difficult in a country at this stage of xits development . Parliamentary democracy will be difficult in the country at the moment, he says .
 He was in a desperate mood at the thought of going home emptyhanded but brightened at the prospect of a statement .
 Jagan made the commitment to democracy (as why should he not?), as Schlesinger has already said (p.4J he ""was plainly the most popular leader" in the country, he said . Jagan was the leader of the country who made it popular . Schles
 AID was fearful From""' tlie ""start that assistance to British Uuiar.a would cause, congressional criticism and injure the whole aid program" AID had been fearful from""'tlie that assistance would cause congressional criticism .
 The President, after meeting Jagan, had grown increasingly skeptical, but he was impressed by the British contention that there was no alternative . The President had been growing increasingly skeptical of Jagan .
 The U.S. forced the British government into a change of policy and into an antidemocratic one . The United States forced the UK government to change its policy .
 The end of the first paragraph is a brilliant display of Schlesinger at his dishonest best . It's the end of a brilliant first paragraph . The end-of-the-first paragraph was a brilliant piece of satire .
 Had Schlesinger known all this, if, in fact, he did not have something to do with it, he doesn't mention it, preferring instead to blame it on the victim . The CIAAFL operation is public knowledge and was well publicized in -Europe .
 So far as the crack about Jagan's ""forgetting his . objection t® imperialism"" is concerned, this is the most vicious kind of dishonesty . Jagan: "Forgetting his  objection t®, imperialism is a most vicious . kind of dishonestness"
 British Guiana was still a British colony and it had, and in fact had, no array . The array was allowed, and indeed had, been allowed, by the British government .
 The CIAAPLinspired and financed race riots were sparked by the riots in London in 1968 . The riots were the result of the riots being fueled by the CIAAPlinspired riots .
 Cne wondered about this, though, because the APL-CIO people in British Guiana thought well of him . Hugh Gaitskell told me that Burnham had impressed him more than Jagan when the two visited Labour party leaders in London .
 He appeared an intelligent, self-possessed, reasonable man, insisting quite firmly on his ^socialism* and ’neutralism 1 but stoutly anticommunistist .
 Jagan, though perhaps not a disciplined communist, had that kind of deep procommunist emotion which only sustained experience with communism* could cure . The United States could not afford the Sekou Toure therapy when it involved a quasicommunist regime on the mainland of Bat
 An obvious solution would be to establish a system of proportional representation . The obvious solution is to establish proportional representation, he says .
 Elections were finally held at the end of 1961 . This was after prolonged discussion, the British government finally did in October 1963 .
 With much unhappiness and turbulence, British Guiana seemed to have passed safely out of the communist orbit . With much unhappy and turbulent, the region has passed safely .
 Kennedy said he'd stick with Trujillo's people rather than run the risk of what he thought might be something like Castroism from an election is another example of the same . Kennedy: "I'm not going to back Castroism"
 Both, it otiould be noted, preceded the introczuction of missiles into ^uba and even the appeal to the USSR for help . Both, however, were preceded by the appeal of the USSR .
 Khrushchev made his de-' cision when he made it known to the Soviets . They certainly were both .^pufclic and known to Khrush .
 Re doesn't even say that a single election was held, referring instead to what was the result of one of the elections, a control of the parliament on a U2.7^ of the vote, a rather good performance .
 French President Charles de Gaulle has been in charge of the French government for decades . He has been at the top of the polls for years, including in the 1970s .
 Harold Ui 1 son had in Britain at the time of publication of Schlesinger' book . And it is a much healthier parliamentary majority than Harold's son .
 The central threat remained pudel Castro, whose broadcasters were now inveighing daily and agents conspiring nightly against the democratic regimes of E a tin America . Castro was inveighed daily and his broadcasts were now .
 There were twelve sure votes for a hard policy; but among the dissenters were the largest countries of the hemisphere Brasil, Argentina, Mexico, Chile as well as Bolivia and Ecuador .
 The foreign minister of Hati, recognising the value of his vote, calmly remarked to Husk that he came from a poor country in desperate need of aid . Obviously this need would affect his vote. Husk said: "Obviously this need is affecting his vote."
 A new idea was emerging out of 0 the incessant buzz of talk in the lobbies and corridors of the San Rafael Hotel that the government of Cuba be excluded from the inter-American system . In the meantime, there was a new idea emerging from the hotel .
 Argentines seek alternative to mandatory sanctions . This idea had been informally advanced by Argentines seeking an alternative . The idea was first discussed in the 1990s .
 His use of the phrase ""spare wobby governments"" to describe a device to avoid the democratic process is as interesting as his lack of note of the political orientation and beliefs of Kickenlooper, close to the far end of the Republican right .
 It would seem that the includion of these two men in the delegation appointed by Kennddy shows that he joined them, and that he wanted them because of their positions .
 Assistant Secretary Woodward solved these juridical scruples by arguing that the declaration of incompatibility would exclude Cuba automatically . Woodward argued that this would be the case for the United States .
 As for Haiti, we finally yielded to blackmail and agreed to resume our aid to the airport at Port Au Prince .
 In the Caribbean states tehich still wanted mandatory sane tjnns; ... tr ~In t he end, after hew"" prob lems , we never built the airport. There remained a . There remained . There . remained a Caribbean states . tehic still wanted
 This is good writing because it excites, the interest of the reader and begins with a very dramatic treatment . This is a good book because it is very dramatic and exciting .
 It is remarkably poor and wholly inaccurate reporting, for it leaves out entirely the background in which the decision was made and entirely the context in which it was made .
 Schleslnger in a burst of yellow .journalism asks a . question he does not answer . Explaining that ""the Soviet Union had never before placed nuclear missiles in any other country"
 Khrushchev took that decision not for Cuban reasons but for Soviet reasons . Cuba did not; really require the introduction of long-range nuclear missiles, U.S. may be sure .
 He argues with a mixture of irony, half-fact, distortion and falsity . Instead of fact, he argues with an ironic mix of irony and distortion .
 The missiles were not long range but were short x®Kgs and intermediate missiles . The missiles are not long-range but short-range and intermediate .
 The defense of Cuba was not a side effect but the only possible effect (see Khrushchev's secret letter to Kennedy in Abel) for the transferring of the entire Russian military establishment to the island of Cuba could not defend Cuba from destruction if the United States determined upon this course .
 There may have been no point in sending missiles until the bases were nearer completion . He explains that it took longer to construct bases for them .
 The worry was not about the military balance for ""this would still leave the United States with a two_to_one superiority in nuclear power targeted against the Soviet Union" The U.S. would still have a two-to-one advantage in nuclear weapons targeted against Soviet Union .
 It was a staggering project staggering in its recklessness and its rejection of groundrules for coexistence among the superpowers which Kennedy had offered in ''ienna. It was staggering . It was also staggering in the misconception of the jweb American response, the American response .
 Kennedy' s""offer"" of ground rules in Vienna, of course, had no standing and certainly not the siaKsanction that Schlesinger here tries to give them . Kennedy' offer"" of Ground Rules in Vienna had . no standing .
 Khrushchev did not wait until this time to ""reject"" what Kennedy had ""offered"" as Schlesinger's own lengthy discussion -of the Vienna meeting makes clear . Nor did he wait until the time to "reject" what Kennedy offered .
 Ehryshche v at the nasSHkg meeting told Kennedy he Would not accept the new strictures Kennedy was trying to impose upon him . Everything in his subsequent actions made clear that he had not and would not accept Kennedy's demands .
 Schlesinger tries to say that what Kennedy offered was a proper thing, that Khrushchev until this moment had accepted, that it was in fact a challenge to the normal relationship between powers . By this anti-Krushchev attempt to say this was not a deal, Schles
 It was K enne dy who sought to impose upon Khrushchev his, Kennedy's, ambitions for the relationship between the two powers .
 An the propaganda devices they used here, including the slight omission of a more precise description of Ilyushin 28, an outdated, short-range plane which could carry nuclear bombs as could commercial airliners .
 He implies that installation of the other missiles did, but he does not say that any effort was ever made to conceal them . He says installation of other missiles was also made but he doesn't say that it was .
 CIA sent an urgent report to the president that 'something new and different* was tfeking place in s oviet aid operations to Cuba' Three weeks later CIA sent the president a report that 'new and different' was underway in Cuba .
 The data ""suggested” the refurbishing of air defense, ""presumably by putting up a network of SAM sites, 11 In the light of the characteristics of Schelsinger* s concept of history as revealed in this book, it is not niggling to point
 At some time, presumably near ""late July"", there was reason to believe missiles were being installed in Cuba . The one thing that Is hard is that at some time . Is hard .
 Structurally, the presumtlon to which S ehlesinger refers relates as much to the nature of the missies as to the fact of the fact that they exist .
 The propaganda has to do with the intention of establishing a ""Soviet bridgehead in the Western Hemisphere"", increasing Castro's prestige and showing the world ""Washington's inability to prevent such things at its very doorstep"", clearly an attribution to ""Moscow""
 Moscow hdd calculated that the United States after the Bay of figs, couldn't object. What little attempt at reasoning consis ts in_ saying "obviously" Moscow hd calculated that U.S. after the . Bay of Figues, couldn’t object.
 Only the United States could define for the Soviet Union and for Cuba what was defensive and offensive . The U.S. could define what was offensive and defensive for Cuba and the Soviet Russia .
 U.S. relations with the Soviet Union was "obvious to him so obscure to him," he said . The Soviet Union had no idea what the U.K. would do to the American reaction .
 His argument is that the Soviet Union never assumed Such a thing would happen that they, in fact, planned the opposite would happen .
 The only possible interpretation of this sentence is that, with an astounding unanimity, ""our best Soviet experts in State and the CIA"" were entirely wrong and of indescribable incompetence . The only way to interpret this is to say that, in fact, they were wrong .
 Schlesinger will not say, even tho his writing says it for him, for the alternative is to say that the entire U.S. administration was wrong . This, of course, is not true, but it is true, Schlesingers will not admit .
 U~2 flight on August 29 showed clear evidence of SAM sites under construction in Russia . President Vladimir Putin put Moscow on notice after the discovery .
 On September 4, the Secretary of State brought over a draft of the warning . The warning is expected to be issued by the U.S. State Department on Monday .
 The President showed it to the Attorney General, who recommended stiffening it with an explicit statement that we would not tolerate the import of offensive weapons . The Attorney General said the move would be stiffened .
 The draft as revised read that while we had no evidence of ""significant offensive capability either in Cuban hands or under &o vie t dire ctio n, "" should it be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise .
 First, B c tilesinger does not say how the ""clear evidence"" was ""of SAM sites"" and not any other kind of missile site .
 By this time Schlesinger has become so skillful in his evasive writing that his language doesn't even say that the President ever issued the warning that had been drafted .
 The Soviet leader pledged in effect that he would stir u;^ no incidents before the congressional elections in November . But perhaps most dishonest of all is the last sentence quoted .
 A similar interpretation is given by Sorensen who vies wlth ochlesinger in his deification of the President and undeviating devotion to the fact that the President never erred .
 Neither Sorensen nor Schlesinger quotes Dobyynin's language, nor do they quote the Atty Gen. Atty. Gen. Doyynin .
 Khrushchev told the President, "don't worry, we're not going to make any trouble for you, especially not in Cuba," says the Soviet Union leader . Khruschev was a "monster and troublemaker, Khruschchev, this Machi avelli in
 Uninn would create no trouble for the U.S. during the election campaign,' 1 Note 'in Berlin or Southeast Asia'" set off jBy dashes for emphasis .
 Whether or not Khrushchev was a troublemaking devil, he didn't exempt Cuba from his deviltry . B 0 whether or not he was the troublemaker .
 The administration mades such a big thing of this Khrushchev message, which certainly is taken out of context and misrepresented, it is very strange that nodi one of the three major writers, all of whom drew upon official information, found it possible to fruote a single word
 Apel's book was exclusively on the subject of this crisis and his emphasis is unmistakable . It can only be concluded that both Sorensen and S c hlesinger intended nothing less than a major deception . The entire administration case hinged upon 2 propaganda devices; first,
 The only purpose of identical missiles is a first-strike capacity . Schlesinger forgets his own dissertation on the Ameri can missiles in Turkey where he carefully points out that the only purpose is to first strike capacity .
 At no point does Schlesinger or any other administration spokesman, including the President, ever say that, upon the completion of the Cuban missile installation, the Soviet Union planned an attack upon the Ug.
 Schlesinger: If these missiles are not to be used in a first strike, they serve only a ""deterrent"" function . Without arguing that the Soviet Union intended to initiate a nuclear attack upon the uB, it cannot be argued that the missiles when installed served anything other
 The B C viet Union said it had all the missiles and all the power it needed on its own territory . Schlesinger also quotes the exact language used by the others .
 When the Soviets had enough intercontinental missiles installed, they installed no more, allowing the U.S. to go ahead without making any effort to catch up with them . Schlesinger had said virtually the same thing .
 The statement continued truculently accusing the United States of ""preparing for ageression^agalnst Cuba and other peace.lvoing states"
 Of course his purpose here is to show the Russians are a bunch of nasty, warmongering propagandists. Of course he's trying to show that . Of course, his purpose was to show them are nasty warmongers .
 The Soviet Union accused the United States of ""preparing for aggression against Cuba"" and warned that, in that event, ""our armed forces must be ready to strike a crushing retaliatory blow" In short, the Soviet Union, even at the cost of war, was going to keep
 Abel also does not identify the source is 'Moscow"" ofothis statement but dates it as of Sept 11 . Abel also dates it to Sept 11. Abel does not name the source of the statement .
 The president's knowledge of an offensive capability or a suspicion so strong tKat he had to run the great risk, both domestically and internationally, especially immediately before an election, where the fever readings would go higher .
 Schlesinger: How many before he doubled and how many after he doubled are unworthy of mention . Schlesingers says he doubled the number of people in the U.S. before and after doubling the number . He says he doesn't want to mention how many of them before he
 This gradually increased as the crisis Increased in intensity to 6-7 a. bay . This gradually . increased as . the crisis increased in intensity .
 Abel says until late August there were 2 flights monthly, stepped up after Aug 29 discovery of SUM sites to 7 flights by Oct 7 . Abel: Until late August, there were two flights monthly . Abel says after the discovery of the sites, there have been 7 flights a month .
 Abel's version ^ is similar to Schlesinger' s but not identical; ""They had overflown on September 5,17,26,29 and October 5 and 7 without discovering anything beyond SAM sites, MIGfighter^p lanes on various Cuban airfields, and Komar
 All but the September 5 flight, however, had limited their photographic sweeps to that portion of Cuba lying east of b av ana .
 Bad weather held up flights between September 5 and 26 and made the September 11 photography unusable .
 Two^U-2 incidents elsewhere in the world, also led to a high level examination of that airplane's use and some delays in flights . Two incidents in the U.S. have led to an investigation .
 The entire administration position, aside from the fiction of ""offensive"" weapons, had to do with Khrushchev's deceit, stealth, etc., etc., the fact that the administration did not know of the introduction of missiles into Cuba .
 The exact date of the flight and the circumstances is of great importance . Therefore, the exact date and circumstances of the incident are important to determine .
 If on such an important thing any of the authors is wrong, all of their""in formation"" is thereby suspect . And especially if Sorensen or Schlesinger I s wrong, they are wrong .
 It's the kind of thing that, in the context of the Cuba missile crisis, permits no error of any kind . It is the sort of thing . It's a sign of respect for the U.S.
 Schlesingsr* s statement, like most of his writing, is quite tricky, of the indication of a continuing military build-up large in its proportions, is tricky . #nd Sorensen's statement, however, may evade by saying it came ""from other sources
 Without the evasion, what S. chlesinger says is essentially what Abel says, and Abel's sources obviously could be nothing but official sources .
 Schlesinger' s very next sentence is The government saw no reason as yet to believe that Khruschev intended anything beyong this; he had not, so far, lost his mind, he had . So far as yet, we knew, that he hadn't lost his
 This is £n direct contra, diction to any reason Kennedy could have had in the last sentence of the previous paragraph in asking for stand-by authority to call up the reserves . This is a direct, direct and indirect way of asking for the reserves to be called up .
 Schlesinger could not have omitted from his book as he does completely by accident . It is further directly contradicted by the very opening of Sorensen's chapter on this subject, which he says contradicts .
 Sorensen says he took notes at the ambassador's suggestion . He says the ambassador suggested he take notes .
 Raul Roa used it at the UN debate, of the definite statement by the United States of the presence of missiles in Cuba . The UN debate reveals an administration communication to an its Latin American allies .
 The use of the word ""nuclear"" here is an obvious device that assumes greater point in the total absence of any nuclear warheads in Cuba . Cuba has no nuclear warheads .
 The fact is that Khrushchev denied their presence in the letter Abel quotes and offered a search of the ships which was not accepted . Abel quotes: 'The fact is . The fact that Khruschev denied . the presence of them in the letters is not true'
 The hurricane season might interfere with the U-2 overflights . The fall political campaign might inhibit the administration from taking drastic action .
 Khrushchev knew of U_2 overflights, Schlesinger says . Khruschev was a tough, gruff guy as Khrusherchev basing everything he did upon the hope of a hurricane .
 Khrushchev intended this construction to be de tected. S 0 , Zn the abaance ofpany even rudimentary effort to disguise any of the construction work in Cuba is clear evidence of an incontrovertible nature that Khrushvic intended this .
 Schlesinger gives us a real insight into the conduct of the govt on the highest level . The cliffhanging fear of the President and his close counsellors, of the dire threat to the national security really the national survival .
 Intelligence community treated the information with reserve . The recommendation was approved, on October 10, and from the eleventh to the thirteen o Sn the pilot and plane Waited for the weather to break .
 On 0 ctober 9 the President whose personal authorization was required for every TF_2 flight and who throughout this period had authorized all flights requested of him approved a mission over the western end of Cuba ... delayed by bad weather until October ll;, the U_2 flew in the
 Sorensen's reference to bad weather, and he makes reference to it, relates only to Sept. 9 . Sorennsen: "Bad weather" refers only to that day .
 Abel's version is that when McCone returned from his honeymoon, .discover that western Cuba had not been overflown for a month"", ''immediately suggested that the whole island be photographed at once with special attention to ifos western end .
 Western Cuba, the most likely place for the installation of ‘'offensive"" missile s,""had not been inspected from the air since September . Here we have another glimpse in the same kaleidoscope of the CIA director who had and continued to hold . the belief that Soviet activity
 Abel says McCone was fretting and bombarding his deputy . But according to Abel, this is not indicated in either Sorensen or Schlesinger McCone .
 President Kennedy never saw the so-called honeymoon telegrams, sent on September 7, 10, l5 and 16 . General Marshall S Carter, with telegrames, sent September 7 and l5, September 7 . President Kennedy did not see the telegram .
 A bel quotes the issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology dated Oct 1 as saying, ""'pentagon strategists consider the present aims build-up in Cuba the first step"" toward eventual construction of intermediate-range ballistic missile emplacements, 1 '
 Col John Ralph Wright, Jr., Jr., of the Defense Intelligence Agency, studied the results of unspecified Sept overflights ""with meticulous care"", according to Abel and notice the odd pattern .
 His citation says that it was he who recommended the coverage of Oct. 14 . The citation says he recommended that coverage of that event be covered .
 Schlesinger fails to say when the flight was made, he fails to reveal when it was made . Be turning to the Oct lip flight .
 In thishe is consistent with his further comment on its results, but his language about uhe ^ flight is merely "Sunday the 14 th dawned beautiful and cloudless" Sunday the 14th dawned "beautiful"
 Sorensen says the U -2 flew in the early morning hours of that cloudless Sunday morning . Abel has more detail .
 At the suggestion of MclTamara, the CIA pilots were canned, he says . The CIA pilots are no longer working for the CIA .
 Majors Rudolph Anderson Jr and Pachard S Heyser, took over on the 14th th. Major officers Rudolph Anderson, Jr. and Pchard S. Heysers took over the 14 th.
 General Carter appealed to the White House, arguing that intelligence was properly the CIA's business . General Carter, in McCone's monthlong absence/ , had appealed to White House .
 Abel says there were 2 planes and 2 pilots /on the one flight . Abel says the implication of Abel is there were two planes and two pilots . Abel: There were planes and pilots on one flight.
 Schlesinger 1 sattack on Sen. Keating is the sneaky thing in which he is a specialist, he says . He says the attack on Keating was a "sneaky thing" that he's a specialist .
 Keating says he treated the refugee reports with no reserve at all . He says Keating treated the reports with 'no reserve'
 At the end of August he began a campaign to force the government into some unspecified fohn of action . The government has yet to respond to the calls for action .
 In general, without saying where the laboratory was, says the negatives were ""swiftly"" sent to the interpretation center, where specialists pored over the blown-up photographs frame by frame .
 It Is with this event, the informing of ^undy, that Schlesinger begins subsection 3 of this chapter . It Is . with this . event, Schlesingers begins subsection .
 Sorensen says top CIA officials were notified and they notified Defense and State intelligence chiefs a n d, at his home . The CIA was notified between 8 and 10m. and 10 m.
 With all the information coming from a single source, there should be no discrepancy of any kind, nor should there be any question about the time, even to the extact minute, especially when dealing with intelligence and such a nature .
 Bundy decided not to tell the President that night since he had nothing with which to brief him and wouldn't until the morning . Schlesinger, Sorensen and Abel agree that Bundy decided to keep quiet that night .
 There is on3.y a 15-minute difference between Sorensen's ""about 9m,"" time and Schlesinger's 8:45m.y .
 Bundy was briefed by an intelligence officer with twopho toanalysts . Abel adds details that a -a 8 o'clock Bundy had been briefed by intelligence officer . Bundy was also briefed by the intelligence officer, Abel says .
 Schlesinger wanaidxKnaixS does not quote Bundy's reason for not Informing the President immediately . He studied the photographs and . accompaniying intelligence r reports, then went to Kennedy's living quarters .
 The meeting, beginning at eleven forty-five that morning, went on with intermissions for the rest of the week . The meeting began at 11:45 a.m. ET on Monday .
 The group soon became known as the Executive Committee . The press later dubbed it ExCom, though one never heard that phrase at the time .
 The U.S. carried on its work with the most exacting secrecy . Nothing could be worse than to alert the Russians before the Dpi ted States had decided on its own course .
 The pretense that the Russians had to be ken t from knowing that we knew is little short of childish . Of course, the pretense is that they had to know we knew was childish, he says .
 Schlesinger has sought to explain Khrushchevas action in the light of the U.S. official line by saying he had pinned his hopes on the hurricane season interfering with the TT-2 flights, so there was no doubt that everybody knew the Russians .
 The ExCom considered ‘‘every alternative” ranging from living with the missiles to taking them out by surprise attack . Khrushchev considered 'every alternative' ranging from making the issue with Castro to mak_ iit wi th Khrrushchev .
 Schlesinger: The response/could not, for example, be confided to the United Nations, where the Soviet delegats^ would have ample opportunity to stall action until the nuclear weapons were in"" place and on target . According to the author, this meant that the response/
 It meant that we could not even risk the delay involved in consulting our allies. It was not the best time to consult our allies, it meant that it was not possible to consult with them. The delay meant that the government could not consult with its allies.
 What it really meant was the United States had no intention of abiding by its commitment to the UN, to the Charter of the UN and to international law . The U.S. had 'no intention' to abide by the UN Charter, the UN said .
 Unless the U.S. could convert the UN to its own purposes, to make it an adjunct of United States policy . Unless, of course, it could convert it to its . own purposes .
 Schlesinger says that at the beginning of the discussions because the President ""made clear that acquiescence was impossible"" there seemed to be nothing possible except an airstrike which impelled the Atty Gen to scribble a wry note ""’I know now how To jo felt when
 The amphibious task force was built up to include i.j.,000 Marines and 5,000 more in Guantanamo . The task force includes i.J.000 Marines .
 The Army prepared its 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions for immediate deployment and soon altogether gathered ‘’more than / 100,000 troops in Florida .
 Air defense facilities were stripped from, places outside the range of the Cuban missiles and re-installed in the Southeast . SAC bombers left Florida airfields to make room for tactical fighter aircraft flown in .
 The Pentagon had undertaken a ""technical analysis of the requirements for a successful strike"" With typical propaganda purposes in midd that could certainly have deceived the President, this was formulated as ... / a ""surgical"" strike confined to nuclear missile bases alone .
 A limited strike therefore might expose the United States to nuclear retaliation . A limited U.S. strike would expose the U.K. to a limited strike . The United States might also be vulnerable to nuclear strikes .
 Anything less, the military urged, would destroy our credibility before the world . Anything less would leave our own nation in intolerable peril, they said .
 This was a heaven-sent opportunity to get rid of the Castro regime forever and re-est ablish the security of the hemisphere . Moreover, this was an opportunity to rid of Cuba forever, says President Obama .
 The Soviet experts pointed out that even a limited strike would kill the Russians manning the missile sites and provoke a drastic and unpredictable response, perhaps nuclear war . Even a strike would provoke the Soviet Union into a drastic response, they said .
 Latin American experts added that a massive strike would kill thousands of innocent Cubans and damage the U.S. permanently in the hemisphere . They said that the strike would damage the United States .
 The Furopeanists said the world would regard a surprise strike as an excessive response . The strike would be an 'excessive response', they said .
 Sec. McNamara "advanced an idea which had been briefly mentioned the day before and from which he did not thereafter deviate" She next isXhkk Sec McNamara . McNamara: A blockade designed to stop the further entry of offensive weapons into Cuba and force the removal
 In KeKamara's mind and Schle singe r* s and everybody else's, this was a blockade, illegan and an act of war . In the U.S. it's a blockade and I.E. s and everyone else's mind, it's
 It was not until later that it was dignified with the euphemism ""quarantine"" As the discussions in the BxSom proceeded thru Thursday, airstrike supporters said a blockade would not neutralize the weapons already within Cuba . They feared a retaliatory blockade on Berlin .
 The arguments of the airs trike advocates are cogent and should have been and still mu&t be considered in any analysis . J
 It certainly could not neutralize^ he weapons already in Cuba’ nor, unless . h® he were willing to be pressured, could it . cause Khrushchev to remove the weapons and they would remain as the threat which caused all of Kennedy's excessive reaction .
 Without Khrushchev* s cooperation, a blockade was meaningless . If he were going to cooperate a quid pro quo of some kind was an essential for him, says historian .
 It is beyond credibility that this thought did not occue to the Pres. or his advisers. It's beyond credibility, he said .
 'From the writings of Sorensen and Abel, they do not, ’from the writings . of hie singer, Sorenten and . Abel, seem to have ever considered this. Yet they . seem to be unaware of this. yet .
 The Russians had publicly done everything except say they had installed such missiles in Cuba . They had not publicly said they had done so, only to say they did so .
 They had been careful to explain their purposes in diplomatic language and they had done nothing to camouflage the work done in Cuba . They had explained their purpose in diplomatic terms .
 Gromyko held his ground and made a very forceful response . Schlesinger pays but slight attention to this meeting so that he can more readily ignore what other writers have pointed out .
 The intellectual tone and level of Schlesinger* s writing is illustrated by his account of the evening meeting of the ExCom Thursday, Oct 18, at which he said the Pres. was attracted by the idea of the . idea of a blockade . because it avoided war . Schles
 The choice shifted the initiation of hostilities to the Russians . Hence, it did not avoid war but shifted the choice to Russia .
 There seems to be a conflict with Sorensen here, but there is not . The Pres ordered preparations for a weaoons blockade to go into effect on Mon morning the 22nd 1 .
 Sorensen does not say whether or not he protested this effort . This is not the version he gives but it is not in contradiction to it .
 A gain the lack of morality and the . lack of any interest in . or concept of legality . A gain of morality is the lack . of morality or the . idea of legality, the author says .
 McNamara was strongly opposed to an airstrike and in support of the blockade . McNamara remained strongly opposed .
 In a footnote to that he describes as an ExCom meeting ag 4 o'clock Fri the 19 th, ""for a discussion of the competing see. ' narios"" Schlesinger goes into the defense Sec of State Rusk made to Ap State Dept correspondent John M Hight
 Ate this meeting, Sc hie singer says, ""the balance of opinion clearly swung back to the blockade (though a blockade was technically an act of war)" Ignoring that he had just said the the blockade might prevent war, with only the flimsy figleaf of the
 There is a reflection in what follows of what may have been ulterior motives on the part of ihhe military in arguing against the blockade .
 The clear inference is that they were actively seeking the means of starting a war . It is thought they were trying to start a war with the U.S. President Obama .
 They may have had illusions about whether or not the Russians would enter such a war, but they could have been nothing but illusions . The Russians may have been hoping to win a war against the U.S.
 The Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy as well as the Secretary of Defense had recommended in 1961 . Someone observed that the United States would have to pay a price to get them out . Perhaps we should throw in our now obsolescent and vulnerable Jupiter missile bases .
 Adkai Stevenson had had to miss the day's meetings because of UR commitments . After a couple of hours, he arrived f 10 in. 10 in .
 He expressed his preference for the quarantine over the strike but wondered whether it might not be better to try to try the diplomatic route also .
 We must, he said, start thinking about our negotiating position . Settlement might include neutralization of Cuba under international guarantees and inspection . Demilitarization would include our own base at Guantanamo as well as the Soviet installations .
 The use of the word ""Someone"" cannot reflect Schlesinger' s inability to find out who the person was . The use  wasn't an attempt to find someone out who it was, it was not a person .
 When Stevenson spoke with force about the importance of a politiaal program, Stevenson "agreed in principle but disagreed with his specific proposals"
 At this meeting the pres ""issued orders to get everything ready"" for the blockade . The pres. issued orders to 'get everything ready' for blockade .
 The Crisis Schlesinger knew nothing about what was going on, nothing about the secret discussions in the White House, until he was informed by -kdl&l Stevenson who had obtained the Pres's permission to tell him about the discussions . The crisis was the first time the Crisis Sch
 His purpose was to ask Schlesinger 1 s help with his speech he Would make early in the week at the Security Council .
 Rusk canceled a speech he had been to make . The president returned unexpectedly from his political tour and canceled the speech .
 On Fri a British delegation for intelligence conferences with the CIA deduced from suspicions based on things other than either Abel or Sorensen wrote about, Mklsk such as their observation of beds being moved into Pentagon offices .
 Schlesinger describes essentially what Stevenson ultimately proposed at the UN, saying it ""centered on the removal of Soviet military equipment and personnel"" which fasm the United States point of view perhaps did .
 From the Soviet point of view the ""non-invasion guarantee ‘ was undoubtedly its center . The guarantee was undoubtedly the center of the Soviet policy . But from the Soviet view the guarantee was crucial .
 Stevenson also wants withdrawal from Guantanamo and removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey and Italy . Stevenson also wanted to promise withdrawal from Gitmo and withdrawal of missiles .
 Schlesinger says the Pres. "regarded any political program as premature" The Pres. ""rightly" regarded any political programs as premature," according to Schlesingers .
 He wanted to concentrate on the enormity of the introduction nf the missiles and the absolute necessity for their removal . He said he wanted to focus on the importance of the missiles .
 Stevenson made just such proposals and the solution was just such a solution . The fact is that within just a few days Stevenson made such a proposal . Stevenson's solution was a solution to the problem .
 ExCom was consistent* It was almost without exception wrong in not understanding, in what it wanted to do, and what it did not want to do . It was wrong without exception to not understanding what it was trying to do and why it was wrong .
 Working all day and well into the night at the State Dept. on the speech with Schlesinger were Harlan Cleveland, Joseph Misies Sisco and Thomas Wilson . The speech will be on display at the White House .
 It was strange, he said, how no one in the intelligence community had anticipated the Soviet attempt to transform Cuba into a nuclear base . He said everyone had assumed that the Russians would not be so stupid as to offer us this pretext for intervention .
 It might draw Russia and China closer together, or at least strengthen the Soviet position in the communist World, he says . It would be a tremendous political blow to the United States, he adds .
 When I remarked that the Russians must have supposed we would not respond, Kennedy said, "They thought they had us either way. if / we did nothing, we would be dead"
 So apparently the Pres. also had no understanding of what the Soviets were aiming for. So apparently he also didn't understand what they meant to do .
 Apparently Schlesinger from what follows did draft a speech Stevenson was to make . The speech was a draft draft of Stevenson's speech .
 "We will have to make a deal at the end, but we must stand absolutely firm now," says Luis Suarez . Suarez: 'We must stand firm now. We must stand very firm now'
 Schlesinger* s version of the 5 o'clock briefing of Congressional leaders, many of whom had been flown in by the Air Force, etc. etc., is essentially that of the others . He says the briefing is essentially the same thing .
 Sen. Russell of Ca disagreed with the blockade and said the only solution was invasion . Sen Russell said invasion was only solution to the blockade .
 After Russell spoke, no one wanted to talk to you can talk to them individually, they are is that . When you get dominated by the man who is what happened the other take issue with him .
 Schlesinger begins this subsdction with a plaint against the XTH; ""...like a permanent political convention: so many people to be considered and cajoled"
 There were too many things that had to be done before the U.S. got its way, he says . The UN should work automatically on behalf of the United States, he adds .
 OAS Resolution passed in exactly the United States form, word for word, and Sisco had an advance copy of it .
 Schlesinger replaces the hi s tori sn in his dramatic account of workmen in Cuba .
 He refers to Ache son's trip to De Gaulle, quoting the general, there is a war, I will be with you* Bui, there will be no war* T . Without elaboration Schlesinger says. He refers .
 According to Schlesinger, ""The President no doubt"" detected ""an element of reserve in Macmillan* s tone..."" and the Pres says ifcxixKksiistahsjixlsxJix of Khrushchev his action had so contradicted all the
 Schlesinger says the British reaction was much less favorable than he thinks it was . But he does quote some of the British reactions .
 The Manchester Guardian said that if Khrushchev had really brought in nuclear missiles, he had done so to demonstrate to the United States and the world the meaning of American bases close to the Soviet frontier .
 Taylor, Richard Titmuss and others attacked the quarantine and defended British neutrality . The quarantine was quarantined during the Second World War .
 Schlesinger quotes Russell's cable to Kennedy as saying: "Your action desperate ... (omissions in original) No conceivable justification, We will not have mass murder ... end this madness/' Both telegrams are separated by conspicuous areas of blank space on the page and are set
 The followers of Stuart Hugheses peace party denounced quarantine, sought excuses for Khrus hchev and prayed for American acceptance of the missiles .
 He singles Hughes out for ridicule on seven different occasions in this book, in itslef a piece of uninhibited dis_ honesty for there was no opportunity for answer .
 One of his techniques is to call Hughes the radical left equivalent of Barry Goldwater and the Bircher3 on the right and pretend that Hughes was a Communis t of some kind, a statement he didn't dare make outright .
 He had just been to seem -Ambassador Dobrynin in an effort to find out whether Soviet ships had instructions to turn back if challenged on the hi£h seas .
 The Soviet Ambassador, the Attorney General said, seemed very shaken, out of the picture and unaware of any instructions . The Attorney General says the Soviet Ambassador was shaken . The Ambassador seemed to be unaware of instructions .
 This meant that the imposition of the quarantine the next day might well bring a clash . The quarantine was due to be imposed on the island of Colombia .
 UH Ambassador Borin's plight is indicative of exactly what the Atty Gen. A feaeta thought, that he was ""out of the picture" and this is not indicative of anything but what the official American interpretation of the entire Soviet ploy was . This, bracketed with
 It was indicative of the tightest and most explusive kind of control exercised on his project by Khrushchev . The tightest control exercised by the former Soviet leader was shown by the Soviet leader .
 J*fhe well knew the potential and he is not about to admit the truth . But again, had Schlesinger gone off into such an analysis, he would not have admitted it .
 Ke called McNamara a n d. He issued the order to remove the president from the White House .
 The reason for not giving the pres this only too obvious counsel is highly suspect and indicative of a desire for an aimed clash . Nor had those in the Pentagon and in each case, the reason for such a decision is suspect .
 Schlesinger makes no effort to underestimate the serious possibilities of the Cuban missile crisis . He says it's a serious possibility of a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 He devotes a few pages of the following chapter to the e ending of the crisis .
 The Russians had obviously anticipated neither the quick discovery of the bases nor the quick imposition of o the quarantine . The Russians did not anticipate the quick response to the discovery .
 Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin himself gave every indication of ignorance and confusion . Diplomats across the world were displaying all the symptoms of improvisation, as if they had been told nothing of the placement of the missiles .
 There undoubtedly was confusion in the diplomatic corps which clearly and highly unusually had not been informed by Khrushchev . The Soviet Union had not informed the Soviet Union, says historian John Avlon .
 Everything Schlesinger has had to say on this subject, as well as what Sorensen and Abel say, makes sense only if the Russians depended upon ""quick discovery of the bases" The Russians had made not even the most rudimentary effort to conceal the bases, they had made
 Khrushchev accepted this thought at once and with evident pleasure; . But, from our viewpoint, it equated aggression and response, said nothing about missiles already in Cuba, permitted work .
 Mew York and Washington agreed in rejecting U Thant's proposal . Still, the manner of the rejection caused debate .
 Some in Washington appeared to fear any response which would 'entrap' us in a negotiating process . It seemed to us in Hework that they seemed to be bent tl clear the road for an air strike and an invasion .
 Stevenson and HcCloy strongly recommended a response to U Thant which would keep the dip lomatic option alive . Stevenson: "I strongly recommend a response which would be a good response to the proposal"
 Khrushchev was signaling a desire to cooperate in moving toward a peaceful solution, he said . He said he was speaking with unusual urgency, speaking with extraordinary urgency .
 Khrushchev’s suggestion of a summit meeting in his reply to -bertrand Russell . His wellpublicized call on the American singer Jerome Hines the night a fx&xxa before after a Moscow concert . His amiable if menacing talk with an American businessman
 This was not the behavior of a man who wanted war, Harriman said . It was the behavior . "This was a man begging our help to get off the hook," he said. "This is not a war. This is not war."
 Khrushchev had sent up similar signals after the U-2 affair in i960, Harriman continued . Eisenhower had made the mistake of ignoring him; we muit not repeat that error now .
 The ridiculousness of this is clear in the second sentence where Schlesinger said ""Khrushchev had sent up similar signals after the U-2 affair in i960" clearly it was not Khrushchev who was ""desperate"" or trying to get himself off the hook
 He did not seek the audience with Khrushchev and was surprised when summoned to the Kremlin . He was surprised to be summoned by the Kremlin.
 Krhushchev confirmed to him that he did indeed have missiles in Cuba and further would, if necessary, use them . He said he would use the missiles if necessary . Krhoshchev confirmed that he had missiles in Cuban territory .
 He also tried to explain the difference between ""offensive"" and ""defensive"" as he saw it .
 Know was hardly the signal of desperation; nor was the ""slowing down" of those Soviet ships nearest Cuba because this was in response to U. Thant's request .
 This unending self-righteousness, the unceasing straining to represent the American govt top echelon and its policies as invariably right, undeviatingly omniscient and holier than the pope is demeaning to the country . The fawning,
 No man is that wise, that never wrong, that all-seeing, that completely perfect. No man can be that wise and never wrong . No man could have been that wise or never wrong.
 Schlesinger, perhaps more than Soresen, succeeds in dehumanizing Kennedy, but he does not make him god . Kennedy is not god .
 The above excerpt is one of countless ones scattered throughout the entire opus . The book is a collection of works of art, including some of the world's greatest artists .
 To almost everybody else, he is the outstanding American expert on Russia . He is known for his views on the Russian crisis in Ukraine .
 "If we deny bim an out, then we will escalate this business into a nuclear war," he says . But if . we deny . bim out, we will . escalate this . business into nuclear war, he adds .
 Harriman told Schlesinger the State oept never asked my aci vice about anything outside the Far East . Harrimans said the State never asked him about anything else outside of Asia .
 Schlesinger attributes weight in the President's decision to Harriman s observations .
 It would seem thao Schlesinger iind so-r^e significance and it is a very obvious thing in the apparent complete lack of any Soviet diplomatic diplomatic sajjsxax .
 It could mean only that the very highest echelon of the Soviet govt. had elected no.i. to imoim d ^ lo ~ mats what was about to happen .
 Schlesinger points out that the Russians appeared to be engaged in a studied effort to disassociate merlin from Cuba . He finds ""the essence of the emerging pattern seems ^to be concern for a peaceful settlement""
 To strengthen the case, Schlesinger dredges up h ity of Capt Ivanov, a Stephen *ard in^ritain ignoring the previous paragraph .
 The Ivanov activity, trying to prepare for a summit meeting, would seem to have been a fpon^eous amateur/6ffort . Ivanov: 'Ivanov activity is an amateur'
 "Any place in the world there was anxiety, at least where rational men lived," says the author of a new book . "The world is full of anxiety. Any place where there is anxiety, it is anxiety," he says .
 Khrushchev stated to Kennedy that all the intended missiles were in Cuba and, in the can text of oU Thant's suggestion, inspection of the ships would show none on them . As Schlesinger very well knew, Khruschev stated that .
 Schlesinger is indulging in juvenile fiction, as so often before . So often before before, he indulged in a juvenile fiction . This is not the first time he has written a novel .
 Of Khrushchev Schlesinger next says, "He knew by now thathis essential gamble had failed. He knew by . now that his essential gamble . had failed." He knew now that he had failed .
 There is no evidence that either of these things is true, and an the evidence is to the contrary, says CNN.com .
 Khrushchev told the Supreme Soviet in December that ‘on the morning of October 27 we received information that the invasion wovild be carried out in the next two or three days.’ Schlesinger quotes the Soviet Union in December .
 Khrushchev said he would have given a choice between using the pockets or abandoning Cuba . This would have allowed him to use his pockets or abandon Cuba, he said .
 "This satisfaction"" that he gave the Africans really was the only purpose for introducing the missiles," he said . This satisfaction"" was the reason for introducing missiles, he added .
 Sorensen barely mentions it in less than half of a paragraph from which anne of the important or specific contents"" of the iSJ&aiisaxjti&BK proposition made by Fomin is made clear . Sorenten: "Sorens
 Fomin begged Scali to find out immediately from State Department friends . Schlesinger says ttiat,7Iwhen Scali said he did not know, Fomin said he didn't know . Fomin: "I want to know what happened"
 If I'm not at the Embassy, call me here. Then, reaching for a pencil, he wrote down his home telephone number .
 Once this happened, Fomin ""rose £ anc^ in his haste to gee the word oack, tossed ^:owo a five-doliar bill for a thirty-cent check and speeded off without waiting for the change . Fomin 'rose £ £
 Ofothis Sorensen said on]y that it arrived in the evening and is careful to avoid a time relationship that has meaning between it and S c ali 1 s reply to Fomin. Fomin said on].
 The Soviet leader insisted that the weapons shipments were complete and that their purpose was aefen-^ sive . He said they were intended to protect the Soviet Union .
 He declared his profound longing for peace; let us, he said, not permit this situation to get out of nand. ine enforcement of the quarantine would only drive the Soviei; union to . necessary measures of its own . Then he declared: "Let us, not
 The United States would give assurances that it would not invade Cuba nor permit others to no so so . But if it would recall its fleet from the quarantine, this would immediately change everything .
 Together with the Scaii proposal, it promised to show light at the end of the cave . The proposal is part of a plan to save the cave from extinction .
 Cubans hint to unaligned delegates that the bases might be dismantled and removed if the U.S. would guarantee the territorialintegrity of Cuba/ l'he President probably had his first good night' s o sleep for ten days .
 The full test of the letter never had b been made public and Abel had it leaked to him with only part of it in quotation . Schlesinger's version of the test is not possible to completely analyze Schlesingers' version .
 Schlesinger cites no evidence that '’the weapons shipments” were not complete . Khrushchev's statement ""that their purpose was defensive” is paraphrased it .
 A-bel devotes pages to a discussion of paraphrasing of and quotation from this letter . The author's paraphrase of the letter is discussed in several pages .
 Abel’s version to refer to, it would be certain that the language used by Schlesinger, that the Soviet Union would take necessary measures to enforce the blockade, is a tremendous understatement . The Soviet Union used the language of its own to enforce its blockade .
 The part about the knot Abel quotes directly quotes directly and again it was Khrushchev's emphasis that the pursuance of the -American blockade would lead to a nuclear war . Abel quotes from the part of the knot .
 At this point and not at the only point in the letter Khrushchev spoke with rare severity to the head of another state . The letter was written by the then-Krushchev in 1956 .
 A moment may come when the knot will be tied so tight that evenhe who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will he necessary to cut that knot . And what that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand
 He referred to their Vienna meeting and said that Kennedy had deceived him in assuring Khrushchev that the Bay of Pigs had been a mistake . Kennedy said that he had assured him that it would not be repeated, an implication being that it was not repeated .
 Schlesinger is quite correct in saying a) that the letter was not, and b) was subsequently described as, hysterical, hysterical . The letter was later described as hysterical, but not hysterical, by Schlesberger .
 Schlesinger says that ""together with the Scan proposal"" it seemed to propose a solution, he is indulging the official administration line, which it is to hide the stupidity of the state Dept and other ExCom people .
 This was the strongest possible language permitted by diplomacy for first he had no control over Castro as subsequent events showed . Second, he couldn't even pretend to have any control, and second, he can't even pretended to have .
 A prelude, an introduction, to the coming letter, to give the U.S. a chance to consider its essentials be fume receipt of the i entire text . The i-word is a prelude to a coming letter .
 Khrushchev was forced to take a more direct path after a misreading of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was overthrown in the early 1960s . The U.S. State Department was investigating the incident .
 Schlesinger 1 s inadequate summary of the letter actually should have been at the beginning because it too was prelude . What follows is a prelude to the letter itself . The letter itself itself is an inadequate summary, but it should be at the start .
 The U.S. would have to guarantee Cuba's territorial integrity if it removed the Cuban bases . The Cuban government said the bases might be dismantled and removed if the United States would guarantee the territorial integrity of Cuba .
 It would never bo gathered from a reading of this KhrushchevSchlesinger or Abel text that the Pres did not have a f j ii I % I P*827 I $ ■wxi monopoly on a firm grasp of the incalculable potentialities of his action
 Schlesinger seeks to excuse them MXiJn which demands of him, as of an the others, a misrepresentation of Khrushchev's o subsequent communication .
 The Soviet Union now said it would remove its missiles from Cuba and offer a nonaggression p&jsi. pledge to Turkey if the U.S. removed its missiles and offered a non-aggression pledge to Cuba .
 The notion of trading the Cuban and Turkish bases had been much discussed in England . Walter Lippmann and others had urged it in the United States .
 Kennedy regarded the idea as unacceptable, and the swap was promptly rejected . Kennedy regarded it as unacceptable .
 The bases were becoming operational, and the Russians were evidently determined to use force to maintain them . Russia was determined to keep the bases operational .
 Vie had no choice, it was argued, but a military response . Strikes at bases would be little use without strikes at the airfields, and strikes at airfields would be of little use . Once the process began, it could hardly stop short of invasion, it said .
 Khrushchev was permitting no dawdling. Second, not Kennedy, it was not Kennedy but Khrushvic . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev preempted him by making it public, making it even tougher for Kennedy . "Everybody knew about it the entire world as fast as Kennedy did, Kennedy did," he said .
 "‘an entirely different proposition"", it was the same kind, only very tough, not at all." "The United States administration, a nd to everybody except the U.S. administration"
 Khrushchev knew Kennedy would not accept the removal of the missiles from Turkey . Kennedy would have voluntarily removed the missiles voluntarily before this seen to remove them from Turkey, says the former president .
 Schlesinger studiously avoids reflection of the severity of the letter as, for example, when saying, ""if the United States would remove its missiles from T u rkey"" r efcc. r e fcc.
 Schlesinger says Khrushchev was giving Kennedy the choice of accepting either his first or his second proposal or a nuclear war . But what he fails to say is that Kennedy was giving him the choice between the two .
 It was not entering its military phase from any timidity on the Soviet part. The Soviet government was not in the mood of timidity, it was in a state of war .
 "Their threat of force, which was so clear, was an alternative to an acceptable and immediate solution," she said . "Their threats of force were so clear," she added . "They were an alternative," she says .
 Schlesinger's handling of the shooting-down of the U_2 plane is not only separated from its true meaning which was obvious, but in turn requires a misrepresentation of what follows in terms of Kennedy's reaction and justification . Kennedy did not react to the shooting down of the
 U_2a had be enf lying over Cuba lik® water over Niagara without molestation. It likens to lying about Cuba likening it to lying over Canada lik® over Niagara .
 The Khrushchev order his own demonstration of just how tough he was prepared to be . The SAM that shot down Major Anderson tola Kennedy loud and clear vhis is it. It was the first demonstration of how tough the Soviet leader was prepared for the test .
 The United States and Pres Kennedy accepted the shooting-down oi the TJ-2 . Take it or leave it now, take it now .
 If they shot down TJ_2s, we would have to react at once, but not necessarily at once . We would react to the possibility of a shot down by the government .
 Kennedy's failure to react immediately in the face of all of his uough talk was a clear signal to Khrushchev that he had at loop last recognised the potentiality of the danger point of the situation .
 There remained the Khrushchev letters, and the Executive Committee turned to them again with bafflement and something close to despair . P.828 .
 Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky had mentioned Cuba and Turkey together jrfas early as Tuesday . Red Star , the army paper, had coupled them again on Friday .
 Scali, fearful that he had been used to deceive his own country, upbraided Fomin . Fomin accused Scali of a double cross . Scali was fearful that Scali had used him to deceive him own country .
 The Embassy was waiting word from Khrushchev at any moment . The Russian said there must have been a cable delay . The Embassy said it was waiting for word from the Soviet leader .
 These conjectures are valid but they are not the central point of the story . These are, of course, valid but not the main point, says author .
 Sorensen deals with this period on pp,7l3-if without reference to the Scan mission . The Scan mission was part of the first phase of the Scan Mission .
 Abel's commentary on the reaction to the public Khrushchev letter is lengthy and begins onl88. Abel's comment on the letter is a lengthy and detailed look at the reaction of the public .
 Both Schlesinger and Sorensen choose to ignore the President's reaction to the continued presence of American caissiles in Turts y which he had wanted to remove immediately upon his inauguration .
 Uespite the picture they paint in such bold strokes and radiant colors of Kennedy ""on top"" of everything, here was a warand-peace, life_and-death issue that he did not stay "on top" of. Ues.
 Schlesinger concedes that the missiles really served no essential function in Turkey . Elsewhere, Schlesingers concedes {see earlier notes] that these missiles were not essential function . The missiles were launched in Turkey in 1998 .
 Sorensen's text is equally devoid of any indication of the dire meaning of the timing of the shooting down of Major Anderson's 5F_ 2 . He also reports con jeettwra about whether ""Khrushchev's hardliners"" had ""once again taken the lead
 Khrushchev himself was staying in personal control of everything and letting nothing go to anybody that did not serve tne central purpose he had in mind . Fomin's lack of information from Moscow was a further evidence that; all three writers should have documented the crucial fact that; Khrush