 The Cold War was a time when two super powers fought each other for the right to be called the most powerful nation in the world . The Soviet Union and the USA fought for the title of world's most powerful country .
 Learn about the Cuban Missile crisis and Malmstrom Air Force Base’s role in our slide show titled 13 Days of Despair . Enjoy learning all about the crisis in this slide show .
 The Crisis Begins October 15, 1962 . A U-2 reconnaissance pilot, Richard Heyser, takes photos which reveal the presence of SS-4 Nuclear missiles .
 Malmstrom Air Force Base had the first and only solid fueled rocket, however they lacked ability to launch it . Meanwhile back in Montana, Montana, the first solid-fueled rocket was launched by the base .
 President John F Kennedy was informed of the missiles while eating breakfast . President Kennedy was in the midst of the missile threat .
 First of three SS-5 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles detected in Cuba . October 17, 1962 .
 President John F Kennedy meets with and advises Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko that the U.S. will not tolerate the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 President Kennedy meets with secretary of defense Robert McNamara to discuss military options . President Kennedy met with McNamara on October 19, 1962 .
 JFK left later to Chicago, he was told not to tell anybody about the crisis . JFK was told to stay away from the crisis and not tell anybody .
 Airmen at Malmstrom Air Force Base started laying wire to launch solid fuel rockets . Meanwhile back in Montana, the U.S. Air Force base is laying wire for solid fuel launches .
 He told the media discovery of new Soviet missile that he had “upper Missiles’ He told media discovery that he has a “higher Missiles.” He said he had a ‘upper Missile’
 Kennedy asks the Air Force if they could take out all of the being built on the Cuban missiles . Sunday October 21,1962 .
 President would tell the Kennedy decided to . American Public navel block Cuba tomorrow. tomorrow. President would say the . President would . tell the . public that the American Public decided to block Cuba. tomorrow .
 The public was informed of the crisis on this day . Some of the world's most famous photographs were taken by U-2 spy planes .
 President Kennedy’s Speech . Addressed the nation about what was going on in Cuba .
 Kennedy ordered Malmstrom officials to be prepared to launch the missiles at any time . Meanwhile back in Montana, Montana, officials were preparing for launch .
 October 23, 1962 . A low level reconnaissance mission brought back stunning pictures of missiles prepared for launch .
 Soviet ships approached the quarantine . October 24, 1962 . Wednesday Wednesday . Wednesday October 24 . 1962 .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviets at the United Nations . The Soviets refuse to answer .
 The United States Navy searched the Soviet ships and only found paper products . The U.S. Navy found only paper products in Soviet ships .
 Khrushchev said he would remove their missiles if President Kennedy said he wouldn't attack Cuba . He would remove the missiles if Kennedy agreed not to attack the country . Khrushchev said he'd remove missiles if president Kennedy said not attack .
 Khrushchev sends a letter saying if the U.S. removes its missiles from Turkey they will remove there’s in Cuba . October 27, 1962 Saturday Saturday .
 U-2 pilot strays into Soviet airspace accidentally while flying in Alaska . Saturday Saturday . Saturday  U.2 pilot was flying in Soviet airspace . Saturday .
 People in Great Falls and on Malmstrom Air Force Base were relieved to know that they didn’t have to be involved in nuclear warfare . Meanwhile back in Montana, Montana, people were relieved that they had no need for nuclear weapons .
 At the end of the negotiations Castro tried to stop removal of the missiles . At the beginning of the talks he tried to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Even after the crisis, both sides would still engage in conflict, continuing the Cold War until the 80’s when the Berlin wall fell . Both sides still engaged in conflict even after the fall of Berlin Wall .
 The United States still did not like communism, as you would see seven years later in the Vietnam War . The U.S. did not want to see communism in the United States, as it would later see .
 This is what led to the invasion of Iraq which we are no longer engaged in. This is why we are not engaged in the war in Iraq, he says . This is the reason for the invasion, he adds .
 The fall of the great Soviet Union did not end until the fall of Berlin Wall in the 80’s . The fall was not the end of the Soviet Union but the end was the end to the Berlin Wall .
 "Thirteen days of despair only was a small chapter in the large book of the story of our fight against communism," says President Obama . "We are not going to give up our hope," says Obama .