 Since the end of the Cold War our policy toward Cuba has remained static, reactive and focused on responding to developments following the demise of Fidel Castro . Cuba's people are changing the way the U.S. policy toward the island nation has been changed in recent years .
 The U.S. should be an active supporter of the process of democratization for one of our closest hemispheric neighbors, the authors say . That policy does not advance or promote the best interests of the United States or the Cuban people, they say .
 The recommendations chart a new direction for U.S.-Cuba policy, one that is guided by a deep understanding of the Cuban people, the impact of five decades of totalitarian rule .
 Our recommendations are a break from the past because they seek to adapt to the realities of the present, which require a measured and incremental path that allows for adjustments along the way based on empirical evidence and evolving dynamics in Cuba .
 The path is not one that can't be assumed or applied solely by the United States . The U.S. cannot assume or apply solely to the U.K.
 Cuba’s present rulers, or their successors, must understand that changes to U.S. policy, must be taken to account for Cuba's future prosperity and stability . It requires Cuba's present rulers to understand that the incorporation of grassroots reforms is essential .
 The Cuban American National Foundation stands ready to contribute in support of a new U.S.-Cuba policy that advances the interests and security of the United States .
 From 1959 until about 1964, U.S. policy was centered on regime change . From 1959 to 1964, United States policy was based on regime changes .
 Administration of President John F Kennedy was focused on removing Fidel Castro from power . U.S. provided support for the Bay of Pigs invasion and approved a series of covert actions under Operation Mongoose .
 The pact brought an end to the policy of regime change and as a result a policy of containment was instituted . The pact remained in place until the presidency of Jimmy Carter in the late 1970’s .
 President Carter quickly embarked on a policy of rapprochement towards Cuba . The effort complemented his attempt at extending a new kind of détente with the Soviet Union and its allies .
 Despite efforts to reach out to Cuba’s leadership, efforts proved fruitless . Cuba increased its presence and military cooperation with the Soviet Union in various countries in Africa including Angola and Zaire .
 Subsequent administrations have limited U.S.-Cuba policy to little beyond posturing for domestic electoral purposes or responding to Castro’s continuing efforts to undermine United States international objectives . The Cuban government continues to try to undermine the United States .
 President Reagan signed Radio Marti into existence and invaded Grenada where Cuban troops were stationed . His administration’s efforts were mainly punctuated by a return to the containment strategy of the Cold War .
 President Bill Clinton’s executive action under that administration was overwhelmingly characterized by cautious reaction to legislative initiatives and unforeseen international events . During that administration, there was an attempt to increase people-to-people contact .
 The 1994 Cuban rafter crisis and resulting wet foot-dry foot policy led to the signing of the Helms-Burton bill . The bill codified significant portions of Cuba policy, such as the United States economic embargo, into U.S. law .
 Under the Administration of George W Bush, Cuba policy was defined by the desire to placate perceived domestic political interests, leading to the enactment of policies that lacked strategic thought or benefit . Cuba’s increasingly influential role in Latin America and its active support for anti-American leadership in the
 Bush Administration cut off vital Cuban-American remittances and flow of aid to Cuba's opposition groups in 2003 . The Bush Administration instead enacted regulations which had the converse effect of cutting off the flow of humanitarian aid .
 The Bush Administration often took to the bully pulpit to criticize the Cuban regime . However, its actions were not consistent with the rhetoric .
 The establishment of entities such as the Commission on Assistance for a Free Cuba 6 and government positions like that of a Cuba Transition Coordinator were ill-defined and directed . Instead, they were merely symbolic gestures with no meaningful effect on precipitating democratic change on-island .
 With ailing figurehead, a cadre of aging hard-liners thwarting reform, and a mounting sense of desperation among a Cuban population . The results of the long term absence of a forward-looking U.S.-Cuba policy may soon become painfully obvious .
 Events may thrust the Cuban people into chaos, forcing the U.S. to take unilateral actions . Rather than a peaceful democratic transition we all want, events may thrust Cuba into chaos . The United States may take unilateral action in securing its own borders .
 White House transcript of President’s remarks establishing Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba, October 10, 2003 . 3 laying the groundwork for a peaceful transition to democracy via support for the development of a strong and vibrant independent civil society in Cuba .
 President Obama and Vice-President Biden have made it abundantly clear that there will not be any unilateral lifting of the embargo absent significant moves on the part of the Castro regime towards freedom and democracy .
 The Cuban American National Foundation concurs with the Obama Administration’s position . The Cuban-American National Foundation agrees with Obama Administration .
 To lift the embargo without evidence of irrevocable change in Cuba would be tantamount to sentencing the Cuban people to the continuation of the deprivation of economic, civil and human freedoms they have endured for the past five decades . It would continue to negatively affect the long term strategic interests of the
 A change in course can only be achieved by bolstering the resolve of the Cuban people so that they may achieve the prosperity, social and political stability that the Castro regime is incapable of delivering .
 Castro government will not unilaterally and freely initiate a path toward democratic rule, Castro government says . Nevertheless, the Castro government is not unilaterally seeking a path to democratic rule . Castro government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 External and, more importantly, internal factors are critical in creating that demand for change . External factors are key in creating the demand for a change in the United States .
 The Cuban people, supported by U.S. policy, must be empowered to speak out, organize, and peacefully enact democratic change . Cuban people must speak out and organize, according to the Cuban people .
 The Cuban American National Foundation believes that the President has the authority and prerogative to initiate the necessary changes in U.S.-Cuba policy within the parameters provided by current statutes .
 United States-Cuba policy should focus on advancing U.S. interests in the region and empowering the Cuban people in their quest for democracy and prosperity . The Cuban people should be empowered to achieve their dreams of democracy, prosperity .
 These two objectives are intricately intertwined and one cannot be individually accomplished without the other . These objectives must be intertwined in order to achieve their objectives .
 The United States has direct national and security interests in promoting a peaceful transition to democracy in Cuba . The U.S. has a role in promoting the peaceful transition in Cuba, President Obama says .
 The resurgence of anti-American forces in the hemisphere that view Cuba as their ideological paradigm has led to increased tensions between the U.S. and several of its Latin American counterparts .
 Growing tensions between the U.S. and Venezuela and Hugo Chavez’s increasing collaboration with rogue 4 nations like Iran that are potential threats to United States national security and the overall security of the region . Most evident is that of the growing tensions .
 A stable and democratic Cuba will avoid a possible chaotic mass exodus of refugees that could cause significant disruptions in affected U.S. communities . The Cuban government will also promote lawful and controlled migration between the two nations .
 A stable, democratic and prosperous Cuba will create the benefit of a regional partner in promoting democratic values, the rule of law, international human rights, and global prosperity . Further, a stable, deteriorated Cuba will also benefit from the regional support of a stable and
 Both countries would have enhanced opportunities to cooperatively address common threats such as drug trafficking, international terrorism, organized crime, human smuggling, and environmental degradation . Both nations would have opportunities to cooperate with each other .
 Such benefits and interests have not and will not be attained by maintaining the status quo. Such benefits must be achieved by maintaining a status quo, he says .
 U.S.-Cuba policy must empower the Cuban people by encouraging independence from the State, self-sufficiency, and entrepreneurship, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A vibrant civil society is the cornerstone to any successful democracy8 . Civil society is a precursor to a peaceful and lasting democratic transition, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 By shifting U.S. focus onto the Cuban people, our commitment to them will match the robust and direct support previously extended to people suffering under repressive regimes, such as those in Eastern Europe, South Africa, Chile .
 Vaclav Havel’s Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia and labor union movements like Solidarity in Poland gave rise to the creation of independent civil society groups . Recommendations Increase Support for the Development of Cuban Civil Society .
 In Eastern Europe under communism, civil society groups built islands of independent thought and action . They created popular movements that were well organized and became effective purveyors of truth and information .
 Without the support of nations like the United States, their triumph may have been delayed . Their success was largely a result of their brave and determined efforts and a confluence of both internal and external factors .
 The Cuban dissident 7 CNN, April 10, 2008, United States terror report cites Venezuela, Iran 8 International Peace Academy, April 2005, Civil Society and Democratic Transitions in the DRC, Burundi and Rwanda, Mashood Issaka and Batabiha Bushoki 5 movement
 Serbia was critical in the late 1990’s and early 2000 in supporting efforts to topple Slobodan Milošević . It also infused opposition groups such as Otpor and Democratic Opposition of Serbia with significant direct aid .
 U.S. government assistance to these groups increased from $10 million in 1999 to $31 million in 2000, the year Milošević was ousted .
 Much of these funds were distributed by the United States Agency for International Development Office of Transition Initiatives . Much of the funds were in the form of direct cash assistance .
 USAID-based assistance for democracy promotion in Cuba is crippled by several factors . The most critical is the banning of cash aid or remittances to opposition groups on island .
 In 1997, a mid-level Clinton Administration official arbitrarily imposed a ban on cash aid claiming he was fearful the funds might be used to try to assassinate Fidel Castro . The ban was lifted by the Clinton Administration .
 The obviously flawed thinking that led to this department-level policy has gone unchallenged through the last two presidential administrations, even though Administration officials have recognized the counterproductive nature of such a policy .
 Civil society organizations are critical in representing mass interests and affecting government decisionmaking . First, once a democratic transition begins to take place, civil society organizations must represent mass interests .
 These organizations act as important conduits for the interpretation of information controlled and disseminated by the new government to the general populace . Secondly, these organizations also exert some influence over the public .
 They are critical actors in helping to implement the decisions, policy and directives of a government embarking on a democratic process . And finally, they are critical players in the process of implementing the decisions and policy .
 Cuba’s independent civil society and opposition groups, as well as the Cuban populace in general, are in dire need of our support, says the Cuban government . Cuba's citizens are critical to pressing for democratic change and for ensuring an enduring democratic transition, she says .
 Cuban-Americans are in the best position to assess the needs of Cubans on the island . They can most efficiently direct essential remittances to them, experts say .
 Cuban people will become more independent from the State in meeting basic needs and in creating and developing civil society . Not only will such a policy provide increased humanitarian aid but it will also permit the Cuban people to become independent, he says .
 An increase in the level of remittances is critical at this juncture due to the impact of last season’s hurricanes and the dire humanitarian situation on the ground in Cuba . The situation in Cuba is dire .
 In 2004, Bush Administration restricted personal hygiene items, seeds, fishing equipment, and soap-making equipment from allowable humanitarian gift parcel items .
 The real effect of these measures has been to deprive Cuban-Americans of the ability to send basic needs items to their family members in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The humanitarian crisis on the ground in Cuba today in the wake of last season’s hurricanes makes the reversal of these additional restrictions all the more critical at this stage .
 The internal ban imposed in 1997 has remained and is perhaps the greatest obstacle to delivering efficient and substantive support to Cuba’s opposition and independent civil society groups . Cuba's internal ban has remained since 1997, but remains an obstacle to democracy .
 Eliminating this ban would allow Cuban groups to receive direct aid in a much more expeditious manner . It would also curtail instances of abuse and misappropriation of funding that has been alleged with some U.S.-based NGOs receiving USAID grants .
 USAID should implement and enforce a cost-share requirement for all U.S.-based non-profits seeking to obtain funding for Cuba democracy programs .
 Many of USAID’s recipient organizations, the majority of which are located in Miami, have relied almost exclusively on government grants . USAID or NED is a major source of funding for many of the organizations .
 Grantees spend majority of government funds on salaries and overhead costs here in the U.S. grantees use little in direct support of Cuban groups . This has created a situation where many grantees spend the majority of the government funds .
 USAID should allow sub-granting to Cuba-based independent civil society groups in Cuba by USAID-Cuba grantee organizations . The U.S. should allow and encourage sub--granted to independent civil rights groups, USAID says .
 The process of sub-granting to independent groups in Cuba will truly help build organic NGOs in Cuba . It is a vital part of establishing a functioning civil society that can take on the grass roots responsibilities of a democratic transition .
 It also provides for a more effective system of support delivery that would allow opposition or civil society groups to grow and carry out their programs .
 Require USAID-Cuba grantees to spend at least 70% of the funds in programs directed to aid Cuban Civil Society . Require U.S. aid to Cuban civil society to be given to Cuba .
 A minimum of 70% of government funding received by grantee recipients should be dedicated to direct aid to the Cuban people . The Cuban people should be given more of the government's budget to help them, writes CNN.com .
 Promote the development and growth of microenterprises in Cuba by permitting private micro-loans . Promote microenterprise growth by allowing private microloans in Cuba .
 The growth of Cuba’s independent economic sector is vital to the growth of an independent civil society as a whole . The growth is critical to preparing and training Cubans for a post-Castro, democratic era .
 Permitting Cuban-Americans and others, under license, to send cash, building materials, agricultural implements and services to independent, private entrepreneurs not affiliated with the regime would have an indelible and immediate impact on the growth of Cuba’s independent economic sector and civil society .
 During the Carter and Clinton Administrations, people-to-people exchanges to Cuba were expanded . People-To-People exchanges were expanded for different strategic reasons .
 In 1977, President Jimmy Carter announced the opening of general license travel to Cuba as a sign of rapprochement . Jimmy Carter made the announcement in 1977 . In 1977 the opening was announced as a result of a thaw in Cuba .
 In 2004, the Bush Administration further restricted Cuban-American humanitarian gift parcels, prohibiting the inclusion of such items as toothpaste, soap, and clothing .
 Rather than opening up avenues for the delivery of aid and information, we have managed to make it increasingly more difficult to get help to even those brave dissidents who risk their lives . The UK has managed to open up avenues to help the people in need of aid .
 The Cuban people have been limited to what aid is allowed to be sent in gift parcels to the Cuban people . A prime example of this is the restriction placed on limiting the types of aid given in gift gifts .
 Communist regimes have frequently used the deprivation of food and basic necessities as a way to control the masses . The deprivation of basic necessities is often used as a means of control by the regime .
 The Serbian regime under Milosevic, the Iraqi regime under Sadaam Hussein, the North Korean regime under Kim Jong-Il, and the Cuban regime under the reign of Fidel and Raul Castro .
 In Cuba, the black market for goods and services has become increasingly important . Cuba's black market is increasingly important in the country's economy .
 Following last season's hurricanes, the regime’s inability to provide enough to meet even the most basic demands has become more evident .
 U.S. policy should allow for direct support to the Cuban people, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba should be able to meet its basic needs, he says .
 Purposeful travel to Cuba is also an important element in transferring news and information as well as providing a means to deliver direct aid and support .
 Purposeful travel aims to put Cubans in contact with those interested in helping the development of an independent Cuban civil society . It encourages the type of exchange that is mutually beneficial and free of State control and manipulation .
 Cuban-American family members are limited to delivering humanitarian aid to the island . The measures have limited the ability for Cuban-Americans to deliver humanitarian aid and act as important conduits for objective news .
 Cuban-Americans are undoubtedly our greatest ambassadors of freedom to the Cuban people . Now, more than ever, we need to provide effective vehicles of support and communication, says Cuban-American .
 "We believe it is important to ensure that safeguards are in place to limit the abuse by individuals who may utilize the accessibility of frequent travel to Cuba for illicit purposes that circumvent U.S. law"
 Support for the Cuban People, Humanitarian Support, Academic Study, and Cultural Exchange . Support for Cuba's people is part of the U.S. support for Cuba .
 Encouraging and increasingly purposeful people-to-people exchanges promote the ability to exchange information in a way that is beneficial to the development of Cuba’s independent civil society .
 The ability for U.S. institutions to travel to Cuba to provide support and training is critical in laying the groundwork for a civil society that is equipped to take on the responsibilities of an open and democratic system .
 Western broadcasts into the former Eastern European bloc were significant in delivering a message of hope and solidarity . Western broadcasts helped deliver a message and solidarity in the former Soviet Union .
 They provided objective news to those living under the cloak of communist censorship . They provided a vehicle for objective news and information to those under the . cloak of censorship .
 Radio Free Europe was perhaps one of the most successful examples of how the free flow of news and information can have an indelible impact on supporting a transition to democracy . Radio Free European is perhaps the best example of how a free press can have a positive impact on a democracy transition .
 RFE's programming content focused on issues that pointed out the clear contradictions of communist practices with the exercise of individual freedoms . RFE’s programming content focuses on issues of communism and individual freedom .
 The discussion of topics ranged from the negative experiences of farmers with agricultural collectivization to those attempting to exercise their right to practice a religion .
 Radio Free Europe boasted a huge audience throughout the Eastern bloc . RFE played a critical role in “bringing down at least three party leaders and was instrumental in sustaining the Solidarity trade union when it was forced underground .
 It would be a huge effort for police to control the channels you get on TV or the phone numbers you are allowed to dial . Police say it would be huge effort to control channels, numbers and numbers .
 Radio Marti was established by President Reagan in 1983 at the urging of this institution’s founder and former Chairman, Jorge Mas Canosa, Jorge Canosa . The institution began transmitting a signal to Cuba in 1985 .
 The purpose was to emulate the work of RFE and VOA in the communist bloc by providing a source of news and information to the Cuban people . VOA and RFE were in communist bloc .
 The Cuban regime has never been able to transmit to a wide audience because the Cuban regime expends extensive resources in blocking its signal . The U.S. has failed to counter by employing technological advances in trying to overcome the jamming .
 Radio and TV transmissions to Cuba have a critical role to play in helping to precipitate democratic change . Radio and television transmissions have a crucial role to help precipitate change in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A lack of proper oversight has allowed the Office of Cuba Broadcasting to veer off course . Yet through successive Administrations, there has been a lack of oversight .
 The General Accounting Office recently documented some of the serious flaws that have led listenership ratings in Cuba to drop from a once impressive 70% to today’s dismal 3% figure .
 Cuban dissidents who represent an umbrella group called the “Agenda for a Transition” recently documented their own complaints about the content of programming and the quality of leadership at the Marti’s .
 Change at Radio and TV Marti is needed . As the recent GAO Report explains, change is needed.
 These critical communication tools must return to their original purpose of disseminating truthful and balanced information and promoting democratic ideals to the people of Cuba, Cuba . The Cuban government must use these tools to promote democratic ideals .
 Radio and TV Marti are essential to achieve freedom in Cuba . Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe played a key role in delivering freedom to Eastern Europe . The U.S. government has supported Radio and Marti in Cuba for decades .
 At one point nearly 70% of the Cuban population tuned in to Radio Marti . According to OCB reports, at one point almost 70% tuned in .
 For the last several years the audience has been diminishing due to programming and management deficiencies . However, for the past several years, audiences have been diminishing .
 Now is the time to act to save and improve this immensely valuable tool in promoting democracy, says CNN.com editor John Sutter .
 The U.S. should allow for the improvement, upgrading, and installation of telecommunications equipment that will facilitate increased telephone traffic between the United States and Cuba . The United States government should allow the upgrade, upgrading and installation .
 Currently, calls to Cuba are subject to some of the highest international rates . Cuba is home to the highest rates in the world .
 We need to extend and improve all methods of direct communication that undermine Cuban regime-imposed censorship . Cuba needs to expose Cubans to news and information from abroad, says Cuban leader .
 Reestablish semi-annual migration talks . Reestablish monthly migration talks. Reestablish bilateral and multilateral diplomatic efforts . Re-establish semi annual migration talks in the U.S.
 The Bush Administration suspended semi-annual migration talks with the Cuban regime in 2004 . In 2004, the Bush administration suspended the talks .
 The migration talks allowed for an opportunity to broach a wide range of issues that went beyond the discussion of visa allocation . The talks were also a chance to discuss a range of other issues .
 The limited contact that has existed since then has been counterproductive in several ways, he says . "The limited contact" has been "counterproductive in many ways," he adds .
 It has negatively impacted our ability to influence events, however limited that influence might be, it has closed down one of the few formal conduits of information that existed, and it has sent the wrong message to the international community . It has also sent a wrong message, it says .
 Restrictions on CUBINT travel within the United States, contingent upon the Cuban government doing the same with USINT personnel inside Cuba . The Cuban government must also comply with the U.S. Travel restrictions .
 In 2004, the Bush Administration imposed restrictions on the travel of CUBINT and Cuba U.N. Mission personnel to a 25-mile radius around their respective offices .
 The Cuban regime reciprocated by limiting USINT personnel movements to a 25mile radius around USINT in Havana . USINT was limited to 25 miles around the Cuban regime .
 The unintended consequence of this action has been that it has severely impacted the ability of USINT personnel to engage with the Cuban people, particularly those in the democratic opposition outside of the capital . The unintended consequences of the action have been .
 Their interaction with members of the Cuban opposition and with the Cuban population is limited to those residing in Havana .
 This has resulted in the inability to provide adequate analysis of the situation on the ground . This has led to the failure of the government to provide an adequate analysis on the situation in the country, says CNN.com .
 In order to provide a powerful incentive to reformers within the regime to push for change, i.e. i.i. The regime will provide a strong incentive for reformers in the country . iReporters will be able to reach out to those who want change .
 Government officials and members of the Cuban military who have not participated in crimes against the Cuban people must understand that the U.S. encourages participation in a post-transition government .
 Such a clear message of support and friendship from the U.S. government will undoubtedly assist in strengthening any existing attempts at reform and promoting the emergence of new efforts .
 Encourage international cooperation in support of Cuban civil society . Encourage, and develop international cooperation, with Cuba's civil society.
 Multilateral efforts by the international community will serve as additional sources of support to the Cuban people in building a civil society . The Cuban people are building their own civil society, the government says .
 Such cooperative international efforts resulted in successful peaceful transitions to democracy in Eastern Europe, South Africa, and Chile . Such cooperation international efforts have led to successful peaceful transition in those countries .