 President John F Kennedy reacted with a quarantine of all offensive military equipment being shipped to Cuba . President Kennedy reacted to the discovery of the Cuban military equipment .
 When the crisis ended, the Soviet Union had agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba and in a separate, secret agreement, the United States had agreed with the Soviets to remove their nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 With no line between Washington and the Soviet Union in 1962, negotiations were difficult and complex . Negotiations were difficult with much distrust on both sides of the border .
 Not until an agreement on the night of October 27, did the two countries step back from the brink of nuclear war . Not until that night, the two nations agreed to avoid nuclear war.
 The last day of negotiations was fraught with several unexpected events that nearly ended in tragedy . The negotiations were fraught with unexpected events .
 What transpired during that last week of intense negotiations is still little known by the American public . That day thereafter would be known as Black Saturday .
 The U.S. response and subsequent negotiations were led by President Kennedy after meetings with his Executive Committee of the National Security Council, ExComm .
 From the Soviet side, decisions were made by Premier Khrushchev and members of the Kremlin\u2019s inner circle . The Soviet Union was ruled by the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Adlai Stevenson, who was then U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, went before the U.N. Security Council to explain the crisis .
 Stevenson brought the case to the United Nations in 2007 . The United Nations gave little satisfactory response to the charges brought by Stevenson .
 One group had always wanted an excuse to go into the U.S. and wipe out the map . Others wanted to get rid of the map and use it to remove it .
 President Kennedy dispatched the USS Randolph and 11 U.S. Navy destroyers to Cuban waters on October 22 . Their last meeting on the evening of October 27 may have averted nuclear war .
 Unbeknownst to the U.S., the Soviets had sent a flotilla of four Foxtrot Class, diesel-electric submarines to Cuba on October 1st in support of the missile shipments . Their job was to enforce a blockade of Soviet ships .
 Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson, piloting a U-2 over eastern Cuba, was shot down by a Soviet S-75 surface-to-air missile . With the U.S. ships and Soviet submarines in such close proximity, the situation escalated dangerously .
 The United States knew that the SAMs were manned by Russian crews and therefore concluded that Khrushchev must have ordered it . The U.S. knew that SAMs had been manned by Russia crews and concluded that it must have been ordered by the Soviet leader .
 Years later, it was revealed that the Russian missile crew had acted on its own and that the Soviet Premier had been furious over their actions .
 President Kennedy said, “We are now in an entirely new ball game.\u201c They\u2019ve fired the first shot.” That same day, an even deadlier situation developed between a U.S. Navy destroyer and a Soviet submarine .
 The USS Randolph detected the Soviet submarine B-59\u00a0 near Cuba . The submarine was detected by the USS Randolph in Cuba . It was the first time the submarine had been detected .
 Following standard procedure for the Navy during those cold war encounters, the destroyer dropped small, practice depth charges such as those used in training .
 Those held small amounts of explosives and were not designed to cause damage . The explosives were not intended to cause harm .
 The purpose of the small depth charges was to force the diesel submarine to the surface for positive identification . The small depth charge was used to make contact with the submarine and force it to surface .
 B-59 was submerged for some time with its air conditioning system out and with no source of fresh air . The plane was submerged with no air conditioning and no fresh air on board .
 The captain and the crew were exhausted and suffering from oxygen deprivation . Captain and crew suffered oxygen deprivation and were suffering from exhaustion .
 There had been no radio contact with Moscow since they submerged and they did not know if war had started . They had been submerged for more than a week .
 Captain Valentin Savitsky ordered his crew to arm its nuclear torpedo and get ready to launch it at the Cony . With the submarine’s condition bad and deteriorating, the commander ordered the submarine to arm the torpedo .
 Each of the four Soviet submarines carried nuclear torpedoes . If that had happened, the 15 kiloton nuclear warhead, about the size of the Hiroshima bomb, would have obliterated the Cony . The U.S. would have probably started a nuclear war with the Soviets .
 A nuclear torpedo could only be launched by the submarine commander with the approval of the next senior officer, who was usually the Political Officer . The Political Officer is usually the political Officer .
 The B-59 carried the Flotilla Commander, Vasily Arkhipov onboard, and because of that, all three senior officers had to approve the launching of the weapon . After the political officer concurred with Savitsky's order to launch, Arkhpov refused .
 At nine o'u2019clock at night, with all their hatches open to bring in fresh air and with their diesel engines recharging the depleted batteries, Captain Savitsky glared at the Cony . At nine p.m. on the night, all the hatches were
 The destroyer had put its spotlight on the submarine further aggravating its skipper . The submarine had been on the surface of the ocean at the time .
 Before the Cony could establish communications with the sub, a Navy P2V patrol plane dropped explosive flares to activate its onboard cameras . The Cony was shot down by a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 At that moment, Savitsky, fearing he was under attack, turned and pointed his torpedo tubes at Cony . The incident occurred at the time of the attack on the Russian leader in Russia .
 An officer aboard the destroyer was able to get the sub's attention, assuring them that they were not under attack . The sub was quickly able to tell the destroyer that they had not been attacked .
 At that point, the submarine closed its torpedo doors and resumed course . The submarine then resumed its course and went on course .
 The destroyer asked if they could assist the submarine in any way . In an effort to make amends, the destroyer asked to assist them . The submarine responded .
 Captain Savitsky asked for some fresh bread and cigarettes which were quickly sent over to the sub . The sub was quickly sent back to the ship .
 President Kennedy was able to reach a tentative agreement with Khrushchev on that same Saturday night . Not until 40 years later, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, was the crew able to learn just how dangerous their encounter was .
 The United States would remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey and all of the Soviet missiles would be dismantled and removed from Cuba . The U.S. would remove its Jupiter missiles and remove all of its Soviet missiles from the Soviet Union .
 The United States would not make a public statement about the missiles in Turkey, but privately agreed to do that . The U.S. would not comment on the missiles, but would privately agree to do .
 The White House portrayed the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba as a victory for the President\u2019s tough stance in the face of Soviet aggression . After the crisis was over, Theodore Sorenson, Special Counsel to the President referred to that October 27th as Black Saturday .
 His refusal to approve the launch of a nuclear torpedo probably prevented a nuclear war . His refusal of approval of a nuke launch probably prevented nuclear war, he says .
 The inaugural Future of Life Award was presented to Arkhipovs family by the Institute of Engineering and Technology . President Kennedy was tested by events of October 1962 .
 Credit for the peaceful resolution of the crisis goes to both the President and Premier Khrushchev . Credit for peaceful resolution goes to President and Prime Minister of USSR .
 Both sides learned from the crisis and several far-reaching events occurred as a result . They both learned from each other's lessons from their mistakes .
 The first Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in 1963 and the first between Washington and Moscow was installed that year . The first nuclear test ban treaty was signed .
 In October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union stood face to face in a diplomatic standoff that nearly ended in nuclear war . And we are all mortal.
 With no “hot line” between Washington and the Soviet Union in 1962, the negotiations were difficult and complex, with much distrust on both sides . With no hot line, there was no "hot line" between the two countries in 1962 .
 What transpired during that last week of intense negotiations is still little known by the American public . What transpired in that week of negotiations still unknown by the U.S.
 From the Soviet side, decisions were made by Premier Khrushchev and members of the Kremlin’s inner circle . Decision was made by Soviet leaders, including the Soviet Union .
 #mc_embed_signup {background#fff; clear:left; font:14px Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif; } /* Add your own Mailchimp form style overrides in your site stylesheet or in this style block .
 We recommend moving this block and the preceding CSS link to the HEAD of your HTML file . We also recommend moving the HTML link and the CSS link from the HTML file to the head of the page .
 Others counseled the President to use diplomacy to get Khrushchev to remove the missiles . Others argued that the President should have used diplomacy .
 The most confidential information was passed back and forth between Ambassador Dobrynin and the President’s brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy .
 In the midst of the negotiations, the most dangerous confrontation took take place on the high seas .
 President Kennedy had dispatched the USS Randolph and 11 U.S. Navy destroyers to Cuban waters on October 22 .
 Their job was to enforce a blockade of Soviet ships and turn them back . They were in charge of enforcing a naval blockade of the Soviet ships .
 The Soviets sent a flotilla of four Foxtrot Class, diesel-electric submarines to Cuba on October 1st in support of the missile shipments . Unbeknownst to the U.S., the Soviets had sent the vessels to Cuba .
 Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson, piloting a U-2 over eastern Cuba, was shot down by a Soviet S-75 surface-to-air missile . Anderson was the first to be shot down in Cuba by Soviet missiles .
 That same day, an even deadlier situation developed between a U.S. Navy destroyer and a Soviet submarine . The incident occurred during the Second World War II .
 With the submarine’s condition bad and deteriorating, the commander, Valentin Savitsky, ordered his crew to arm its nuclear torpedo and get ready to launch it at the Cony . The submarine's condition deteriorated and the crew was ordered to arm the torpedo .
 The 15 kiloton nuclear warhead, about the size of the Hiroshima bomb, would have obliterated the Cony . A retaliation by the United States that would have probably started a nuclear war would have likely started a war .
 History can never truly explain the irony of what happened next aboard B-59 . The irony is that history can never explain what happened .
 Arkhpov refused Savitsky’s order to launch, refusing to launch . ArkHPov refused to launch the rocket, which was launched by the political officer .
 He was finally able to convince Captain Savitsky to bring the submarine to the surface . He finally managed to convince him to raise the submarine .
 At nine o’clock at night, with all their hatches open to bring in fresh air and with their diesel engines recharging the depleted batteries, Captain Savitsky glared at the Cony . The Cony was the last ship to leave the station in Russia .
 An officer aboard the destroyer was able to get the sub’s attention, assuring them that they were not under attack . The sub was quickly able to tell the destroyer that they had not been attacked by the sub .
 Not until after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the crew was able to learn just how dangerous their encounter had been . Not until 40 years later, they learned of the dangers of their encounter .
 President Kennedy was able to reach a tentative agreement with Khrushchev on Saturday night . President Kennedy reached a tentative deal with the Soviet leader .
 The White House portrayed the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba as a victory for the President’s tough stance in the face of Soviet aggression . The withdrawal was portrayed as a triumph for President Obama's tough stance .
 The crisis was over, Theodore Sorenson, Special Counsel to the President, referred to that October 27th as “Black Saturday’s ‘Black Saturday.”
 President Kennedy gained international acclaim for his patient, steadfast, handling of the crisis . President Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 The inaugural Future of Life Award was presented to Arkhipov’s family by the Institute of Engineering and Technology . The award is the first ever given to the family of the deceased .
 The first Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in 1963 and the first ‘hotline’ between Washington and Moscow was installed that year . The first "hotline" was installed in 1963 after the treaty was signed .
 Sadly, that last point would be driven home just six short months later . Sadly, it would be a reminder of the tragedy of the year .