 In this compromise, the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw all missiles and the United States pledged not to invade Cuba . The United States agreed to pull missiles from Cuba in return for a U.S. invasion .
 The man pulling out the 'teeth is Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader who rose to power in 1953 following the death of Stalin .
 He was responsible for the tensed relations with the United States on the Soviet side . He remained in power throughout the Cold War and was mainly responsible for relations with America .
 Fidel Castro is the leader of the Communist Cuban government after his successful revolution in 1959 . The man having his ‘teeth’ pulled is Fidel Castro .
 The star on Castro’s shirt represents the white star on the flag of Cuba . Castro's shirt is also the star on Cuba's national flag .
 The author most likely supported Kennedy and the U.S. stand against Communist views and nuclear war . Although from the surface it seems as if the cartoon is un-biased, the dialogue of Khrushchev being conveyed in this cartoon shows that the author most probably supported Kennedy .
 He claims that this hurts him more, as he had spent money on aid for Cuba and Castro . He says he is losing money he spent on aid given to the Castro brothers .
 The despair on both men’s faces shows that Communism, just like the countries these two men represent, will soon diminish . In addition to the despair on their faces, both men's faces show that Communism is soon to diminish .
 The solution to this problem is non-violence and peace between the U.S. and the USSR . The end of Communist views that negate democracy is the solution . Non-violence is the only solution .
 The launch of the Sputnik, the world's first satellite to reach orbit, by the Soviet Union on October 4th, 1957 . The issue being represented here is the launch of a Soviet Union satellite .
 This was a major development for the science field, especially in finding how to send more objects and people into space to discover the unknown . This was the first time a spacecraft has been launched into space .
 Sputnik launched during the height of the Cold War, the Soviet Union's success . The American public and federal government envied the launch and vowed to have the first man step on the moon . The Apollo 11 mission was the first manned mission to the moon in 1969 .
 The man to the side represents U.S. science and organizations like NASA that were pulling along many unnecessary funds with them that were slowing them down . NASA was pulling along unnecessary funds that were . slowing them up .
 The man representing U.S. science has a rope aroung his neck like a racing horse, pulling along government secrecy and under-developed areas like education . Similarly, in this image, the man representing United States science is pulled along a rope .
 The author of this cartoon most likely was an American citizen who strongly believed we should be side-by-side, competing with the Soviet Union and making our own developments .
 He or she might have also believed that our pace in the 'space race' was slowing down, and we needed to start racing again . He may have also thought that the pace in our space race was slowing .
 The 'Red Scare' encouraged by people like Senator McCarthy, and focus on more important issues like education and science . Additionally, it was important to stop the Red Scare, and instead focus on science and education .