 The essay finds that Cold War scholars described Khrushchev's decision making as calculated, reasonable, and justifiable . It finds that post-Cold War scholars describe his decisions as risky .
 U.S., Soviet and Eastern European sources have been declassified . Such differing assessments are likely due to the greater material available to post Cold War scholars .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had his nation’s military deploy nuclear tipped missiles to Cuba . The missiles were deployed by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 After a U.S. imposed naval blockade of Cuba, negotiations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States ended . The crisis ended after a United States imposed naval blockage of Cuba .
 It was a peaceful settlement that primarily involved the removal of missiles from Cuban soil, removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey, and a United States non-invasion pledge of Cuba .
 His decisions have been continually debated, especially whether he made a sound decision to deploy the missiles in the first place .
 Historians writing from the 1960s to the 1980s appear to believe that the USSR’s move in placing missiles on Cuban soil was relatively calculated, reasonable and justifiable .
 Scholars also believed that the Soviet Union’s assessment was that such a deployment would not result in a strong reaction from the United States. Further highlighting this belief of caution .
 Khrushchev’s decision was meant to provide the USSR with a strategic military advantage and to maintain the status quo of other nations not having nuclear weapons .
 The assessment of Khrushchev’s decision-making drastically changes following the end of the Cold War in the early 1990s . However, the assessment of the former Soviet leader's decisions drastically changes .
 Scholars began to show that the Soviet Union’s deployment decision was risky, especially since there is recently unearthed evidence to suggest that the Soviets believed it would prompt a strong American reaction .
 Khrushchev may have been emotional in defending Cuba, especially since he suffered humiliation by having the U.S. place missiles in Turkey, directly pointed at the Soviet Union . Further lending credence to this idea is that Secretary of Defense may be emotional .
 The USSR and the Secretary’s decision-making are seen as synonymous within this paper . Unless the author pointed out otherwise and with Secretary Khrushchev being a clear and undisputed leader of the Soviet Union, the author of this paper's article said otherwise .
 Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles on Cuba in 1962 was a much riskier move than previously understood by historians of the Cold War . The available evidence shows that the decision was a riskier and emotional move than previous understood .
 From the 1960s to 1980s, many scholarly articles indicate that Khrushchev’s decision to deploy nuclear missiles was not a particularly radical move . The move was not particularly radical, according to some of the articles .
 One author implies that the missile’s presence in Cuba was a natural non-aggressive military decision from the Soviet Union . After all, USSR missile placement in Europe already threatened Western European nations with little resistance . One author suggests that the USSR placed missiles in Europe in Europe .
 Khrushchev's decision for USSR missile placement in Cuba, which threatened the U.S. to be any different . The decision was made in response to the threat posed by the United States .
 Khrushchev might have decided to deploy missiles to Cuba to counterbalance the U.S. weapons in Europe . This was further supported by then National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy . Bundy believed that the missile deployment might have been in response to U.K. forces in Cuba .
 The USSR believed the U.S. would also see the deployment as a moderate move and unworthy of reaction . Further reinforcing the belief that the Soviet Union acted cautiously was the belief, prior to the crisis .
 From the Soviet Union’s perspective, they believed that the United States would not interfere based on a lack of American actions during and after the disastrous U.S. sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion . The Soviet Union thought that the American invasion would not be involved based on the lack of
 During the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union saw the United States as reluctant to commit its own forces . The U.S. did not provide air support as originally planned for the invasion .
 The United States did not interfere with USSR military assistance to Cuba . Even after the failed invasion, the U.S. didn't interfere with military assistance .
 Large shipments of tanks and artillery accompanied by several thousand technicians and military adviser” were sent to Cuba . Even though military assistance was relatively substantial, it was not all the military assistance .
 An Analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior, World Politics 16, no. 16, is published on October 16, 2012 .
 The USSR would deploy their nuclear missiles to the island . The Wilson Quarterly 6, no. 149, was published in the Wilson Quarterly .
 The USSR partly made their decision to deploy nuclear missiles based on seemingly sound history of U.S.-Cuban relations .
 For any reaction to the Americans, a multitude of events would have to occur, and, by then, nuclear missiles would be firmly employed . The U.S. would then use nuclear missiles if any reaction was made .
 American decision-making, especially on such a significant matter, would take time . U.S. decision making is difficult, and actual implementation of such decisions would take a long time, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It was immaterial whether Khrushchev knowingly committed a radical or non-radical decision to deploy missiles to Cuba, since the U.S. would simply be too slow in reacting . The United States would simply have been too slow to react .
 One author writes that the Soviet Union decided to place nuclear missiles on Cuban soil because it provided them with an advantage in nuclear parity that they needed . The Soviet Union placed the missiles in Cuba because of their nuclear parity advantage, he writes .
 This reinforces the idea that Secretary Khrushchev was acting relatively cautiously . If it was a significant strategic benefit, the move could be more readily classified as radical or risky as radical moves typically enjoy significantly higher rewards .
 A deployment of missiles to Cuba would have included areas of Soviet foreign policy, especially as it pertained to China at a time of strained Sino-Soviet relations . Another set of advantages for a deployment of missile missiles would have been a Soviet policy .
 The Soviets hoped that their success in Cuba would cause the Chinese to trust the Kremlin in its nuclear defense and not develop nuclear missiles . One scholar points out that the Soviets hoped their success would stop the Chinese from developing their own missiles .
 This would boost the USSR’s sense of security since China, a bordering nation to Russia, would not one day threaten the USSR with nuclear weapons . This would be a boost to the country's sense of security since China would not threaten the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets may have hoped that their missiles being stationed in Cuba would have resulted in a Western and USSR signed peace treaty denying Western Germany to develop nuclear missiles of their own in return for removal of USSR missiles from Cuba .
 In the same way as China, this would boost the USSR’s sense of security . Again, in the same described manner as China . This would be a boost to the USSR's security .
 This basic rationality of maintaining the status quo reinforces the idea that Secretary Khrushchev was acting in moderation . This is despite the fact that the Soviet leader was acting moderation .
 In a roundabout fashion, this partially falls in line with the USSR acting cautiously . The USSR acted cautiously in the 1980s and 1990s . The country is now in a state of war with Russia .
 If the Soviet Union had acted radically, it stands to reason that they would have had significant potential gains and/or significant potential losses .
 If the Soviet Union had acted reasonably, they would have had moderate gains and/or moderate potential losses . On the other hand, if they acted reasonably they would've had moderate gain or losses . The Soviet Union acted reasonably .
 The Soviet Union lost their missiles in Cuba (a moderate loss as it simply maintained the status quo of Cuba being non-nuclear) and gained moderate results in lowering Cold War tensions . The loss of missiles was a moderate loss .
 Other scholars point out that Secretary Khrushchev had won moderately favorable results . Other scholars say that Secretary Krushchev won't win the most favorable result .
 Scholars argue that fear caused the USSR to back out of its decision to deploy missiles in Cuba . They say fear prompted the decision to pull missiles out of Cuba .
 One author argues Khrushchev did not make a cautious move at all . Instead, he argues quite the opposite . The author also argues that the move was not cautious .
 The potential benefits of having missiles deployed in Cuba were very high, he argues . He argues that the risks were also qualified as being very high . In direct contrast to previous authors, he says the risks are also qualified .
 The chances of war with the United States or having to remove the missiles under American pressure were deemed higher than the potential benefits of removing the missiles .
 Welch, “Crisis Decision Making Reconsidered,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 33, no. 33, is published in the journal of conflict resolution . Welch: Crisis Decision Decision Making is a better way to make crisis decisions .
 One scholar has pointed to the length of time for nuclear weapons setup as a hindrance to the Soviet efforts . As opposed to previous discussion that centered around time being on the side of the USSR due to the American decision-making process, one scholar has said that time being spent on nuclear
 The missiles did stand a strong chance of being discovered by the Americans, due to the time/effort required for transporting and setting up such a large-scale nuclear missile deployment along with its associated equipment .
 Secretary Khrushchev believed that such a large-scale operation would be detected by Americans . Khruschev himself believed that the operation would have been detected by the Americans .
 It was only due to the pressures from the Soviet Ministry of Defense that the operation proceeded as planned . The operation was only the result of pressure from the government .
 Khrushchev’s decision to move nuclear weapons to Cuba was a risky gamble, especially due to his fears of detection . In this context, the decision was risky, especially in Cuba .
 Evidence of Khrushchev’s doubts was likely unavailable and/or classified so it is unlikely that scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s could account for this in their assessments .
 Evidence suggests many in the Soviet leadership, including Khrushchev, believed that President Kennedy would aggressively react to the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba . Evidence suggests that many in Soviet leadership .
 American officials informed Soviet leaders via private and public channels that a crisis would develop if the USSR placed nuclear missiles on Cuban soil . U.S. officials told Soviet leaders that the situation would develop in Cuba .
 Available evidence suggests Khrushchev was acting relatively recklessly, writes Andrew Hammond . He was not only making a gamble but it was a gamble that he knew he might lose, Hammond says .
 Highly classified information regarding public and private channels between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was likely unknown to scholars writing between the 1960s and the . 1980s .
 The view of the Soviet need to gain an advantage in nuclear parity is also presented in a different light by historians writing since the end of the Cold War .
 Historians explain why the Soviet Union needed the advantages, focusing primarily on the USSR losses . Unlike the authors before them, those historians use a broader context .
 Losses include the largest U.S. military buildup during peacetime and the belief that the United States would attack Cuba . Losses included the largest United States military buildup in peacetime .
 President Kennedy’s administration suffered humiliation at the proclamation that the long-believed missile gap between the USSR and the U.S. was a myth . Further adding to these losses was the humiliation from President Kennedy's administration .
 U.S. satellites could determine that they had four times the number of land-based ICBMs, in comparison to the Soviets . The USSR not only underwent this humiliating statement but it was also true .
 Secretary Khrushchev even believed that the U.S. had the upper hand domestically . Secretary Krushchev believed that the United States had the advantage domestically . The U.N. had been in the lead in the Cold War .
 This is why Secretary Khrushchev had to do something to preserve the USSR and cut back on its losses . This is the reason for the Soviet Union to cut back its losses, says historian John Avlon .
 The Americans had stationed missiles in Turkey, which had enough range to directly threaten several Soviet Union cities . The missiles were stationed in Turkey .
 The missiles became operational in April of 1962 and, likely not coincidentally, this was the same time that Secretary Khrushchev decided on deploying USSR missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev even went so far as declaring Turkey as an American puppet . This highlights his views of the United States having unfair strategic benefits well beyond its territorial limits .
 Khrushchev was adamant about supporting Castro’s government . He encouraged other Soviet bloc nations like Czechoslovakia to provide military aid to Cuba . Unlike others in the Soviet leadership who saw SovietCuban relations as a lost cause, he was adamant .
 This helps to support the argument that Secretary Khrushchev did not act in a cautious or calculated manner and may have acted more out of emotion and affinity for a new communist regime in Latin America . It may have been a reaction to the growing anti-communist movement .
 Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Missiles of November, ed. ed. Kennedy . Kennedy. Kennedy. Castro. Kennedy: Kennedy, Kennedy. Khrushvich. Kennedy’s assassination of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Scholars of today have greater access to materials unknown to scholars of the past . The fact that such important quotations come from Chinese sources indicates that scholars of today are able to access materials unknown .
 A successful deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba could change the worsening position of the USSR to its benefit in the Cold War competition with the United States .
 A deployment of missiles would aid in a worldwide buildup of the USSR’s own forces, which would address its concern of the U.S. military buildup and the missile gap . The USSR would be concerned of the American military buildup .
 USSR's concern of an invasion of Cuba could be thwarted by a nuclear deterrent . Plus, the USSR’s concern of a . invasion of . Cuba could also be thwarted, says author .
 Soviet concern of an attack on its soil could be mitigated by having a nuclear deterrent so close to the U.S. homeland . Thirdly, the Soviet concern . could be alleviated by having such a nuclear .
 A nuclear presence in Cuba could present enough of a victory to distract Soviet citizens from their low standards of living . Moreover, it is possible that a nuclear presence . could present a victory in Cuba to distract citizens .
 It would be a balance to have nuclear missiles stationed in Cuba threatening U.S. cities . Just as nuclear missiles in Turkey would threaten USSR cities, just as they would in Turkey, would threaten US cities .
 A reasonable move would not alleviate these concerns; radical action is needed . Radical action would not ease these concerns, and radical action was needed .
 The local Soviet commander in Cuba had the most authority in the country . Cuba was ruled out of Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 He was authorized to launch nuclear missiles at the United States without additional authorizations or codes from Moscow . The U.S. was not authorized to do so without authorization from Russia .
 Such a launch would likely ignite into a full-blown nuclear conflict between the USSR and the United States . A more cautious move would certainly have not provided the local commander such authority .
 In his writings after the Cold War, he argued that humans are too fallible and nuclear weapons are too dangerous for a hair trigger alert policy to be in place .
 A singular individual from the Soviet Union, the local commander in Cuba, had such a power as mentioned above, strongly suggests that the USSR acted rashly . Considering that a singular individual . had such . a power, it strongly suggested that the Soviet . Union acted .
 There is even evidence to suggest that Secretary Khrushchev acted rashly during the crisis . There is also evidence that . evidence that he acted .
 Soviet weaponry on the island for defense, or allow Soviet troops stationed at Cuba to be granted the authority to defend themselves with short-range nuclear weapons . The Cuban government would have to decide whether to allow the U.S. to defend itself from Cuba .
 All three of these options express very little hope for diplomatic measures to take effect . All options could have easily escalated into nuclear warfare .
 Scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s would not have been able to make assessments on the whole picture for lack of evidence . This is yet another clear example that scholars writing in the 1960-80s would have been unable to assess the case for the first time .
 The Russian Protocol 62, previously classified, provided the evidence that it was Secretary Khrushchev, not hawkish Kremlin officials, who upped the ante of diplomatic stakes . The Protocol 62 was previously classified .
 Khrushchev increased his demands for the U.S. to remove its bases in Turkey and Pakistan . This evidence describes Secretary Khrushvic as the one who increased his . demands for . the United States to remove . its bases . The United States has been accused of being involved in
 This rash boldness of defending Cuba at whatever the cost, not including diplomatic options, was also reflected before the crisis . It's not the first time the U.S. has defended Cuba at any cost, and not including diplomacy .
 Secretary Khrushchev was determined to make the decision, regardless of the risk . The decision was made in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 He received advice from several advisors stating that Fidel Castro may not even desire such weapons . Fidel Castro received advice that he may not want such weapons, according to advisors .
 The last military aid request from Cuba asked for conventionally armed missiles and a 10,000 Soviet troop deployment . After all, the last request from the last Cuban aid request was for conventional missiles and troops .
 Secretary Khrushchev painted the deployment of missiles as an “offensive policy”; this was not a defensive or a moderate policy . This was not the defense or moderate policy; this is not a defense policy, it was an offensive policy .
 Khrushchev took the more diplomatic approach towards the end of the crisis by agreeing to withdraw missiles from Cuba, much to the displeasure of fellow communist nations, including Cuba and China .
 Castro urged Secretary Khrushchev to start a nuclear war in the event of an American attack on Cuba . But the Soviet leader ultimately chose a less aggressive path, choosing to avoid a war .
 This article is primarily concerned with analyzing Khrushchev’s decision-making in planning the crisis and partly during the crisis . However, this article is mainly concerned with analysis of the crisis in planning, during and after the crisis.
 There were relatively few scholarly works on Secretary Khrushchev’s decision-making . As such, there were relatively little scholarly works .
 Historians and other scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s often included the mention of the USSR gaining benefits but gave little consideration of the possible negatives to such a deployment .
 The positives include having missiles that could easily strike the U.S. homeland and maintaining the status quo of China and West Germany not having nuclear weapons . The positives primarily reference the moderate gains of the deployment .
 Khrushchev’s decision-making in deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba was moderate, cautious, and calculated, according to studies . These studies have concluded that the decision to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba was calculated .
 Studies emphasize that Khrushchev had knowledge that the Soviet missiles placed on Cuba had a strong chance in being detected . These studies emphasize that he understood that such a deployment decision was fraught .
 Khrushchev’s bold move was driven by his desire to protect Cuba against all odds and to change the status quo of the Cold War competition with the United States . They also show that Khrushchev's bold move .
 This article has argued that the disparity of views between Cold War scholars and post-Cold War scholars regarding Khrushchev’s decision-making towards Cuba is primarily due to the lack of primary sources that produced such different assessments .
 Khrushchev was much more risk prone, emotional, and rash in his decision to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba than previous historians, who saw him as cautious and moderate, have ever been able to piece together .