 This memorandum assesses the number of Soviet missiles deployed to and subsequently withdrawn from Cuba . The chances that Soviet missiles remain in Cuba, and the situation and outlook with respect to rates of withdrawal of IL-2Ss and other significant Soviet weapons in Cuba .
 The Soviet claim to have delivered only 42 missiles to Cuba is consistent with our evidence . The claim that they were only delivered 42 missiles, and to have now withdrawn these, is inconsistent with evidence .
 We cannot esrclude the possibility that more-.actually arrived,' and that some therefore remain, but we think that some . remain . But we think any such number would be small .
 Available evidence also warrants the conclusion that the Soviets are preparing to withdraw the IL-28s . Available evidence suggests that the Soviet Union is preparing to pull IL-27s .
 The Soviets almost certainly intended to deploy substantially more than the .42 missiles which they acknowledged and have withdrawn . The missiles were probably intended to be deployed by the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets normally provide two missiles for every I.IRBM and IRBM launcher and, since several of the launchers already had two, we believe that they intended to provide two each for the others . This would be a total of 72 launchers identified .
 MRBIJs,. of ..which .which .we identified 33, and the remainder would-be IRBMs., of which we have no evidence that any had reached Cuba, by 22 October . MRBIJ,. of . which . we identified 33 . and the rest would-
 The pattern of the nine identified sites strongly suggests that at least one more was planned to form a pair with the ninth . It is believed that one of the 9 identified sites was planned for a pair .
 Some evidence suggests that the Soviets planned a third deployment area, in eastern Cuba, to follow upon those in the western and central parts of the country .
 Five of the seven ships which turned back from the Cuba run were five of the ships capable of carrying missiles . O '-P 0P ' SECRE T 1 .
 It remains to ask whether the Soviets did indeed succeed in bringing more than 42 missiles to Cuba . It remains a mystery whether the Soviet Union actually succeeded .
 A review of our information from all sources, presented in detail in Annex A, leads us to believe that they probably did not . We are happy to clarify that they did not, and that they didn't .
 Analysis indicates missiles were shipped in one piece — less only warheads — on the transporter in a package about 68 feet long as hold cargo . This estimate is based on the following factors .
 Of the Soviet dry cargo ships involved in the Cuban arms buildup, only seven ships have hatches which would allow stowage of this missile package . Only seven of the ships involved are equipped with hatches that would allow the missile package to be stowed away .
 The most probable load was six to seven missiles per ship . Because of the time in port for both the loading and unloading, apparent Soviet loading practice in deliveries to Cuba, and the size of the ships, we believe the most likely load was seven missiles .
 More would have required extensive shoring between decks and this does not appear to have occurred . More than enough would have needed shoring .
 The information concerning six of the voyages indicates that they almost certainly must have carried strategic missiles . The information about six voyages is almost certain that they were carrying strategic missiles.
 The other seven, because of their arrival times and evidence of non-missile cargoes, cannot be identified . One or more of them may have delivered missiles, but one or more could be missiles .
 Reconstruction of the apparent timetable of the buildup, correlation of photography (both over Cuba and of a number of ships en route) with all other sources, and analysis of reporting by ground observers all argue against our having wholly missed likely ships other than the seven identified .
 We can in this way account for. at least 36 missiles — six on each of six voyages . We can . account for at least six missiles . Six missiles are launched on each mission, six each on each voyage .
 The Soviet claim of 42 is consistent with our evidence, but we -2.2 Top Secret T 110 .
 The analysis of these thirteen voyages in Annex B inclines us to accept a figure not much higher than the 36 we can account for . The analysis suggests that the number of voyages we have to account for is not as much higher as the 36 .
 Sources inside Cuba have provided numerous reports in recent weeks claiming that strategic missiles have been retained in Cuba and concealed from aerial reconnaissance . The missiles are believed to have been kept in Cuba .
 Most of these sources are untested, and some of their reports are manifestly erroneous . Most of this information is based on unverified sources .
 Checks by other methods, including photographic intelligence, have failed to produce clear confirmation of any of these reports . But we are not able to disprove some of them .
 "We have not, however, identified any equipment which can be associated with strategic missiles," says Pentagon .
 Since the foregoing evidence is not fully conclusive, we must also consider whether the Soviets would wish to secrete strategic missiles in Cuba . The Soviets would also want to secure a strategic missile base in Cuba, says author .
 It is doubtful, in our view, that they would do so for strictly military reasons . It's doubtful, we think, that it would be a purely military decision .
 Shipping analysis leaves little room for a number of remaining missiles large enough to be strategically significant at some later date . In the first place, the shipping analysis left little room left for the remaining missiles .
 Such missiles could not participate in an all-out Soviet surprise attack without great risk that preparations would be detected by the U.S. and the entire strategic plan compromised . Such missiles would not be able to participate in such a surprise attack .
 The Soviets could not count on being able to use them in a retaliatory strike . Neither could the Soviets count on using them in retaliatory second strike .
 In contemplating concealment, the Soviets would be aware of great risk . The Soviets are aware of the risk of concealment .
 If the U.S. found out, a second Cuban crisis would ensue which would be unlikely to leave the Castro regime intact . They would foresee that, if the United States found out of Cuba, it would be a second crisis which would not leave the country intact .
 Such a renewed crisis would find the Soviets in an even more disadvantageous position than before . The Soviets would be in a position to protect their interests or avoid humiliation .
 We have confidence in our estimate that no more than 42 IL-28s were delivered before the quarantine began . The plane was carrying cargo en route to Cuba .
 Photography of 25 November indicates that 20 IL-28 fuselage crates remained unopened at San Julian air base . Some of the remaining 13 which had previously beeu partially or fully assembled were being dismantled .
 Photography indicates that the other nine crates, located at Holguin airfield, were still unopened on 25 November and had been removed to an undetermined location on 27 November . Photographs indicate that nine crates had been left unopened .
 Shipping suitable for this purpose is continually available, and almost any four of the Soviet dry-cargo vessels in the Cuban trade could carry the entire number .
 Those still in crates could be moved to ports in a day or two, and the rest could be disassembled and moved to port by the agreed date . The operation is expected to take place in the next few days .
 Soviet weapon systems in Cuba include surface-to-air missiles, coastal defense missiles, Komar missile boats, and fighter aircraft . Other Soviet weapons systems include surface to air missiles, missile boats .
 The equipment for four armored combat groups (including possibly 6-10,000 men) remains on the island . In addition, the equipment for 4 armored combat units (including 6 to 10,000 people) is also on island .
 We have no evidence of any preparations in Cuba to withdraw these elements from Cuba, officials say . The Cuban government has been accused of using the Cuban government to destabilise Cuba .