 The precise location of the Soviet nuclear storage bunkers at Bejucal and Managua is revealed for the first time in a new book . Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs based on interviews with Soviet veterans and raw U.S. intelligence film obtained from the National Archives .
 CIA analysts concluded that the sites could not be used for the storage of nuclear weapons because of the lack of visible security measures such as guard posts and extra fencing . Declassified CIA documents show that U.S. intelligence analysts at the time concluded that .
 One of the biggest remaining mysteries of the Cuban missile crisis has now been solved . CNN's John Defterios says the missile crisis was the biggest mystery of the crisis .
 President Kennedy repeatedly pressed the CIA for information on the warheads in order to be able to gauge the scope of the threat . President Kennedy learned about the existence of medium-range Soviet missiles targeted on the U.S. on October 16, 1962 .
 The intelligence community made numerous attempts to locate the warheads, but was unable to do so . Intelligence community tried to locate warheads but failed to find them .
 The CIA suspected that the Soviets had brought nuclear warheads to Cuba . The CIA lacked conclusive evidence until after the missile crisis was over .
 In January 1963, the CIA succeeded in tying a Swedish-built Soviet freighter, the Aleksandrovsk, to the transportation of nuclear weapons to Cuba . The freighter was tied to a shipment of nuclear arms to Cuba in January 1963 .
 Analysts showed that the Aleksandrovsk had sailed to Cuba from a nuclear storage depot near the Soviet Navy port at Severomorsk with specially configured vans used for the transportation of nuclear warheads .
 The subsequent reconstruction of the movements of the Aleksandrovsk is available here . The reconstruction is based on a reconstruction by the same time as the reconstruction .
 The Aleksandrovsk was meant to dock in Mariel, Cuba, but it was diverted to the port of La Isabela on October 23 . President Kennedy declared a naval blockade around Cuba after President Kennedy .
 Its cargo included 24 1-megaton warheads for the intermediate range R-14 missile and 44 14-kiloton warheads . The FKR cruise missile was also carrying 44 14 kiloton warheads for a cruise missile .
 The R-14 warheads remained on board the ship, while the FKR warheads were sent to Oriente province for targeting on Guantanamo . The F.K. warheads remained in the ship while the R.14 .
 Another Soviet ship, the Indigirka, had previously arrived in Mariel on October 4 . The ship is the second Soviet ship to arrive at Mariel .
 Its cargo included 36 1-megaton warheads for the medium-range R-12 missile, 36 14-kiloton warheads for FKR missiles . Six 12-kilotot atomic bombs for IL-28 bombers were also included .
 Details of the movement of all the warheads are provided in One Minute to Midnight . Details of movement of the warheads will be provided in this map .
 The R-12 warheads offloaded from the Indigirka were taken to the nuclear storage center near Bejucal, according to Soviet veterans interviewed by Dobbs . The warheads went to a storage center in Bejucaal .
 The Soviets had built an underground ammunition storage facility at Bejucal in late 1961, CIA memo says . CIA memo: The Soviets built the facility in late 1960s . The facility was built in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 The lack of significant security at the Bejucal site has prompted CIA analysts to revise their assessment . CIA analysts say the site was protected by only one fence . The site was only protected by one fence, CIA analysts said .
 A detailed re-examination of the raw intelligence photographs, combined with interviews with Soviet officers handling the warheads, proves that Bejucal was the central nuclear storage depot .
 The single security fence, circular road, and remains of the bunker facility are visible in Google Earth, and on Satellite view on the Google Map version above . Google Earth is also available on satellite view .
 Key to identification of Bejucal is the presence of nuclear storage vans, similar to those transported to Cuba on board the Aleksandrovsk . Key to the identification of the site is the fact that the Soviet Union has sent nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 The vans were photographed by low-level U.S. reconnaissance missions on October 23, October 25, and October 26 . The vans are believed to have been photographed by the United States .
 The Soviets were building bomb-resistant nuclear storage facilities at all the missile sites . These structures were still incomplete by the end of October . The San Cristobal MRBM Site Nr 1 in 1962 and in 1992 .
 On October 26, the Soviet commander on Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, decided to send a consignment of warheads from Bejucal to the R-12 missile sites around Sagua La Grande .
 The warheads for the tactical Luna/FROG missiles were stored at another underground facility, near Managua, near Bejucal .
 U.S. intelligence planes also took photographs of this site . The lack of obvious security measures again confused analysts .
 Khrushchev ordered both the Aleksandrovsk and the Indigirka to return to the Soviet Union with the warheads . The missile crisis was over, but the warheads were never returned to Russia .
 The U.S. apologized for the incident, without suspecting that the nuclear arsenal was on board the Soviet vessel . The United States apologized, but did not suspect that the weapons were on board .
 More information on the nuclear storage sites, including the atomic bombs stored in a seaside property, is available in One Minute to Midnight .