 The missiles were placed to protect Cuba from attacks by the United States . They were placed in Cuba to protect the country from attacks .
 The placement was rationalized by the Soviets as retaliation for the U.S. placing deployable nuclear warheads in the United Kingdom, Italy and most significantly, Turkey . The placement of the warheads was a response to the United States placing them in Britain, Italy, Turkey and Turkey .
 The crisis started on October 16, 1962, when U.S. President John F Kennedy revealed Soviet nuclear missile installations on the island . Nikita Khrushchev announced that the installations would be dismantled on October 28, 1962 .
 Fidel Castro took power in Cuba after the Cuban Revolution of 1959 . Fidel Castro is the Cuban leader of Cuba's first government .
 President Obama took actions harmful to U.S. trade interests on the island . Soon afterwards, he took action harmful to American trade interests .
 The U.S. stopped buying Cuban sugar and refused to supply its former trading partner with much needed oil . In response, the United States stopped buying sugar from Cuba .
 The U.S. government became increasingly concerned about the new regime . The United States government is concerned about Syria .
 This tension became a major focus of the Kennedy administration when it took office in January 1961 .
 In Havana, fear erupted that the U.S. might intervene against the Cuban government . Fear erupted in Havana, fearing that the United States might intervene .
 Cuban exiles, trained by the CIA, staged an invasion of Cuban territory at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . This fear materialized in later 1961 when exiles trained by America's CIA staged the invasion of Cuba's territory .
 Although the invasion was quickly repulsed, it intensified a buildup of Cuban defense that was already under way . The invasion intensified an already-understood buildup of Cuba's defense .
 Operation Ortsac, a mock invasion of a Caribbean island in 1962, staged by U.S. armed forces . Operation . United States armed forces then staged Operation . Orcsac staged a mock . invasion of Caribbean island .
 The purpose of the invasion was to overthrow a leader whose name was in fact Castro spelled backwards . Castro's name is spelled backwards, and he was overthrown in Cuba .
 Castro soon became convinced that the United States was serious about invading Cuba . Ortsac was a fictitious name, but Castro soon convinced that it was serious .
 Shortly after the Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro declared Cuba to be a socialist state . Castro entered close ties with the Soviet Union in the wake of the invasion .
 To Soviet leaders, the missile deployment was a necessary response to desperate military situations . The missile deployment is a response to a desperate military situation, the Soviet leader says .
 The Soviets had been cornered by a series of remarkable U.S. successes with military equipment and military intelligence . The Soviets were forced to withdraw from the Soviet Union .
 By the close of 1962, the U.S. had a dramatic advantage in nuclear weapons with more than three hundred land-based intercontinental missiles and a fleet of Polaris missile submarines . The United States had more than 3,000 land based nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union had only four to six land-based ICBMs in 1962, and about one hundred short-range V-1 type missiles that could be launched from surface submarines . In 1962, the Soviet Union was only about one in five ICBM missiles .
 Few in Washington seriously believed that a few dozen ballistic missiles in Cuba could change the essential strategic balance of power . Few believed that the U.S. would be willing to engage in Cuba in Cuba .
 The prevailing sentiment in Washington was that the Soviet Union was hopelessly outgunned . Washington was convinced that the U.S. was outgunning the Soviets .
 By the fall of 1962, America’s arsenal contained three thousand nuclear warheads . The U.S. arsenal contained 3,000 nuclear warheads, according to the U.N. report .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky had served as an intelligence agent for the Americans and British . Before his arrest on the first day of the Cuban missile crisis, he had been a spy for the Russians .
 Melman argues that top officers in the Soviet Union concluded that the U.S. had a decisive advantage in arms and intelligence . Melman argued that the United States then possessed decisive advantage . The United States no longer wielded a credible nuclear deterrent .
 In 1961 the United States started deploying 15 Jupiter IRBM nuclear missiles near Izmir, Turkey, which directly threatened cities in the western sections of the Soviet Union . The U.S. deployed the missiles in 1961 .
 President Kennedy regarded these missiles as being of questionable strategic value . An SSBN was capable of providing the same cover with both stealth and superior firepower .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had publicly expressed his anger at the Turkish deployment . Soviet premier Khrushchev had expressed anger at Turkish deployment of troops .
 The deployment of missiles in Cuba is commonly seen as Khrushchev's direct response to the Turkish missiles . The deployment in Cuba was the first time Soviet missiles were moved outside the USSR .
 Soviet Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles on Cuban soil, with a range of 2,000 kilometers, could threaten Washington, D.C. and nearly half of the U.S. Strategic Air Command bases .
 U.S.'s radar warning systems would have provided little warning of launch from Cuba . Radar warning systems oriented toward the USSR would have given little warning . The launch would have taken place in Cuba .
 Khrushchev devised the deployment plan in May of 1962 . The plan was approved by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 By late July, over sixty Soviet ships were en route to Cuba, some of them carrying military material . Some of them were carrying military materials .
 While there, he had been told by French Intelligence that the Soviets were planning to place missiles in Cuba . He had also been told that the Soviet Union was planning to use missiles .
 President Kennedy warned President Kennedy that some of the ships were probably carrying missiles . He warned that the ships could carry missiles .
 President Kennedy, Dean Rusk, and Robert McNamara concluded that the Soviets would not try such a thing . However, the president, Robert Kennedy, and DeanRusk, concluded that such a move would not happen .
 Kennedy administration had received repeated claims from Soviet diplomats that there were no missiles in Cuba, nor any plans to place any . Soviet diplomats had said there was no missile in Cuba .
 The Soviets claimed they were not interested in starting an international drama that might impact the U.S. elections in November . The Soviets said they did not want to start a drama that could impact the United States elections .
 Photographs of San Cristobal MRBM launch site taken from Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft . Photographs taken from the U.2 reconnaissance plane .
 A Lockheed U-2 flight in late August photographed a new series of Surface-to-air missile sites being constructed . The U.S. Air Force says the missile sites are being used to build .
 On September 4, 1962 Kennedy told Congress that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba . In spite of this, Kennedy said in 1962 that the missiles were not on Cuba's soil .
 On the night of September 8, the first consignment of SS-4 MRBMs was unloaded in Havana, Cuba . The first MRBM was unloaded on September 8 in Havana .
 The planned arsenal was forty launchers, an increase in Soviet first strike capacity of 70 percent . It was intended to increase the Soviet arsenal of forty launchers .
 As many as a thousand reports about the missile installations reached Miami . Perhaps as many as 1,000 reports of the installations have already been made .
 A number of unconnected problems meant that the missiles were not discovered by the United States until a U-2 flight on October 14 clearly showed the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal .
 Initially, the U.S. government kept the information secret, telling only 14 key officials of the executive committee . The United States government initially told only the 14 key members .
 In a televised address on October 22, President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations . President Kennedy made the announcement in a televised broadcast .
 He proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union and would be responded to accordingly . The Soviet Union would respond to any attack by Cuba .
 He also placed a naval ""quarantine"" on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of military weapons from arriving there .
 After the Bay of Pigs disaster, the USSR sent conventional missiles, jet fighters, patrol boats and five thousand soldiers and scientists to Cuba . It was still unclear to the United States whether or not nuclear weapons were based on Cuba .
 This group later became known as the ExComm, or Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The ExComm was later known as Executive Committee, or National Security Committee .
 Beginning the morning of October 16, this group met frequently to devise a response to the threat . The group met often to devise an effective response to a threat .
 An immediate bombing strike was dismissed early on, as was a potentially time-consuming appeal to the U.N. An immediate strike was also dismissed, as well as a possible U.S. strike .
 They rejected a diplomatic solution, narrowing the choice to a naval blockade and an ultimatum, or a full-scale invasion . They eventually rejected diplomatic solutions . The choice was narrowed to naval blockade or a naval .
 A blockade was finally chosen, although there were a number of conservatives who pushed for tougher action . A blockade of the border was eventually chosen, but there were some calls for tougher measures .
 Soviet and Cuban troop number estimates on Cuba were around 10,000 and 100,000 . Cuban and Soviet troop numbers were estimated to be between 10,00-100,000 troops .
 United States intelligence was unaware that 12 kiloton-range nuclear warheads had already been delivered to the island and mounted on FROG-3 ""Luna" short-range artillery rockets .
 These missiles could be launched on the authority of the Soviet commander on the island, Issa Pliyev, in the event of an invasion . The missiles could launch on the . authority of a Soviet commander .
 An invasion would probably have precipitated a nuclear strike against the invading force, with catastrophic results . An invasion . would probably precipitate a . nuclear strike .
 As Fidel Castro noted, there was nothing illegal about the missile installations . Fidel Castro said there were nothing illegal .
 There was concern of the Soviets’ reaction to the blockade, as it had the potential to turn into escalating retaliation . There was also concern that the blockade could turn into escalation retaliation .
 Kennedy spoke to the American public and the Soviet government in a televised address on October 22 . Kennedy was speaking to the public and Soviet government . The address was broadcast from October 22 to October 24 .
 The United States was surprised at the solid support from its European allies, particularly from the notoriously difficult President Charles de Gaulle of France . The U.S. was surprised by the support of the European allies .
 The British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, as well as much of the international community, did not understand why a diplomatic solution was not considered . Nevertheless, the British PM did not know why he did not consider a diplomatic option .
 The case was conclusively proved on October 25 at an emergency session of the UN Security Council . It was proved at a meeting of the Security Council in October .
 Stevenson produced photographs taken by U.S. surveillance aircraft showing missile installations in Cuba . Zorin refused, Stevenson produced photos taken by United States surveillance aircraft .
 Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24 claiming the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union . The letters were sent to Kennedy in response to the Cuban missile threat .
 The Soviets delivered two different options for resolution to the United States government . The Soviets also delivered two options to the U.S. government .
 On October 26, they offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba or support any invasion . The Cuban government offered to pull missiles in exchange for a United States guarantee .
 The second deal was broadcast on public radio on October 27, calling for the withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey in addition to the demands of October 26 . The deal also calls for withdrawal of United States missiles .
 The crisis peaked on October 27, when a U-2 was shot down over Cuba, killing pilot Rudolph Anderson . Another flight over Russia was almost intercepted when it strayed over Siberia . A U.2 flight was also almost intercepted over Russia .
 This was after Curtis LeMay had neglected to enforce presidential orders to suspend all over-flights . This was despite orders from President Obama to suspend over-flight flights .
 Kennedy responded by publicly accepting the first deal and sending Attorney General Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to accept the second in private . Kennedy responded to the first and the second deal .
 The fifteen Jupiter missiles near Izmir, Turkey, would be removed six months later . The 15 Jupiter missiles were removed from the city of Izmir .
 Kennedy requested that Khrushchev keep this second compromise out of the public domain . Kennedy also requested that the second compromise be kept out of public view .
 Some accounts downplay the significance of the removal of the missiles in Turkey as something that President Kennedy had already previously ordered due to their obsolescence .
 On October 28, Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The missiles were removed from Cuba .
 President Kennedy ordered an end to the quarantine of Cuba on November 20 . President Kennedy was satisfied that the Soviets had removed missiles .
 The withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey was not made public . The compromise satisfied no one, but it was a sharp embarrassment for Khrushchev .
 The USSR gallantly saves the world from nuclear holocaust by not insisting on restoring the nuclear equilibrium . The USSR saved the world by not trying to restore the equilibrium .
 Khrushchev's fall from power two years later can be partially linked to Politburo embarrassment at his ineptitude in precipitating the crisis . The fall was partly linked to his eventual concessions to the U.S. and his incompetence .
 U.S. military commanders were not happy with the result . United States military commanders are also unhappy with the results of the vote .
 For Cuba, it was a betrayal by the Soviets whom they had trusted, given that the decisions on putting an end to the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev . Cuba, Cuba, and the Soviet Union, had trusted each other .
 In early 1992 it was confirmed that key Soviet forces in Cuba had, by the time the crisis broke, received tactical nuclear warheads for their artillery rockets, and IL-28 bombers .
 General Anatoly Gribkov, part of the Soviet staff responsible for the operation, stated that the local Soviet commander, General Issa Pliyev, had pre-delegated authority to use them if the U.S. had mounted a full-scale invasion of Cuba . General
 Pliyev was given permission to use tactical nuclear warheads only in the most extreme case of an American invasion during which contact with Moscow is lost . Other accounts show that Plieviev was allowed to use nuclear weapons only in extreme cases .
 Khrushchev rescinded his earlier permission for Pliyev to use the tactical nuclear weapons, even under the most extreme conditions . However, when American forces seemed to be readying for an attack, he rescinded the permission .
 The purpose of this undersea line was to have a way the leaders of the two Cold War countries could communicate directly to be better able to solve a crisis like the one in October 1962 . The purpose was to help solve a Cold War crisis .
 In the Essence of Decision, Graham T Allison and Philip D Zelikow use the crisis to illustrate multiple approaches to analyzing the actions of the state .
 It is an excellent case study for analysis of success in resolving a military-type standoff without resorting to military aggression . In addition, it is also a case study of successful military-style standoff in Afghanistan .
 In October 2002, McNamara and Schlesinger joined a group of other dignitaries in a ""reunion"" with Castro in Cuba to continue the release of classified documents and to further study .
 Secretary McNamara discovered that Cuba had many more missiles than initially thought . McNamara found out during the first meeting that the missiles were more sophisticated .
 McNamara realized that, Castro and Khruschev, viewed then by the White House inner circle as 'rational men' had been perfectly willing to start a nuclear war over the crisis .
 It was also revealed at this conference that an officer aboard a Soviet submarine, named Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov, may have single-handedly prevented the initiation of a nuclear catastrophe . Vasili may have saved the Soviet Union from a nuclear disaster .
 John F Kennedy Nikita Khrushchev Soviet Union United States . See also Cold War Cuba .
 Allison Allison, Graham T and Philip Zelikow read on the Cuban missile crisis . Allison Allison: "The missile crisis was a nightmare for Americans"
 Credit is due under the terms of this license that can reference both the New World Encyclopedia contributors and the selfless volunteer contributors of the Wikimedia Foundation . Use this license to share the images and videos that appear in this article .