 The author will appreciate comments, corrections and imagery related to the subject .
 The USSR moved a whole army around the globe and deployed the most sophisticated weapons of its time right under the nose of the overwhelming force of its potential adversary . In a clandestine operation unprecedented in military history, the USSR moved around the world .
 Many English-language accounts of the Cuban missile crisis skewed heavily toward the American perspective . Many books, memoirs and publications shed light on this crucial event of the 20th century .
 This summary attempts to overview the Soviet side of the Cuban missile crisis . It obviously started many months before its culmination in October 1962, and included critical details mostly overlooked .
 Fidel Castro overthrew a pro-American military junta in Cuba on January 1, 1959 . The island is just a few hundred kilometers of the coast of Florida . Fidel Castro led a rebel movement lead by a young lawyer .
 Cuba is now a failed experiment with a total state-controlled economy and political life, along with an awkward alliance with a foreign government half a world away . For the people of Cuba it meant that their country turned from an underprivileged economic colony of the United States run by a corrupt
 Three years after Castro's revolution, the nuclear standoff between the U.S. and Russia is at center of the nuclear crisis in Cuba . Even in their wildest dreams, neither ordinary Cubans nor their new government could imagine that their small country would become an epicenter of nuclear standoff
 By 1962, despite a major expansion of its nuclear arsenal, the Soviet military knew well that it had been far behind the U.S. in arms race . The rational by comparison is the rational by contrast .
 Khrushchev quickly gave up an expensive and hopeless effort to match the U.S. air power . The Soviet leader gave up the effort in 1953 .
 Khrushchev banked on ballistic missiles as his asymmetrical response . The Soviet territory was vulnerable to long-range bombers from several fronts . The missiles were designed to protect Soviet territory .
 The development, testing and deployment of intercontinental ballistic missiles, ICBMs, capable of reaching the United States proved slow and expensive . Yet again, the USSR quickly found itself confronted with much greater number of U.S. ballistic missiles .
 By October 1962, the USSR managed to build six huge and vulnerable pads for R-7 ICBMs near Tyuratam and Plesetsk and deploy only around 20 R-16 ICBMMs . The USSR was able to deploy only about 20 ICBM missiles in October 1962 .
 U.S. estimates put a number of operational Soviet ICBMs at around 50 . United States estimates put it at about 50 . The United States says there are around 50 operational Soviet ICBMs .
 Cuba presented the Soviet leadership with an opportunity to target the U.S. territory with more readily available short-range and intermediate-range missiles, not unlike, the United States was aiming such weapons from Europe or Turkey .
 Even with missiles in Cuba, the USSR would still be far from parity with the U.S. in a number of deployed carriers of nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union would still have far fewer deployed carriers than the United States .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba could serve as a deterrent to an ever-present U.S. threat to invade the island . Almost as importantly, Soviet missiles could be a deterrent .
 Khrushchev managed to convince himself and others that he had been driven by altruism . Even though it is extremely hard to believe that interests of Cuba stood before strategic calculations, it is difficult to believe it .
 He would maintain this stance all the way when at the bring of World War III over Cuba, he would put the issue of Cuban security before the problem of U.S. missiles aimed at the USSR .
 Khrushchev first brainstormed the idea to deploy missiles on Cuba during his official visit to Bulgaria which started on May 14, 1962 . According to his own memoirs, the idea was first conceived during his visit in Bulgaria .
 The normally affable Khrushchev wondered alone through the labyrinths of a seaside park in Varna, Bulgaria . The plan was apparently hatched during a stopover at the Bulgarian Black Sea resort of Varna .
 He reportedly shared his thoughts with Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko on the way back to Moscow on May 20 . He reportedly received no objections from the Foreign Minister .
 Khrushchev quickly realized that a total secrecy would be a key to the success of the idea, in order to avoid an overwhelming domination of the U.S. navy in the region . The idea was to avoid the United States dominating the Soviet Union .
 Unlike the deployment of United States missiles aimed at the USSR, which had been done openly, the USSR had to resort to an elaborate plan of deception . When its government would finally find out, it would look even more sinister to the US when it would find out .
 Khrushchev's memoirs: Nobody but Anastas Mikoyan dared to question the plan as dangerous . The Soviet leader countered that potential benefits would be worth the risk . The plan was approved by the Soviet Union in 1964 .
 He did admit that miscalculation in such a decision could lead to a nuclear war . Miscalculation would lead to war .
 On May 24, 1962, an expanded meeting of the Presidium quickly made a unanimous decision to deploy nuclear-tipped R-12 and R-14 missiles in Cuba . After several discussions of the plan, the plan was discussed .
 The flight range of R-12 and R-14 could cover most of the U.S. except for the far northwestern section of the country . The range of the aircraft could cover the entire nation .
 In June, Khrushchev discussed the plan at the meeting of the Defense Council chaired by Semen Ivanov . In June the plan was discussed by the defense council chaired by Ivanov and Khrushnik .
 Minister of Defense Radion Malinovsky also endorsed the strategy . Minister of defense Malinovski also endorsed it .
 The commander of the strategic missile forces, RVSN, Marshall Sergei Biryuzov reportedly was enthusiastic . The commander has reportedly been enthusiastic about the idea .
 On June 13, the Minister of Defense issued a directive ordering preparations for the deployment of Soviet troops in Cuba .
 Operation Anadyr was code-named after a river in the Russia's far north . Ivanov initiated Operation Anadyr initiated Operation in the 1990s . Operation Ivanov insurgently involves operation against terrorists
 Even classified military documents referred to the operation as a ""strategic exercise,"" aimed to test movements of arms and units around the Soviet Union . Due to high secrecy of the plan, the plan was described as a test exercise .
 Staff all participating units with an assigned number of personnel . Prepare provisions for 60 days and a rocket propellant cache at 1.75 from a required fueling amount for each R-12 missile . Prepare, check and pack personal weapons and ammunition . Prepare documents on weaponry and hardware, which was
 By the middle of the month, Chief of Staff of the Soviet armed forces approved the new structure of the division and gave a green light to the formation of its units .
 The directive of the Chief of Staff of RVSN instructed to employ available soldiers and officers of missile regiments for the Cuban expedition . It also established strict selection criteria, based primarily on strict health requirements .
 The KGB security service screened all personnel heading to Cuba . The KGB also screened personnel traveling to the island .
 A considerable percentage of regular staff of the units had to be replaced with new members . As a result of the changes, some of the regular staff were replaced .
 It would create considerable problems during the deployment of missiles in Cuba . Later, it would create significant problems during deployment of Cuban missiles .
 The original idea of placing few missiles in Cuba soon expanded into a grandiose plan to deploy a 44,000-strong Soviet contingent capable of protecting the rocket units and the rest of the island from a U.S. invasion .
 It would include rocket personnel, guard units, anti-aircraft batteries, fighter jets and even tanks . It would also include high-speed missile-carrying boats and tanks . The rocket personnel would include the rocket .
 The Soviet Navy and the civilian Ministry of Sea Fleet, Minmorflot, got involved in the support of shipments to Cuba, therefore its representative was delegated to work at the Chief of Staff .
 At the beginning of July, RVSN formed task groups responsible for processing and shipment of rocket regiments .
 Khrushchev and Podgorny personally approved GSVK's leadership on July 7 . By June 20, the Ministry of Defense formed the Group of the Soviet Army in Cuba, GSVK . On July 7, the two men personally approved its leadership .
 World War II cavalry veteran General Issa Pliev was appointed the commander of the army . He was appointed by Malinovsky .
 Pliev received official identity papers for an ""agricultural specialist" named Ivan Aleksandrovich Pavlov . Pliev's identity papers were issued for Pavlov, who was a "specialist" in the Soviet Union .
 The scale, distance and secrecy of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba had no precedents in the world's military history . The organization The organization is based in Havana, Cuba, and Cuba, Cuba .
 A bulk of the rocket division intended to go to Cuba was to be formed from three regiments of the 43rd rocket division, which itself was a part of the army stationed in Ukraine .
 The combined Soviet missile force in Cuba was designated the 51st rocket division . The 51st missile division was designated by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 On July 12, veteran of Word War II Igor Statsenko was appointed its commander . Statsenko has been appointed as the commander of the Ukrainian National Guard .
 The ballistic missile forces were to be protected by two anti-aircraft missile divisions with three squadrons each, and a total of 10,000 personnel . The missile forces would be protected from the threat of air strikes by two missile divisions .
 The Soviet Air Force supplied 40 MiG-21 fighter jets, 36 helicopters and six Il-28 nuclear capable bombers . A total support personnel of 5,000 people was also supplied by the Soviets .
 Ground forces also supplied four mobile infantry squadrons with a total personnel reaching 10,000 . Ground forces of the Soviet Army also supplied 4 mobile infantry squads . The Soviet Army was also supplied by ground forces .
 The Soviet Navy contributed 36 nuclear-capable Il-28 mine and torpedo aircraft, 12 R-183 speed boats carrying a pair of P-15 cruise missiles each . 12 speed boats were carrying a . pair of . P-16 cruise missiles, two squadrons of cruise missiles with
 Soviet delegation led by First Secretary of Uzbekistan's Central Committee Sharaf Rashidov . Commander of the strategic rocket forces, RVSN, Marshal Sergei Biryuzov and Lt. Lt. Sergey Biryukov were present .
 General of the Air Force Sergei Ushakov traveled to Cuba at the end of May and broke the news to Fidel Castro . He broke the deal with the Cuban leader .
 Castro was initially stunned and flabbergasted, according to a Soviet ambassador to Havana . Castro was stunned by the discovery of the Soviet Union in Cuba . The Cuban leader was shocked by the revelation .
 Soviet arguments about the inevitability of the U.S. invasion and hints about the dependency of Soviet economic assistance on his cooperation, made him to accept the plan . However, Soviet arguments made him accept the invasion .
 In the first half of July, Cuban and Soviet defense ministers Raul Castro and Radion Malinovsky worked out a secret agreement in Moscow on the deployment of Soviet troops in Cuba . The agreement was reached in the first part of July .
 Soviet officials first proposed placing missiles in a heavy jungle of the central Cuba, while deploying troops in improvised dugouts . Soviet officials also proposed deploying numerous troops in an improvised dugout .
 Soviet survey team landed on island on July 12 and led by Igor Statsenko, the commander of the 51st missile division in Cuba, found these sites unusable . Survey team found the sites were unusable by the Cuban government .
 Statsenko later wrote that the region had poor roads and was infiltrated with counter-revolutionary bands . Statsenko said the region was a difficult terrain for transporting missiles . The region was difficult to transport missiles because of poor roads .
 Statsenko argued tropical climate with its high precipitation and humidity would make it impossible to house soldiers in dugouts . Statsenko also argued that tropical climate makes it impossible for soldiers to live in a bunker .
 Tent camps had to be built, later becoming one of the features betraying the presence of Soviet troops in Cuba . Tent camps were built instead of the camps built by Soviet troops . The camps were later used as a base for operations against the Soviet Union in Cuba, Cuba .
 Ernesto Che Guevara visited the USSR bringing the amendments to the agreement, which Khrushchev accepted . On August 26, Che Che visited the Soviet Union and signed the agreement . The agreement was signed by Che Che Che and the USSR in 1968 .
 The construction of the main missile site was conducted at the plato Esperon, under a cover of a training center for the Cuban army . The construction was conducted under the cover of the training center .
 Chief of the army intelligence service Pedro Luis was informed of the plan, along with 10 other people . Besides Castro brothers, the chief of the military intelligence service was informed .
 By the time the massive deployment of the Soviet forces was completed, only 15 officials within the Cuban government were informed about these activities . Only 15 officials in the government were aware of the massive operation .
 The first Soviet supplies for what would turned out to be missile bases started arriving in late July . According to the U.S. intelligence, the Soviet supplies began arriving in July . The United States intelligence says the bases were built in Cuba .
 The missiles, their associated equipment and division personnel were sent to Soviet ports of Nikoalev, Sevastopol on the Black Sea and to Baltiysk in the Baltic Sea . In the first leg of the journey, the missiles, along with the division personnel, were sent
 On August 10, the first rocket squadron led by I Sidorov and the field repair and technical unit led by Lt. Lt. S. Sidorova were launched . The Russian rocket squadron was formed in the Soviet Union in 1964 .
 On September 9, the first Soviet missile unit arrived to the Cuban port of Casilda onboard the Omsk vessel . The missile unit was transported to Casilda on September 9 .
 During the sailing, rank-and-file military personnel would be housed below decks .
 Soldiers were not allowed to come upstairs, even when the temperature in bottom compartments would climb to 50 degrees . Soldiers were prohibited from coming upstairs even though the temperature would reach 50 degrees in the bottom compartment .
 The people would be able to have food only twice and only during the night . Food would be limited to twice a day and only twice a night . The government would not allow food to be eaten during the day .
 In the meantime, top military brass would mostly travel onboard civilian passenger ships . Top military brass will mostly travel aboard civilian passengers .
 Upon entering the Atlantic, ships would first head toward South Africa . Only near the Equator, captains would unseal envelops with directions to go to Cuba .
 Soviet military guard units arrived first, then facilitated the arrival of missiles . The missiles were fired by Soviet military forces in the 1980s and 1990s .
 All arriving Soviet military personnel were dressed as civilians and donned Cuban army uniforms upon arrival . The Cuban military personnel donned their uniforms to the Soviet military .
 Unloading operations were conducted at night under conditions of total darkness . The operation was carried out under total darkness at the time of the operation .
 Every two hours, divers were checking bottoms of the ships standing in port . Divers were checking the bottoms every two hours for two hours .
 The missiles were transported during night hours from midnight until 5m. The missiles are transported during the night hours .
 In advance of their pass, Cuban army would block all approaches to the routes followed by missile trailers . Cuban army blocked all approaches in advance of the pass .
 As diversionary tactics, the army would even simulate traffic accidents and send columns of regular tracks to various directions . The army would also send regular tracks in various directions to simulate accidents and divert traffic .
 Speaking Russian was strictly forbidden, instead Spanish phrases and commands would have to be used . Speaking Russian is strictly forbidden .
 Efforts are also made to change silhouettes of missile erector platforms and fueling vehicles . Efforts were also made by the U.S. to improve the silhouette of missile platforms .
 The arriving Soviet missile regiments had no construction personnel with them, therefore they had to rely entirely on their own engineering service and regular soldiers . The arrival of Soviet missile units in the Soviet Union in the 1960s was the first time they had arrived .
 By the end of September, a group of high-ranking RVSN officials led by Lt. Lt. Dan O'Neill led the RVSN . The RVSN says it has been working with the military for more than a year .
 Butsky flew in to Cuba on a routine commercial flight and inspected the missile division . He flew in and inspected Cuba's missile armament .
 The loading of the special cargo was conducted by officers of the central nuclear base under protection of KGB security personnel . The loading was carried out under protection by officers at the base .
 The captain of the ship learned about his destination only near Farer Island, upon opening of a special envelope . He learned about the destination only by opening of an envelope .
 By October 15, nuclear warheads temporarily located at the consolidated warehouse, were checked and made ready for integration with their missiles . The nuclear warheads were made ready to be integrated with missiles .
 Squadrons armed with R-12 missiles had to reach battle readiness by November 1, 1963 . Squadrons equipped with missiles with the R-14s had to be ready by January 1 . Soviet Army issued directive on September 8, 1963, saying squadrons with missiles were ready by November
 Sidorov was declared operational on October 20, with two hours 30 minutes required for firing the missile . The missile will be able to be fired within two hours of firing .
 The entire missile division deployed in Cuba was declared operational on October 27, or three days earlier than originally planned . The missile division is declared operational in Cuba .
 Soviet nuclear forces arrive to Cuba unopposed . Crisis ensues . Extreme secrecy measures instituted around the deployment of missiles on Cuba worked .
 CIA reported to the United States president that ""something new and different"" had been happening with Soviet supplies to Cuba . Sometimes in mid-August, the CIA reported that something new and different had been happening .
 A number of Soviet ""specialists"" on the island was estimated at 5,000 . Some military-related construction was detected in the area .
 New anti-aircraft sites appeared on photos taken by a U-2 spy plane during an overflight of the island on August 29 . The U.2 plane was overflighting the island during a mission to find the sites .
 Surveillance flights increased two-fold during September and the first half of October revealing more construction, but no ballistic missiles . No ballistic missiles were found .
 Sources on the ground in Cuba reported the presence of ballistic missiles, however they had been wrong before and thus could not be considered reliable . Sources said they had previously reported missile sightings .
 Data apparently led to increased attention to the area in the west of the country . Still, this data led to an increase in interest in the area .
 On October 10, the United States government approved another overflight of the western section of the island by the U-2 aircraft piloted by Richard S Heyser . The U.S. government approved the overflight .
 Due to bad weather, the mission had to wait until Sunday, October 14 . The mission was delayed until October 14 due to weather .
 Photo-interpreters identify ballistic missile, launch pad and launch pad being built near San Cristobal . The missile is believed to be a ballistic missile .
 Kennedy was informed next morning and immediately ordered more overflights, while keeping this startling news completely secret . Kennedy was told next morning that he had been ordered to carry out overflights . Kennedy ordered the overflights and kept the news a secret .
 On the same day, 14,000 U.S. reservists were mobilized . Tactical aircraft and anti-aircraft assets were ordered to concentrate in the southeast of the country .
 He had to defend himself from 'I told you so' critics in the US, whom he previously tried to persuade that there were no offensive weapons in Cuba . Not only he was cunningly deceived by Khrushchev, but also had to explain himself from numerous critics .
 On October 17, Defense Secretary McNamara proposed a naval blockade of Cuba, against the advise of many high-ranking officers, who demanded an immediate military action .
 On October 18, Kennedy received the Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, but told him nothing about his knowledge about the missiles . He only repeated his warning from September 13 against placing offensive weapons in Cuba .
 The possibility of U.S. air strikes was actively discussed on October 19, with the military promising to be ready for the attack as early as October 21 . The military is expected to launch air strikes in Syria on October 21.
 These plans were still on the table as late as the afternoon on October 20 . These plans still were still being considered for the day of the day .
 Kennedy ruled out a full-blown war for the time being and firmly decided to go with a blockade . However on that day he ruled out full-fledged war .
 Kennedy introduced quarantine of all shipments of offensive weapons to Cuba . Kennedy announced on TV that the quarantine would be introduced .
 On October 23, the United States started the blockade, enforced by 90 navy ships and eight aircraft carriers . The U.S. started a blockade of Cuba on October 23 .
 As many as 25 unarmed Soviet vessels en-route to Cuba including those transporting R-14 missiles were now risking a stand off with the U.S. battleships .
 Soviet submarines provided escort for the ships, but they themselves had been targeted by American anti-submarine systems . The ships were attacked by the U.S. in the early 1950s .
 In Cuba, all preparations at missile sites on the island continued unabated . Most of the work was switched to the night time .
 At 5:40 in the morning local time, the Cuban government announced military readiness for the army and the rest of the country . The Cuban government said it was ready to deploy forces in Cuba .
 By 8m. as many as three Soviet missile units were declared operational, even though at two of them were still ongoing . At two of the missile units, technical work was still ongoing.
 Russian sources say a half of 36 R-12 ballistic missiles were ready for fueling and integration with their warheads . The missiles apparently never took off, according to Russian sources .
 Two minutes later, a pair of United States aircraft flew over launch sites commanded by Sidorov and at 12:00, they flew over the site commanded by Cherkesov . The U.S. aircraft also flew over a launch site commanded by the Russian president .
 Robert Kennedy arrived at the Soviet embassy and talked to the Soviet ambassador Dobrynin . He asked him whether the Soviet government intended to stop the incoming ships . Kennedy's visit to the embassy in Washington was one of the last moments of his life .
 Dobrynin seemed shaken and out-of-the-loop on what was going on and could not provide any assurances . He said he was 'shaken' and 'out of the loop' on what happened .
 Kennedy ordered the U.S. navy to back away from the approaching Soviet ships to give the Kremlin a little bit more time to react . To avoid a clash at sea, Kennedy ordered a back-up order .
 Soviet diplomats in Washington showed no signs of real knowledge of what was going on in Moscow . The U.S. demands were met with no response to the United States' demands .
 The Soviet embassy had never been informed about the whole operation in Cuba, it had actually been used as a vehicle for disinformation in the run-up to the crisis . As it was confirmed decades later, the Soviet embassy never knew about the operation .
 Soviet ships were either slowing down or changing course . However by the end of the day, the news came to the White House that Soviet ships had slowed down .
 Through intermediaries, Khrushchev signaled to Kennedy that a peaceful resolution was possible . Through intermediaryaries, he also signaled to JFK that a peace solution was possible.
 The U.S. navy scrambled to detect and pursue Soviet submarines which were seen escorting Cuba-bound cargo ships . In the meantime, the United States navy scrambled and pursued the Soviet submarines .
 Observations confirmed that half of the Soviet ships had turned around and others stopped . October 25, Thursday Observations confirms half of Soviet ships were turned around . Observations confirm that half a Soviet ship turned around.
 A lone Soviet tanker entered the quarantine zone, but Kennedy ordered to let it reach Cuba unopposed . Kennedy ordered the tanker to reach Cuba without opposition . Kennedy also ordered a single Soviet tanker into Cuba .
 U.S. diplomats publicly revealed for the first time aerial images of Soviet missile installations in Cuba . Diplomats demanded the USSR to admit the deployment of offensive weapons on the island .
 Khrushchev wrote an emotional letter to Kennedy about U.S. preparations for war . The letter was published on October 26, 1962 .
 It was delivered to the U.S. embassy in Moscow around 17:00 local time . After various delays for translation and transmission, it reached Kennedy in the evening Eastern Time .
 The letter proposed to remove missiles and Soviet military specialists from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade the island . The letter essentially proposes to remove Soviet military experts from Cuba .
 By October 27, three units of the 51st rocket division were ready to fire missiles from 24 launchers . October 27: Three units ready to launch missiles were ready for the first time .
 The warheads were also moved from the central warehouse to the launch sites . The warheads have been moved from central warehouses to launch sites.
 Antiaircraft guns previously deployed around Havana were moved to the proximity of the sites . For additional protection of launch sites, the antiaircraft weapons were moved around Havana . The move was made to protect launch sites from Havana .
 At that point, the Soviet government apparently believed that the U.S. attack would start in the next two or three days . The Soviet government believed that it would start within days of the attack on the United States .
 Khrushchev's proposals for a resolution of a standoff with the U.S. were read by the Soviet radio . Khruschev's proposal was read with an added demand to remove United States missiles from Turkey .
 Khrushchev was pressed by hardliners or that he even been overthrown . Speculation that he had been pressed or overthrown led to confusion in Washington . The additional demand caused some confusion .
 The U-2 spy plane was shut down over Cuba, further escalating tensions . U.S. military put new pressure on Kennedy to attack Cuba .
 Another U-2 plane ""strayed"" into Soviet airspace somewhere between Alaska and the North Pole and was chased by the Soviet fighters . To make matters worse, another U-1 plane ""Strayed" into Soviet air space .
 Kennedy responded to Khrushchev's October 26 letter with his own letter accepting his proposals on Cuba and hinting further concessions on the NATO front . Kennedy then responded to his letter by accepting his proposal on Cuba . Kennedy also hinted at further concessions .
 Robert Kennedy gave a copy to Dobrynin along with a warning that without a response in 24 hours, the attack against Cuba would likely start on October 30 . Kennedy gave the copy of the letter along with the warning that if a response was not received, Cuba would attack .
 Khrushchev promised removal of offensive weapons and asked the U.S. to put a stop to overflights of Cuba . October 28, Sunday At 9:00 in the morning Washington Time, the new letter from Khrush .
 Khrushchev promised further negotiations in the UN, but also warned that violations of the Soviet airspace like the one by a U-2 a day before could trigger a nuclear war .
 From October 29 to 31, Soviet units dismantled all ballistic missile sites in Cuba leaving one R-12 as a memorial . The site is a memorial to the site of Soviet missile sites .
 Soviet ships with missiles on their decks steamed back home as the United States navy aircraft watched from respectable distance . The U.S. Navy aircraft were watching from respectable distances .
 As agreed, the United States removed missiles from Turkey and never again tried to invade Cuba . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles and remove them from Turkey . As a result of the agreement, Cuba was never again invaded .
 The Cuban government continued pursuing hard-line policies of a totalitarian communist state with little room for economic reform . Ironically, long after most former Soviet republics initiated a transition to free-market economies, the Cuban government continues pursuing hard line policies of the communist state .
 Popular accounts of the Cuban missile crisis would not fail to fail to stress how close the world came to nuclear armageddon .
 During the crisis, all launch sites were brought to operational readiness . According to memoirs of veterans at Tyuratam, during the . crisis, during . the . mission, all launched sites were . brought to . operational readiness.
 Helicopters were reportedly used to bring nuclear warheads to launch facilities in preparation for installation on their missiles . Helicopter was reportedly used by the U.S. in the 1980s .
 During most of the crisis, many officers on vacation had not been recalled back . Some started their vacations in the midst of crisis and were only asked by their superiors to leave their addresses in case of a recall .
 In mid-October, a major space launch campaign was shaping up in Tyuratam . Even more importantly, as the situation around Cuba was escalating, the situation was escalating . The launch was the first of its kind in the region .
 Korolev's engineers rolled out the 8K78 launch vehicle with a Mars-bound spacecraft to the one of only two available launch pads for the R-7 ballistic missiles in Tyuratam . On October 21, as the situation was near its culmination, engineers rolled it out .
 Mars probe lifted off as scheduled on October 24 but got stranded in low Earth orbit . The Mars probe got stuck in Earth orbit after getting stuck in Cuba . The mission was scheduled to launch October 24 .
 A day later, yet another launch vehicle with a Mars-bound spacecraft arrived to occupy the strategically important launch pad . The launch pad was occupied by a spacecraft bound for Mars that will orbit the red planet .
 Top officers in Tyuratam were called to the range headquarters to prepare for an emergency situation . They were ordered to prepare facilities for possible air attacks and even an invasion of paratroopers .
 All transport flights in and out of Tyuratam were discontinued . Security was beefed up around all launch facilities with the help of machine-gun-armed infantrymen . Anti-aircraft batteries also put to highest alert .
 Kirillov received an order to open his sealed envelope with instructions for the preparations of the R-7 ballistic missiles and their integration with a nuclear warhead . The envelope contained instructions for preparing the missiles and integration with nuclear warheads .
 Chertok reported to the processing building at Site 2, he discovered the launch personnel working with an R-7 ballistic missile . The missile normally sat under wraps by the wall of the cavernous building . The launch personnel worked with the missile .
 A rocket for the third Mars-bound spacecraft was all but neglected . Now it was at the center of attention, while a rocket for another is at center of the attention .
 All unessential personnel would have to leave the facility according to safety instructions . Kirillov: The nuclear warhead would arrive to Site 2 for the integration with the missile within two hours .
 Chertok had no choice but to leave the military run things, however the nuclear-tipped missile never left the processing building . Chertuk was forced to step down from the military in order to save his life .
 By the end of the day, doomsday crews were allowed to stand down and the space rocket remained on the pad . Doomsday crews stood down, but the rocket remained at the launch pad .
 It was launched successfully on November 1 and was announced as Mars-1 . It was the first of its kind to be launched successfully .
 The R-7 team in Tyuratam would likely have enough time to prepare both of its missiles for launch . Given the fact that the U.S. probably would not attack Cuba until October 30 .
 At another R-7 launch site in Plesetsk, as many as four missiles could be prepared for launch as quickly as in seven or eight hours . At another launch site, the missiles are said to be ready for launch in seven to eight hours.
 As many as four unprotected launch pads for the much-more compact R-16 ICBM were also operational by the beginning of 1962 . In addition, as many as 4 unprotected launch pad for the more compact ICBM also operational .
 Three protected silos for R-16 would not be ready until Spring of 1963 . Three silos would be ready to be ready in Spring 1963 .
 The Plesetsk launch base was brought to high alert on September 11 at 13:00 afternoon . All launch pads were ready to fire their missiles .
 High alert officially remained in effect until 09:00 in the morning on November 21 . The high alert was officially put in place on November 20 .
 Several times during the crisis, sirens were sounding around the residential complex of the base . The light curfew was instituted during the night time .
 Although the popular U.S. press could not resist its usual temptation for self-congratulation, those who were involved on both sides knew better .
 The real war was avoided, however, the Cold War would continue if not escalate in the following years, with the USSR attempting to achieve parity with the U.S. in the number of ICBMs .
 USSR and Cuba USA May 24: The expanded meeting of the Presidium makes a unanimous decision to deploy nuclear-tipped R-12 and R-14 missiles on Cuba . USSR and U.S. USA USA USA .
 The Soviet Minister of Defense issues a directive ordering preparations for the deployment of the Soviet troops in Cuba . The Soviet minister of defense issues the directive .
 Chief of Staff of RVSN started drafting an organizational structure of the rocket division to be deployed in Cuba . Chief of . Staff of . RVSN drafted organizational structure for rocket division .
 Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro visits Moscow to sign secret agreement with his Russian counterpart Radion Malinovsky on deployment of Soviet weapons and troops in Cuba . The deal is a secret agreement signed by the Cuban defense minister and Russian counterpart .
 RVSN formed task groups responsible for processing and shipment of rocket units on transport vessels . RVSN is responsible for the shipment of rockets to transport ships .
 The commander of strategic missile forces approved a plan of ""interviews"" with the personnel assigned for the departure to the Anadyr exercise . August 31 . August 29 .
 Ernesto Che Guevara visits USSR with the amendments to the Soviet-Cuban agreement . Ernesto . Che Guesara visited USSR in 1950s and 1960s with Che .
 CIA reports to the president that ""something new and different"" is happening with Soviet supplies to Cuba . CIA reports that ""new and different" is happening in Cuba . The president reports that something new is happening .
 A U-2 spy plane delivers photos of new anti-aircraft sites under construction in Cuba . U.S. spy plane flies over to Cuba to deliver photos of the sites . The U.2 has been in Cuba for more than a decade .
 Khrushchev's message to Kennedy assuring no issues in relations all the way to U.S. congressional elections in November . Soviet ambassador in Washington hands in message to JFK .
 Chief of Staff of the Soviet armed forces issues a directive to bring units armed with R-12 missiles to full readiness by November 1, 1962 . Units armed with . R-14s by January 1, 1963, and units armed . with R.12 missiles . by . November 1
 The first Soviet missile troops arrive to Cuba onboard Omsk cargo ship . First Soviet missile forces arrive in Cuba on a cargo ship from Russia . Soviet invasion of Cuba began in 1961 .
 The Soviet Strategic Missile Forces, RVSN, are brought to highest battle readiness in Plesetsk and Baikonur . The Russian Strategic Missile Force is currently stationed in Russia's southernmost region .
 USSR declares that all military shipments to Cuba have strictly defensive nature . Accuses the U.S. of preparing an aggression against the island .
 An intelligence report to the president denies the possibility of deployment ballistic missiles in Cuba . The report says ballistic missiles could be deployed in Cuba, the report says .
 Photographs reveal Soviet R-12 missiles near San-Cristobal . U.S. reconnaissance aircraft delivers photos .
 Photo-interpreters identify a ballistic missile, along with launch and support infrastructure under construction near San Cristobal . Launch and launch infrastructure are under construction in the region .
 Kennedy receives the Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, but does not reveal his knowledge about ballistic missiles in Cuba . Kennedy receives Soviet foreign minister's approval of missile tests in Cuba in 1960s .
 The first Soviet missile unit on Cuba, led by I Sidorov, reaches operational readiness .
 Kennedy announces on TV an introduction of the naval blockade of Cuba . Kennedy announced on TV that the blockade would be introduced to Cuba .
 Cuban army and Soviet missile forces on the island are brought to the highest military readiness . Cuban army, Soviet missile force on island were brought to highest readiness .
 All three units of the 51st rocket division in Cuba are declared operational . Cuba's rocket division has been declared operational in Cuba .
 Soviet anti-aircraft missile on Cuba shuts down a U-2 aircraft of the U.S. Air Force . The U.N. aircraft was shot down by Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Soviet ships remove 42 missiles and Il-28 nuclear-capable aircraft from Cuba . Soviet ships removed 42 missiles from Cuba in a move to remove them from Soviet ships .
 The Soviet government orders the Strategic Missile Forces to discontinue high alert status for ICBM units in Plesetsk . The move follows the collapse of the Soviet Union's first ICBM ICBM unit .
 Major General Igor Demyanovich Statsenko is the commander of the 51st rocket division in Cuba . He is also a Russian Major General .
 Soviet military specialists in Cuba in 1962 . Anatoly Zak; last update: June 19, 2016 All rights reserved .
 One of several civilian vessels brought Soviet military specialists to Cuba in 1962 . The ship was one of several vessels that brought military experts to Cuba .
 The S-75 antiaircraft missile guards the entrance to the Baikonur museum as a monument to its role in the air defense of the super-secret site in the early years .