 Students will outline and define the events that led to both the United States and U.S.R. being on the brink of nuclear war . Students will also outline the events leading up to nuclear war in this week's program .
 This will highlight major global policies and negotiations that took place to avoid conflict and nuclear destruction . It will highlight how major global . policies and . negotiations that . took place in the past avoided conflict and . nuclear . destruction .
 This will help summarize the growing tensions that existed between the United States and U.S.R. when Kennedy took office, and elucidate how the Cold War was a continuous ideological conflict . In addition to this, this will help explain growing tensions between the two countries .
 Have students create a timeline poster to incorporate into a presentation or gallery walk . For an alternative to the timeline layout, have students create an alternative .
 Have students create a timeline of events affecting the relationship between the U.S. and Cuba led by Fidel Castro . Use this week's Explore Cuba's relationship with the United States .
 This will highlight America’s sour relationship with the small, communist nation and how the U.S. responded over the years .
 Students should try to also connect to current day events, i.e. the Cuban embargo being lifted and improved relations with Cuba in 2015 . Students should also try to understand current events in Cuba .
 Each cell contains an image that depicts the events, using appropriate scenes, characters, and items . Use this image to create a map of the events in each cell to show the events surrounding them .
 Rubric Timeline creates a timeline of important events and people, and explains their significance . Use the Rubric Rubric to help students understand important moments in their lives .
 Photos for Class pictures are historically accurate or significant . Make sure the dates are correct, and the photos for Class photos are historical or significant.
 The events chosen for the timeline are significant and important to the overall understanding of the time period . Proficient 33 Points Emerging 25 Points Beginning 17 Points Events and Dates are selected .
 Most of the events chosen for the timeline are significant and important to the overall understanding of the time period . The timeline is based on events that are significant to the history of the period .
 Explanations/Descriptions provided for each event are accurate and provide insight into the significance of the events .
 The explanations or descriptions provided for each event are mostly accurate and attempt to provide insight into the significance of the events . The explanations attempt to be mostly accurate .
 There are several glaring inaccuracies in the explanations or descriptions of the events .
 There may be little or no insight int the significance of the events, or the information provided may be too limited or missing .
 English Conventions There are 0-2 mistakes in spelling, grammar, and mechanics . There is 0-1 mistake in spelling and grammar . There are no mistakes in grammar, spelling or mechanics .
 All storyboards are public and can be viewed and copied by anyone . Storyboards can be shared with anyone . Use this article to help us understand today's featured news stories .
 The author can choose to leave the storyboard public or mark it as Unlisted . Personal Edition: The author may also choose to mark it unlisted .
 Unlisted storyboards can be shared via a link, but otherwise will remain hidden . Unlisted storiesboards can also be shared by a link .
 Teachers can view all of their students’ storyboards, but students can only view their own . Teachers can also view all their students' storyboards .