 Robert Kennedy's tally of initial positions on a possible U.S. response to the missiles in Cuba . Robert Kennedy: "It's not easy to say if you're going to go to Cuba, it's not so easy"
 The ""hawks" supported an airstrike; the ""doves" supported a naval quarantine . The ""dove"" supported a navy quarantine; the "hawks" backed an airstrike . The 'hawks' and 'doves' supported the airstrike .
 The 2700 pages of RFK papers opened yesterday include the first proposed letter to "Mr F.C.,"" evaluated by the Executive Committee of advisors to Kennedy on October 17th -- just one day after the president learned of the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The Archive also posted two diagrams Robert Kennedy drew on his notepad during the crisis deliberations .
 Draft letter warned Castro that by deploying the ballistic missiles had ""raised grave issues for Cuba" Draft letter said by deploying ballistic missiles the Soviets had raised "grave issues" for Cuba .
 Warning that failure to remove the missiles would lead to United States ""measures of vital significance for the future of Cuba,"" the message offered an oblique carrot of negotiations for better relations once the Soviets and their weapons of mass destruction were gone .
 Kennedy's top advisors pressed him to reject this message to Cuba because it would undermine the option of a surprise U.S. air attack on the island . Kennedy's advisors said this would undermine an air strike on Cuba .
 Kennedy ordered State Department to come up with diplomatic alternatives to attacking Cuba . Kennedy decided on interim option of naval quarantine of Cuba to buy time for diplomacy to convince Soviets to withdraw missiles .
 The State Department submitted a series of creative options for resolving the crisis peacefully . The options included allowing the United Nations to take control of both the Soviet missile bases in Cuba and the United States missile bases .
 Kennedy approved a version of this message to be sent to Castro, albeit disguised as a Brazilian peace initiative sent by the government of Joao Goulart, rather than one from Washington .
 The draft cable instructed the Brazilians to secretly carry the message to Castro that his regime and the Cuban people were in ""great jeopardy" if he didn't expel the Russians and their weapons . The cable, published here for the first time, is published here .
 By the time the Brazilian emissary arrived in Havana on October 29th, however, the urgency and relevance of Kennedy's Brazilian back-channel message had been eclipsed by events . The urgency of the message had not been realized by events in Cuba .
 On October 28, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles . In return for a Kennedy's public pledge not to invade Cuba, the President's secret promise to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey .
 For more than 40 years, the details of Kennedy's approach to Castro remained Top Secret . The details of the relationship with Castro remain Top Secret for more than four decades .
 An abbreviated account of the Castro approach, written by Peter Kornbluh, appears in the November 2012 issue of Cigar Aficionado .