 History may have something to teach us today about the importance of history and history . I have a story from history this morning that shows that both may have important lessons to us today .
 October 27, 1962, has been described as ‘the most dangerous’ day in human history . Let’s go back to the day of the most dangerous day in history . Saturday October 27 was October 27 .
 It was the height of the Cuban crisis, the riskiest part of the Cold War with the old Soviet Union . The Cuban crisis was the most dangerous period in the history of Cuba .
 Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union, knew that the U.S. was trying to destabilise Cuba . He knew it was a move that would destabilise the country . The Cuban government was overthrown in 1959 .
 Cuba was a communist run island in the Caribbean, just 90 miles from the US mainland . Cuba is now a communist-run island, 90 miles away from the U.S.
 He thought the Americans would not dare to intervene if they knew that Cuba was equipped with Soviet nuclear warheads . He thought that the Americans . would not . dare to . intervene if . they knew . that Cuba had Soviet nuclear weapons .
 "Clearly, this situation was unacceptable for the United States of America. Clearly, this is unacceptable," said President Obama .
 No one knew if the missiles were operational, and the only way to find out would require a fullscale invasion of Cuba . The only way of finding out would be to invade the country .
 Any such attack on an ally of the Soviet Union would surely provoke a military response from Russia . Russia would surely respond to any attack on a Soviet ally of Russia .
 Both sides are equipped with thousands of nuclear warheads, each on a hair trigger to launch them . The conflict had every chance of ending in a nuclear-tipped World War Three .
 The American President – John Fitzgerald Kennedy was being guided towards a violent solution when by chance he bumped into an old colleague, Adlai Stevenson . The American president was guided to an end of the war when he was assassinated .
 Stevenson persuaded Kennedy to try a peaceful solution before committing to war . Stevenson convinced Kennedy to stop war in Vietnam .
 By the time President Kennedy learned of the plan, these subs were halfway across the Atlantic . Subs were already on their way to the U.S.
 Stevenson’s suggested peaceful solution, Kennedy announced the quarantine of Cuba by the U.S. Navy . Stevenson's suggestion was part of the solution .
 Cuba would be sealed off to prevent any Russian ships from getting through . Cuba would also be closed off to stop Russian ships getting through the island .
 The submarines were nearing the island when they were ordered to change course and take up positions in the Sargasso Sea . They were ordered by the Soviet naval command to take up position in the sea .
 Conditions in submarines designed for the icy waters of the North were hellish . Conditions in the submarines were designed to cope with the harsh winter conditions .
 U.S. destroyers were practically on top of the sub this prevented it from surfacing to recharge its batteries and use its antenna to receive instructions from Moscow .
 After 5 days of waiting underwater, conditions on B-59 were so bad that men were passing out . Men were waiting underwater for 5 days underwater . Conditions were such bad that they passed out .
 The boat’s captain, Valentin Savitsky, knew from previous days’ communications that a crisis was unfolding above the waves . But, unable to receive radio signals, he had no way of learning about recent developments . The boat's captain knew from earlier days that a
 American warships were supposed to follow a careful protocol when they came across Russian submarines . To avoid any escalation to armed conflict, the U.S. warships would have to follow protocol .
 They were to drop harmless depth charges and instruct the subs to surface . Subs were to be instructed to surface and drop harmless depths charges .
 Hand grenades dropped into the water from a U.S. Navy ship . The hand grenades were dropped from the water by the ship .
 The suffering Soviet submarine was suddenly rocked by a series of explosions . It was the first time a Soviet submarine had been hit by a major explosion .
 Had the captain’s orders been carried out, there would have been a nuclear explosion . The chances are good that the Americans would have responded in kind a full-scale nuclear war would have broken out .
 Russian translators found it almost impossible to decipher what he meant . Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, wrote badly and wrote badly . But Fidel Castro wrote badly.
 Under the sea, in a submarine battered by exploding hand grenades, another crisis was unfolding . Under the water, in the submarine, the submarine was battered by hand grenades .
 On board B-59, next to the sub’s captain who was determined to fire his nuclear torpedoes, was a Soviet Navy captain called Vasily Archipov . The sub's captain was also a Russian Navy captain .
 It was pure chance that Archipov was on board, but he was to play a vital role in what happened next . The Russian legend was a key figure in the success of his country's first season .
 Archipov had already been involved in a nuclear disaster, as an officer on a submarine called K-19 . He was involved in the disaster as a submarine officer on the submarine .
 A year earlier, K-19 had been participating in exercises off the coast of Greenland when its reactor coolant system failed . A year later, the ship was taking part in exercises with the U.S. Navy .
 K-19’s commander sent in crew members to repair the damage, knowing that they were likely to receive lethal doses of 3 radiation . The mission was likely to be fatal, and the crew were sent in to repair damage .
 Eight of the crew members volunteered for the task were killed . The crew members were killed within days of the mission .
 It was he who talked the sub’s captain down from firing a nuclear torpedo and potentially starting the Third World War . The sub's captain had to be talked down by the captain of the sub .
 If it hadn't been for Archipov’s experience off Greenland, he might not have stepped in . If it wasn’t for him, he may not have been able to step in .
 Kennedy might not have met Stevenson and been persuaded to try a peaceful solution . Kennedy may not have been persuaded by Stevenson to try to solve the problem .
 The message from Castro to Khrushchev could have been translated as a request for a nuclear strike . Castro's message was likely to have been a request to use a nuclear weapon against the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev could have rejected the deal that the U.S. then offered Russia . The United States then offered the deal to Russia, which was rejected .
 There were countless other moments during the 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis when things could have gone very wrong indeed .
 A full-blown nuclear exchange between the U.S. and Russia would have led to the extinction of almost every living thing on the face of the planet . By very wrong, I mean a nuclear exchange would have left the planet almost completely uninhabited .
 I would not be here speaking, this Hall would be in ruins and almost no one in the room would have even been born . I would have been born in this room today if I had been born, I would never have been here speaking .
 Those here old enough to remember the year 1962 would have died then in a flash of light and heat, or in the long dark cold nuclear winter that would have followed . Those here are those who are still alive today .
 All we hold dear hangs by a thread, and we must fight hard to preserve our life and civilisation . My first thought is that all we hold near-by-hand is that we must preserve our civilisation .
 All complex situations contain the possibility of unanticipated events, no matter how carefully we plan . My second thought is that all complex situations involve the possibility for unanticipated developments .
 It makes sense to step carefully as we prepare for whatever future we hope to live . The world's future is in the hands of the U.S. government .
 When everything was spiralling out of control and it looked as though we were heading for a 4 violent, desperate conclusion, a single man stepped forward and did what he thought was right . A single man stood up for the cause of the tragedy .
 Everyone in this room owes their life to a man whose name you had never heard, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Everyone owes their lives to the man you never heard"
 "What he did on October 27, 1962, in an overheated submarine, rocked by explosions, surrounded by screaming men, saved us all. But what he did in that submarine, in a overheated sub, was to save us all."
 A single man, acting calmly and guided by reason was the thread upon which the fate of our world hung . A single . man, acted calmly, guided by . reason, was a thread on the thread of our . world hung.
 "I pray that no one in this room finds himself in such a moment of crisis," says President Obama . "No one in the room will find himself with such a crisis," he says .
 "In the moment when you are tested, I hope you might remember Vasily Archipov," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "I hope you will remember you as a person," says Putin .
 I hope that memory inspires you to be that voice of calm, controlled reason that brings a peaceful conclusion . I hope you can be the voice that brings peace in the world .
 You don’t need to wait for a crisis to be calm, controlled and reasonable, says David Cameron . And you don't need to sit back and wait for the crisis to get calm and controlled, he says .