 It had always been a United States ally and had held United States military bases there . U.S. has always been an ally of the region .
 Fidel Castro overthrew Batista in 1959 . Fidel Castro was the leader of the revolution that overthrew the Batista regime .
 He took over all U.S. corporations, much to the dismay of the Americans . He took on all United States corporations .
 The U.S. cut off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961 and decided to invade in April 1961 . They decided to do so after cutting diplomatic relations in 1961 .
 Anti-Cuban exiles attempted to overthrow Castro but it would have never worked . This was called the Bay of pigs and turned out to be a resounding failure . The Bay of Pigs was a failure .
 The rebels were not supported and the Bay of Pigs ended in an embarrassing defeat for the U.S. The rebels did not receive support from the Americans .
 The USSR was interested in Cuba because it was a new, flourishing communist state . It was so close to America that it was close to the U.S. It was also close to Cuba .
 It provided a necessary launch base for Russian missiles, similar to the ones America was keeping in Turkey . The base was used to launch missiles from Russia .
 In October 1962, a U2 spy plane took photos of what was identified to be a USSR missile base in Cuba . The base is believed to have been the site of a Soviet missile base .
 Ships were also spotted heading to Cuba from the USSR carrying more weapons . Ships also seen heading to the country from the Soviet Union carrying weapons .
 They were worried it could be finished in less than a week so they had to act fast . They had been worried that the work could be done in under a week . They are worried it will be finished within a week of the deadline .
 JFK decided that blockading Cuba was the safest way to act . JFK made the decision on the 20th October, 1962 .
 He publicly called on the USSR leader, Khrushchev, to remove these weapons and call off the delivery . But he refused to even acknowledge it existing .
 Khrushchev ordered the ships to turn back around in a turn of luck . The ships were ordered to return to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev offered to stop all work on these missiles in return for a removal of the blockade and the threat of the US invading Cuba . However, the offer was not accepted and Khrushche offered to end the work on missiles .
 He amended this later to order the removal of missiles from Turkey too . He amended that later he amended that he had ordered the removal .
 After a U2 plane was shot down over Cuba, Kennedy agreed the first terms but still refused to remove the missiles in Turkey . Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from Turkey and Cuba were dismantled . The missiles were removed in Turkey and the missiles were dismantled in Cuba .
 Cuba remained communist and heavily armed after this but no longer had nuclear weapons that would severely threaten America . Cuba remained heavily armed but had no nuclear arms that would threaten the U.S.
 A permanent hotline was set up between the White House and the Kremlin in case of further disputes . The White House has also set up a hotline with the Kremlin to prevent further tensions .
 This crisis showed that the alternative of co-operation and containment worked, mainly because the threat of nuclear war was far too severe . This crisis was the only time when the threat was too severe, says David Cameron .