 Khrushchev demands that the U.S. remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey as a condition of Soviet removal of the missiles in Cuba . The Soviet position seems to be hardening .
 In 1953, Stalin died and there was a struggle for leadership of the Soviet Union . Stalin died in 1953 and there were a struggle to replace him as Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev prevailed, becoming party leader on September 7 of that year . He had his main rival, NKVD chief Lavrenty Beria, executed on December 7th, that year he had been killed .
 Khrushchev's leadership marked a crucial transition for the Soviet Union . The former Soviet Union leader was the leader of the Cold War era .
 The speech was typical Khrushchev, shrewd and reckless at the same time . The speech is typical of the former Soviet leader's shrewd, reckless and reckless .
 In the summer of 1956, he had to go to Warsaw to personally oversee a crackdown in order to save his own skin . He had to travel to Poland to oversee the crackdown .
 Khrushchev became Premier of the Soviet Union on March 27, 1958 . He established himself as head of both the state and the party . Khrushchev became head of the state in 1958 .
 He began a reform of the economy, stressing the production of consumer goods over heavy industry . He began to push for consumer goods rather than heavy industry in the country .
 His view of the West as a rival rather than an evil entity alienated China's leadership . His view led to the Sino-Soviet split in 1960, leading to the split in China .
 Khrushchev was regarded by his political enemies in the Soviet Union as a boorish, uncivilized peasant . He had a reputation for interrupting speakers to insult them . He was seen by his enemies as an uncouthful peasant .
 The Politburo accused him once of hare-brained scheming referring to his erratic policy . He once interrupted British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan during a speech at the U.N.
 This was the leader of the Soviet Union as major changes were occuring in Cuba . The Soviet Union was in the midst of major changes in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Fidel Castro assumed power in Cuba on January 1, 1959, after a six-year battle against dictator General Fulgencio Batista . Castro took over from Batista in 1959 . Castro was the first Cuban dictator to take over Cuba .
 The following year, Soviet Deputy First Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan visited Cuba with the intent of moving Cuba away from economic dependence upon the United States . This was not the first contact between Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 In April 1959, Raul Castro, Fidel's brother and admitted communist, contacted Moscow with a request for military advisors to help him consolidate his hold over the Cuban military . Fidel Castro's brother, Fidel, asked Moscow for military advisers in 1959 .
 On May 7, 1960, Cuba and the Soviet Union officially established diplomatic relations . Several months after the visit by Mikoyan, Cuba established diplomatic ties with the USSR .
 On August 28, the United States imposed a trade embargo on Cuba, who in turn, countered by nationalizing about one billion dollars of U.S. investments in Cuba on October 8 . On October 8, Cuba nationalized about onebillion dollars of United States investments in Cuban investments .
 In September 1960, the first Soviet military assistance arrived on Cuban soil . The first Cuban military assistance came in September 1960 .
 By the end of 1960, relations between the U.S. and Cuba had seriously deteriorated . Cuba was one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 On December 19, Cuba and the Soviet Union issued a joint announcement . Cuba committed itself to solidarity with the Sino-Soviet bloc . Cuba said it would align itself with the domestic and foreign policies of the Union .
 Khrushchev told a gathering at the Cuban Embassy in Moscow that the most aggressive American monopolists are preparing a direct attack on Cuba . On January 2, 1961, Khruschev said, "alarming news is coming from Cuba at present"
 They are trying to present the case as though rocket bases are being set up or are already established in Cuba . What is more is more than a rocket base is already being established, they say . The Cuban government is trying to make the case .
 The next day, the United States and Cuba severed diplomatic relations . The U.S. turned over the handling of its affairs to Switzerland and Cuba to Czechoslovakia .
 In a message to Kennedy after the outcome was assured, he said, ""aggressive bandit actions cannot save your system"
 He assumed that the United States would land American troops after the initial invasion began to run into trouble, using Marines, and bombing the island with their own planes to ensure an exile victory . He had assumed the U.S. would use Marines, use their own .
 Khrushchev decided that Kennedy had been seriously weakened by the failed invasion and decided it was time to meet with him . Khrisschev decided to meet Kennedy after he was seriously weakened .
 On May 12, he accepted a long-standing invitation to meet with Kennedy . Talks are scheduled for June 3-4 in Vienna, Austria .
 Khrushchev believed that the Bay of Pigs had weakened Kennedy enough that he could take the bold step of placing offensive weapons in Cuba . The Bay of Pics had weakened JFK enough to take action .
 Kennedy later told the press that Khrushchev's demands had made the prospects for war very real . Kennedy later said the prospect of war was very real and that the situation was very serious . Kennedy said the situation had been made very serious by the demands .
 Khrushchev himself was pleased with the outcome and told associates later that he felt Kennedy was someone he could bully . The result was that he was able to bully Kennedy, who he felt he could do so .
 If Kennedy displayed weakness toward Khrushchev, he was showing strength toward Castro . Kennedy showed weakness toward the Soviet leader, but showed strength against Castro .
 On November 30, 1961, he authorized ""Operation Mongoose," a major covert action aimed at overthrowing the Castro government . Operation Mongoose was the first attempt to overthrow Castro's government .