 This is history and a historical speech that only proves the Castro regime’s lifelong dream of destroying America, says President Obama . The Castro regime's lifelong dream is to destroy America, Obama says .
 The Castro regime were able to get so deep into construction without the U.S. knowledge, still baffles the mind . These missile silos would have been built anyway and how the Castro regime managed to build without the United States knowledge .
 Many people have forgotten the Missile Crisis because of time but for those Castro adoring so-called Americans who are in favor of lifting the embargo, amnesia takes over .
 It’s the same Castro regime that is still controlling Cuba right now, there hasn’t been any change at all, the threat is always there, says CNN.com .
 They actually feel the Castro regime is changing their ways, turning towards a democracy . The Castro regime feels it is changing its ways, according to the Cuban people .
 They should pickup their history books and/or start watching the video . They should pick up their history .
 Nothing in Cuba has changed and nothing will, as long as the same Castro regime depicted in this video is still around . Nothing has changed in Cuba since the Castro regime was depicted in the video . The Castro regime is still in power in Cuba .
 Under “Operation Pot Pie” he quietly withdrew 64 U.S. nuclear missiles from Great Britain, 30 from Italy and 15 from Turkey . In exchange, he allowed a Soviet combat brigade to remain in Cuba indefinitely . He also withdrew 64 United States .
 Kennedy applied the Neutrality Act against Cubans fighting against the Castro dictatorship . Kennedy publicly promised that the U.S. would never invade Cuba and applied the Act .
 Cuban exile, Eugenio de Sosa Chabau, who fled Cuba after two decades as a political prisoner ADVISED President John F Kennedy about Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Cuban exiles gathered enough information in Cuba to present to the U.S. government about missiles arriving in Cuba from Russia . Exiles were risking their lives to gather enough information to present the United States government .
 It wasn’t until October 1962 that flying U-2 planes confirmed the existence of the U.S. Air Force One .
 Kennedy administration could have saved itself a lot of griefs if they had only taken action when first advised about the missile build up in Cuba from JUST other Cuban exiles .
 Cuban exile advised the U.S. about Cuba’s electronic spying facility at Lourdes, Cuba . The facility is located in the Cuban city of Lourde .
 It wasn’t until Stanislas Lunev, a former colonel in the Soviet military intelligence agency GRU, brought it up that the U.S. started taking notice .
 Former Cuban intelligence officer who defected says Castro tried to build his own missile capable of carrying nuclear weapons .
 For the ultra secret project he recruited military engineers and professors from Cuban universities . The project was the brainchild of Cuban military engineers .
 The missile, a sort of primitive V-1 bomb similar to the one developed by the Nazis, would use a MiG-21 jet motor . The missile would be a sort-of-a-bomb that was developed in Germany .
 General Rafael del Pino Díaz, the highest ranking Cuban defector, advised the United States in 1983 of castro’s plan to bomb Turkey Point Nuclear Plant . General Pino told the U.S. in 1983 that castro planned to bomb the nuclear plant .
 Just another Cuban exile has passed on to the United States. These are just a few bits of information .
 Many in the U.S. government and the MSM just choose to ignore it . Obama administration and the media have ignored it .
 I believe that for whatever reason–that I cannot fathom–the U.S. wants castro in power . Rayarena believes that the United States wants Castro .
 As firefly pointed out, castro’s ceaseless hostility to the USA spams decades . castro has been a major ally of the U.S. for decades .
 Cuban exiles have warned the U.S. government, they have ignored the warnings . Yet, the United States does not consider castro a threat . The United States has ignored these warnings .
 One thing makes sense, if one continues to make the same mistake over and over again, then one is either stupid or simply not forthright . One thing that makes sense makes sense is that if one makes the same mistakes over and again, it's either stupid, or not forwardright
 I don’t think that the U.S. government and its intelligence forces are stupid, he says . He says he doesn't think the United States government is stupid .
 JFK was a disastrous mix of delusional arrogance, inexperience, ignorance, ineptitude, and a twisted moral compass .
 JFK was simply entitled to get what he wanted because he was JFK, regardless of what harm that might entail for other people, even for an entire country like Cuba . It absolutely did not matter what means had to be used to achieve his ends, he was entitled to it .
 We are talking about a very severe and advanced case of hubris, we say . It would have seemed even more grotesque and repulsive if it had not been wrapped in youth, superficial physical and personal appeal, and fawning adoration .
 Kennedy mythology, like Che mythology, only goes to show how easy it can be to manipulate and deceive people .
 The older I get, the more it strikes me how very, VERY weak-minded people are . Far too many people clearly are, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The really interesting matter is to note the prevalence of extraordinarily silly notions among people of very high intelligence . The problem is not sure that can be remedied .
 The sheer number of individuals with impressive IQs who nonetheless talk utter malarkey is startling is startling . Some of those people are certainly immune, but some are immune, according to the author .
 Many people pride themselves on not accepting popular “superstitions” like religious faith or patriotism . To complete the irony lap, many such people pride they don’t accept religious faith .
 The average sociology professor believes in some variant of socialism . Perhaps some average schmo believes in UFOs, but the average sociologist believes in socialism .
 The premise that human beings, including ourselves, are basically not rational and have to work at intellectual coherence is an admittedly tough conclusion, but I think it’s altogether warranted .
 Great description and analysis of JFK–may he burn in Hell for all eternity. Rayarena .
 If I hear “Camelot’s mentioned one more time in relationship to his name, I’m going to regurgitate whatever I ate .
 We can all thank the Mayor of Chicago, Richard Joseph Daley and Chicago Mob boss Sam Giancana for stealing Illinois and giving it to Kennedy . Daley stole Illinois and gave Kennedy the title of state .
 Richard M Daley – and Obama’s buddyis the son of Richard Joseph Daley, the former Mayor of Chicago, Richard M. Daley . By the way, the ex-mayor of Chicago is also the son .
 U-2 photos sat on the President’s desk revealing those “refugee rumors,” complete with nuclear warheads, and pointed directly at Bundy, JFK and their entire staff of sagacious Ivy League wizards .
 Until today, the U.S. has complied with her promise to not interfere with Castro and to not allow anyone else to interfere with him .
 Nixon, who lost by a mere 1%, would have supported and aided the Bay of Pigs invasion . Nixon lost by just 1% in the '60s but would have backed the invasion .
 This is what happened and why I placed the video there, it’s history . But this is why I put it there, and it's history. It's history .
 If the Castro regime is presented with this golden opportunity again, they will take it in a heartbeat . Castro regime would be presented with a golden opportunity, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Johnson sends American soldiers half way around the world to defend South Vietnam and Cuba is 90 miles away . Afterwards Johnson sends U.S. soldiers to defend Vietnam .