 At any time before your due date you can extend or purchase your rental through your account . At any . time before . the due date before your . due date can be extended or purchase a rental through the account .
 He argues JFK had become a major threat to the military-industrial complex and had to be eliminated through a conspiracy planned by the CIA . “The CIA’s fingerprints are all over the crime and the events leading up to it” not by a crazed individual, the
 Kennedy gradually turned away from his Cold Warrior beliefs and toward a policy of lasting peace . Horrified by the specter of nuclear annihilation, Kennedy turned away .
 Kennedy’s change of heart was a direct threat to their power and influence . But to the military and intelligence agencies in the U.S. who were committed to winning the Cold War at any cost, it was a threat .
 Kennedy’s saving grace was that unlike Truman he recognized the evil of nuclear weapons . Unlike Truman, Kennedy recognized nuclear weapons, he recognized their evil .
 Kennedy resisted the Joint Chiefs of Staff and most of his civilian advisers, who pressured him for a preemptive attack on Soviet missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1961 .
 Thanks to the sheer grace of God, to Kennedy’s resistance to his advisers, humanity survived the crisis . Kennedy, however, survived it for only a little more than a year .
 Two critical questions converge at Kennedy’s assassination . As we shall see, because of his continuing turn from nuclear war toward a vision of peace in the 13 months remaining to him, he was executed by the powers .
 There is nothing so threatening to systemic evil as those willing to stand against it regardless of the consequences . The second question may be key to the first, because there is nothing more than those who stand against evil .
 John Kennedy became so threatening to the most powerful military-economic coalition in history that its wielders of power were willing to risk everything they had to kill him . So we will try to see this story initially through the life of John Kennedy, to understand why he became .
 Kennedy was a reckless playboy from youth to death, under the abiding influence of a domineering, womanizing father and an emotionally distant, strictly Catholic mother . Seen through that lens, Kennedy was seen as a womanizing playboy .
 President Kennedy’s steely resistance to pressures of a military-intelligence elite focused on waging war . President Kennedy's life was formed, first of all, by death, the hovering angel of death .
 To family and friends, Jack Kennedy always seemed to be sick and dying . Yet he exuded an ironic joy in life . He saw death approach repeatedly .
 Both the weaknesses and strengths of his character drew on his deeply held belief that death would come soon . Both his strengths and weaknesses drew on the belief that he would die soon .
 John Kennedy’s World War II experience was characterized by a willingness to give his life for his friends . By smiling at his own death, he was free to resist others' deaths .
 Two years before the Hiroshima bombing, Kennedy was a PT boat commander in the South Pacific . Kennedy was in the Pacific at the time of the bomb attack .
 On the night of August 1–2, 1943, he was at the wheel of his PT 109, patrolling Blackett Strait in the Solomon Islands . He was patrolling a corridor of water used by Japanese destroyers .
 There was a terrific roar, as the gasoline aboard went up in flames . The section of the boat Kennedy was on stayed afloat . Kennedy was aboard the boat when it exploded .
 Kennedy, who had been on the Harvard swimming team, swam through the dark to shouts, finding his badly burned engineer, McMahon . Kennedy swam to find the engineer, who was badly burned .
 He coaxed and cajoled others not to give up, then towed McMahon a hundred yards back to the floating hulk identified by a crew member’s blinking light . McMahon was rescued by a rescue team after he was found by the crew .
 All the survivors in the water reached the tilted deck and collapsed on it . The survivors in water reached a tilted deck, collapsed on the collapsed deck . The ship was carrying passengers and crew members on board .
 They wondered how long it would take for them to be rescued by PTs from their base on Rendova Island, forty miles away . When daylight and noon came with no rescue, the group abandoned the sinking hulk .
 They swam to a small, deserted island, in the midst of larger islands with Japanese soldiers . The survivors were taken to the island by Japanese soldiers, who were also on the island .
 Nine of the crew held onto a two-by-six timber and kicked and paddled their way to the island . The crew paddled to an island in a paddling style .
 Kennedy would swim in ten-minute spurts, then pause to rest and check on McMahon . Kennedy again towed McMahon, holding a strap from McMahon’s life preserver in his teeth .
 A chronicler of this episode described it from McMahon’s point of view . McMahon would have found the swim unbearable if he had realized that Kennedy was hauling him through three miles .
 McMahon could see little but the sky and the flattened cone of Kolombangara . He was floating on his back with his burned hands trailing at his sides .
 He could not see the other men, though while all of them were still together, he could hear them puffing and splashing . He could hear the men puffing, splashing in the water . The other men could not be seen .
 The swim seemed endless, and he doubted that it would lead to salvation . He doubted that he would lead the swim to the end .
 He was hungry and thirsty and fearful that they would be attacked by sharks . He was fearful that the sharks would attack them .
 The awareness that he could do nothing to save himself from the currents, the sharks or the enemy oppressed him, he said . He said: "The awareness that . he could . do nothing, the awareness . could not do nothing."
 Kennedy told the crew he would swim from the island out into Ferguson Passage, a mile and a half away, where the PT boats usually patrolled after dark . They staggered up the beach and ducked under trees, barely avoiding a Japanese barge that chugged by and failed to
 He took the 109’s lantern, wrapped in a life jacket, to signal the boats . The 109's lantern was used to signal boats to safety .
 Kennedy swam for half an hour, forded a reef, then swam another hour, to reach his intended point of interception . Kennedy reached his intended interception point of intercepting .
 After a while, he saw the flares of an action beyond the island of Gizo, ten miles away . He said: "After a long journey, I saw the flare flare of action beyond Gizo."
 Kennedy tried to swim back to his men, but the PT boats had taken a different route . The PT boats took a different course of their own route . Kennedy was killed in the attack .
 "He dropped his shoes, but he held onto the heavy lantern, his symbol of contact with his fellows," he said . He dropped his shoe, but held onto his heavy lantern .
 A few hours before he had wanted desperately to get to the base at Rendova . He had been desperately trying to reach Rendova, but was unable to get there .
 Now he only wanted to get back to the little island he had left that night, but he didn’t try to get there; he just wanted to . He didn't try to go there, but instead he wanted to go back to his island .
 The tide shoves and sucks through the islands and makes the currents curl in odd patterns . The tide pushes and sucks the currents to the surface of the islands .
 His mind was blank, but his fist was tightly clenched on the kapok around the lantern . His eyes were blank as he clutched his fist tightly around a lantern lantern . The lantern's lantern light lit up, but the lantern was still glowing .
 Current moved west past Gizo, then north and east past Kolombangara, then south into Ferguson Passage . Current moved in a huge circle, moving west, east, west, north, east and west .
 The sky turned from black to gray, and so did Kennedy’s mind . Kennedy: “Early in the morning the sky turned black, so did so did his mind. The sky was black, but so was the sky,” he said .
 Kennedy’s SOS message, scratched on a coconut shell, was scratched on coconut shell . The natives carried it to an Australian Navy coastwatcher, Reg Evans, who was working behind enemy lines .
 Evans radioed the United States Navy for assistance . Kennedy and fellow officer Barney Ross almost died in another failed effort to signal PTs at night in Ferguson Passage .
 They found a dugout canoe, and paddled it into high waves in the darkness . They paddled the canoe in high waves into the dark .
 The waves threw the two men against a reef, but they again survived . Kennedy’s crew never forgot his commitment to their lives . Kennedy's crew never forgave him .
 Kennedy took first from his war experience was a heightened sense of the precious value of his friends’ lives, he says . Kennedy: "What he took first ... was a sense of his friendship with his friends' lives"
 Among the wartime deaths he mourned were those of his brother Joe Kennedy, Jr., and brother-in-law Billy Hartington . He also mourned the deaths of Joe Kennedy Jr. and his brother, Joe Kennedy .
 As we saw, since childhood chronically poor health had brought him near death many times . As we have seen, since . childhood chronically . poor health . had brought many near death . many times.
 He had scarlet fever when he was very young, and serious back trouble . He also had serious back problems in his life, including back problems .
 When we were growing up together we used to laugh about the great risk a mosquito took in biting Jack Kennedy . With some of his blood the mosquito was almost sure to die. With Jack Kennedy's blood, the mosquito would almost certainly die .
 He was in Chelsea Naval Hospital for an extended period of time after the war . Had major and painful operation on his back in 1955, campaigned on crutches in 1958 .
 "I never heard him say anything that would indicate that he felt God had dealt with him unjustly," she says . She says he never said anything to indicate he felt that God dealt him unfairly .
 Those who knew him well would know he was suffering only because his face was a little whiter, the lines around his eyes were a little deeper, his words a little sharper . He said he suffered only because of his whiter face and lines .
 What is infinitely far worse is that we have unleashed the terrible powers of atomic energy, says David Cameron . 'We have to live with the terrible power of nuclear energy,' he says .
 "Above all, day and night, with every ounce of ingenuity and industry we possess, we must work for peace," says President Obama . "We must work ... for peace"
 Kennedy attended the conference that founded the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 as a journalist for Hearst press . After his bad back and colitis had forced his discharge from the Navy, Kennedy had attended the U.N. conference as a reporter for the Hearst .
 On July 1 in London, he had dinner with William Douglas-Home, a former captain in the British army who had been sentenced to a year in jail for refusing an order to fire on civilians .
 Kennedy observed in his diary, “prowess in war is still deeply respected,” he said . Kennedy: “Prowess is still deep respected.”
 His more bellicose views in the fifties reflected the book he had written in 1940, Why England Slept, an expansion of his Harvard thesis .
 Kennedy’s book found Britain too slow in rearming to resist Nazi Germany . Kennedy's book found that Britain was too slow to resist the Nazis .
 Kennedy’s amendment failed, but his commitment to a “flexible” Cold War strategy would be carried over into his presidency . Kennedy would emphasize conventional forces and "smaller" nuclear weapons .
 In 1958, Senator John Kennedy delivered a major speech attacking the Eisenhower administration for allowing a “missile gap” to open up between allegedly superior Soviet forces and those of the U.S. It was an illusory policy supported by Democrats that could easily have led to the
 Kennedy repeated the charge of a missile gap in his successful 1960 presidential campaign . Kennedy developed it into an argument for increased military spending .
 Kennedy had taken a Cold War myth, had campaigned on it, and now partly on its basis, was engaged in a dangerous military buildup as president . Whether or not Kennedy already suspected the truth, he had taken the Cold War myths, and had campaigned for it .
 Even in his years espousing Cold War principles of defense, Senator Kennedy had occasionally broken ranks with the West on colonial wars, particularly in Indochina and Algeria .
 Speaking in the Senate on April 6, 1954, Kennedy critiqued predictions of a U.S.-sponsored French victory in Vietnam over Ho Chi Minh’s revolutionary forces . Kennedy: “I don’t believe the predictions of victory were true .
 Algerians were seeking a hearing at the United Nations for their national liberation movement . That spring he talked with Algerians who were seeking to be heard at the U.N.
 His biographer, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Jr., wrote of the episode, “Even Democrats drew back.” Even Democrats “draw back”
 Kennedy’s renewal of his purpose in entering politics: the attainment of peace in the nuclear age . Ordeal in Africa in Africa.
 As the 1960 primaries increased his presidential prospects, Kennedy told a journalist that his horror of war would be the most valuable resource he could bring to the presidency, based on personal experience . Kennedy told the journalist that he would be a better candidate for president based on his personal war experience .
 Kennedy said he “had read the books of great military strategists—Carl Von Clausewitz, Alfred Thayer Mahan, and Basil Henry Liddell Hart—and he wondered if their theories of total violence made sense in the nuclear age . Kennedy: "I had read the
 Kennedy’s pledge: “To those new states whom we welcome to the ranks of the free, we pledge our word that one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely to be replaced by a far more iron tyranny.”
 Nonaligned listeners at least as likely to have capitalist as communist stripes . What to an American audience was a cunning communist tiger was to nonaligned listeners .
 Kennedy’s worst decision as president would be to develop role of counterinsurgent warfare in Vietnam . The U.S. would then wind up inside the United States tiger it had been riding, he says .
 Kennedy promoted the Green Berets as a response to communist guerrillas . He failed to recognize that counterinsurgent warfare would turn into a form of terrorism .
 The idea that the United States could deploy Green Beret forces in client states “to win the hearts and minds of the people” was a contradiction that would become a negative part of Kennedy’s legacy . The new president recognized no such conflict in his inaugural address .
 John F Kennedy’s Inaugural Address reflects the profound tensions of his political philosophy . JFK's Inauguration Address reflects his profound political beliefs .
 Kennedy envisioned in 1945 ‘the day of the conscientious objector’ with an international relinquishing of sovereignty and the abolition of war by popular demand . From the lives he had seen lost in World War II, Kennedy had envisioned the day of conscientious objectors .
 John Kennedy remained a Cold Warrior in his understanding of the means needed to resist tyranny . John Kennedy was the Cold Warrior of the Cold War in his thinking . He said he remained Cold Warrior .
 For the sake of both peace and freedom, he had no way out except to negotiate a just peace with the enemy . The most dangerous political conflict in world history was the most dangerous conflict in the world history .
 Thomas Merton, a Trappist monk, wrote a book on the assassination of President Kennedy . He says Kennedy learned from his own side of the conflict to push through such negotiations . Merton would learn just how dangerous it was, from his side of that conflict .
 Thomas Merton was a novice monk at the Abbey of Gethsemani in the hills of Kentucky . John Kennedy was being carried by the movements of a Pacific current .
 A providential hand saved each of their lives for a further purpose . Yet one can discern a providential . hand saving each of them for a greater purpose .
 What Kennedy half-dreamed that night in the Pacific in relation to the little island his men were on could be said also of Merton’s spiritual journey to Gethsemani .
 He just wanted to, in a heartfelt prayer that had no fixed attachment to its goal, he said . He said, "I just want to pray. I'm not trying to kill myself."
 Merton arriving at Gethsemani was like Kennedy stumbling up on the beach and collapsing in the arms of his crew . In the early sixties, Thomas Merton began responding to the imminent threat of nuclear war .
 His writings on the nuclear crisis are an illuminating context in which to view the presidential struggles and Cold War murder of John F Kennedy . His writings drew him into what he called ‘the Unspeakable”
 Merton wrote impassioned articles protesting the nuclear buildup, he became a controversial figure . Merton became an outspoken critic of the nuclear program .
 Monastic superiors ordered him to stop publishing on peace . His alarmed monastic superiors told him to publish on peace instead .
 Merton was obedient, yet deeply determined to keep articulating the gospel truth, if not in a forbidden format . Merton's work was published in The New York Times, published in October 2013 .
 For a year at the center of the Kennedy presidency, Merton wrote letters on war and peace to a wide circle of correspondents . Even before he experienced the inevitable crackdown on his published work, he had already written a voluminous series of letters on peace .
 Ethel Kennedy, Dorothy Day, Clare Boothe Luce, E. Kennedy and Dorothy Day were among those who attended the ceremony . They included psychologists Erich Fromm and Karl Stern, and the mayor of Hiroshima, Shinzo Hamai .
 Merton collected over a hundred of these letters, had them mimeographed and bound, and sent them out to friends in January 1963 . The letters were bound and bound in 1963 .
 It was “not merely against physical destruction, still less against physical danger, but against a suicidal moral evil and a total lack of ethics and rationality with which international policies tend to be conducted,” he said .
 “President Kennedy is a shrewd and sometimes adventurous leader. True,” he added, he said . “True,’ he added .
 Too much the Time and Life mentality, than which I can imagine nothing further, in reality, from, say, Lincoln . Too much of the time and life mentality, too much of it, says author .
 Merton speculates in an inspired insight, “Kennedy will break through into that someday by miracle by miracle. Maybe,” he speculates, ‘Kennedy’s .
 Lincoln noticed a little slip of paper that had fallen on the floor . Lincoln was about to clear the table when he found it .
 The revelation of a storm coming had occurred at the end of the meeting, as the two men faced each other across a table . The revelation was made at end of meeting .
 Kennedy’s gift to Khrushchev, a model of the USS Constitution, lay between them . Kennedy's gift to the Soviet Union was a gift of the U.S. Constitution .
 Kennedy pointed out that the ship’s cannons had been able to fire half a mile and kill a few people . Kennedy said that the cannons were able to kill some people .
 If he and Khrushchev failed to negotiate peace, the two of them could kill seventy million people in the opening exchange of a nuclear war . The two sides could kill 70 million people if they fail to reach peace .
 Kennedy shocked at what he felt was his counterpart’s lack of response . Kennedy was shocked at the lack of a response from his counterpart . Kennedy said he was shocked by what he thought was the response .
 The result of their unsuccessful meeting would be an ever more threatening conflict . The result would be a more dangerous conflict .
 Thomas Merton in his initial sense of Kennedy had doubted if JFK, by falling short of Lincoln’s character, was capable of weathering a storm . Merton: "I doubt if JFK was able to weather a storm."
 The president’s friend Paul Fay, Jr., Jr., told of an incident that showed JFK was keenly conscious of the peril of a military coup d’État . JFK was aware of the danger of a coup d'état.
 Kennedy was asked what he thought of Seven Days in May, a best-selling novel that described a military takeover in the U.S. Kennedy was on a vacation with friends in 1962 when he read the novel .
 The next day Kennedy discussed with his friends the possibility of their seeing such a coup in the United States . Kennedy discussed the possibility with friends the next day . Kennedy: "We are going to see a coup"
 It was a covert project initiated by President Dwight D Eisenhower . It was the first time President Obama had been involved in the project .
 By late summer 1960, when Kennedy became the Democratic nominee for president, the CIA had already begun training fifteen hundred Cuban exile troops at a secret base in Guatemala for an invasion of Cuba .
 Eight B-26 bombers of the Cuban Expeditionary Force carried out air strikes to destroy the Cuban Air Force on the ground, achieving only partial success . CIA’s covert-action chief, Richard Bissell, reassured him there would be only a minimum need for air strikes .
 Castro ordered pilots to sleep under the wings of the planes, ready to take off immediately . Castro then ordered his pilots “to sleep’s wings,” and ordered them to sleep .
 The new president bitterly disappointed the CIA and the military by his decision to accept defeat at the Bay of Pigs . More than one thousand members of the CIA were taken prisoner .
 Kennedy realized after the fact that he had been drawn into a CIA scenario that was a trap . Kennedy was drawn into the trap by the CIA, but realized later that he'd been drawn in a trap.
 As Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., observed, “the Joint Chiefs of Staff had only approved the Bay of Pigs.” ‘The Joint Chiefs were only approved of the Bay,’ he said . ‘Bay of Pigs’ was the only Bay of
 CIA advisers drew John Kennedy into a plan whose prerequisites for success contradicted the president’s own rules for engagement . Rules for engagement precluded any combat action by United States military forces .
 Dulles and his associates knew this condition conflicted with the plan they were foisting on Kennedy . They kept silent in the belief that “the realities of the situation” would force the president to carry through to the end they wished .
 Four decades after the Bay of Pigs, we have learned that the CIA scenario to trap Kennedy was more concrete than Dulles admitted in his handwritten notes . Dulles' handwritten notes reveal more concrete details of the plot than he claimed in his notes .
 Four anti-Castro brigade leaders told their story to writer Haynes Johnson . They revealed how the Agency was prepared to circumvent a presidential veto .
 Kennedy’s NSAM 55 informed the Joint Chiefs of Staff that it was they who were his principal military advisers in peacetime as well as wartime . The Joint Chiefs’ of Staff said they were their principal military adviser .
 Director Allen Dulles, Deputy Director Richard Bissell, Jr. Jr., Jr. and Deputy Director General Charles Cabell. Director Dulles was at the top of the CIA staff at the time .
 Kennedy’s firing of Dulles, Bissell, and Cabell, his reduction of the CIA budget, and his clear determination to deal with the Agency placed him in direct conflict with a Cold War institution that had come to hold itself accountable .
 One week after the assassination Dulles was appointed by the new president Lyndon Johnson to serve on the Warren Commission . However, far from being considered a suspect, he was appointed one week after his assassination .
 Allen Dulles’s own closely guarded feelings toward John Kennedy were revealed years later in a remark to a prospective ghostwriter . He thus directed an investigation that pointed toward himself .
 Dulles stunned Morris with an abrupt comment about President Kennedy . Dulles made the remark during a conversation with Morris .
 The words pouring out of Merton’s typewriter were spilling over from unpublished manuscripts into his Cold War letters . Merton's words poured over to the Cold War . The words poured out of the typewriter was spilling over .
 He wrote to archbishop Thomas Roberts: “At present my feeling is that the most urgent thing is to say what has to be said and say it in any possible way”
 She wrote to Merton saying that her husband, a leader of the anti-Castro forces in the invasion, had been taken prisoner in Cuba .
 It was addressed to Clare Boothe Luce, wife of Time-Life-Fortune owner Henry Luce . Luce was a Cold War media baron whose editorial policies demonized communist enemy .
 Clare Boothe Luce, celebrated speaker, writer, and diplomat, shared Henry Luce’s Cold War theology . She was the daughter of Luce's son-in-law, who was a diplomat .
 In 1975 Clare Boothe Luce would lead investigators into the JFK assassination . She would work for the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Luce led investigators on a time-consuming wild goose chase .
 HSCA analyst Gaeton Fonzi discovered that Luce at the time was on the board of directors of the CIA-sponsored Association of Former Intelligence Officers . Luce was a member of the Association of Ex-Intelligence Officers, a former intelligence officer .
 Even in the early sixties, Merton with his extraordinary sensitivity may have suspected Luce’s intelligence connections . Merton believed Luce had intelligence connections with the CIA .
 He knew her as one of the wealthiest, most influential women in the world, with a decidedly anti-communist mind-set . In any case he knew .
 In his New Year’s Eve letter to Clare Boothe Luce, Merton said he thought the next year would be momentous . He welcomed her into his circle of correspondents .
 “Our sudden, unbalanced, top-heavy rush into technological mastery,” Merton saw, had now made us servants of our own weapons of war . Merton: “We’ve got to be servants of ourselves ourselves,’
 We live by them: They give us our living, they sustain our economy, they bolster up our politicians, they sell our mass media, and they sell mass media . We live with them. They sustain our lives, sustain our economies, bolster our politicians and bolster our media .
 He had far-flung correspondents and spiritual antennae that were always on the alert . However, he had to rely heavily on spiritual sources .
 The weapons keep us in a state of fury and desperation, with our fingers poised over the button and our eyes glued on the radar screen . Hence the weapons keep . us in state of . fury . and desperation .
 This was the period in which Merton still had little confidence in John Kennedy . Merton was still in doubt about Kennedy's leadership .
 He was beginning to catch glimpses of a man who, like himself, was deeply troubled by the prevailing Cold War atmosphere . He was nevertheless beginning to glimpse of a deeply troubled man . He said: "He was starting to see himself as a man ... not a man like himself"
 Merton was doing more than writing words of protest on the backs of envelopes . Besides praying, Merton also was writing words on envelopes, he said . Merton: "I'm praying for God, I'm not just praying."
 He was appealing to the president, through Ethel Kennedy, for a courageous stand in conscience . He appealed for a "courageous stand" for the president .
 President Kennedy demanded that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dismantle and withdraw the missiles immediately . Kennedy was in the 13 days from October 16 to 28, 1962 .
 Kennedy also set up a naval ‘quarantine’ that blockaded Soviet ships proceeding to the island . Kennedy also blocked Soviet ships from entering the island to prevent further invasion .
 In a struggle between good and evil involving world-destructive weapons, the installation of Soviet missiles brought home to Washington the temptation to strike first .
 Merton’s warning to Clare Boothe Luce about a preemptive strike that year was coming true . Merton warned that a pre-emptive strike against the U.S. might have been coming true.
 President Kennedy was pressured for a preemptive U.S. strike on Soviet missile sites in Cuba . President Kennedy died at the age of 65 .
 The tapes were declassified, transcribed, and published in the late 1990s . They were released to the public in 1998 .
 Transcripts reveal how isolated the president was in choosing to blockade further Soviet missile shipments rather than bomb and invade Cuba . Transcripts show how isolated he was in the decision to block further missile shipments .
 President Nixon met with Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 19, 1962, in Washington, DC . President Nixon stood alone against the pressures for a sudden air strike .
 A historian who has studied the missile crisis tapes for over twenty years, Sheldon Stern, has noted a pause in the conversation during which the Joint Chiefs “must have held their collective breath waiting for a reaction from the President.”
 The general had gone well beyond merely giving advice or even disagreeing with his commander-in-chief . He had gone beyond merely simply giving advice . The general's actions were beyond merely saying or disagreeing .
 General LeMay breaks in, reminding Kennedy of his strong statements about responding to offensive weapons in Cuba . LeMay reminds Kennedy of strong statements that responding to Cuba would be a response .
 General LeMay, Army Chief of Staff General Earle Wheeler, and Marine Corps Commandant General David Shoup remain . General Shoup remains in command of the Marine Corps .
 Robert Kennedy made a statement that may have strengthened the president's resolve against a preemptive strike . Kennedy's statement is unheard on the tapes, but may have helped strengthen his resolve .
 A Soviet submarine was about to be intercepted by U.S. helicopters with depth charges . The two Soviet ships it was accompanying turned back from the United States “quarantine” line .
 The president feared he had lost all control of the situation and that nuclear war was imminent . He feared he was losing control of nuclear war and that it was likely to be imminent .
 Robert looked at his brother: “His hand went up to his face and covered his mouth.” His brother looked at him and his brother looked back at him: ‘He looked like he was going to die’
 Inexplicably, I thought of when he was ill and almost died, when he lost his child, when we learned that our oldest brother had been killed, when I think of personal times of strain and hurt . I thought about when he almost died and when he had a child .
 The voices droned on …”89The miracle occurred—through the enemy, Nikita Khrushchev.89”” – The miracle occurred through the enemy’s enemy,” the author says .
 Khrushchev ordered the Soviet ships to stop dead in the water rather than challenge the U.S. quarantine . The United States had been quarantined by the Soviet Union .
 The incident goes unmentioned in Khrushchev's memoirs . In July 1993, the U.S. State Department declassified twenty-one secret letters between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushche .
 These private, confidential letters between the Cold War leaders, begun in September 1961 and continued for two years, will be examined here for the bright light they shed on a relationship critical to the world's preservation .
 The secrecy was at least as much as as as much to avoid Soviet attention as American . The secrecy of the U.S. government was at the heart of its secrecy .
 Khrushchev was “taking his risks, assuming that these letters were, as we believe, being kept secret from the military, from the foreign service,” aide Theodore Sorensen said three decades later .
 The Soviet premier meditated on the beauty of the sea and the threat of war . While the Berlin crisis was still not over, the Soviet premier began the correspondence with his enemy by meditating .
 As a former Naval officer you would surely appreciate the merits of these surroundings, the beauty of the sea and the grandeur of the Caucasian mountains .
 Khrushchev expressed a regret about Vienna . Now as the threat of war over Berlin continued, Khrushche expressed regret about the city .
 He said he had “given much thought of late to the development of international events since our meeting in Vienna, and I have decided to approach you with this letter’
 The whole world hopefully expected that our meeting would have a soothing effect, would turn relations between our countries into the correct channel and promote the adoption of decisions which would give the peoples confidence that peace on earth will be secured .
 Khrushchev continued with deepening respect: “I listened with great interest to the account which our journalists Adjubei and Kharlamov gave of the meeting’s meeting with you in Washington.” He said: ‘I listened very closely with the account
 "They gave me many interesting details and I questioned them most thoroughly," she said . She said: "I was very impressed with them. They gave me very interesting details"
 Khrushchev mentioned Vienna, this time as a backdrop to his decision to write such a letter . “My thoughts have more than once returned to our meetings in Vienna.” he wrote .
 I remember you emphasized that you did not want to proceed towards war and favored living in peace with our country while competing in the peaceful domain . "I remember you emphasizing that you wanted to live in peace"
 "Though subsequent events did not proceed in the way that could be desired, I thought it might be useful in a purely informal and personal way to approach you and share some of my ideas"
 If you do not agree with me you can consider that this letter did not exist . Naturally I, for my part, will not use this correspondence in my public statements . If you don't agree, consider that you can .
 "I started out by describing the delights of the Black Sea coast, but then I nevertheless turned to politics," he said . "As you see,” he added apologetically, he added .
 Khrushchev was as insistent on the fundamental need for peace as Kennedy had been in Vienna . Even though in the process he forgot his Black Sea calm and argued his points with a vengeance, he was insistent .
 Khrushchev liked, he said, the comparison of their situation “with Noah’s Ark where both the ‘clean’ and ‘unclean” found sanctuary . The 'clean' and 'unclean' found sanctuary in the Soviet Union, Khrush
 The mayor of New York City says his family has had a home overlooking the Atlantic for many years . He says he is proud of his family's home in the city .
 My father and brothers own homes near my own, and my children always have a large group of cousins for company . My children have always been with their cousins .
 This is an ideal place for me to spend my weekends during the summer and fall, to relax, to think, to devote my time to major tasks instead of constant appointments, telephone calls and details . So this is the perfect place to relax and spend your weekends, she says .
 Their private letters should supplement public statements, she says . They should give each other a chance to address the other in frank terms, she adds .
 Neither of us is going to convert the other to a new social, economic or political point of view . Neither will be able to convert each other to the other's social, political or economic points of view, he says .
 Neither of us will be induced by a letter to desert or subvert his own cause. Neither will be influenced by the letter to deserve his own interests. We will not be induced to desert, subvert our own cause .
 Their mutual respect had given way to mistrust, mistrust, counter-challenges, and steps toward the war they both abhorred . They both abhored each other .
 In the weeks leading up to the crisis, Khrushchev felt betrayed by Kennedy’s contingency plans for another Cuba invasion, whereas Kennedy thought Khrushchev was betraying him by sneaking nuclear missiles into Cuba . Kennedy thought the plan was a betrayal .
 Both were again acting out Cold War beliefs that threatened everyone on earth . Both were part of the Cold War in the U.S.
 The two men met in Vienna and wrote secret letters to each other . They knew each other as a human being he could respect . Their secret letters allowed them to trust each other more easily .
 They once agreed warmly that the world was a Noah’s Ark, where both the ‘clean’ and ‘unclean” had to keep it afloat . They also knew they had once agreed to the world be a Noah's Ark .
 Khrushchev stopped his ships dead in the water and the Ark remained afloat . It was in just such a world, where ‘clean’ and ‘unclean” were together under a nuclear threat, he says . The crisis was not over.
 President Kennedy received a hopeful letter from Khrushchev in which the Soviet premier agreed to withdraw his missiles . Pentagon and ExComm advisers increased their pressures on the president for a preventive strike .
 Khrushchev demanded U.S. commitment to remove missiles from Turkey . Kennedy received a second, more problematic letter from the Soviet leader on Saturday .
 Kennedy felt he could not suddenly surrender a NATO ally’s defenses under a threat, failing to recognize for the moment that he was demanding Khrushchev do the same with his ally Castro . The Joint Chiefs pressed their demands for an air strike .
 A Soviet surface-to-air missile shot down a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba, killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr. The plane was shot down by a Soviet missile over Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs and ExComm had already recommended immediate retaliation in such a case . The Joint Chiefs recommended immediate immediate retaliation .
 They now urged an attack early the next morning to destroy SAM sites . They now urge an attack on SAM sites early next morning .
 Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen drafted a letter accepting Khrushchev’s first proposal, while ignoring the later demand that the U.S. withdraw its missiles from Turkey .
 Robert described later the thoughts his brother shared with him . He talked first about Major Anderson and how the brave died while politicians sat home pontificating about great issues .
 He talked about miscalculations leading to war, a war Russians didn’t want any more than Americans did . Americans didn't want a war, he said, but Russians did .
 He wanted to make sure he had done everything conceivable to prevent a terrible outcome, especially by giving the Russians every opportunity for a peaceful settlement . He said he wanted to give the Russians a chance to neither diminish their security nor humiliate them .
 "The specter of the death of the children of this country and all the world," Robert said . Robert: "The prospect of war much more fearful than it would otherwise have been" Robert: The young people who had no role had no say, who knew nothing even of the
 It was this,” wrote Robert in a work published after his own assassination, “that troubled him most, that gave him such pain.” Robert wrote in a book published after he was assassinated .
 Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs what he thought Robert Kennedy told Dobrynin, who had relayed the message to him . ‘The President is in a grave situation,’ Robert Kennedy said, ‘and he does not know how to get out of it.�
 We want to ask you, Mr Dobrynin, to pass President Kennedy’s message to Chairman Khrushchev through unofficial channels . Even though the President is very much against starting a war over Cuba, an irreversible chain of events could occur against his will .
 RFK was himself of the opinion there were many generals eager for a fight . However, his friend and biographer Arthur Schlesinger says, whatever the Attorney General said .
 Khrushchev felt the urgency of the pressures on the president . Robert thought the situation could get totally out of control .
 Air Force launched an intercontinental ballistic missile from Vandenberg Air Force Base on October 26, 1962, the day before the U-2 was shot down . The day before, the Air Force said to have launched the missile, the U.S. launched a similar missile .
 The ICBM was unarmed, unarmed, a test missile destined for Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands . It was intended to be an unarmed test missile . The missile was unarmed and was intended for a test launch in the Pacific region .
 A test missile at Vandenberg had received a nuclear warhead, changing it to full alert status for the crisis . Three days before the crisis, a test missile had been sent to Vandenberg for a nuclear test .
 By October 30, nine Vandenberg “test” missiles were armed for use against the Soviets . The missiles are now armed with a range of missiles .
 At the height of the missile crisis, the Air Force’s October 26th launch of its missile could have been seen by the Soviets as the beginning of an attack .
 Had the Soviets been suckered into giving any sign of a launch of their own, the entire array of U.S. missiles and bombers were poised to preempt them .
 President Kennedy had reason to feel he was being circumvented by the military so they could win a nuclear showdown . Fortunately, the Soviets didn't bite .
 Kennedy may also have recalled that Khrushchev, in his second secret letter to the president, on November 9, 1961, regarding Berlin, hinted that belligerent pressures in Moscow made compromise difficult from his own side .
 Robert Kennedy promised Anatoly Dobrynin that U.S. missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn but not immediately . Neither side revealed that, as part of the agreement, on the analogous issue, Robert Kennedy had in fact promised an Anatoly Doyrynin he would withdraw the missiles
 President Kennedy was prepared to make a further concession to Khrushchev in order to avoid war . Six months later the U.S. took its missiles out of Turkey .
 Khrushchev accepted Robert Kennedy’s promise to Dobrynin that the Jupiter missiles would be removed . Kennedy's further readiness for a public trade mediated by U Thant became unnecessary .
 The president’s willingness to go that extra mile with Khrushchev shocked the former ExComm members . Rusk revealed it for the first time at the Hawk's Cay Conference on March 7, 1987 .
 Kennedy’s willingness to trade away missiles with Khrushchev was beyond political orthodoxy at the time can be illustrated by his own experience . The extent to which Kennedy's willingness to deal away missiles was beyond orthodoxy, he says .
 In May 1963 I wrote an article on Pope John XXIII’s encyclical Pacem in Terris . The Pope's encyclic was published in May 1963 .
 Dorothy Day's pacifist Catholic Worker newspaper was published by Dorothy Day in her radically pacifist newspaper . Dorothy Day published the pacifist paper in her radical pacifist magazine .
 The more critical strategic fact, unknown to the U.S. at the time, was that these weapons were ready to be fired . "The most important strategic fact was that the weapons were available to fire," the author says .
 On October 26, 1962, the day before the U-2 was shot down, the nuclear warheads in Cuba had been prepared for launching . The day before, the Cuban government had been preparing for launching nuclear warheads .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff were outraged at Kennedy’s refusal to attack Cuba and his known concessions to Khrushchev . Kennedy refused to strike Cuba and even made known concessions . Joint Chiefs were outraged .
 McNamara recalls how strongly the Chiefs expressed their feelings to the president . McNamara recalled how strongly he expressed his feelings to him .
 JFK and Khrushchev agreed mutually to withdraw their most threatening missiles . JFK went to Mass in Washington to pray in thanksgiving . JFK refused their first-strike mandate and turned decisively toward peace with the enemy .
 We excel in getting ourselves into positions where we ‘have to’ press the button, or the next thing to it,’ says Paul Scholes . ‘I’m going to be in a position where I’ve got myself into a position that I
 I realize more and more that this whole war question is nine-tenths our own fabricated illusion . I think Kennedy has enough sense to avoid the worst injustices, he acts as if he knew the score, he says .
 I say in the circumstances, because only a short-term look at it makes one very happy. I say 'in the circumstances', because only the circumstances are the circumstances . I say "in the circumstance of the circumstances"
 It was a crisis and something had to be done and there was only a choice of various evils . It was the only choice of evils. It was not a choice, it was a choice for various evils. Something had to do and something was done .
 In the aftermath of the missile crisis, Kennedy was alternately hopeful and frustrated . Nevertheless, in the process of turning from the brink, Kennedy seemed unable to begin walking in a new direction .
 The imminence of holocaust pushed him and Khrushchev toward a new commitment to negotiations . In the 1950s, he was convinced that the threat of the holocaust had pushed him to a new deal .
 Cold War opponents agreed that a ban on nuclear testing was a critical next step away from the brink . Yet in the months following the crisis, the Cold War foes seemed unable to seize the moment . They agreed that the ban on testing was the next step .
 Both men had a history of conducting nuclear tests that contaminated the atmosphere and heightened the tensions between them . Yet both men had history of testing nuclear weapons .
 In response to the Soviet Union’s nuclear tests in the summer of 1961, Kennedy had resumed U.S. atmospheric tests on April 25, 1962 .
 The U.S. carried out a series of twenty-four nuclear blasts in the South Pacific from April to November of 1962 .
 President Obama had already agreed to the U.S. position of three annual inspections, only to see the Americans suddenly demand more . For the sake of peace, he agreed to an agreement with the United States .
 Kennedy said Khrushchev had mistaken the original U.S. position . Kennedy said the original United States position had been mistaken .
 Khrushchev replied pointedly through an intermediary: “You can tell the President I accept his explanation of an honest misunderstanding and suggest that we get moving.” The Soviet Union responded to the President’s suggestion that we move .
 Kennedy created a bridge to Khrushchev . By the empathy he expressed toward the Russian perspective, Kennedy created an empathy . Kennedy created the empathy for the Russians .
 JFK's murder would have left five and a half months left to make peace before JFK’s murder . JFK would have been assassinated in November 1963 . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 At the same time as Kennedy’s speech reached out to Khrushchev, it opened a still wider chasm between the president and his own military and intelligence advisers . At the time, the speech was reaching out to the Soviet leader .
 We have already seen how President Truman exulted at the bombing of Hiroshima . We have also seen how he exultsed at Hiroshima .
 Truman administration failed to internalize the suffering beneath the mushroom clouds at Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Truman administration began an era of atomic diplomacy based on hubris . The Truman administration was a failed leader in the world of diplomacy .
 Truman was supremely confident because he had unilateral possession of the atomic bomb . He tried to dictate postwar terms in Eastern Europe to the Soviet Union . Truman tried to impose his own terms on Eastern Europe .
 A month after Hiroshima, the Soviets rejected U.S. demands backed by the bomb at the London Council of Foreign Ministers . The Soviets rejected the United States demands at a meeting in London .
 John Foster Dulles, who attended the London meeting, regarded it as the beginning of the Cold War . The meeting was held in London in 1961 .
 President Truman announced in September 1945 that he was not interested in seeking international control over nuclear weapons . Truman then announced he did not want to seek international control of nuclear weapons in 1945 .
 He felt he did so successfully in Iran just seven months after Hiroshima and Nagasaki . He felt that he had succeeded in Iran .
 Russian army was prolonging a wartime occupation in northern Iran . It was seeking Soviet oil leases like those of the British in the south . The Russian army wanted to lease oil leases .
 Truman later told Senator Henry Jackson that he had summoned Soviet Ambassador Andrei Gromyko to the White House . Truman later said he summoned Andrei Gromyko on behalf of him .
 The president demanded that the Russian troops evacuate Iran within forty-eight hours or the United States would use the atomic weapon that only it possessed . The U.S. threatened to use the weapon if Russia did not evacuate Iran or the U.K. would use it .
 The U.S. enforced a Cold War strategy of containing the Soviet Union . The troops moved in twenty-four hours .
 The containment policy was formulated by State Department diplomat George Kennan, writing as “X” in the July 1947 Foreign Affairs .
 Kennan said the purpose of containment was more diplomatic and political than military . The Pentagon carried out by encircling the U.S. with United States bases and patrolling forces . To match the efficiency of a totalitarian enemy, military leaders urged legislation .
 Plausible deniability encouraged the autonomy of the CIA and other covert-action agencies from the government that created them . It marked the creation of a Frankenstein monster.
 CIA authorized not only to violate international law but to do so with as little consultation as possible . CIA was authorized to protect the visible authorities of the government from protest and censure, the author says .
 The less consultation there was, the more creative CIA authorities could become in interpreting the mind of the president . President George W. Bush wanted to splinter the CIA in a thousand pieces and scatter it to the winds, he says .
 CIA contacted underworld figures John Rosselli, Sam Giancana, and Santos Trafficante, offering them $150,000 for Castro’s assassination . In late 1960, without the knowledge of President Dwight Eisenhower, the CIA had contacted the underworld figures . The CIA offered $150
 Gangsters were happy to be hired by the U.S. government to murder the man who had shut down their gambling casinos in Cuba . The gangsters had been hired to kill the Cuban gambling casinos .
 CIA's Technical Services Division prepared a batch of poison pills for Castro . If they were successful, they hoped a U.S.-sponsored successor to Castro would allow them to reopen the casinos .
 The murder plot failed because the CIA’s Cuban assets were unable to get close enough to Castro to poison him . The CIA's Cuban assets failed to get near enough to poison Castro .
 The CIA’s purpose was to kill Castro just before the Bay of Pigs invasion . The CIA was behind the killing of Castro in order to get him killed .
 As Bay of Pigs planner Richard Bissell said later, “Assassination was intended to reinforce the plan.”
 Helms testified to the Church Committee that he never informed either the president or his newly appointed CIA director John McCone of the assassination plots . Helms said he never told McCone or the president of the plots .
 Helms said he sought no approval for the murder attempts because assassination was not a subject that should be aired with higher authority . Helms: Assassination was not an issue that should have been aired with authority .
 Szulc said he was against political assassination in principle and doubted if it would solve the Cuban problem . Szulk said he doubted if political assassination would solve Cuba's problems . He also doubted if the assassination would help solve the problem .
 The president leaned back in his rocking chair, smiled, and said he had been testing Szulc and agreed with his answer . President: "I was testing him, and agreed to his answer"
 Kennedy told Szulc, "I’m glad you feel the same way" Helms, however, did not . Richard Helms.3Richard Helms .
 Helms was known as “the man who kept the secrets,” the title of his biography . He was known for his role in World War II . Helms died at the age of 92 .
 He was master of the possibilities beneath plausible deniability, exemplified by his command and control of the CIA’s plots to kill Castro . He was a master master of possibilities, exemplifying his command .
 CIA Cold War veterans thought they knew the president’s mind better than the president did himself . As Helms demonstrated in his Church Committee testimony, he and other CIA veterans thought that they knew better than himself .
 He joined Harold MacMillan in proposing to Khrushchev new high-level talks on test ban treaty . He first joined British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan .
 Moscow suggested that Moscow be the site for the talks, itself an act of trust . Moscow is the site of the talks .
 Kennedy decided to suspend U.S. tests in the atmosphere unilaterally . Khrushchev accepted .
 He reached his decision independently, without their recommendations or consultation . He reached the decision independently—without their recommendations .
 He knew few would support him as he went out on that limb; others might cut it down before he could get there . "He knew few will support him," he said. "I knew few . would support me"
 He had seen U.S. belligerence toward the Russians build to the point of Pentagon pressures for preemptive strikes on Cuban missile sites .
 Kennedy outlined his thoughts for what he called ‘the peace speech’ to adviser and speechwriter Sorensen . Kennedy knew he had few allies within his own ruling circles within his ruling circles .
 “The total influence—economic, political, even spiritual—is felt in every city, every State house, every office of the Federal government ...”“In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought,
 That Pax Americana policed by the Pentagon was considered the system’s indispensable, hugely profitable means of containing and defeating Communism . It was considered to be a hugely profitable way to contain and defeat Communism .
 Some say that it is useless to speak of world peace or world law or world government . Some say it will be useless until the leaders of the Soviet Union adopt a more enlightened attitude .
 Lee Harvey Oswald presented himself at the American Embassy in Moscow to the Consul Richard E Snyder . Oswald had been discharged two months earlier from the United States Marine Corps in California .
 Oswald said his purpose in coming was to renounce his U.S. citizenship . Oswald said he was renouncing his United States citizenship . He said he would renounce the citizenship of the United States . Oswald is the son of former President Richard Nixon .
 Oswald had been a Marine Corps radar operator at Atsugi Air Force Base in Japan . Oswald was a radar operator from September 1957 to November 1958 . Oswald had worked for the Marine Corps in Japan from 1957 to 1958 .
 Atsugi, located about thirty-five miles southwest of Tokyo, served as the CIA’s main operational base in the Far East . It is located about 35 miles from Tokyo, Japan .
 CIA’s top-secret U-2 spy planes took off on their flights over the Soviet Union and China . It was one of two bases from which the CIA's top secret U.2 planes flew over China .
 The U-2 was the creation of the CIA’s Richard Bissell, also the main author of the Bay of Pigs scenario . Bissell was also the author of a scenario that involved the CIA's U.S. invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Bissell worked closely on the U-2’s Soviet overflights with CIA director Allen Dulles . Bissell and Dulles worked closely together on overflights .
 Radar operator Oswald was a small cog in the machine, but he was learning how it worked . Oswald was one of the first to learn how to use the radar in the war's first mission .
 Oswald had access to secret information that would have been of interest to a Cold War enemy . Oswald continued to have access to secrets that would be of interest .
 Former Marine Corps Lieutenant John E Donovan testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald had access to the location of all bases in the west coast area . Donovan was Oswald’s officer in the Santa Ana radar unit . Donovan testified that Oswald “had the access to all radio frequencies for all
 The lawyer said, “We asked you exactly what we wanted to know from you and we asked you everything we wanted for now and that is all. That is all . The lawyer told the judge, "We asked for everything that we wanted from you. That's all."
 The downing of the U-2, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, wrecked the Paris summit meeting between President Eisenhower and Premier Khrushchev . The U.2 crashed during a meeting between Eisenhower and Soviet leader Vladimir Khruschev .
 Gary Powers later raised the question whether his plane may not have been shot down as a result of information Oswald handed over to the Soviets . Powers raised the possibility that his plane was shot down after being handed over information by the Soviet Union .
 Oswald volunteered all the information he had as a Marine radar specialist to the Soviets was an apparently criminal act . Yet when Oswald returned to the United States Embassy in Moscow after working for over a year at a Soviet factory in Minsk, he was welcomed back by American officials .
 The U.S. embassy gave him a loan to return to the country he betrayed . Not only did the United States make no move to prosecute him, he was given a loan by the embassy to return home .
 Oswald later obtained a new passport overnight . The toleration of Oswald’s apparent treason extended to his later obtaining a new . passport .
 Oswald was miraculously issued a passport in New Orleans twenty-four hours after his application for a new passport . Oswald's passport was issued on June 25, 1963, 24 hours after he applied for it .
 Oswald would be arrested and killed quickly, before he could say what he knew of the president’s murder . Oswald would have been able to tell the truth, but Oswald would then be killed quickly . Oswald was killed in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 The Warren Commission dealt with the U.S. government’s odd toleration of the apparently treasonous Oswald . In Dallas whatever light Oswald might cast on the assassination would be switched at once into darkness .
 Oswald had a “Crypto” clearance, which was higher than “Top Secret,” and that his work immersed him in information about the CIA’s super-secret U-2 flights . Oswald worked in the Marine Corps as a radar operator, and had
 Oswald overcame government barriers with almost supernatural ease . Oswald would be arrested and murdered before we knew it, but in Dallas he was arrested and killed .
 A solution to the mystery was suggested by former CIA agent Victor Marchetti . He resigned from the Agency in disillusionment after being executive assistant to the Deputy Director .
 The CIA fought a legal battle to suppress Marchetti’s book The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence . The book was published by the CIA in 1996 . The CIA has a history of trying to suppress the book .
 It provides an explanation for the U.S. government’s indulgence of his behavior . It provides a reason for the United States .
 Oswald was in fact a participant in such a program, his former roommate in Santa Ana said . Oswald's former roommate said he was a participant . Oswald was a student at Santa Ana University, California, in the 1980s .
 Botelho, who later became a California judge, stated in an interview with Mark Lane that Oswald’s Communism was a pose . He said that Oswald's Communism was just a pose.
 Two civilians dropped in and asked a few questions, took no written statements, and recorded no interviews with witnesses . Then, when no real investigation occurred at the base , I was sure that Oswald was on an intelligence assignment in Russia, I thought he was .
 Oswald, it was said, was the only Marine ever to defect from his country to another country, a Communist country, during peacetime . Oswald was said to have defected to China in peacetime during the Cold War . It was a cover-investigation so that it could be
 Lee Harvey Oswald was a young man on assignment in Russia for U.S. intelligence . Among them would be a young American working for the CIA in Russia . Oswald was killed in September of Oswald's assassination .
 Oswald’s trajectory was guided not by the heavens or fate, but by a disturbed psyche . Oswald's trajectory would end up meeting Kennedy's in Dallas, Dallas, was guided by fate .
 Oswald is being moved square by square across a giant board stretching from Atsugi to Moscow to Minsk to Dallas . Oswald was being moved across the board in a giant piece of land in Russia and Ukraine .
 The hands moving Oswald were prepared to sacrifice him and any other piece on the board . For the sake of victory in the Cold War, the hands of the hands moving were prepared .
 I remember well the United States’ warring spirit when President Kennedy said those words . President Kennedy spoke of the U.S. Warring spirit in Kennedy’s words .
 Our deeply rooted prejudice, cultivated by years of propaganda, was that peace with Communists was impossible . We have a long history of prejudice against the Communist Party . We are proud to be able to make peace with the Communists, we say .
 In the nuclear age, that meant being prepared to destroy the world to save it from Communism . In the 1950s, the U.S. was prepared to kill the world in order to prevent it from being threatened by Communism .
 JFK was learning himself from his intense dialogue with Khrushchev . Peace could become visible again by acting in response to concrete problems that stood in its way, he writes .
 Peace need not be impracticable, says President Obama . He says war "need not be inevitable" and peace need not always be impossible .
 With these words President John Kennedy was echoing a theme of Pope John XXIII’s papal encyclical Pacem in Terris , published two months earlier on April 11, 1963 .
 Pope John had issued his hopeful letter to the world just before he took leave of it . In response to the threat of nuclear war, Pope John issued the letter just before taking leave .
 He was already in friendly communication with Nikita Khrushchev, sending him appeals for peace and religious freedom .
 His unofficial emissary to the Soviet premier, Norman Cousins, delivered a Russian translation of Pacem in Terris personally to Khrushchev . The encyclical was issued to the rest of the world .
 Kennedy knew from Cousins the details of his meetings with Khrushchev on behalf of Pope John. John. Kennedy .
 Kennedy’s answer was that when we felt the enemy's pain, peace was possible . Kennedy's answer was to say that when . we felt . the enemy’�s pain, we felt peace was not only possible, but also possible .
 It was as necessary as the life of one’s own family, seen truly for the first time, said CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Kennedy: "Our most basic common common link is that we all inhabit this small planet" Kennedy: For, in the final analysis, “In the final . analysis,” he said, summing up his vision of interdependence, he said .
 If we could accept compassion for the enemy, Kennedy’s most crucial appeal for self-examination could become more possible for his American audience . If we accept such compassion for our enemies, Kennedy's appeal could become possible for Americans .
 When the missile crisis was resolved, the president stringently avoided, and ordered his staff to avoid, any talk of victory or defeat concerning Khrushchev .
 Khrushchev’s critics in the Communist world who could tolerate no retreat from the capitalist enemy, the Soviet premier had suffered a humiliating defeat . Yet for many, the . Soviet premier suffered a . humiliating defeat. Khrush .
 Kennedy moved on to concrete steps, already in progress, toward realizing his vision of world peace . Kennedy's vision of peace is already being realized in the shape of the world .
 He announced first the decision made by Macmillan, Khrushchev, and himself to hold discussions in Moscow on a test ban treaty . He announced that the decision was made in Moscow .
 He declared that the U.S. does not propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other states do not do so . He then proclaimed his unilateral initiative .
 As we shall see, Kennedy meant what he said, and U.S. intelligence agencies knew it . As we will see, we will find out that the United States knew what Kennedy meant and what he meant .
 The steel crisis is an overlooked chapter in the Kennedy presidency that we will explore . Kennedy clashed with corporate power brokers who had clashed with him the year before in the steel crisis .
 He would say more on this subject the following night in his groundbreaking civil rights speech . He would later say more about this subject in a speech . The speech would be the first time he would address the issue in public .
 In an ironic turn of events, the Soviet Union became its principal venue . The Soviet Union was its main venue .
 JFK's identification with the Russian people's suffering penetrated their government’s defenses far more effectively than any missile could have done . JFK's ID with the Russians’ suffering penetrated the government's defenses more effectively .
 The full text of the speech was published in the Soviet press . Sorensen described the speech's impact on the other side of the Cold War .
 After 15 years of almost uninterrupted jamming of Western broadcasts, by means of a network of over three thousand transmitters and at an annual cost of several hundred million dollars, the Soviets jammed only one paragraph of the speech when relayed by the Voice of America in Russian . Then suddenly stopped jam
 International Atomic Energy Agency agrees to inspect nuclear reactors for peaceful purposes . Agreement also agreed in Vienna to the principle of inspection .
 For the first time Americans had less opportunity to read and hear their president’s words than did the Russian people . Americans were less likely to hear and read their president's words than Russians, CNN.com reports .
 Kennedy's position in his own government had become precarious . Whereas nuclear disarmament had suddenly become feasible, Kennedy’s position in government became precarious . Kennedy was forced to resign from the White House .
 Kennedy’s rejection of Cold War politics was considered treasonous by forces in his own government . However, Kennedy rejected the Cold War and was considered to be treasonous .
 President Kennedy’s June 10, 1963, call for an end to the Cold War, five and one-half months before his assassination, anticipates Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King's call for end to Cold War .
 April 4, 1967, Riverside Church address called for an end to the Vietnam War, exactly one year before his assassination . King’s courage in his address was the courage of his courage in calling for a end to Vietnam War .
 Each of those transforming speeches was a prophetic statement provoking the reward a prophet traditionally receives . Each of these speeches was prophetic statements provoking a prophet's reward, a prophet .
 Oswald was welcomed by order of the United States government . He and his Russian wife Marina disembarked with their infant daughter June from the ocean liner Maasdam in Hoboken, New Jersey .
 The Oswalds were greeted at the dock by Spas T Raikin, a representative of the Traveler’s Aid Society . The Warren Report tells us that, on the recommendation of the State Department, the . State Department. was .
 The Warren Report does not mention that Raikin was secretary-general of the American Friends of the Anti-Bolshevik Nations . The organization was an anti-communist organization with extensive intelligence connections, like the American government .
 The Warren Report says Spas T Raikin helped the Oswald family pass smoothly through immigration and customs . The Oswalds settled in Fort Worth, Texas, in the summer of 1962 .
 They were welcomed by a local White Russian community characterized by its pronounced anti-communist view of the world .
 Lee was befriended by George de Mohrenschildt, the son of a czarist official . Lee befriended George in the early days of his life in Russia . Lee was a member of the family of a Russian aristocrat who died in 1918 .
 In 1962, de Mohrenschildt was handed Lee Harvey Oswald’s address in Fort Worth by “one of Moore's associates,” who suggested that he meet Oswald . He said he felt he was being primed .
 De Mohrenschildt then phoned Moore to confirm such a mission and set up another mutually beneficial relationship . Moore then set up a new relationship with the British politician .
 U.S. embassy in Haiti asked for help arranging approval by dictator "Papa Doc" Duvalier for an oil exploration deal . He told Moore he would appreciate help from the United States embassy .
 Moore gave de Mohrenschildt the go-ahead to befriend the Oswalds, which he promptly did . Moore then gave him the OK to befriend them, but said he was carrying out the CIA's wishes .
 Oswald took him so seriously that he quit his job at a Fort Worth welding company and made the move . Oswald took his job so seriously he quit the next day and moved to Texas .
 Baron's wife and daughter said it was he who organized Oswald’s securing a new job, four days after his move, with a graphic arts company, Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall .
 The official record is that Louise Latham of the Texas Employment Commission sent Oswald to the firm . Oswald was sent to the Texas employment commission by Latham .
 Latham, who denied that de Mohrenschildt got the job for Oswald, says he was responsible for Oswald's immediate hiring .
 Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall had contracts with the U.S. Army Map Service . It was described by the Warren Commission as “a commercial advertising photography firm”
 Oswald's classified work connected with Oswald’s history as an apparent traitor . Its classified work connects with Oswald's history as a traitor . Oswald's work was classified classified .
 Oswald’s co-workers were setting type names for Cuban place names to go on maps . Oswald's colleagues say the maps were probably for the same spy planes the ex-Marine had already offered to the Soviet Union .
 In mid-March 1963 George de Mohrenschildt did receive a Haitian government contract for $285,000 . In April he left Dallas, and in May he met in Washington, D.C., with CIA and United States Army intelligence contacts to further his Haitian connections .
 None of George de Mohrenschildt’s U.S. connections are mentioned in the Warren Report . He never saw Oswald again .
 George de Mohrenschildt was found shot to death in the house where he was staying in Manalapan, Florida, in 1977 . Garrison says he was told that Oswald had been the assassination scapegoat . Garrison: Both deMohrenschildts were vigorous in their insistence that Oswald
 Gaeton Fonzi, an investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, left his card with de Mohrenschildt’s daughter and told her he would be calling her father that evening for an appointment .
 George de Mohrenschildt had no “need to know,” and thus probably no understanding in advance of the scapegoat role that lay ahead for his young friend . Soon after he took the card and put it in his pocket, he went upstairs, then apparently put the
 In the years after Kennedy and Lee Oswald were gunned down, the de Mohrenschildts seemed to grow in remorse for the evil in which they had become enmeshed . In the aftermath of the Kennedy assassination, they grew in remorse .
 The Atomic Energy Commission was pushing Kennedy to schedule another series of atmospheric tests . The tests were scheduled to take place in the summer .
 Khrushchev made preparations to welcome the U.S. test-ban negotiators to Moscow . In response to the United States test-busting, the Soviet Union prepared to meet with the negotiators . The United States tested a nuclear weapons program in 1962 .
 Kennedy saw the moment was ripe for at least a partial test ban, bypassing the negotiators’ impasse on inspections . Kennedy: "The moment is ripe" for a partial ban on test flights .
 The Joint Chiefs and CIA were adamantly opposed to Kennedy’s turn toward peace . The Joint chiefs and CIA opposed Kennedy's decision to pursue peace .
 The president felt getting Senate ratification of a test ban agreement would be “almost in the nature of a miracle” as he described the task to advisers . Cold War influences so dominated the United States Congress that the president felt it would be a miracle to get Senate ratification .
 Kennedy named Averell Harriman, former ambassador to the U.S.R., his top negotiator in the Moscow talks . Kennedy was committed at all costs to seeing it accomplished . The process, miraculous or not, was engineered humanly .
 Known as a tough bargainer, Harriman was liked and respected by the Russians . He was known for his tough negotiating skills .
 Kennedy personally prepared the negotiators . They saw his appointment as a sign of the president’s seriousness in wanting a test-ban agreement .
 He emphasized the importance of their mission . Perhaps a last chance to stop the spread of testing and radioactive fallout .
 If successful, it would mean a concrete step toward mutual trust with the Russians . If they were successful, they would be the first step toward closer relations .
 In both literal and symbolic senses, they stood to achieve a more peaceful atmosphere in the world . In both literally and symbolic sense, the world was at the center of peace .
 Their head negotiator would be, in effect, not Harriman but the president himself . The president himself would be the head negotiator .
 Kennedy spent hours editing the U.S. position as if he were at the Moscow table . No one outside a tight circle of officials personally approved by him was to know any of the details .
 Soviet ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin was astounded at the president’s command of every stage of the process . He said: “I’m astounded by the president's command of all the process.”
 Kennedy had decided to take the issue of ratification immediately to the people .
 He wanted to do everything he could to turn public opinion around as quickly as possible, he said . He said he wanted to try to turn the situation around .