 CIA imagery analysts brief the president on the results of U-2 photo reconnaissance overflights of Cuba on Sunday . They discovered the existence of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 The briefing begins with an interpretation of the images by Arthur Lundahl from CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center . The CIA's Acting Director Marshall Carter gives his analysis .
 Lundahl then introduces Sidney Graybeal (""our missile man"") who shows president photos of similar weapons systems taken during Soviet military parades . Lundahl introduces the president with a photo of the weapons system .
 The president then asks Graybeal when the missiles will be ready to fire . Obama then asks for the missiles to be ready for launch .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara doubts that missiles are yet ready to fire . McNamara adds that there is no indication that nuclear warheads are present .
 McNamara and then General Maxwell Taylor briefed the president on his military alternatives . The Joint Chiefs of Staff briefed McNamara on alternatives to the CIA .
 Rusk's voice is faint, but he warns the president that an air strike on the missile installations may actually trigger a 'general nuclear war' if the Soviets decide to launch them before they are destroyed on the ground . Rusk: An air strike may trigger a general nuclear war if
 The president questions the Soviet motive for establishing the missile sites, with subsequent comments from McNamara and then Taylor . The president then questions the Soviets' motive for setting up the sites .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy asks whether a military strike on Cuba would include all airfields . Bundy then asks if a strike would include airfields in Cuba . Bundy says strike would not include all Cuban airfields, including airfields and military bases . Bundy: "It's not a
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev may want the U.S. to live under the fear of Soviet nuclear weapons the same way the Soviets live with missiles in Turkey . Rusk then faintly heard asking again about the Soviet motive .
 Clip ends with the president asking how many missiles are in Turkey . The clip ends with a question about the missiles in the country .
 His brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, adds that a full invasion is also an option . Robert Kennedy warns that this would probably provoke a response from the Soviets . His brother adds that full invasion could provoke a reaction .
 McNamara and Taylor explain how much time is needed to prepare for a full invasion of Cuba . A short conversation then ensues in which they explain how long is needed for an invasion .
 He is not sure, however, whether to proceed with a larger air strike or an invasion . He says he is not yet sure whether he will proceed with an air strike .
 Bundy then asks whether they have ruled out a political solution, and discussion then ensues about various tracks that could be followed . Bundy then says they have not ruled out any political solution .
 Bundy and president discuss the importance of keeping the plans secret . Bundy and the president then discuss the need to keep the plan secret. Bundy and Bundy then discuss keeping the secret .
 President Obama asks how long it will be before preparations for air strikes are complete . The president then asks if preparations are complete before the strike .
 Carter and Lundahl respond that cloud cover makes the reconnaissance mission difficult . Lundahl: "Cloud cover makes reconnaissance missions difficult"
 Robert Kennedy inquires as long it would take invading U.S. military forces to gain control of Cuba . The clip was part of a series of interviews with Kennedy .
 CIA analysts discovered that the Soviets were installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles on the island . By the morning of October 18 CIA analysts had discovered that, in addition to the medium-range missiles spotted two days earlier, the Soviets also installed intermediate range ballistic missiles with twice the range .
 Ball and McNamara discuss the consequences of an unannounced U.S. air strike on military installations . Ball, McNamara talk about the effects of a strike on the military installations.
 Ball argues that they need to consider the consequences of such an attack and the likely reaction of Khrushchev in Turkey or elsewhere .
 Khrushchev will ""take Berlin"" whether or not the strikes are announced ahead of time . President replies: "I'll take Berlin whether or if I'm not in Berlin" Khrushchevski says he will 'take Berlin' if he is in Berlin .
 The president again asserts that Khrushchev will ""grab Berlin"" over missiles that do not even threaten NATO allies . After an unidentified speaker mentions that a blockade might buy some time, the president again says that .
 Discussion then turns to the option of a blockade of Cuba, and the president asks whether this would require a declaration of war . The president also asks if this would need to be declared a war .
 President Obama announced on October 22 that Cuba would be subject to a U.S. naval blockade . Cuba is now subject to the blockade .
 The next evening, shortly after the signing of the blockade order, met with his advisers . The president signed a blockade order on Syria .
 At the end of this meeting the president and his brother are left alone for a private discussion . The president and brother are separated from each other .
 The recording is of very poor quality, but the conversation is notable for its intimacy and candor . The recording of this conversation is of poor quality but it's of very good quality .
 If he's going to get this mean on this one, in our part of the world, there's no choice .
 Khrushchev had a message for you, he said. Then he came back to see me, and he told me, "Krushchev has a message to you"
 An American U-2 spy plane was reported overdue from a reconnaissance flight over Cuba . The plane had been flying over Cuba when it was intercepted by the U.2 .
 Khrushchev sent conflicting messages the day before and the morning of the day . The president and his advisers grappled with how to respond to the messages .
 Khrushchev indicated he would remove the missiles in exchange for Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba . Kennedy's promise to remove missiles was part of a deal to remove them from Cuba . The deal was first made in 1962 .
 The second, however, proposed that the removal be contingent upon the removal of similarly placed United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The U.S. Jupiter missiles have been placed in Turkey, the second proposed .
 The president begins with a discussion of NATO and concerns that European allies might have with the removal of the Jupiters from Turkey .
 Ball proposes that they simply ignore Khrushchev's second letter and simply respond to the first . Ball then proposes that the government simply ignore the letter and respond to it .
 The president suggests that he tells NATO ambassador to NATO to prepare for retaliatory action from the Soviets in Berlin or Turkey . As guidance for Thomas Finletter, U.S. Ambassador to NATO, the president suggests he tell him to prepare .
 Rusk raises the possibility that the missiles be turned over to the United Nations for destruction . Rusk says the missiles could be destroyed by the U.N. if they are found .
 The president is most concerned with the reaction of the Turks to which McNamara responds, McNamara says . McNamara: "The president is very concerned about the reaction to the Turkish reaction"
 Bundy at one point suggests an enlargement of the blockade . Bundy also suggests an enlarged blockade . Several more issues are raised . Bundy: "The blockade is not going away"
 At the end of the clip, the president warns of what might happen if an invasion takes place . The president is responding to a point raised by the ambassador .
 Saturday, October 27, 10:00 p.m. ET, The Oval Office and Cabinet Room, The White House. Saturday, Oct. 27, The Obamas.
 On Saturday evening, October 27, with the Soviet freighter Grozny rapidly approaching the blockade, the president sent off a letter to Moscow accepting the terms of the October 26 letter . In exchange for the removal of the missiles in Cuba in exchange for a United States non-invasion
 At the same time, the president instructed his brother to privately assure Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be removed . This pledge could not be made publicly, and was not made publicly .
 Dillon: You have to pick out the things they might-McNamara: Well, I think, that's right . Dillon: "You have to be careful of the things you might-