 Each country had the power or the . probability of affecting the outcome of the crisis in any way it deemed fit . Each country has the power to affect the outcome in any . way it deems fit .
 Cuba was alone as it could not count on the support of the Soviet Union for long . However, contrary to numerous beliefs on the crisis, Cuba was not alone in the crisis .
 Cuba’s approach was to support radical movements across Africa, Asia, and Latin America to progress a league of like-minded nations . Cuba was continually threatened by America .
 Fidel Castro termed the revolution socialist since the country believed that America was intent on obliterating the uprising . During the Bays of Pigs incursion in 1961, Fidel Castro called the revolution a socialist .
 This led to the fear of a United States incursion; thus, Cuba looked for ways to defend itself . The fear of an U.S. incursion led to Cuba looking for ways of defending itself . Cuba has a history of anti-American sentiment .
 The countries did not resolve the crisis amongst themselves since America’s aim of destroying the Cuban rebellion continued even after the October crisis . The Soviet Union agreed to America's demand that the crisis be resolved .
 Crisis fought from three main fronts may have instigated a nuclear war . I look forward to working with you moving forward ” +84 relevant experts are online Hire writer .
 Several actions and counter-actions ensured that the crisis did not blow to a full blown war . However, the crisis was not a full-blown war . The crisis was resolved with the help of several counter-action measures .
 In this regards, Cuba played an important role during the entire crisis . Cuba played a major role in the Cuban crisis, says President Obama .
 Cubans saw the Cuban Rebellion as the main cause of the crisis . The Soviet and American thought otherwise . The Cuban Rebellion was the main factor in the Cuban crisis .
 The evaluation of the crisis provides alternative and comprehensive outlook of the causes, impacts, and issues surrounding the crisis from the Cuban standpoint . The evaluation provides an alternative perspective on the crisis .
 The crisis, fought from three main fronts, may have instigated a nuclear war . The crisis is fought on three fronts from three fronts .
 The Cuban Crisis of 1962 was the most significant incident of the Cold War . The Cuban crisis of 1962 is known as the Cuban Crisis .
 For 13 days, the America and the Soviet went at each other’s stand on superiority in a period crisis that almost created a nuclear war . The America-Soviet stand-on-impeach was a stand-off that almost went to war .
 Inexorably, chronological assessments of the Crisis center on the power struggle between the Soviet and America . The crisis was centered on the Soviet-U.S. power struggle .
 Infrequently, people do not consider it indispensable or essential to regard Cuba as a main actor of the crisis, says Cuban diplomat . The Cuban government has been criticized for its role in the crisis .
 To appreciate and comprehend the lessons of the Crisis, it is essential to value Cuba’s role in the predicament . Therefore, to . entirely appreciate . comprehend the lesson of the crisis, Cuba should be valued in its role in its predicament .
 As the Cold War fades and the world takes shape of a new order, the significance of comprehending the events of the crisis becomes more imperative . The significance of understanding the events and the main antagonists of that crisis to construct upon the current view of the world and prepare for future crisis becomes
 Cuba remains a region of significant to America general defense interests . Even though now obviously missing Soviet martial services and financial support, Cuba, today remains important to America's interests .
 A link between Cuba and America relations, and the military oppression or missiles predicaments following the crisis may offer future intuition on America’s intent during the crisis, may offer .
 Other countries such as Turkey and Germany were indirectly involved in the crisis . However other countries such a country such as Germany and Turkey were involved .
 At the occurrence of the predicament, America and the Soviet were the most significant and deterministic countries . At the time of the situation, America was the most important and detergent countries .
 The Soviet sough to help Cuba fight off an impending invasion by America as a result of Cuba’s stand in socialists views . The Soviet helped Cuba defend itself from an impending American invasion .
 Later, Khrushchev termed the missiles as protective precautions against any invasion . Khrushvic termed the missile launch as a 'preventive measure'
 Kennedy administration’s disinclination to admit to the status quo in Cuba may have caused the crisis . The Kennedy administration may have been reluctant to admit that the situation in Cuba was unsustainable .
 Kennedy’s administration ordered an ill-fated incursion of Cuba by anti-Castro expatriates in 1961 April . Unwaveringly disparate to Castro, Kennedy's administration ordered the incursion .
 Following the “Bay of Pigs’ debacle, the CIA sought to murder Castro Castro and backed clandestine operations against Cuba . The CIA sought the murder of Castro Castro after the 'Bay of Pics' debacle .
 America’s Department of State ordered a monetary and opinionated embargo of the country . The Pentagon prepared a full-blown incursion of Cuba while the State Department ordered an embargo of Cuba .
 The Soviet Union had become intensely engaged to the Castro regime since 1960 . On the other hand, the Soviet Union was pleased with Cuba’s call for socialism .
 Khrushchev viewed Castro as modern Lenin; thus, he knew he was doing something important to liberate Cuba . In fact, he viewed Castro Castro as a modern Lenin, and knew it was important .
 Cuba knew that Operation Mongoose was meant to destabilize the country and overturn the gains that the country had made over the years . The country was prepared to fight any America's invasion tactics .
 The Kennedy administration’s disinclination to admit to the status quo in Cuba may have caused the crisis . Cuba guessed correctly that the preparations of Pentagon, CIA, and State were preparations for Kennedy administration .
 In fact, Cuba guessed correctly that the preparations of Pentagon, CIA, and Department of State were preparations for Cuba . On the other hand, the Soviet Union had become intensely engaged to the Castro regime since 1960, and it was pleased .
 Cuba guessed correctly that the preparations of Pentagon, CIA, and Department of State were preparations for future assault on the Cuban soil .
 In this regards, Cuba acknowledged the Soviet strategy to mount missiles in May of 1962 to prevent any America assault . Cuba acknowledged this in May 1962 .
 The installation of the missiles meant that Cuba would become a de facto partner of the Soviet Union . Furthermore, the installation of . the missiles would mean that Cuba . become a . de facto partners of the . Soviet Union in Cuba .
 America’s estimation of armed Cuban was 100,000, Cuba planed to stage a surprise; thus, had about 270,000 armed Cubans by October 22, 1962 . The U.S. estimate of armed Cuba in 1962 was about 10,000 .
 Cuba knew that Kennedy’s administration would not honor its pledge of not invading Cuba; thus, called on the Soviet Union not to withdraw its bombers from Cuba . The U.S. called on Soviet Union to pull out of Cuba .
 Kennedy persuaded Cuba that it could not rely on the Soviet Union any longer . Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy’s terms, which persuaded Cuba not to rely on Russia .
 Cubans saw the crisis as lasting for 6 years during which tension existed between the country and America . In this regards, Cubans said the crisis lasted 6 years . The crisis was a time of tension between America and Cuba .
 Castro’s administration asserted that the crisis was never resolved amicably . Castro's administration said that it was never amicably. The crisis was not resolved, Castro said .
 The aim of the crisis continued to dissipatee. Although the countries realized peace, the aim of it dissipated . The aim was to create peace .
 America’s aim to destroy the Cuban rebellion continued; thus, according to Cubans, the crisis never ended . According to Cuban citizens, the war never ended in Cuba . America's aim to kill the Cuban rebels continued; according to Cuban leaders .
 Historians have accorded Cuba little regard concerning the crisis even though though they were the main antagonists to the crisis . Cuba was the main antagonist to the Cuban government in the 1950s .
 Were it not for the Cuban Rebellion, America would not have shown an outstanding interest to invade Cuba, the president says .
 Analysts should give credibility to the assertion that both Cuba and the Soviet Union observed the missiles as a restraint against America’s incursion . Analysts say the missiles were a restraint .
 Analysts fail to address the Cuban Rebellion as a key deterrent to any invasion . Cuba did not have a missiles; thus, its negligible powers to affect the outcome of the crisis . The Cuban Rebellion was a major deterrent to an invasion .
 The fact that an amicable resolution did not emanate reveals Cuba’s significant to the crisis . In fact, the fact that . an . amicable . resolution didn't emanate from Cuba, it reveals Cuba's significant role in the crisis.
 More often, historians see Cuba as a colony of the Soviet Union in the crisis . Cuba only acted on Soviet Union’s powers, hence, it only acted .
 The Soviet's agreement to America’s terms after the crisis 13 days demonstrates that Cuba was not an outpost of any country . The Soviet agreement to U.S. terms after 13 days shows that Cuba wasn't an outposts of any nation, says historian .
 Cuba affected the history the crisis through many aspects of its socialist ideas and rebellion . The countries did not resolve the crisis amicably, but facts show that Cuba’s motives, actions, insights, and behaviors during the three stages of the crisise were Cuban . Cuba's motives,
 People view the Missile predicament as the pinnacle of the Cold War . However, it was only 13-days long to America and the Soviet Union . People view it as a pinnacle of their Cold War but it only lasted 13 days .
 Cuba sought out support from the Soviet Union as a result of the imminent America’s invasion of Cuba . The Soviets installed missiles all over Cuba, and the Soviets installed them in Cuba .
 U.S. viewed this as an intimidation from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union prepared for the invasion with economic embargoes on Cuba and plans to assassinate Castro .
 After 13 days of plans and predicaments, America and the Soviet came to an agreement that saw the Soviet withdraw its missiles from Cuba . The agreement was reached after 13 days .
 Cuba at a crossroad on the permanence of the crisis since its standoff with America remained . Cuba's standoff with the U.S. remains at a stand-off .
 Following the agreement America and the Soviet were cautious of using missiles during the entire period to the end of the Cold War . On the other hand, following the agreement, the two countries were cautious .
 Cubans do not relate the crisis to the Cold war; thus, the difference in thinking between the primary viewpoint on the crisis and Cubans’ viewpoint . Cubans' view of the crisis is different than that of Cubans .
 Between 1898 and 1959 America and Cuba were allies . Before 1962 October 22 was October 22 October 22 .
 America cultivated enmity with Cuba that saw several embargoes against Cuba . However, after Castro took authority from Fulgencio Batista America cultivated enmity with Cuba . America had a long-standing relationship with Cuba .
 Castro called for socialism, which angered the Americans . After Castro took over the authority of the country he called for socialist socialism . Castro is known for his call for socialism .
 Cuba experienced the Cuban Rebellion, which Cubans see as the cause of the crisis . Further, following the swearing-in of Castro, Cuba experienced a Cuban Rebellion .
 The rebellion forced America to think of ways of ending the revolution and the calls for a socialist society . America’s ideas of obliterating the rebellion caused the Cuban Crisis .
 The Bay of Pigs incursion demonstrated America’s intent to invade Cuba . Economic embargoes and institutions of seditious forces against Cuba were among the reasons for the invasion .
 Castro turned to the Soviet for help who were more than willing to help Cuba . This caused Castro means of defending Cuba; thus, he turned to Russia for help . Castro was forced to turn to the Soviets for help in Cuba .
 Cubans were afraid of any direct incursion by America since they had witnessed the horrors committed in Dominican Republic and Vietnam . In fact, Cubans feared any invasion by America .
 Leaders from Cuba believed that America reacted to the 1961 Bay of Pigs fiasco by organizing for much superior invasion of Cuba . Leaders believed that U.S. planned to invade Cuba in response to the failed Bay of the Pigs invasion . Cuba's leaders believed that the US planned a superior invasion .
 Leaders believed Americans were intent on overthrowing Cuba’s leadership with the help of America’�s military forces . Actually, the leaders believed that Americans were trying to overthrow the leadership . Cuba's leaders believed Americans wanted to overthrow their government .
 The Soviets shared Cuba’s sentiment; hence, offered to help with the installation of several missiles across Cuba . The Soviets also offered to install several missiles in Cuba .
 Cubans’ interpretation of America’s hostility led inescapably to the conclusion of an impending America invasion . Cubans interpreted the hostility of America as an impending invasion .
 Kennedy concluded strategies to contain Cuba’s political separation by speaking to the forum of OAS symposium at Punta del Este, Uruguay, in June 1962 . In June 1962, however, Kennedy said that he would not accept Cuba's political separation .
 The OAS affirmed Castro’s administration irreconcilable with the inter-American organization and, closing that Cuba should be . be . closed that Cuba . should be barred from the OAS, corresponded with America suggestions to enforce an arms ban . On the proposals of America
 With hindsight, both America and Cub held each other responsible for their shared animosity . The twisting of trepidation and resentment leading to Crisis .
 For Castro, this resentment was entrenched in his obligation to break Cuba’s reliance on America and make Cuba a socialist nation . Castro: "For Castro, it was a duty to break America's reliance on the U.S."
 Castro was persuaded that American regalism had caused Cuba’s tribulations . Castro was convinced that only the eradication of Cuba's reliance on America could overturn the tribulations.
 In spite of untimely America’s endeavors to work with the Castro administration, Castro had no intent of joining forces America. America. Castro.
 Castro looked for any excuse to break the two countries’ ties, Castro said . Castro also looked for a reason to break ties between the U.S. and Cuba .
 Cuba saw the suspension as a preparation tactic or diplomatic action taken prior to an invasion . Cuba saw it as a pre-emptive military action .
 Several reports of an impending invasion followed the action with Miro Cardona indicating that John Kennedy planned on invading Cuba . Cardona said that Kennedy planned to invade Cuba .
 America threatened to extend its economic restrictions to countries that traded with Cuba . The U.S. threatened to impose economic restrictions on countries that trade with Cuba.
 U.S. tried hard to frustrate Cuba’s trade negotiations with countries such as Japan, Israel, Jordan, Iran, and Greece . In fact, America tried to frustrating trade negotiations between Cuba and Israel .
 Cuban leaders interpreted the U.S.’s orchestrated activities as part of a well schemed strategy to destabilize and destroy Cuba . Cuba leaders interpreted it as a well-schemed strategy . Cuba has been a source of tension in Cuba for decades .
 The Cubans saw the Operation Mongoose as an orchestrated plan meant to bring about a rebellion of the Cubans . Furthermore, the Cuban government saw the operation as a plot to destabilize the country .
 The operation was a vast strategy that included blowing up bridges, cutting communication, destruction of sugar mills, and oil facilities, and sabotage of machines .
 The CIA and secret radio broadcasts infiltrated numerous teams to support guerrilla forces in Cuba . CIA and radio broadcasts were used in support of Cuban rebels .
 Cubans saw the guerrilla warfare as an integral strategy aimed at assassinating Castro . Cubans believed guerrilla warfare was an attempt to assassinate Castro .
 America did not want to replace Castro’s administration with Che Guevara, and they organized for a military invasion that would see major invasions after the death of Castro . America didn’t want a government that would replace Castro with Che .
 Castro believed that the exiles would not overthrow the government . Conversely, Cub believed that they would not . overthrow the . government .
 Reports indicate that Cuba was aware of the operation Mongoose since Cuban agents penetrated the Mongoose team . Cuban agents infiltrated the team, according to reports . The operation was carried out by Cuban agents .
 Events preceding the operation and America's impending invasion may have stimulated Cuba’s decision to accept Soviet's missile operation . The operation may have prompted Cuba to accept the operation .
 The Kennedy’s government seemed to straighten out on a strategy of pestering and ambassadorial segregation in order to restrain Castro .
 The aggravation incorporated the use of operations such as Operation Mongoose and clandestine operations between Cuba and Florida, demolishing factories, and performing hit-and-run assaults alongside the Cuban coast .
 America had intended to storm the Bay of Pigs another time, but then, the humiliation the country underwent forced it forego the plans . America's plans were never realized, but the humiliation forced it to forego it .
 The operations and America's harassment strategies point to the fact that America intended to wholly disintegrate Castro’s government . America wanted to completely disintegrate the Castro government, the author says .
 President Kennedy referred to the existence of standard and long-range ballistic artillery in Cuba in his October 22nd report to the American people, he said . The crisis was the result of the crisis .
 CIA had indicated the existence of two IRBM and four MRBM instigation sites in diverse stages of manufacture and structured into a minimum of three regiments .
 Of these sites, two contingents of eight missile launchers each were supposed to be portable and structured to instigate the MRBMs . People believed the one contingent of eight permanent launchers to be designed for the IRBMs.
 This evaluation shows or clarifies the true threat that faced America at the time of the crisis . The evaluation shows that this is not the only threat facing America .
 The missiles and rocket launchers showed Soviet intent to help Cuba fight off any invasion that America planned to carry out in an objective to end the Castro’s uprising . The missiles were launched in Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Cuba harbored about 42,000 Soviet military personnel during the crisis . During the crisis, Cuba had 42,00 Soviet military staff .
 Cuba had 270,000 armed people, which meant that America would have suffered enormous losses coming after the Vietnam War . In addition, Cuba had about 270,00 armed people . The U.S. would have lost enormous losses .
 An air assault would not have shattered all the missiles installed across Cuba, which meant America would have at the end of the assault forced to open war .
 This would have provided Cuba and the Soviet with a chance to crush America’s army . This would provide them with a way to crush the U.S. army, says the author .
 Cuba would have suffered the greatest loss since the war was supposed to be in its soil . However, the war would have meant that Cuba suffered the most loss since it was meant to be on the soil .
 With Cuba and the Soviets prepared to “battle to the very last man,” a lengthy, prolonged war could well have been anticipated . Besides, with Cuba and Russia prepared to fight to ‘battle to last man’, a lengthy war could be anticipated .
 Castro faced with just an alternative to fight agreed to the employment of missiles in Cuba . Castro, faced with only an alternative, agreed to Cuba's use of missiles as a weapon .
 Cuba was involved in the crisis as much as the Soviet and America were involved . Cuba’s Involvement was a major factor in the Cuban crisis .
 Some point out that Cuba remained the main antagonist during the entire crisis since America wanted to invade it and the Soviet provided missiles to the country .
 The crisis was tied to the invasion of the Bay of Pigs, Cubans understood that the invasion was between America and Cuba . In addition to the crisis, Cuban people understood that it was between the two countries .
 Soviet claimed that its aim was to support Cuba from America from America . Cuba saw it as a support to its interests . On one hand, the Soviet claimed it was supporting Cuba .
 The agreement between Cuba and the Soviet saw the Soviet place the missiles to support Cuba . The missiles were placed in support of the Cuban government .
 The aim of the Soviet to resolve the issue remained ambiguous even to Cubans . However, the aim was ambiguous even though the aim remained ambiguous .
 The decision to remove the missiles after 13 days demonstrated Soviet’s unwillingness to support “Little Cuba” as it claimed . Decision to remove missiles from Cuba demonstrated Soviet refusal to support Little Cuba .
 This shows that the animosity that existed between America and Cuba continued . The animosity between the U.S. and Cuba has continued .
 Cubans saw the Soviets help as more than support against America . Cubans, therefore, saw the help as support against the U.S.
 In fact, the Soviet sought to repay America’s unkindness for surrounding the Soviet Confederation with missiles and military base . The Soviet Union wanted to repay the American aggression .
 Since Cuba is strategically located near America, the Soviet saw the crisis as a major chance to demonstrate to America its happiness . The Soviet saw it as an opportunity to demonstrate its happiness to America . The crisis was a major opportunity for the U.S.
 Khrushchev also intended to use the missiles as bargaining whittles during the United Nations forums and to further its ideals during the Cold War . Khrushchchev also wanted to use them to further his ideals .
 Cuba understood its stand during the crisis, and after the Soviet agreed to America’s terms, it was not left with any chance, but to resort to socialism calls . In this regards, Cuba understands its stand in this regards .
 Castro understood that America was intent on invading Cuba no because of the crisis, but mainly because of Cuban Rebellion . Castro understood all along that U.S. was intent to invade Cuba .
 Castro’s administration planned well throughout the crisis . Cubans understood their importance during the crisis; thus, Castro's government planned well .
 The administration understood that the crisis emanated as a result of Cuba’s calls for socialism and not because of the missiles . The administration understands that the . crisis emanates as a . result of the calls for socialist socialism .
 The government understood that even after agreeing to the terms of the deal between the Soviets and America, it remained free of both countries . In this regards, the government understood it would not be able to leave the country .
 The administration knew that the crisis still existed since the main issues surrounding the crisis were never resolved . However, the administration knew there was still an ongoing crisis .
 Cuba played the most significant role in the progress of the crisis and the conclusion of it six years later . In this regards, Cuba played a major role in helping to end the crisis .
 Most people think that the crisis ended after 13 days, it continued with animosity between America and Cuba rising continually each day . Although most people think it ended, the U.S.-Cuba tensions continued to rise .
 Castro denied the claims that he instigated an appeal to place the missiles . Castro stated during a speech in 1963 that the installation of the missiles was a mutual accord between Cuba and the Soviet .
 Castro instigated a plan to compel the Soviet to provide the missiles to Cuba . However, data shows that data shows he instigated plan that would compel the Soviets to provide missiles .
 Castro influenced the activities and actions that led to the Soviets agreement to deploy the missiles to Cuba . Castro influenced his actions in order to get the missiles into Cuba, he says .
 The missiles provided Cuba to deter any America's invasion and reduce the country’s reliance to the U.S. The missiles were designed to reduce Cuba's reliance to America .
 The lack of any battle during the crisis helped deter any warfare that would have emerged . It was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in a major war effort .
 The withdrawal of the missiles may have offered a chance for the countries to remain at peace with each other . In addition, had America invaded Cuba, Cuba would have realized guerrilla warfare across the whole nation .
 During the period of the Crisis, people believed that America had attained an enormous triumph . Conclusion: During the crisis, people thought that America was a triumph .
 Cubans believed that there was no resolution in regards to the crisis; thus, they remained the main losers . In addition, Cubans believe that there is no resolution of the crisis . Cubans are still believed to be main losers in the ongoing crisis .
 After the agreement between the Soviets and America, the Soviets removed the missiles from Cuba, which left Cuba with no support . The agreement left Cuba without support from the U.S.
 This shows that Cuba was solitary in its endeavors during the crisis, and the crisis was nothing but America’s intent to crush socialism in Cuba . The crisis shows that the Cuban government was alone in its efforts, and that the U.S. was behind it .
 The agreement between the Soviet and America forced Cuba to agree to the requisite of the deal . Castro’s reputation inside Latin America suffered significantly .
 Kennedy did not achieve his goal of overthrowing Castro in Cuba . However, Cubans understood that America did not win during the crisis .
 Although the Soviet removed the missiles, Castro remained the president . Castro was the president of Cuba during the Soviet Union .
 America enforces an economic embargo against Cuba, which shows that there was no resolution on the crisis . In fact, today, the U.S. enforces a trade embargo against Cuban citizens .
 America enforces a restriction on Cuba while Castro persists to be a nuisance to U.S. aims in the Caribbean . America still enforces an embargo on Cuba, but Castro persists .
 Cuba does not enjoy Russia's economic subventions and military aid . The struggle between America's egalitarian principles and Castro’s socialism continues .
 Castro still holds Cuba’s administration, and that communism and an intrinsic mistrust of America remains . While America's efforts concerning Cuba have realized little victory, it is noticeable that Castro still hold Cuba's administration .
 The crisis demonstrates the antagonism and repressions that existed between the three countries . The crisis is the result of an antagonism between three countries. The crisis shows the tension between Russia and Syria .
 Cuba’s involvement in the crisis demonstrates that the crisis was between America and Cuba with the help of the Soviet for some times . Although people see the war as a supreme battle between the Soviet and the Soviet, Cuba's involvement shows that the war was between the two sides .
 After the agreement to withdraw the missiles the crisis remained a contention between America and Cuba . However, after the agreement, the crisis continued to be a contention .
 The animosity between America and Cuba remains to date . Indeed, the countries did not resolve the crisis since the animosity between them remains .
 The crisis offers a chance for historians to rethink the roles of the country during the crisis . Conclusively, the crisis offers historians a chance to rethink their roles in the country .
 ASK writer for help with your questions: Ask the author for help . Give us your email address and we’ll send a sample to the author .
 By continuing, you agree to our Terms of Terms and Conditions . Send me the sample by email email jennifer.com .
 Students looking for free, top-notch essay and term paper samples on various topics . Students can submit samples for free use of the samples .
 Additional materials, such as the best quotations, synonyms and word definitions to make your writing easier are also offered here . Additional materials include best quotations and synonyms .