 It is with great satisfaction that I studied your reply to Mr U Thant on the adoption of measures in order to avoid contact by our ships and thus avoid irreparable fatal consequences . I studied Mr Thant's reply to your reply on this issue .
 This reasonable step on your part persuades me that your are showing solicitude for the preservation of peace, I note this with satisfaction . This is a reasonable step, and I note it with satisfaction. This is not the first time I’ve heard from such a person who has
 I have already said that the only concern of our people and government and myself personally as chairman of the Council of Ministers is to develop our country and have it hold a worthy place among all people of the world .
 In your statement, you said that the main aim lies not only in reaching an agreement and adopting measures to avert contact of our ships, and consequently, a deepening of the crisis . Contact can spark off the fire of military conflict after which any talks would be superfluous because others forces and
 U.S. worried about arming Cuba with arms designed to strengthen its defensive potential . Cuba, no matter that weapons it had, could not compare with you since these are different dimensions, the more so given up-to-date means of extermination .
 "No one can challenge the humanity of our motives aimed at allowing Cuba to live peacefully and develop as its people desire," the Cuban government says .
 It is good that you agreed for our representatives to meet and begin talks, Mr President says . The United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant will attend the talks, he says .
 "We believe that he can cope with the responsible mission if, of course, every side that is drawn in to this conflict shows good will. Consequently, to some extent, he assumes the role of intermediary, and we believe that .
 People would heave a sigh of relief, considering that the statesmen who bear the responsibility have sober minds, and an ability to solve complicated problems and not allow matters to slide to the disaster of war . Then people would be relieved, considering statesmen with sober minds and awareness .
 Your representatives will make a statement to effect that the United States, on its part, will evacuate its weapons from Turkey . The U.S. should evacuate its analogous weapons from the Soviet state, the U.K. will .
 After this, representatives of the United Nations Security Council could control on-the-spot the fulfillment of these commitments . Representatives of the U.N. Security Council would be able to control on the spot the commitments .
 U.S., Soviet Union, Turkey and Cuba should be trusted by Security Council members, says John Avlon . Avlon: It would be better if these representatives enjoyed the trust of the Security Council an ours .
 It will declare that the United States will respect the integrity of the frontiers of Cuba, its sovereignty . It will restrain those who would think of launching an aggression against Cuba either from United States territory or from the territory of other states bordering on Cuba .
 Of course, for this we would have to reach agreement with you and arrange for some deadline . We would need to agree to an agreement, and I'm sure we'll have to agree .
 Let us agree to give some time, but not delay, two or three weeks, not more than a month . Let's agree to a delay of two-to-three weeks or a month. Let's give it a month, not a month."
 Cuban forces are stationed in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government . They are only in the country's interests only in defensive aims . The Cuban government has requested the presence of the troops .
 The greatest pleasure for all the peoples would be an announcement on our agreement, on nipping in the bud the conflict that has arisen .
 I attach a great importance to such understanding because it might be a good beginning and, specifically, facilitate a nuclear test ban agreement . It might also facilitate an agreement on nuclear test bans in the region .
 A nuclear test ban agreement has also been reached in the wake of a nuclear bomb ban agreement . The agreement is important to reach an understanding to both these problems in order to make a good gift to the people, says the Russian scientist .
 These problems have not yet been solved, but they wait from an urgent solution which would clear the international atmosphere . These problems are not yet solved, and they wait to be solved, writes David Cameron .