 Serhii Plokhy will transport us back to the Cuban missile crisis and the brink of nuclear Armageddon . Drawing on recently declassified KGB files, Serhiy Plkhy will travel back to Cuba and brink of Armageddon .
 Nuclear war between the two most-powerful nations on Earth . Ash and cinder, famine and fallout; nuclear war between nuclear war .
 In conversation with Matthew d’Ancona, Harvard historian and award-winning authority on Eastern Europe Serhii Plokhy will tell the riveting story of those weeks . Traced the tortuous decision-making and calculated brinkmanship of John F Kennedy, Nikita Kh
 Plokhy will argue that the Americans and Soviets simply misread each other . He says they operate under mutual distrust, second-guesses and false information .
 Plokhy will illustrate the drama of those tense days . Drawing on the impressive array of primary sources, including the recently declassified KGB files .
 Don't miss this powerful new account of the Cold War’s most perilous moment . Authoritative, fast-paced and unforgettable, don’t miss the book .
 "In gripping, granular detail, he shows us just how close the U.S. and the Soviet Union came to Armageddon” – Anne Applebaum, author of Twilight of Democracy .
 Serhii Plokhy’s almost hour-by-hour account illuminates mistakes by the Kremlin and the White House that triggered the crisis, and snafus at sea and in Cuba that almost sparked a nuclear war . “An excellent overview of the Cuban missile
 Individual tickets are £10-15, or free for subscribers to How To + Replay . A link to replay the event will be made available 48 hours after the event is over to enjoy .
 History of a Tragedy, Lost Kingdom, The Gates of Europe and The Last Empire . History of the Lost Kingdom . Lost Kingdom. Lost Kingdom was Lost Kingdom and Lost Kingdom by Edward VII .
 Matthew d’Ancona is an award-winning journalist and author . He has published numerous books, including a book about the world’s first female president .
 Be the first to hear about How To Academy’s forthcoming live talks, masterclasses, conferences, festivals, and free digital content . Sign up to our Newsletter to see how To Academy's upcoming live talks .