 The editor-in-chief of HNN, Rick Shenkman, asked me to write a critique of the account of the Cuban missile crisis in Robert Caro’s The Passage of Power, Volume 4 of his authoritative biography of Lyndon B Johnson .
 Shenkman felt that Caro had utilized “myths that you debunked years ago on HNN” -and, unfortunately, he was right . Shenksman felt Caro used ‘myths” that he had debunked years before .
 Myths versus Reality, to be published in September, deals explicitly with the issue of what really happened in the White House in October 1962 .
 RFK revealed himself to be “a master of compromise of diplomacy with a moral element, of diplomacy that was, in fact, in some ways grounded in ‘the moral question’” that a sneak attack was not in the American tradition .
 RFK’s claim that moral argument dominated the first week of discussions is false . RFK's claim was not even one of the dominant themes in the discussions . The ExComm tapes demonstrate conclusively that the moral argument was not dominant .
 A full invasion was the only choice, he argued, that justified the military and political costs resulting from so much destruction and loss of life . He argued that a full invasion of Iraq was only choice that justified so much damage .
 RFK never seemed to connect the dots between U.S. military action against Cuba and the real possibility of escalation to full-scale nuclear war with the Soviet Union . RFK, in short, was a hawk from the start .
 RFK pressed for U.S. intervention to prevent a Castro-inspired communist takeover of the Dominican Republic . RFK was still smarting from the Bay of Pigs disaster in 1961 .
 He had suggested blowing up the U.S. consulate to create a pretext for sending in American troops . He had even suggested blowing it up the United States consulate .
 A blockade could become “a very slow death” over a period of months, he says . It would still require dangerous military steps such as shooting down Russian planes that try to land there, he adds .
 He also urged the president to revive the bombing option that had been rejected during the first week of meetings .
 The administration should put the air strikes back on the table in order to demonstrate “that we’re not backing off and that we're still being tough with Cuba’s Cuba, he said . The administration, he reasoned, should do so to show ‘that we
 McNamara demanded dramatic military escalation late on that final Saturday evening, RFK did not object . McNamara did not respond to RFK's call for a dramatic escalation .
 “That would be nice. That would be a catalyst for moral-based compromise and diplomacy.” -are hardly the sentiments of a . catalyst for a .moral-based . compromise .
 RFK's assertion about President Kennedy's presence at ExComm meetings is demonstrably false . RFK’s perceptive behavioral insight, he says, is perceptive .
 The president did not deliberately stay away from any of the White House meetings when he was in Washington, D.C.
 Robert McNamara, one of the most strident ExComm hawks at the meetings, demanded on the final day that the U.S. should be “damned sure they understand it’s coming.” McNamara .
 Within a year, McNamara had already begun to finesse his role in the ExComm discussions . Nonetheless, within a year of his presidency, he was already in charge of the project .
 McNamara himself had actively supported Robert Kennedy’s hard-line stance on enforcing the blockade . In the fall of 1963, he told JFK about a recent conversation with Admiral Hyman Rickover .
 RFK insisted that it would be “a hell of an advantage” to seize a ship in order to examine and get photos of their nuclear weapons . RFK had insisted that the ship would be a "hell of advantage" for him to seize .
 RFK was one of the most persistently hawkish members of the ExComm and his views were all but identical to those of LBJ on Black Saturday, October 27, 1962 . RFK in sharp contrast to his brother, RFK had a more hawkish stance .
 The committee’s conclusion was based on the sudden appearance of a Dallas police dictabelt that supposedly “proved” that four shots were fired in Dealey Plaza - and everyone agreed that one gunman could not have fired all four shots .
 The alleged “fourth shot” was actually background noise and occurred a full minute after the fatal shots were fired . The dictabelt was subsequently analyzed by acoustic experts and conclusively shown to be worthless and immaterial .
 Robert Caro includes a poignant chapter, “Defeating Despair,” about Robert Kennedy - LBJ’s bête noir . The Passage of Power includes a chapter about Kennedy . Caro's book, The Passage Of Power, is published by Caro .
 RFK became a changed man in the wake of his brother’s assassination, says Caro Caro . Caro's argument, backed up by many citations and anecdotal examples, is hardly new -namely, that RFK .
 The evolution from Kennedy’s old Manichean ‘black and white’ view of life became, suddenly, much more noticeable . But now, after the assassination, the evolution from the old . 'Black and white' view of . life became suddenly more noticeable after the
 It cannot be stressed strongly enough that this ubiquitous view of RFK’s role in the ExComm meetings is false -essentially invented by Bobby Kennedy himself in the draft of Thirteen Days .
 Khrushchev agreed publicly on October 28 to remove missiles from Cuba . JFK was preparing to announce the lifting of the naval quarantine around Cuba .
 RFK urged his brother to resist giving any public assurances that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . Hours before the statement to the nation, RFK had urged him not to give assurances .
 With the quarantine removed, he argued, a potential invasion was the only remaining lever for putting pressure on Khrushchev . He argued, with the quarantine taken off, it was the last lever for pressure .
 JFK continued to speculate about whether a U.S. noninvasion promise would also strengthen Khrushchev’s political position in the Kremlin and perhaps make it easier for him to eventually withdraw his conventional forces from Cuba as well .