 From after Fidel Castro’s overthrow of Batista in January 1959 until 1961, typically less than 5 percent of the public considered Cuba to be the “most important problem” facing the country . Less than 5 per cent of Cuban citizens considered Cuba the most important problem .
 After that small peak concern subsided until August 1962, less than 2 percent of mentions dealt with Cuba . After that, concern steadily subsided .
 In late August there were a series of attacks on Cuba by exile groups and increasing news reports on the Soviet military build-up in Cuba .
 President Kennedy revealed the presence of groundto-air antiaircraft missiles in Cuba on September 4, 1962 . Kennedy warned the Soviet Union not to install offensive weapons in Cuba . President Kennedy also warned Soviet Union against installing offensive weapons .
 The president again spoke publicly about the Cuba situation on September 13 . The Senate passed a resolution authorizing the use of force to counter a Soviet military threat in Cuba . Cuba became a top worry of the U.S. people .
 On October 22, President Kennedy announced that the Soviet Union had installed long-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy demanded the missiles be withdrawn from Cuba .
 He indicated that the United States would enforce a blockade of offensive weapons to Cuba until the missiles were removed . The U.S. would also enforce an offensive weapons embargo .
 A Gallup poll in the field from October 19 to 24 showed that concern over Cuba remained high at 25 percent, but not higher than in late September . Concerns over Cuba remain high at about 25 percent in the poll .
 President Kennedy ended the blockade on November 21 . After compliance was verified, the blockade was lifted .
 In the immediate aftermath of the settlement, but before the crisis completely subsided, public concern over Cuba stood at 31 percent . In the past month, concern over the situation in Cuba was 31 percent, the highest level of concern .
 By September 1963, only 3 percent said Cuba was the most important problem, and only once in the next 3 years did as many as 5 percent mention it . Only 3 percent of Americans mentioned Cuba in September 1963 .
 The Cold War dominated international relations between the Soviet Union and the United States . From the end of World War II until the fall of communism in the late 1980s, the Cold War rivalry between the U.S. and the USSR dominated world relations .
 Just 19 percent were expecting a war within 5 years in August 1959 . Worries then waned to just 19 percent expecting the war within five years .
 The U-2 incident, the Berlin crises of the early 1960s, and other events pushed concern back up to 53 percent in September 1961 . The U.2 incident and the Berlin crisis of the 1960s pushed concern up to 54 percent in 1961 .
 In the spring, “the atomic bomb or fallout” had been on the minds of 28 percent of residents during the previous week . During the crisis 65 percent had thought of it during the crisis .
 Even during and immediately following the peak of the crisis, fear of war was far from rampant . Fear of war in Iraq and Afghanistan was not rampant in the years leading up to the crisis .
 NORC study: 45 percent say chances of war between U.S. and Russia decreased . Only 28 percent say that it had increased due to the situation in Cuba .
 War was in early 1963 the public’s number two concern among items on the list . Less than a quarter saw it as the top problem, and almost no one saw fallout shelters as the most pressing issue . Concern over good versus bad relations between the Soviet Union and the United States
 People in December 1962 were less sanguine about whether the coming year would be one of peace or conflict . In December 1962, people in the U.S. looked forward to a year of peace and hope .
 This was the second most optimistic assessment from 1959 through 1977 . However, this was the most optimistic view from 1959 to 1977 .
 People saw the outcome of the crisis as a U.S. victory and as an advantage that they expected to continue into the new year . People expected to see the outcome as a victory that they expect to continue in 2015 .
 Of all post-World War II presidents, Kennedy ranks as the most popular . John F Kennedy presidential job approval is highest of all presidents .
 During his term in office, he had a higher average job approval rating than any other president . During that term, he was the most successful president in the world .
 Public assessments of the job approval of past presidents are higher than their average ratings while they were in office for presidents deemed successes and lower for those considered failures .
 President Kennedy’s handling of the Cuban missile crisis significantly contributed to his overall job approval scores . President Kennedy handled the crisis in the 1960s and '90s .
 They then slowly, but steadily, subsided, dropping to a low of 61 percent in mid-October 1962 . In mid-November 1962, they dropped to 61 percent .
 Approval then again waned, falling to the upper fifties in the fall of 1963 immediately before his assassination . Approval fell to the mid-fifties, but approval then waned again in fall of 1964 .
 The Cuban missile crisis dramatically changed the public’s basis for evaluating his performance . Besides increasing public approval of the president, the crisis also dramatically changed public opinion of him .
 Just 9 percent mentioned foreign policy as positive remarks . Only 8 percent had heard negative comments on his handling of international 3.5 percent .
 After the crisis foreign policy in general and Cuba in particular dominated people’s evaluations of President Kennedy, those evaluations were positive by about five to one . Thus, after the crisis, people were more positive about Kennedy's foreign policy .
 Only 10 percent of Americans endorsed invasion, bombing, or other belligerent action . In September 1962, only 10 percent endorsed invasion or bombing of Cuba . Only 10 per cent of Americans supported invasion or other action .
 State polls by Harris in late September and early October indicated opposition to going to war with Cuba . Polls by Harris and Harris indicate opposition to war .
 In the spring of 1963, 6–7 percent supported military action, 6 percent wanted to “get Russian troops, missiles, etc. out of Cuba,” and 1–2 percent favored getting rid of Castro . In March 1963, the Cuban population was in its prime form
 Sentiment did shift as U.S. policy in response to the disclosure of offensive missiles changed . Sentiment shifted as United States policy changed .
 In September 1962, 22 percent wanted the U.S. to “keep out, hands off,” and 25 percent did not know what action should be taken toward Cuba .
 Only 3 percent still endorsed a hands-off policy, and uncertainty dropped to 17 percent . Only three percent of Americans still endorsed the hands-on policy .
 Both noninvolvement and uncertainty increased again in the spring of 1963 . The president of the U.S. House of Representatives was assassinated in 1963 .
 The public quickly and strongly endorsed President Kennedy’s call 4.4 . Also, the public quickly backed President Kennedy's call 4 .
 The questions asked in the four surveys from September 1962 to May 1963 were identical but different open-ended codings used hamper comparisons . While the questions were identical, the questions asked were identical .
 A special Gallup poll taken within hours of his address to the nation found that 84 percent approved of the blockade decision, 4 percent disapproved, and 12 percent “withheld judgment” Overall, during Kennedy’s presidency, the public rejected invading Cuba .
 He warned that it was “a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out’s set out.” He said it was a ‘difficult and dangerous’ effort .
 NORC Illinois study suggests there was much less anxiety and panic than these accounts portray . NORC study suggests that there was less panic and anxiety in the wake of the terrorist attacks .
 Most people reported no notable disruptions in their lives during the crisis . First, most people reported little notable disruptions .
 Only 11 percent of Americans said they had made any changes because of the Cuban situation . Only 11.9 percent reported such changes .
 Of those having changed their normal patterns because of the crisis, only onethird engaged in any safety or survival-related activities .
 Even during the height of the crisis, Cuba did not dominate people’s concerns. Second, even during the . height of . the crisis . Even during . the height . of the . crisis, even . the . Cuban crisis did not . dominate people's concerns.
 Thoughts about the “world situation” were even more widespread, on 93 percent of people’s minds . The world situation was also on the top of the list of thoughts .
 All other topics from money to health occupied fewer people’s thoughts during the Cuban missile crisis than in previous spring .
 It's particularly notable that thoughts about death fell from 37 percent in the spring to 29 percent during the crisis . It's also notable that those who think about death are more likely to think about it .
 The Cuban situation was a major, but not obsessive, topic of conversation . Likewise, the Cuban situation is not obsessive .
 Three measures of psychological response reveal the complex mixture of responses to the Cuban missile crisis . These measures include affect balance, psychosomatic symptoms, and behavior changes .
 Feelings of positive affect were down during the crisis period compared with the spring . Table 29 shows that positive affect was down in the spring compared to the spring.
 Despite this clear drop in positive affect, assessments of overall happiness rose during this same period .
 In the spring, 23 percent rated their lives as very happy, while during the Cuban missile crisis, 28 percent said they were very happy . During that time, during that crisis, a majority of Americans rated their life very happy.
 Of the eight symptoms, four were more common during the crisis and four were less frequent . The symptoms were common during that time and were more frequent during that period .
 This article did not refer to changes because of the Cuban missile crisis or specifically during that period . It may reflect more nostalgic beliefs that things were easier in the past .
 More focused were items about changes in problematic activities during 6.5-hour session .
 The Cuban missile crisis was on most people's minds . Overall, the public was not overwhelmed by worries and did not dwell on concerns .
 Positive affect was down, general happiness was up, and negative affect changed little . Negative affect was also down, but positive affect was up .
 Measures of stress and anxiety showed little alteration and showed no evidence that people were traumatized or debilitated by worries over the crisis .
 People did report slight gains in some problematic activities and a larger increase in drinking . People did, however, report slight improvements in some activities .
 In sum, the public did not panic, was not overcome by nuclear anxiety, and remained psychologically intact during the crisis . The public was mentally unharmed and psychologically intact .
 Thirty-eight percent mentioned the Cuban missile crisis compared with 29 percent selecting the Bay of Pigs invasion, 25 percent his stand on Civil Rights, and 22 percent his inauguration speech . Thirty-nine percent selected the Bay Of Pigs invasion .
 Less than 20 percent mentioned other events like the Berlin crisis, the Peace Corps, or the nuclear test ban treaty . Less than a third of Americans mentioned the Berlin Crisis .
 It is likely that the Cuban missile crisis received these mixed ratings because many saw it as both a proud and dark moment in the recent history of the U.S. The Cuban crisis received mixed ratings .
 Both events involved a clear and present danger to the country, galvanized the populace, and propelled the political leadership into decided and forceful action . The particulars of the two events are quite different .
 The U.S. people were resilient in the face of these confrontations. Politically and psychologically the United States people are resilient, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 They absorbed the shock, backed their leaders, and carried on with their lives . They absorb the shock and backed them, and carry on with lives .
 This may be the hallmark of the U.S. people in times of greatest challenge . The United States people are resilient and resilient, says President Obama . This is a hallmark of America's people, Obama says .
 The percentage mentioning Cuba is included in the total mentions in the first column of this article . Cuba is Cuba .
 Communism in the United States 31.2 5.6 Danger of a world war 23.7 3.8 Juvenile delinquency 15.9 2.0 Education 15.7 1.6 Race relations 8.0 10.3 Taxes 2,0 17.5 Fallout shelters 1
 A peaceful year, more or less free of international disputes, or a troubled year with much international discord . 2014 was a peaceful year with little international disputes and little international strife .
 Some people say that the U.S. should send our armed forces into Cuba to help overthrow Castro . Some say that should be done to overthrow Castro, others say that is not true .
 The April–May 1961 Gallup poll is not archived at the Roper Center . It was released on April 28, 1961 . The April-May 1961 poll was not archived .
 Gallup Organization believes that its sample size was around 1,600 . The Gallup Organization has a small sample size of 1,000 people .
 Some people say that the United States should work with Central and South American countries to decide what policy we should follow with regard to Cuba . Others say the U.S. should work through the United Nations to determine what policy it should follow .
 Some people say that within the next 2 or 3 years the people of Cuba will overthrow Castro and the communists . Some say within 2 to 3 years, the Cuban people will overthrow the communist government .
 People Mentions: National or international political situation 6.8 4.8 . Health 26.7 17.5 Mental health . Finances 14.1 9.3 Other 40.2 26.4 Nothing 22.1 14.5
 More worried now 5.7.7 Same 38.9 Less worried 54.5 Missing/don’t know .9 28.9 More worried than now .
 I am going to show you a card which describes some of the ways people feel at different times, and you tell me whether you felt like that during the past week . You tell me if you felt that way during the last week .
 The following list describes some of the ways people feel at different times . The list includes some of those people who feel different at a time .
 Let me read you a list of things some people have said they remember most about President Kennedy . President Kennedy's legacy will be remembered for his service to the nation .
 The missile crisis in Cuba and the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba are the most significant moments of his presidency . He is the first Catholic elected to the White House and the first to win the 1960 White House .
 The United States has been involved in international events in recent history . Here is a list of international events that the U.S. has participated in in in recent years .
 For each, please tell me whether you think it was a proud moment in U.S. history, a dark moment, or neither . Neither of these is a proud and dark moment . For each of the above questions, please share your thoughts .
 Please tell us if you feel we should have or should not have used our military the way we did .