 HE CUBAN MISSILE crisis marks its 50th anniversary this year as the most studied event of the nuclear age . ZEGART ^ ^ ^ He says the crisis is most studied in the world's nuclear age as a major nuclear event .
 Scholars Ê and policymakers alike have dissected virtually W every aspect of that terrifying nuclear showdown .
 After half a century, we have learned the wrong intelligence lessons from the crisis . Yet after 50 years of intelligence failures, we still have the wrong lessons, says David Cameron .
 Typically, learning is envisioned as a straight-line trajectory where time only makes things better . This is not the case for learning, but it's a good path to success .
 Organizations (and individuals) frequently forget what they should remember and remember what they need to remember . Organizations often forget what to remember and what to forget when it comes to remembering and when to forget .
 Zegart intelligence success — needs to be challenged . Zegert: Intelligence success is a problem that must be challenged in the United States .
 Shifting the analytic lens from intelligence success to failure reveals surprising and important organizational deficiencies at work . Shifting analytic lens to intelligence success, moreover, reveals surprising intelligence success .
 Graham Allison penned Essence of Decision in 1971, a great deal of research has focused on the pitfalls of individual perception and cognition in policymaking .
 Little work has been done on the crucial role of organizational weaknesses in intelligence analysis .
 Many of the same problems still afflict U.S. intelligence agencies today . Many of these same problems remain today .
 The pre-crisis estimates of 1962 ( / HE EMPIRICAL RECORD of U.S. intelligence assessments leading up / to the crisis is rich . / Heirical Record of United States intelligence assessments . ( / HeIRIC)
 Between January and V—' October 1962, when Soviet nuclear missile sites were ultimately discovered, the CIA'S estimates offlce produced four National Intelligence Estimates about Castro's communist regime, its relationship with the Soviet Bloc, its activities in spreading communism throughout Latin America .
 NIES and SNIES were the most authoritative, pooled judgments of intelligence professionals from agencies across the U.S. government . These were not just any intelligence reports, they were the gold standard of intelligence products .
 Sherman Kent, the legendary godfather of CIA analysis who ran the CIA'S estimates offlce at the time, described the process as an ""estimating machine" where intelligence units in the State Department, military services, and CIA would research and write initial materials . An interagency
 The four pre-crisis estimates of 1962 reveal that U.S. intelligence officials were gravely worried about the political fallout of a hostile communist regime so close to American shores and the possibility of communist dominoes in Latin .
 The U.S. was not especially worried about risk of a military threat from Cuba or its Soviet patron . But they were not particularly worried about the threat from the Soviet-backed regime .
 The flrst estimate, released January 17, 1962, was a big-think piece that assessed threats to the U.S. from the Caribbean region over the next 20 years .
 The time horizon is important, suggesting confidence that Khrushchev would be unwilling to risk establishing a Cuban base for at least several years . The time frame is important .
 The intelligence community's long-term estimate anticipated no short-term crisis brewing . The review period stretched 20 years into the future, this is quite a statement .
 The estimate discounts heavily the possibility that estimates of Ip6z the Soviet Union would defend Cuba or establish show the U.S. offensive capabilities there .
 Carefully chosen and reviewed in the estimates process, they are meant to convey a high degree of certainty . The estimates process is carefully reviewed and reviewed to convey the highest degree of accuracy .
 Khrushchev made the decision to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba about ten weeks later, between May and June of 1962 . In fact, the decision was made in May 1962 .
 Massive numbers of Soviet troops were roaming about the island by fall . Nuclear missiles began arriving in early September . Total numbers were not known for the next 25 years .
 The third estimate was disseminated on August i , 1962 , just a couple of weeks after intelligence began indicating a major Soviet arms buildup in Cuba .
 Starting in mid-July, a stream of intelligence reporting from both technical and human sources indicated a massive arms buildup .
 This reporting increased dramatically in August and September, and the estimate's heading reflected these developments . This reporting has increased dramatically since the start of September .
 The estimate notes that between mid-July and early September, approximately 70 ships had delivered Soviet weaponry and construction equipment . The estimate says 70 ships delivered Soviet weapons and equipment .
 Soviet shipments were three to four times greater than total Soviet shipments for the entire first half of 1962 . That number was 3 to 4 times more than total shipments for entire Soviet shipments .
 President Kennedy made explicit public warnings on September 4th and again on September 13th that if the Soviets placed offensive weapons in Cuba, ""the gravest issues would arise,"" a warning understood to imply potential nuclear confrontation .
 For the fourth time in nine months, a national intelligence estimate asserted that Soviet activities in Cuba were meant to deter an American attack there . The estimate says the activities were intended to sustain a vital ideological victory for the communist cause .
 The estimate considered but ultimately dismissed the possibility of a major offensive Soviet base .
 We know now that the Soviets had, in fact, deployed nuclear missiles to East Germany briefly in 1959 . Some U.S. intelligence officials suspected as much before the Cuban missile crisis broke . We know that some intelligence officials had suspected that .
 Working group and its judgments never made it into the September 19, 1962, Cuba Special National Intelligence Estimate . Yet this working group never made an official estimate .
 The possibility of a precedent-setting Soviet nuclear missile deployment to a satellite country didn't appear to reach the president . Nor did the possibility of precedent-set Soviet nuclear missiles deployment to the satellite country appear to have been discussed .
 President Kennedy told his colleagues that no Soviet Eastern European satellite had nuclear weapons . President Kennedy said this would be the first time the Soviet Union had moved these weapons outside their own territory .
 Why the East German special intelligence repon seems to have been unknown or disregarded by the estimating machine and its policymaking customers remains unclear . The estimating machine was used by East German policymakers .
 More recently declassified Soviet archives reveal that the intelligence community's mistakes were not confined to misjudging Khrushchev's intentions .
 It turns out that larger numbers of Soviet military forces actually were in Cuba at the time . "We just didn't know it," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Soviet forces numbered 41,900, a figure ten times higher than the September estimate . CIA estimators assumed this key indicator of a Soviet strategic missile base would be easy to see . CIA: Soviet forces number 41,000, ten times the previous estimate .
 U.S. intelligence officials were unaware of the full size of the Soviet troop deployment for the next 25 years . Instead, the United States was left waiting for 25 years to find out the size of Soviet troop deployments .
 The pre-crisis intelligence estimates of 1962 a strategic warning failure . The intelligence success narrative has been a success narrative for decades .
 The intelligence narrative of the Cuban missile crisis has taken two contradictory forms . Instead, the intelligence narrative has taken a contradictory form. Instead, it has taken an entirely contradictory form .
 One argues that intelligence warning succeeded, the other admits that no accurate warning was possible . U.S. intelligence estimators did the best that anyone could, one says .
 The crisis ended without nuclear confrontation and gave Khrushchev a major political defeat . The U.S. intelligence warning worked well, but the U.K. warned that it might be a mistake .
 U.S. intelligence officials discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba days before they became operational, but failed to anticipate the presence of Soviet missiles every day before then . The missiles were discovered days before becoming operational .
 The essence of warning is not presenting a list of iron-clad facts but anticipating and preventing the looming and murky danger of strategic surprise, says Amy Zegart .
 For most of 196z, there were no nuclear missiles in Cuba to be found .
 All four of the estimates had a distinctly reassuring quality to them . They highlighted inferences and evidence in ways that suggested policymakers need not worry about a Soviet offensive base in Cuba .
 The estimates made the surprise all the more sudden, shocking, and total . Rather than inoculating the Kennedy administration against the horrors of a possible Soviet missile surprise in Cuba, the estimates made it more sudden .
 History cautions against finding intelligence warning success in chancy, happy outcomes . History also cautions not to find intelligence success in a chancy outcome .
 Kennedy's "seizing the initiative" after seeing U2 photos of missile sites nearly led to nuclear disaster, not American victory . In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, each passing decade brings new and frightening evidence .
 Scott Sagan has chronicled numerous instances during the crisis where mistakes nearly spiraled out of control .
 In zooz, scholars unearthed terrifying new evidence that one Soviet submarine captain actually did order preparations to launch a nuclear-tipped torpedo off the U.S. coast .
 On October Z7, Z7 was bombarded by U.S. Navy depth charges and running out of air, the Soviet Captain gave the order to prepare a nuclear weapon for firing . On October 7, the Soviets were forced to withdraw from Z7 . The United States Navy depth
 "We will not disgrace our navy,"" the Soviet intelligence report quotes the Soviet captain as saying . The report quotes a captain of the Soviet navy as saying: "We are not disgraceful"
 Another submarine officer, Vasili Arkhipov, convinced him to await further instructions from Moscow . But in the heat of the moment, he said he would wait for further instructions .
 The Soviets mounted a substantial denial and deception program to keep the deployment secret . The Soviet Union denied the existence of the program .
 The second variant of the success narrative maintains that U.S. intelligence estimators may have been wrong, but they did the best that anyone could . The second version of the story maintains that United States intelligence estimates were wrong .
 In this particular case, Kent admits to being dead wrong but then claims no one could possibly have predicted Khrushchev's irrational behavior . Kent: 'No one could have predicted the irrational behavior'
 With a few exceptions, examinations of the Cuban missile crisis have picked up this theme . With few exceptions to this theme, the Cuban crisis has picked up a theme .
 Blaming the adversary for his unpredictable behavior is an odd argument, to say the least . Blame the opponent for his behavior is a strange argument, says CNN.com .
 By this measure, the Cuban missile crisis seems a textbook case of anomaly leading to crisis . The Cuban crisis seems to be an anomaly that led to crisis, the author says .
 U.S. had never provided such an extraordinary level of military aid to Cuba . Nor had they ever provided such a huge amount of military assistance to Cuba.
 Starting in the spring of 1962, ships were sailing, and by summer, crates of weapons — lots of them — were being unloaded . The U.S. government says it has never lost any of the weapons it acquired .
 U.S. intelligence officials knew something was different was happening, officials say . Something different was definitely afoot, they say . It's not the first time the CIA has been involved in a major terror attack .
 Their estimates confronted these anomalies and declared them more of the same . Yet their estimates were the same, they said . Yet they were more than the same as the previous estimates .
 Or failure is not simply an exercise in I semantics . The benefits of calling a failure a failure are the benefits of being called a failure . Or failure isn't simply a failure, it's a success .
 Intelligence research on the crisis has focused primarily on cognitive psychology and the pitfalls inherent in human cognition .
 Organizational explanations, by contrast, have remained an under-tilled area . Organizational . explanations have remained under the radar .
 Much has been made of bureaucratic politics in presidential decision-making . Little has been done to examine the silent but deadly role of organizational weaknesses in intelligence during Cuban missile crisis .
 The September 11 terrorist attacks and faulty estimates of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction can have devastating effects . But more recent analyses of the September 11 attacks and Iraq's WMD suggest that organizational weaknesses in intelligence can be devastating effects.
 There are lingering questions surrounding weaknesses in the Cuban missile crisis . And there are still questions surrounding such weaknesses .
 Intelligence warning requires analysts to separate ""signals,"" or clues that point to an adverStructures and sary's future action, from a background that is filled with processes that turn out to be irrelevant, confusing, or just plain wrong . I Signals and noise have been
 Wohlstetter's important insight warns against the perils of hindsight bias . He warns against hindsight bias and says that hindsight bias should be considered .
 Sites focus more on the ratio of signals to noise and the analytic techniques to improve individual perception . But it has also generated analytic pathologies of its own, focusing more on individual perception than organizational forces .
 Rarely do we examine organizational structures that determine whether signals get noticed or ignored, amplified or dispersed . Rarely, however, do we . examine the silent organizational structures and processes that determine if signals are heard or ignored .
 A brief comparison of the Cuban missile crisis and the 9/11 terrorist attacks illustrates the point . A comparison is made between the crisis and September 11 terrorist attacks .
 CIA Director John McCone wrote that his agency received 7.6 million intelligence signals in Cuban missile crisis . Intelligence noise was tremendous while signals were scarce, he wrote .
 The President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board says just 3 5 of these reports turned out to be signals indicating the actual Soviet deployment .
 McCone, Kent, Wohlstetter, Garthoff, and others argue that these were terrible odds for detecting signals of Khrushchev's nuclear gambit . McCone: "The odds are terrible odds"
 Intelligence officials would gladly trade signals-to-noise ratios with Cuban missile crisis counterparts . Intelligence officials working in the weeks and months before the September 11 terrorist attacks isn't the number .
 In 1962, there were just 5,000 computers worldwide, no fax organizational machines, and no cell phones . There were also no fax organization machines or cell phones, and there were no cell phone phones .
 Backlogs at NSA alone were so enormous that less than i percent of the intake was ever decoded or processed . NSA alone had backlogs of data that were so large that only a fraction of the data was processed .
 Signal detection remained about the same as it was in 1962 . Signal detection continued to be at the same level as in 1962.
 In two years before 9/11, U.S. intelligence officials picked up 23 signals that al-Qaeda was planning a major attack on the United States homeland . Intelligence officials had picked up a grand total of 23 signals in the two years prior to 9-11 .
 As the comparison suggests, quantifying signals and noise tells part of the warning story, but not the most important part . As well as quantifying signal and noise, it's important to know what is happening in Syria .
 Every signal, once detected, would eventually get lost in the bureaucracy . Instead, the problem had to do with organizational deficiencies that ensured every signal was lost in bureaucracy .
 Chief among these organizational deficiencies was structural fragmentation . The problem was jurisdictional divisions within and across intelligence agencies that dispersed signals .
 Three of the FBI'S 56 U.S. field offices independently uncovered what turned out to be three key signals . Seven weeks before 9/11, for example, three of the . FBI's 56 United States field offices uncovered three key . signals .
 In Phoenix, Special Agent Kenneth Williams identified a pattern of jihadists 8. 8.8.8 . 9.8 in Phoenix, Arizona .
 Zegart wrote a memo urging that flight schools be contacted, specific individuals be investigated, and other intelligence agencies, including the CIA be notified .
 Zacarias Moussaoui wanted tofly747s and paid $6,000 in cash to use a flight simulator . He lacked all the usual credentials but lacked all of the usual qualifications .
 He became the only person convicted in the United States for his connection to the attacks . He was convicted of 9/11 attacks in 2001 .
 The FBI field office structure was highly decentralized, and agents working these cases knew about the othTt i<; thp ra<ip ^^^' ^^ because a gaping divide separated domestic and foreign intelligence agencies, the CIA and the rest of the U.S. intelligence
 Minneapolis agents tried to obtain a search warrant for Moussaoui . Agency was unaware of Phoenix memo or existence of another terrorist in custody who could have been identified from al-Qaeda training .
 An FBI agent went searching blindly for alM i h d h a r and al-Hazmi in N e w York hotels, unaware that the Bureau's San Diego field office had an informant who knew both terrorists . The FBI agent was unaware of the informant's knowledge .
 In these cases, and 20 others, someone somewhere in the intelligence bureaucracy noticed something important . In the past, the intelligence community has been involved in some of the world's most dangerous situations .
 They were found, and then subsequently lost in the bowels of the bureaucracy . They were later found, but then lost, in bureaucracy .
 Structural fragmentation appears to have played a similar role in the Cuban missile crisis . Structured fragmentation isolates and weakens signals rather than concentrating and amplifying them .
 In 1962, just as in 2001, the Central Intelligence Agency was central in name only . Just as in 1962, the CIA was in charge of the CIA, but in 2001 it was central only .
 The CIA was hobbled from birth by existing intelligence agencies in the State, Justice, War, and Navy Departments . The CIA had been created just fifteen years earlier .
 The CIA, in fact, did not control the intelligence budgets or activities of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, or any of the military intelligence services . All of the services reported to the secretary of defense .
 The Bay of Pigs debacle of April 1961 made a weak CIA even weaker . What's more, the CIA was even weaker than it was before the debacle .
 John McCone is a Republican businessman with staunch anticommunist leanings . McCone has no professional intelligence experience . He is a staunch opponent of the Obama administration .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency photographed deck cargoes of Soviet ships en route from the Soviet Union . The agency photographed deck cargo on Soviet ships .
 The Navy conducted air reconnaissance of ships entering and leaving Cuba . It was the first time the U.S. Navy had conducted an air reconnaissance operation .
 The CIA ran human agents in Cuba, but jointly operated a special Cuban refugee debriefing center in Florida with the military . The CIA and the military jointly operated the center with Cuban refugees in Florida .
 The National Security Agency intercepted communications indicating Soviet ship movements, radio transmissions in Cuba, and other signals intelligence . The agency also intercepted radio transmissions from Cuba .
 At first the CIA, and then the Strategic Air Command, manned uz Intelligence reconnaissance flights over Cuba . At the time, the CIA and SAC were involved in reconnaissance flights .
 Estimates were technically produced by the CIA'S Office of r 6 National Estimates but coordinated and approved analysis of the by an interagency group called the U.S. Intelligence Cuban situation Board .
 In 196z, as in zooi, there were many bureaucratic players and no one firmly in U>as handled by them all . In short, in short, there was no one in charge of them all.
 There was a 'rigid compartmentalization' between aerial imagery collectors and CIA analysts . This divide kept the CIA from disseminating reports and information about the possibility of offensive Soviet weapons in Cuba before the October 14th discovery of missile installations .
 The PFIAB report on the crisis was completed in February 1963 . It finds that before October 14, CIA analysts did not publish any information indicating a potential offensive buildup .
 The agency's rules required that any report that could be verified by photographic evidence first had to be sent to a separate CIA unit . The National Photographic Interpretation Center was located in the Directorate of Science and Technology .
 For CIA analysts, this was the bureaucratic equivalent of Lower Slobovia . CIA analysts housed inside the agency's Directorate of Intelligence . The agency's Director of Intelligence is housed in Washington DC .
 There was no systematic process to inform analysts about the status of their aerial verification requests to NPIC . So many SO requests could languish or simply disappear without any further action .
 Without any idea whether further action would ever be taken, analysts withheld information from their written products . Analysts withheld information without knowing if further action was ever taken .
 Zegart takenly interpreted the verification rule as an outright ban on publishing all reports of offensive Soviet weapons without definitive photographic proof . The PFIAB found that analysts misOcTOBER & NOVEMBER 2012 found that .
 This same rigid division between analysis and photographic collection created a filter that appears to have hindered initial signal detection as well . The filter was created by the same rigid bureaucratic division .
 A September 9th report from Castro's personal pilot claimed that there were ""many mobile ramps for intermediate range rockets,"" an item subsequently deemed significant .
 CIA analyst who saw it was charged with identifying information relevant for aerial surveillance thought it was too general to be of targeting use . At the time, it was given only ""routine"" precedence because the CIA analyst thought the information was "too general" to be used in targeting .
 Preliminary evidence suggests that the same organizational barriers operating on 9/11 were also at work during the missile crisis . In short, preliminary evidence suggests . that the Preliminary same organization barriers operating . on 9-11 were . also at play .
 It seems unlikely that Cuban intelli, gence reporting constituted a shining exception ° where intelligence warning signals were collected, assessed, and disseminated by a well-oiled coordinann O/TT t/jprp ^^^^ machine .
 In both cases, bureaucratic jurisdictions and standard operating procedures also at work created invisible fault lines within and during the across intelligence agencies that kept signals from converging .
 Structural fragmentation made it likely missile crisis . signals would get lost, even after they had been found .
 Recall that the estimate clearly indicated conditions on the ground had changed since the previous estimate, which was published on August i , 1962, published in August i . 1962 . The estimate was published in 1962 .
 This report structure had the effect of sharply distinguishing present intelligence reporting about the military buildup from speculation about future possibilities .
 Intelligence about the buildup clearly showed the Soviets adopting a defensive posture, estimate says . The estimate says intelligence showed the Soviet Union was adopting a defense posture . Earlier assessments had concluded that the buildup was defensive .
 In other words, earlier judgments about Soviet objectives and intentions still held . Earlier judgments still held.
 In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, Kent took a great deal of criticism for the September 19th estimate . Kent was criticized for the estimate .
 Nearly all of it centered on analytic misjudgments, particularly mirror imaging or the tendency for analysts to believe an adversary will behave as they would . Analysts often misjudged their adversaries .
 More recent scholarly work also focuses on problems of perception and cognition .
 American estimators failed to see the world or weigh the costs and benefits of the missile deployment through Soviet eyes . According to this work, U.S. estimator failed to weigh costs or benefits of missile deployment .
 Mirror imaging was not the only problem hindering the estimates process . Instead, mirror imaging was the main problem in the estimate process .
 Organizational pressures were also driving strongly toward conformity and consistency across the four Cuba estimates .
 Zegart is not the product of a single mind, a single view, or even a single agency . These reports were OCTOBER & NOVEMBER 2012 .
 They were collective reports that required interagency coordination and consensus . They required inter-agency coordination, consensus, consensus .
 And that organizational fact of life tilted the whole estimating machine toward consistency over time, he says . "It's a good thing to say, but it's a bad thing to do," he adds .
 Presidential advisors did not need to be convinced that the world essentially looked the same today as it did last month . Presidential advisors say the world is essentially the same as it was last month.
 Where consistency was a given, inconsistency had to be explained, justified, and defended . In the U.S. where consistency was given, consistency was not a given . consistency had to explain, justify and defend .
 Changing a previous estimate required taking a fresh look, marshaling both new and old facts, and laying out what had shifted, and why . Changing a new estimate requires taking a new look at both sides of the debate .
 Changing an earlier estimate did not just take more rill work inside each agency . It required convincing every intelligence agency involved in the estimating process that what it said or assessed or wrote or wrote should be discarded or modified this time .
 In out what had short, organizational dynamics naturally gave consistency the upper hand . In out of what had been short, organization dynamics naturally took the lead .
 By political considerations, I don't mean to suggest that estimators bent their judgments to curry favor or told policymakers what they wanted to hear . I do not mean to . suggest that . estimators bend their judgments .
 Obama administration is facing high political stakes when it comes to an analytic judgment . Obama administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy . The White House has been accused of mishandling the situation .
 Any new estimate that revises earlier judgments can be seized, however unjustifiably, as proof that earlier estimates were wrong . In these situations, any new estimate . can't be seized as proof of earlier estimates are wrong, however .
 CIA had already caused Kennedy a devastating defeat in the Bay of Pigs invasion just eighteen months earlier . The Cold War stakes had never been greater and the CIA had caused Kennedy to lose the invasion .
 With midterm congressional elections just weeks away, the pressure to ""get Cuba right"" was tremendous . Now, with midterm congressional election just weeks from the end of the year, it was tremendous.
 An intelligence estimate that gave serious consideration to a new, more ominous reading of the Soviet buildup would almost certainly have been read as an indictment of earlier, less alarming estimates . In this environment, an intelligence estimate would have been seen as a damning indictment .
 It would have contradicted earlier public assurances by the president himself, as well as his closest advisors, that the Soviet buildup was purely defensive in nature . And it would have contradictored those assurances, which would have come from the president .
 Such considerations may not have been in the foreground of the estimates process, but it is hard to imagine that they were not in the background . Such considerations are not always in the forefront of the process .
 The above discussion helps illuminate why the estimates were consistent even when confronted dramatically new facts . The debate helps illuminate how the estimates are consistent .
 It does not, however, explain why the estimates failed to contain any dissenting views . The estimates do not explain why they did not contain any dissenters .
 Footnotes were used to provide dissenting opinions in estimates of other subjects written during the same period . Footnotes are used in the analysis of other studies written during that period .
 As Wohlstetter writes, "let us remember that the intelligence community was not alone. As well as the CIA, we should remember that we are not alone."
 It had plenty of support from Soviet experts, inside and outside the Government . It was backed by Soviet experts inside and out of the Government.
 CIA Director estimates contain John McCone, who suspected Soviet missiles from the start . McCone is believed to have been involved with the CIA since the 1960s .
 McCone was a paranoid anticommunist . Vtews, who always seemed to find signs of aggressive Soviet behavior, and was often wrong . McCone found signs of aggression and where were behavior and was wrong .
 In fact, he forcefully advocated his TQ6Z estintates^ hypothesis about Soviet missiles with senior Kennedy advisors on several occasions, starting in August 1962 .
 After SAM sites were discovered, he sent a series of cables to Washington from his European honeymoon, again strenuously asserting his hypothesis . The cables were sent back to Washington, where he requested additional reconnaissance .
 The question, then, is why he never did so in the national intelligence estimates . The question is whether he ever did so .
 Some argue that McCone refrained from foisting his opinions or judgments on the estimates process, and conclude that this was a good thing . Others argue that this is good thing.
 The notion is that all organizations specialize to increase efficiency, and specialization turns out to be a double-edged sword . The idea is that organizations specialize in increasing efficiency, but it's not always the case .
 Amy B Zegart labor into subunits enables experts to tackle specialized tasks in specialized ways . The subunits can be divided into sub units and subunits .
 specialization generates organizational structures and standard operating procedures that filter out information and keep an organization from learning . On the other hand, however, specialization creates organizational structures .
 Standard ways of writing reports, assembly line production processes, and rigid communication channels help managers work across sub-units .
 The idea of using TV and radio to promote ideas that do not fit into the normal formats, channels . But they also keep ideas that don't fit into those channels from getting heard . The idea is not only possible, but it is also possible to use the internet to promote new ideas
 Reports are written in certain ways, with certain types of information, for certain purposes, and for certain audiences . Reports, for example, are written with certain kinds of information .
 This setup is designed to create a standard product precisely by weeding out nonstandard ideas and approaches . This setup was designed to make it a standard standard product . It's designed to weed out ideas that don't fit into the standard .
 Organizations are filled with these kinds of standard formats and operating procedures . Organizations are full of these types of standard practices .
 The trouble is FiftV vears more that things get done the same way each time each time . The entire system becomes a well-oiled machine missile crisis, keeps alternative ideas from getting through .
 Cuba intelligence is highly specialized, with multiple units, offices, and agencies collecting and analyzing different pieces of the Cuba intelligence puzzle . It was challenges highly specialized .
 Kent describes the estimates process as a ""machine,"" with specific stations, regularized processes, and an ""assembly line"" production . Kent himself describes the process as an ""machine"
 One of the key features of the estimating machine was its evidentiary standard for revising earlier estimates or voicing dissenting views . The machine was designed to allow people to voice dissenting views of the government .
 Kent writes extensively about what it would have taken to revise the September 19 th estimate or offer a dramatically different, stronger view of the buildup . He concludes that the evidence was simply not there .
 Footnotes are ordinarily used for airing disagreements about evidence . Footnotes were ordinarily used to air disputes about evidence, but footnotes were used for discussion . Footnote was used to discuss evidence in a book about the trial of the Queen Elizabeth II .
 The CIA director's approach never fit into this standard operating procedure . The CIA chief's approach was never accepted by the CIA, a source says .
 There was no place in the National Intelligence Estimates or Special National Intelligence estimates for such things. And there was no . place in . such things, he said . And there were no place . in the intelligence estimates .
 He made his case — in meeting after meeting, cable after cable — to Kennedy and his top advisors . And while he waited for the estimating gears to grind, he made the case .
 Structural secrecy led the estimating machine to run smoothly into failure . Structured secrecy led to the estimate machine to fail . The estimating machine was built in secret .
 Intelligence warning is plagued by many of the same challenges as the Cuban missile crisis . Lessons for today C. yi.
 Some of the most powerful barriers to effective intelligence warning remain relatively unexplored . And yet, some of these powerful barriers are still unexplored, experts say .
 Organizations are not passive players, where individuals do all the hard thinking and make all the tough calls . Organizations don't have to rely on individuals to make the tough decisions, it's not just individuals .
 Organizations powerfully influence whether signals get amplified or weakened . Organizations influence whether analysis looks backward at continuity or leans forward toward disjuncture, and whether dissent gets highlighted or hidden .