 Farrell Dobbs The Cuba Crisis The Week of the Brink from International Socialist Review, Vol. 1 . Dobbs Archive | Trotskyist Writers Index | ETOL Main Page .
 The transcript of the tape recording is substantially unchanged . The transcript is published here substantially unchanged.
 If there are any of you here tonight who did not live with fear during the period of extreme tension following Kennedy’s nuclear war threat, then I can only say you must have been on the granddaddy of all drunks .
 The Soviet ships were sailing toward Kennedy’s naval blockade of Cuba . The ships were seen sailing toward the embattled revolutionary island of Cuba.
 It was as though an announcement had come from the astronomers that a fiery object from outer space was heading toward us . The people of the world were watching with fear and horror to see if it was on a collision course with our planet, and would incinerate us all .
 The threat of nuclear war suddenly and dramatically exploded into an immediate danger . The threat had seemed somewhat remote, but it suddenly exploded into a danger .
 The people of the U.S. became vividly aware that this country won’t be exempt in a nuclear war . President Obama said the United States will not be exempt from a war .
 Never again will a general war be fought in which people in other lands will be destroyed wholesale, civilians and all, their cities leveled, their country ravished, while the U.S. experiences no destruction within its boundaries . The United States will never again be destroyed in a war that
 The people of America are aware that we, like the rest of the world, will be the victims of a nuclear war . They’re aware that there is no place to hide, and they’ve been warned .
 A most meaningful manifestation of that realization occurred in Washington, D.C. during the crisis . "A most meaningful realization was in Washington during that crisis," she says .
 At one point he came to the question of civil defense, whereupon the hardbitten, cynical reporters laughed in his face . "Civil defense," he said .
 "They lived with fear and they lived with hope that maybe the threat would go away," she says . "They didn't know what was going on, but they didn't see it as a threat. So they lived ... with fear," she adds .
 Kennedy kept the pressure on, hour by hour, and day by grueling day, until Khrushchev’s threats were realized . Kennedy kept pressure on until the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles that Kennedy held .
 Kennedy’s grim speech on October 22: ‘Nobody was quite the same as they were before that grim speech’ But nobody was quite as much as they had been before that .
 There is a new consciousness in people’s minds that nuclear war is a clear and present danger, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Some new thoughts are percolating as to why there is the war danger . Some new and more intensive searches are going on among people to try to determine what can be done to prevent war .
 I won’t try tonight to deal with the tactical issues at the peak of the crisis, although they have a certain importance in probing into the full meaning of that crisis . I won't try to focus on tactical issues but they have been important in probing the meaning of this crisis
 The lessons of the crisis are not the real key to an analysis of the lessons of this year's crisis, says David Frum . He says that is not the only key to understanding what happened in Syria .
 The main, immediate fact that emerges from the crisis is that nuclear war has been averted — only temporarily — but it has been avoided . The main reason for avoiding nuclear war is that we have gained precious time in the fight for world peace, he says .
 To use that time effectively we need to analyze the lessons of the Cuban crisis . To use this time effectively, we need an analysis of the crisis in Cuba .
 Discussion of these questions and the arriving at common conclusions by more and more people will have to develop as a process . Discussion is a process that will need to be developed as a result of the debate .
 All I propose to undertake tonight is to make a start in the discussion of some of these basic factors . All I'm proposing to undertake is to start in a discussion of those basic factors.
 The Cubans were defending their sovereign right to make social changes within their country that they thought would better serve the welfare of the population . The Cuban government was defending their right to change social changes .
 The right of a people to take affairs into their own hands is written in our own Declaration of Independence proclaiming the American Revolution of 1776 . The right to reshape things in the way they see fit to make a better life for themselves is the right of the people, as it was
 The Cuban government is to be commended for that act, because it was in keeping with the rights of the Cuban people . That was a progressive act and they are to be praised for that, says David Cameron .
 It was Kennedy, who precipitated the nuclear war crisis, who used the issue of Soviet aid to Cuban self-defense as his pretext . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union in Cuba and used it as a pretext for war .
 Kennedy’s line: ‘If he has to bomb every Latin American from 90 miles off our shores to the southern tip of South America. That was Kennedy's line,’ he said .
 The imperialist ruling class of the United States stands as the only governing power in the world that has ever used nuclear weapons against other human beings . The U.S. is the only ruling class that has used such weapons against others .
 The Soviets are removing their missiles from Cuba and Kennedy is still on the prod . Kennedy is the president of the United States. Kennedy was on the Cuban missile program .
 He is broadening his definition of what he calls ‘offensive weapons’ He is now broadening the definition of ‘offending weapons” to include weapons .
 If defense is aggression, then so long as the Cubans have any arms with which to defend themselves against attack, they have “offensive” weapons that “threaten” the U.S. The United States. The U.N. has a right to have
 Cuba will possess “offensive weapons’ so long as there is a zip gun in a back alley in Havana . Cuba will also possess ‘offensive’ weapons, but only if they are in Havana’s back alley .
 Because the imperialists are preparing new violations of Cuban sovereignty, they are preparing to violate Cuban sovereignty . The imperialists must respect the sovereignty of Cuba, Cuban citizens .
 They are determined to turn back the clock and restore exploitation of Cuba by U.S. monopoly corporations . The Cuban government is determined to restore exploitation by American monopoly firms .
 The Cuban revolution still remains in grave peril of U.S. aggression . That is why the Cuban revolution continues to be in grave danger of the United States aggression .
 "It is our duty to defend from within this country the rights of the Cubans," says President Obama . "It's our duty ... to defend our rights," says Obama .
 Back them in their demand that the United States withdraw from Guantanamo . Back them on the U.S. withdrawal from Guantanamo. Back us in the demand that Guantanamo be removed from Guantanamo Bay .
 Kennedy wants to dictate what weapons the Cubans can have because they are “threatening” the U.S. from 90 miles away . He has a military base right on Cuban soil .
 It is our duty to support the demands of the Cubans that Kennedy call off that naval blockade, that he call off his violations of Cuban air space . It is also our duty that Kennedy lift the economic embargo against Cuba .
 The Cuban government stressed the minimum assurances it would be necessary to have before they could put an ounce of trust in any promise Kennedy might make that he would not invade Cuba . These are points stressed by the Cubans .
 We should demand that the Kennedy administration restore diplomatic relations with Cuba . The Kennedy administration should restore diplomatic ties with Cuba, CNN.com reports .
 "Let the people of this country go down there and see for themselves what it is all about. Let's people go down and see what it's all about," he said .
 Give the Cubans economic aid and pay them reparations for the damage that has already been done to them by the U.S. Give the Cuban government reparations, pay them back, says CNN.com .
 Now look at the lessons of the Cuban crisis from another point of view . The lessons of Cuban crisis will be revealed in a new book .
 There has been a notion that the imperialists would not risk nuclear war in trying to maintain their rule . Ever since people began to grasp what the horror of nuclear war would probably be, there has been an idea advanced that they would not .
 It has been argued that they would hold back because they would risk their own destruction in a nuclear war . It has also been argued they would not hold back as they would be risking their own lives in a war .
 This contention has been counterposed to the Marxist analysis of the historic role of ruling classes . This contention is counter to that of Marxist analysis .
 Marxists hold that the whole history of class struggle demonstrates that no ruling class will peacefully yield up its privileged minority rule upon demand from the majority . Marxists believe that the majority will not tolerate a ruling class's minority rule .
 The ruling class will try by all available means, through force and violence, to impose its minority will on the majority in order to preserve its privileged position, writes David Cameron . Cameron: "The ruling class is trying by all means, . through force or violence, ... it will try
 The father of Caroline Kennedy is prepared to risk the death of his daughter in nuclear war in order to preserve the capitalist system and maintain imperialist exploitation over peoples in other countries . He is willing to risk his daughter's death to preserve capitalism and maintain imperialism .
 War danger stems from the basic nature of capitalism, says David Cameron . Crisis in crisis offers fresh proof that capitalism is not to blame .
 The roots lie in class exploitation within a capitalist country, in our case the U.S. The roots of class exploitation lie in the United States, the author says .
 Capitalist exploitation breeds social injustice, creates class inequities within society . Capitalists exploit social injustice in society, creating social inequities .
 Madison Avenue describes us as a society of equals, but it just happens that the capitalists are more equal than workers . That is built into the capitalist system, and that's the way it is going to remain under capitalism .
 Out of this class inequality a surplus accumulation of capital becomes amassed in the hands of our native capitalists . They have to do something with it, in order to make more money for themselves, says the author .
 This thirst for new riches impels the capitalist ruling class into a drive toward exploitation of peoples abroad . The capitalist class wants to exploit people around the world, says the writer .
 An intricate network of imperialist oppression develops, imposed by a combination of political trickery and military force . The network of oppression is imposed by the use of military force and political trickry .
 Social injustices provoke class struggles on a world scale that lead to colonial revolutions for independence from imperialism and to social revolution . Social revolution to overturn the whole capitalist system and lay a foundation through workers’ states for an advance to a socialist society .
 The imperialists, and before all others, the imperialist rulers of the U.S. are striving desperately to stem and reverse this revolutionary tide . The Imperialists are striving to stem, reverse the revolutionary tide, the author says .
 Their immediate aim in the case of Cuba is to proscribe social revolution from the Western Hemisphere, to keep it a private preserve of capitalism . The Cuban government is trying to keep social revolution out of the West Hemisphere .
 It says right in the constitution of the U.S. that the Cubans can’t do that. The Cuban government is not allowed to do that, the president says . It's a constitutional violation in the United States .
 They intend to put an end to this business in which racial discrimination and segregation are actually outlawed to unite all workers and enable them to act in common to improve their conditions .
 They intend to restore discrimination and segregation in order again to split the Cuban workers and enable the imperialists to exploit them . The imperialists want to exploit Cuban workers again, says the Cuban president .
 Washington has said there is no change in the basic policy of Washington with respect to Cuba . Cuba has been a source of tension with the United States .
 There is no change in their aim to smash all revolutionary gains made by working people throughout the world . And by that they also mean there are no changes in their aims to smash revolutionary gains .
 They are girding for nuclear war precisely for the purpose of restoring imperialist supremacy over the world . The U.S. is preparing for a nuclear war to restore its imperialist supremacy .
 Their aim is to make the world safe for the investments of the Rockefellers and the Kennedys . The aim of the group is to protect the world from terrorism, according to the report .
 War can be prevented only by stripping the imperialists of their ability to make war . War can only be prevented by stripping them of their right to war, writes David Cameron .
 The U.S. needs to abolish capitalist rule wherever it still holds sway, including in the United States . That can be accomplished only by political class struggle to abolish capitalism .
 Workers states that have come into being since 1917 have the same inalienable right as the Cubans to prepare the strongest possible military defense of their countries . Workers states have the right to prepare for military defense, says the Cuban leader .
 Military defense, vital though it is to them, is not the primary key to world peace, to holding back the imperialist war drive . But military defense is vital to the world, but not the main key to peace, it's vital to hold back imperialism .
 The imperialists won't go for that. Reasonable though it would be to have peaceful coexistence between nations; reasonable though . Let the different social systems engage in orderly competition .
 They won't go for it because they are wholly aware that they would lose in peaceful competition between the rival social systems . They won’t do so because they’re wholly aware of the risks . They would lose if they went for it .
 The imperialists won’t agree to peacefully coexist a minute longer than they absolutely have to with countries having a non-capitalist social system . They won't agree to coexist peacefully with non-capitalism any longer .
 A serious question arises as to whether one can fight for peace under a slogan of peaceful coexistence with capitalism with capitalism . The question therefore arises as a serious question of whether one . can fight peace under the slogan 'peace coexistence'
 The policy based on that slogan was first shaped by Stalin as the head of the Soviet Union . It has been continued in all its main essentials by the Khrushchev regime .
 The policy assumes that Soviet military power can serve as a key deterrent against imperialist war with nuclear arms . The policy is based on the belief that Russia's military power is a deterrent to imperialist war .
 On that key premise, the anti-capitalist, antiwar masses of the world are diverted from class struggle opposition to imperialism into pressure groups supporting Soviet diplomacy . The anti-war masses are diverted to support Soviet diplomacy, the author says .
 In capitalist countries such as ours, rebels against capitalist policies are diverted from independent working class political action into support of so-called ‘peace loving’ capitalist politicians .
 The Soviet leaders have sought to assert unquestioned authority over all anti-imperialist forces in carrying out their international line . Within the framework of this basic policy, the Soviet leaders .
 They have acted unilaterally in taking important steps touching the interests of working people in other countries, in other workers’ parties . Repeatedly, they have taken important steps touched the interests in other . countries, says the Labour Party .
 Moscow and Washington have been involved in the Cuban crisis for decades . That has been part of the history of Kremlin policy, and it appears to have been repeated in Washington .
 It appears that the Cubans are asserting their right to be consulted and to have a voice in any negotiations, as shown by their opposition to Khrushchev’s offer to allow United Nations’ inspection of Cuban military installations .
 In the first place the Cubans have a sovereign right to have any kind of arms they want, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The Cubans have a right to whatever weapons they can get to defend themselves, CNN.com's John Sutter says . Cubans should have weapons to protect themselves, he says . Sutter: "The Cubans are right to be armed with whatever they need"
 It would be no less unjust if Castro took the top Pentagon brass on a tour of the Cuban defenses so they could better prepare for an invasion .
 It is an outrage and the Cubans are right in standing their ground on this. It's an outrage, and it's a shame for the Cuban government, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Castro spoke correctly when he told the Cuban people in his speech a week ago last night that the inspection issue is not a question to be discussed with the imperialists . At the same time Castro spoke correct when he said last night .
 There remains an unbreakable alliance between the Cuban and Soviet states, he said . These are things they will discuss and work out among themselves among themselves, he added .
 More to be said on the subject in due course by the Cubans, if not by Moscow . We can expect more to say on the matter .
 People who are seriously interested in the question of worker’s democracy, should pay close attention to what is said. And people who are serious about the question should pay .
 The disagreement poses the question of democracy in relations between workers’ states, as a corollary to the issue of democracy within revolutionary parties . The disagreement raises the question .
 Worker’s democracy on both counts is vital to the forces fighting against imperialism and for world peace . Worker's democracy is vital in the fight against imperialism, for peace .
 I HAVE described briefly the policy of peaceful coexistence and popular frontism, as developed by Stalin and continued by Khrushchev . I have described briefly how the policy was developed by the Communist Party .
 It didn’t prevent the imperialists’ intervention in Korea, nor is it preventing the present intervention in Vietnam, writes Andrew Hammond . The imperialists' intervention in South Korea didn't prevent the intervention, he says .
 Kennedy threatened nuclear war in his attempts to overturn the Cuban revolution . Kennedy threatened to use nuclear weapons in his attempt to overturn Cuba's revolution .
 The Soviet retreat on the missile issue under pressure of Kennedy’s threats warded off the immediate danger of nuclear war . Of course, it was true that the Soviet retreat under pressure from Kennedy's threats warding off the danger .
 It’s true that Khrushchev has stripped Kennedy of a phony pretext for an invasion of Cuba, but it's true that . Kennedy has stripped himself of the pretext for invasion, but that's not the case .
 There are also other facts that we should keep in mind in analyzing the lessons of this latest war crisis . But there are also facts that should be kept in mind .
 Popular front politics within the U.S. didn’t get to first base in stopping Washington from shaping its nuclear war policy . Washington's nuclear policy is shaped by popular front politics in the United States .
 Soviet military power didn’t stop Kennedy from threatening a nuclear attack . Kennedy threatened a nuke attack on the Soviet Union .
 They once again call into question the international policy of the Soviet leadership . The Soviet leadership's actions in the 1980s and 1990s are now under scrutiny .
 They compel serious thought about the need for class struggle opposition to imperialism . The class struggle against imperialism is an example of the need to be united .
 Military self-defense by the revolutionary countries, as I said, is important to their security . The revolutionary countries are important in their security, says President Obama .
 But class struggle action is the key to the fight against imperialist war . Class struggle is key to fighting imperialist war, says the Workers Party .
 Castro’s speech on the issue of UN inspection was a speech to the UN, Castro said . Castro said the UN inspectors should not be allowed to inspect any of the buildings in Cuba . Castro: "In that connection I want to call your attention to Castro”
 Castro's speech will be broadcasted at 9 p.m. ET on Monday night . Castro will address the nation's first state of the state of Cuba . Castro is expected to make a speech at the end of the year .
 Cubans are shaping a policy increasingly permeated with the concepts of class struggle defense against imperialism . It pinpoints the fact that the Cubans, learning as they struggle and learning their lessons well — because they know imperialism won't allow them time for second guesses .
 You’ll find at the literature table back there a Pioneer pamphlet containing the Second Declaration of Havana .
 It’s worth your while to study the speeches and documents put out by the Cuban revolutionary movement .
 They are thinking out loud, learning the lessons of the struggle as they go forward, and we have something to learn from them . We have a lot of respect for the U.S. President Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and Hillary Clinton .
 They have generally supported the Democrats, usually by campaigning against the Republicans .
 You will recall that they supported Kennedy in 1960 by calling for the defeat of Nixon as the main danger . They called for the election of Nixon to be the main threat .
 Nixon is no prize package, and on top of everything else, he just proved he is also a sore loser . Nixon is not a prize package . He just proved that he is a loser .
 Wallace backed Truman in the Korean War . Wallace backed the President in the war . Wallace was a "peace loving" leader .
 "They repeatedly prove that they learn nothing and they forget nothing," they say . Yet they repeatedly prove nothing, yet they repeatedly fail to learn nothing, and forget nothing .
 Wallace turned from Wallace back to support Stevenson and Kennedy by opposing Eisenhower and Nixon . They simply turned to Wallace back in support of Stevenson and . Kennedy .
 Kennedy’s party has decisively proved where it stands on the burning question of war and peace, and his nuclear war threat had bipartisan support, all the way . Today's TODAY TODAY show that Kennedy's war threat was bipartisan support all the time .
 No sane person could but welcome peaceful relations between nations . As a sane person, no sane person would but welcome peace between nations.
 Stalinist technique, twist and distort things so that to disagree with a certain policy of Khrushchev’s becomes anti-Soviet, writes David Frum . To disagree with the policy, disagreeing with Khrushchevitch's becomes anti Soviet, he writes .
 It contributes nothing but confusion to the search for effective ways to fight against imperialist war . It contributes to confusion over how to deal with imperialist war, writes David Cameron .
 The CP leaders resort to this simply as a cover for continuing their same old bankrupt policy. The CP leader is simply trying to cover up his bankrupt policy, he says .
 They smear the pro-Cuba, pro-Soviet SWP, and at the same time they continue to seek political coexistence with the anti-Soviet, anti-cuba, Social Democrats . They could not even make a demonstration against Kennedy’s nuclear war threat without having
 Two power centers down in Washington, one in the White House, and the other in the Pentagon . They find there are two power centers in Washington . The White House is in charge of the Pentagon, the Pentagon is the other .
 The Pentagon gang, they say, are in a coalition with the ultra-right, the Republican leaders and Wall Street . They say the Pentagon gang is in coalition with Wall Street, the ultra right, the GOP and Wall St.
 They are acting independently of the White House in moving to aggravate the crisis . The White House says they are acting independent of the administration .
 We must save him from this Pentagon cabal so that he can show his better self and really be Caroline’s daddy again, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Worker has also opened a polemic against the SWP over the peace question . The Worker also opened an open polemic about the peace issue .
 We regret the factional distortions that have been introduced by the Worker . But we regret that we have introduced a factional distortion .
 That statement simply takes facts and turns them upside down, inside out, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter . "That statement simply took facts and turned them inside out," he says .
 The purpose of it is, of course, to oppose a class struggle political policy and try to defend their class collaborationist line . "The purpose of this is to oppose [class struggle] political policy," he says .
 We recognize that people cannot be expected to leap in one stride to socialist conclusions when they set out to do something to stop a nuclear war . We recognize—we're not entirely stupid, you know .
 We support all partial steps going in the direction of opposition to the imperialist war policy . We support 'all partial steps' to opposition to war policy, says party .
 We support the demand for unilateral action by the United States in ending nuclear tests . We support, for example, the demand that the U.S. end nuclear tests in North Korea .
 We believe all tests should be stopped, but we also think people fighting against nuclear tests from within the United States should concentrate on demands that the U.S. government stop them . We also believe people should be fighting to stop nuclear tests, but also to stop them from occurring .
 "We favor demands to withdraw all American troops from abroad, to dismantle all military bases," the group says . We favor demands that the U.S. withdraws from abroad .
 Let the rest of the world run their own affairs as they see fit, while we concentrate on clearing up the social mess created by the capitalists here in our country. Let the people of the rest-of-the-world run their . own affairs .
 As is the duty of all socialists, we campaign day in and day out for independent working class political action. We campaign day-in-day out for working class action.
 We seek to explain why working class political action must lead to adoption of a socialist program . We seek constantly to . explain why . working class . action must . lead to the adoption of socialist program.
 New fighters for peace are bound to be aroused by the Cuban crisis . Because of the brutal truths about imperialist policy revealed in Cuba, new fighters will be aroused . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in Cuba for decades .
 If socialists advance a class struggle program to them, more headway can be made in the fight for peace . Socialist peace is possible, but peace is not possible in the long run .
 We can make progress in explaining to American workers the need for our country to follow the revolutionary example of the Russian, Chinese and Cuban workers . We need to explain to U.S. workers that they need to follow revolutionary example .
 Khrushchev had in mind, but not what the circumstances were in their mutual relations, he says . "I’m not going to try to guess what’s going to happen," he says of Castro-Kirrushchev .
 I do not know, but I would take it for granted that the facts will slowly come to light in the next period . I do . I would be taken for granted, but the facts are slowly coming to light, he says .
 Castro’s speech sets a new and very good example in moving away from the practice of secret diplomacy between governmental powers behind the backs of the people . I am quite confident that there will be more information coming from the Cubans, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Castro gives a refreshing view of a revolutionary leadership telling the workers the truth . Castro talks to U Thant about his revolutionary leadership in Vietnam .
 It's not a very wise thing to make snap judgements on tactical questions without having all the facts. It’s not a good thing to say ‘yes’ without knowing the facts,’ says Luis Suarez .
 There is an expression for that here in the United States --drug store quarter-backing . There is a phrase for that in the U.S. It's a drug store quarter backing .
 On Monday at the drug store lunch counter the experts decide what mistakes the quarterbacks and the coach made in the football game the previous Saturday . On Monday the experts decided what mistakes they made in Saturday's game .
 Anybody who has had trade union experience will recognize that it is a chancy thing to be too categoric from too far away about a tactical move made in a given struggle .
 We should study this aspect of the Cuban question, as we dig more deeply into the lesson of the crisis, in a sense similar for instance to the question that arose over the question of Soviet resumption of nuclear tests .
 The Soviet Union had the right to resume nuclear tests as it did, after the tacit ban on tests which had come about, you will recall, when the Soviets unilaterally declared a moratorium on tests . The Soviets had to resume tests after the end of a tacit ban .
 Our party felt that even though the Soviet Union had this right, its breaking of the moratorium on tests gave propaganda advantage to the imperialists among people who were strongly opposed to nuclear testing .
 In short, you come down to a question of the strategic interrelationship between military defense and political defense of the workers states against imperialism . The question is whether military defense is political defense against imperialism, he says .
 There is a real question as to whether the missile issue involved tactics which put military above political considerations in the defense of Cuba . From that point of view, there is a question as well as whether tactics involved tactics .
 Revolutionary leadership has to be sensitive about taking military defensive steps which may interfere with the mobilization of political defense . Since so many of you are preoccupied with the question, that in itself is objective testimony to the fact .
 The more imperialists get crowded, the more likely they are to take long chances, as they just demonstrated in the Cuban crisis . It is true that the more the imperialists are crowded, they are likely to take a long chance .
 Without the strongest class struggle opposition to stay their hand, the imperialists will become bolder in their drive to overturn all past revolutionary conquests and will throw the world into war anyway . The world will be going to war anyway, but without the strength of the opposition, the world will
 Imperialism is either going to be defeated everywhere or it’s going to make war . Imperialism will either be defeated, or it will be made war, he says .
 The imperialists are not entirely free agents in deciding when they can make war . But the imperialists aren't always free agents, they are free agents to make war.
 At the same time the foreign minister spoke at a street meeting of Brazilian workers and students . He admitted the right of the Cubans to establish a socialist regime within the Western Hemisphere .
 The pressure of class struggle was impeding the firm mobilization of a capitalist government behind the imperialist attack on Cuba . It means that the pressure of the class struggle is impeding a capitalist mobilization of the government .
 The wider the class struggle, the greater will be the mobilization of humanity on the side of revolution . The lesser will be that portion of the human race that remains under the influence of imperialism, the lesser .
 President Obama has been criticized for his policies in the United States . He has been accused of being a traitor to the U.S. by some of the world's most powerful institutions .
 Not a single Democrat or Republican politician in Congress said one word in opposition to Kennedy’s line in the Cuban crisis . “You all know that not a single Republican or Democrat or Democrat in Congress.”
 Let's assume that there had been just one actual representative of the working class to speak within Congress against Kennedy’s policy and tell the class truth about the Cuban crisis . The working class spoke out against Kennedy's policy .
 It would have had a very significant effect on the minds of the American people, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Kennedy’s line was not met with resistance in the councils of government or unions . As it was, though, nowhere in the top leadership of the unions was there a voice speaking out .
 People were subjected to a drum fire of propaganda in support of Kennedy all during the crisis . People subjected day in and day out of day-to-day propaganda .
 Feingold won't be allowed to speak again in the U.S. Senate on Tuesday night .
 Her example shows that insofar as we can mobilize forces to break through the curtain of lies drawn around the U.S. by the imperialists, it can have an effect . Her example is that, as well as her example .
 For the moment a lot of people have been taken in by the way Kennedy was able to utilize the missile issue . The missile issue is still a mystery to many .
 Missiles or not, Kennedy did provoke quite a few protest actions in the capitalist sector of the world . Kennedy provoked quite a lot of protest .
 You’ll find in the Militant a round-up on some of these protests in various countries, including a very interesting one .
 Suppose there were tactical errors on the military defense side involving the Soviet Union and perhaps involving the Cuban leadership . The Cuban leadership may have made a tactical error .
 If that was the way things worked out in the class struggle, you wouldn't have a single trade union in the U.S. today, he says . "Our boys at the top of the union movement don’t need to take a backseat for anybody when it comes
 In fact Kennedy will succeed for a while in doing a snow job on the American people precisely because the leaders of the mass organizations in this country are trucking to him, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He won't fool the world, and he won't change the relationship of forces in the world revolutionary struggle through his propaganda . But he won’t fool the . world, he says .
 On the question of what independent socialists can do within the peace movement, this is a big subject in itself . I can only briefly touch on it in passing .
 A big problem in the first hours after Kennedy’s speech was not what kind of protest action to mobilize but how to impel people heading the so-called “respectable” peace organizations into calling any demonstrations at all .
 They wanted to take ads in the newspapers and start firing telegrams to Kennedy . "They wanted to use the media to try and get him to talk to Kennedy," she says . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 It constitutes a good starting point to examine the peace movement in terms of the Cuban crisis . The peace movement is a good start point to examining the crisis, writes David Frum .
 These questions require study, particularly since a lot of young people turned up in the demonstrations where they occurred around the country, young militants who wanted some fighting leaders . These questions must be studied, especially in the case of young militants, the author says .
 One of the most important things that socialists can do is to work in the peace movement to help these young people to develop a class struggle policy . The peace movement is a key part of the peace struggle .
 I come now to the last question, the problem of speaking to audiences that aren’t sympathetic to the Cuban Revolution as is the audience here tonight. The Cuban Revolution was a major source of inspiration in Cuba .
 "I would suggest that things are a little different than they were before October 22, even with an unsympathetic audience. I would suggest to you that things . are different now, even if things are still different," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 There is better than an even chance that Kennedy is going to overreach himself concerning the momentary propaganda advantage he has gained in this country on things like the missile issue . Kennedy is not likely to overrule himself on matters such as missile issues .
 There is a whole series of questions that will arise as he presses his offensive against Cuba . There are a lot of questions to be asked about the U.S. response to the Cuba crisis .
 CNN's John Sutter suggests a new question to introduce a new dimension to Cuba discussion . For instance, ask a question to put to your audience that helps introduce new dimension into the Cuba discussion.
 I am speaking in the terms now of cutting through his missile propaganda which won’t stand up indefinitely, he says . ‘I’m speaking in terms of cutting . through his . missile propaganda,’ he says. “I am speaking . in terms now
 "Now is the time, more than ever, to go back and explain carefully to people what they are doing in Cuba," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "Put it in terms of the things that the working people of this country are struggling for," she said . "Put the things you need to be able to do for your family," she added .
 They are doing the same things in Cuba that the NAACP is organized to do in the U.S. The NAACP is organizing to do the same thing in Cuba as in the United States .
 Groups are fighting for higher old-age pensions, better medical care, more schools, adequate housing in Cuba . They are doing the same things in Cuba that organizations in this country are trying to do in the same way .
 Of course, the imperialists still harp on the question of Cuban elections . The imperialists are still harping on the issue of Cuban election .
 I thought Dick Garza handled that matter well in a discussion with a radio commentator . I thought it was a good example of how he handled the matter well .
 The U.S. went quite a few years longer than the Cubans have yet gone before they had what passed for elections here, he said .
 "It is entirely possible, you know, that there would be some changes made in this country," says President Obama . "It's entirely possible" that there could be changes made, he says .