 Edu prepared for delivery at the 2001 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Hilton San Francisco .
 Almost every year, Americans are told that their country's reputation is on the line . The U.S. is told that its reputation is at risk every year .
 If we did not set a precedent in the Persian Gulf, we were warned, aggressors everywhere would swallow up their neighbors . If we didn't accomplish our mission in Somalia, everyone would believe that the U.S. would flee if its military forces suffered casualties .
 Each of these claims rests on the “reputation hypothesis,” that tomorrow's enemies will assess America's credibility on the basis of U.S. actions today .
 The reputation hypothesis is widely believed by American decision makers . The U.S. has paid a high cost in dollars and lives to protect America's reputation for resolve . The United States has paid an enormous amount of money to protect its reputation .
 The United States has fought wars over issues of little immediate importance in order to build or preserve credibility for the future . The U.S. has been involved in wars over little immediate issues in the past, but also in the Middle East .
 In this paper I test the reputation hypothesis against what I call the power/interests hypothesis . If reputation is true, reputations are short-lived, or if they only apply in a narrow set of future cases, then decision 2 .
 The ""power/interests hypothesis" posits that decision makers assess the credibility of their adversaries’ threats by evaluating the current balance of power and interests, without reference to the adversary's history for keeping commitments .
 If the power/interests hypothesis is correct then countries do not need to take costly actions today in order to generate credibility for the future . Countries should not be taking costly actions in order for credibility, says David Cameron .
 Future commitments will only be credible if and only if they are tied to real interests and backed by sufficient power . Future commitments must be backed by real interests, says John Defterios .
 This paper uses words which are used frequently in everyday discussions of politics and which, therefore, have multiple meanings . It uses words that are frequently used in everyday discussion of politics . This paper includes words used frequently by politicians and politicians .
 A country's credibility is the perceived likelihood that it will carry out its threats and promises, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One factor which may contribute to a country's credibility is its reputation . The reputation of a country is a key part of its credibility, according to experts .
 A country's reputation is the perception, held by others, of the state's pattern of past behavior . The reputation of a country is held by people who see it as a nation's image .
 The ""reputation hypothesis"" links the concept of reputation to credibility . The hypothesis is based on the notion of reputation .
 The reputation hypothesis posits that a country's reputation has a significant effect on its credibility . The reputation theory is based on the reputation of a country in a country .
 According to the reputation hypothesis, when a country tries to assess the likelihood that an adversary will carry out its commitments, it bases its analysis on that makers should not invest much in reputation . In other words, according to this hypothesis, the reputation of an adversary is not worth much .
 Only if reputations last a long time or apply broadly will it pay to invest much in reputation . Reputations last long and apply broadly, so it pays to invest in reputation, says Simon Tisdall .
 Different observers can assign different values to the likelihood that a country will carry out each of its threats and promises . A country can have different amounts of credibility on each issue with each observer .
 I look for evidence that U.S. decision makers were influenced significantly by a Soviet reputation for keeping or breaking past commitments, and for evidence they assessed Soviet credibility strictly on the basis of the balance of power and interests .
 For several reasons, the CMC provides an excellent test for the reputation and power/interests hypotheses . The CMC is a great test of the reputation of the people involved in the project .
 The reputation hypothesis predicts that Soviet credibility during the missile crisis should have been low . The CMC erupted soon after a series of unfulfilled Soviet threats, it says .
 In this project, I focus on the way countries assess credibility during a crisis . In the years leading up to the crisis, 4.5% of the world's economies have been in crisis-hit countries .
 This might be different than the way they assess credibility during periods of low tension . This might not be the same way it assesses credibility during low tension periods .
 "I also focus on the way that countries assess the credibility of their adversaries," he says . "I focus on how countries assess their credibility," he adds .
 This may or may not be the same way that they assess their allies' credibility . This may be the way they assess each other's credibility .
 Focusing on the effects of reputation on one’s adversaries makes sense . The likely effects of losing credibility with adversaries is probably much worse than losing it with allies, he says .
 In order for it to be costly to have a reputation for irresolve in the eyes of one’s allies, not only must the reputation hypothesis be true, but balance of threat theory must be false .
 America’s military trump card—its superiority in nuclear forces -- had disappeared for all practical purposes . The U.S. lost its nuclear superiority in North Korea in the missile crisis . The crisis was the first time the U.N. had been able to use nuclear weapons in
 The thousands of pages of declassified documents on American decisions, as well as the audio tapes of the key meetings, allow scholars to develop very reliable, high-resolution picture of the decision making process .
 The crisis presents a very easy test for the reputation hypothesis . It is an easy test of the reputation theory . For reasons described in detail below, the crisis presents an example .
 Given that the reputation hypothesis has fared poorly in previous empirical tests,6 it makes sense to construct easy tests for the hypothesis .
 If it fails these tests, too, we should discard the hypothesis, at least in its current form . The hypothesis should be discarded at the very least .
 The CMC provides strong evidence against the reputation hypothesis, and lends support to the power/interests hypothesis . It lends support for the power and interests hypothesis .
 Snyder and Diesing find little evidence to support the reputation hypothesis . Snyder says there is little evidence that the reputation theory is true .
 Paul Huth and Bruce Russett did find empirical support for the reputation hypothesis in their early statistical analyses of deterrence outcomes and reputation . Huth, Russett and Russett have published a book on reputation theory .
 The statistical significance of a country’s past actions on future deterrence success disappeared, researchers say . But in their later analyses, the statistical significance has disappeared .
 There is no evidence that years of bluffs and unfulfilled threats had damaged Soviet—or Khrushchev’s—credibility . There is also no evidence of damage to the Soviet-Krushchev's credibility .
 Senior members of the Kennedy Administration thought the Soviet commitment to defend Cuba was credible because the strategic balance of power had shifted to favor the Soviets . Consistent with the predictions of the power/interests hypothesis, the U.S. supported the Cuban defense of Cuba .
 In the first section I develop the reputation and power/interests hypotheses, and I discuss research methods and case selection criteria . In the second section I discuss the research methods used in this article .
 In the second section I briefly describe Soviet behavior in a series of crises prior to the Cuban missile crisis, the events of the missile crisis itself, and the balance of power between the two superpowers in 1962 .
 I use the information about past Soviet behavior and the balance of power to derive predictions from the reputation and power/interests theories about U.S. decision making during the missile crisis . Then, I use that information to make predictions about the future of the United States .
 The case is neither a particularly easy nor hard test of the power/interests hypothesis, so the evidence supporting this theory is only suggestive . At the same time, the case is not an easy or hard test for the hypothesis .
 Many more cases should be studied to determine the power of the power/interests theory, says author .
 Some of the necessary empirical work on the power/interests hypothesis has been conducted and is in Press, “What Causes Credibility?”, PhD Dissertation, 2001 .
 Reputation Hypothesis posits that a country's credibility depends on its history for fulfilling, or breaking, past commitments . Reputation hypothesis: Reputation depends on a nation's ability to fulfill its promises .
 A state which consistently keeps its promises and carries out threats will gain a reputation for resolve . A state that consistently carries out its threats and carries on its promises will gain the reputation of resolve .
 A state with a history of breaking promises and not carrying out its threats will gain a reputation for irresoluteness . On the other hand, a state without carrying out promises will not be believed . A state without a reputation of irresolving promises and carrying out threats will not
 One version holds that a state’s actions in one crisis have a long-lasting and broad effects on its credibility . One version of this theory holds that such actions have an impact on the credibility of a state .
 In this formulation, today’s actions affect credibility long into the future, in crises that occur anywhere around the world, and in situations which involve very different issues and stakes . The U.S. government's actions will affect credibility in the future and in crises anywhere in the world
 I use the words ""theory"" and ""hypothesis"" interchangeably throughout the paper . But other versions of the reputation hypothesis posit that reputation has a 8th-place .
 This theory—which I call the “Never Again” theory—is tested in the book manuscript, but is not covered here . This theory is tested, but not covered in this article .
 Some of his arguments appear to support the broad version of the reputation hypothesis . The reputation hypothesis is based on a reputation theory .
 Much of his discussion of manipulating reputation explicitly argues that a country’s commitments fall into different “sets” of commitments . A country needs to convince its adversary that the interests which it intends to defend are in the set of primary national interests, he says .
 According to a narrower version of the reputation hypothesis, today’s actions may affect credibility in future crises, but only for a short period of time, if those crises are similar to the situations in which the reputation was earned . The hypothesis is based on the reputation of a person who
 These conditions can be combined to create many variations of the reputation hypothesis, any of which might be correct interests . The reputation hypothesis is based on a reputation theory .
 The U.S. must make the Soviets believe that Europe is like Florida or California, he writes . He writes that the United States must make Europe's interests like those of the continental United States .
 Foreign policy makers argued that abandonment of South Vietnam would shatter U.S. credibility across the globe . They were using a very broad version of the reputation hypothesis .
 The credibility of U.S. commitments around the world depended on defeating Serbian terror operations in Kosovo, they argued . They were claiming that America’s reputation would 9 translate across the globe, across issues .
 There are two shortcuts which can reduce the work required to evaluate this theory . But there are also two shortcuts to make sure the theory is true .
 If studies show that the broadest version of the reputation hypothesis is true, it will be unnecessary to test each narrower version because they are almost certainly correct . The reputation of people in the U.S. continues to affect credibility long into the future, experts say .
 It is hard to imagine why decision makers might systematically use a country’s actions from the distant past, and from dissimilar crises, to assess its credibility .
 If even the narrower version of the reputation hypothesis is false, it is hard to imagine that they will use evidence from the adversary’s distant past to assess credibility . Conversely, if even the narrow version of this theory is false it is unlikely to be true .
 The power/interests hypothesis posits that a country’s credibility is not tied to its history of keeping commitments . The credibility to carry out a threat or fulfill a promise is a function of the current balance of power and interests .
 If the adversary can successfully do what he threatens, and pay low costs, the threat will be credible . If the threat is credible, the adversary’s threats will not be credible, experts say .
 If the adversary lacks the power to do what he threatens, or would probably pay a large cost, the threats will be less credible . If the threat is not credible, the threat will become less credible, experts say .
 Next, decision makers consider the interests that the adversary has at stake in the crisis . Next, they consider the interest that the adversaries have at stake .
 The more that the adversary has at stake and stands to gain by carrying out its threats, the more credible that these threats will be . The more credible threats are made by the adversary, the better they will be, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 With much at stake, an adversary’s threats should be relatively credible, even if carrying them out entails substantial risks and costs . The U.S. should be able to carry out its threats even though carrying out them entails substantial costs and risks .
 Even threats which involve high probabilities of victory and relatively low expected costs might not be credible . On the other hand, in crises involving trivial interests, even threats involving high probability of victory are not credible . Even threats that involve high likelihoods of victory or relatively low costs might be credible,
 The reputation and power/interests hypotheses appear to overlap when decision makers look at an adversary's past actions to assess that adversary’s power and interests, but a clear line can be drawn between the two hypotheses .
 If the decision maker uses an adversary's history of military competence to assess the adversary’s current power, he is acting the way that the power/interests hypothesis predicts . The hypothesis is that the history of the adversary's military competence is used to assess credibility .
 The question at the heart of this thesis is whether countries need to keep their commitments in order to build or preserve their credibility, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The question is whether nations need to maintain their commitments to maintain credibility .
 If countries use their adversary’s history of keeping or breaking commitments to assess their credibility, then they should worry that breaking commitments might damage their future credibility .
 If countries do not use the history of keeping commitments to assess credibility, there is no reason to keep commitments for the sake of credibility . But if countries don't use history to assess the credibility of their commitments, it is no longer credible .
 Whether or not past military performance is used by countries to assess their adversaries' power has no bearing on the question of whether or not it is important to keep one’s commitments . It merely suggests that if one fights, one should fight effectively, not simply to win the battle at
 If countries use their adversaries' history for keeping commitments to assess their credibility, the reputation hypothesis is correct . In sum, if countries use . their adversaries’ history for . keeping commitments, assesses their credibility .
 If countries assess their adversary’s credibility by evaluating the current balance of power, the power/interests hypothesis is correct . But if countries assess the credibility of their adversaries by evaluating their current balance power, even if that requires looking at the adversary's past military competence, the hypothesis
 The size of the costs that decision makers ought to be willing to pay to build or maintain a reputation, depends on the amount of reputation that one can buy, the costs of generating each increment of reputation, the life span of the reputation and the breadth of its applicability .
 If reputations in international politics tend to be very specific, decision makers should be willing to pay less to build or protect them . Reputations are very specific and can be hard to find out .
 Even if the reputation hypothesis is correct, this does not imply that every opportunity to build reputation will be worth the costs . In other words, even if the hypothesis is true, this doesn't mean that every chance of building reputation is worth it .
 First, there are substantial risks of selection effects in data from crisis behavior . Second, there is substantial risks from selection effects of crisis behavior. Third, there may be substantial risks for selection effects .
 In this section I describe the approach adopted throughout this project for overcoming the first obstacle . The issue of selection effects is the subject of a separate paper .
 The dependent variable in this study, credibility, is invisible, it exists in the minds of decision makers, the study says . The study says credibility is invisible and is invisible to decision makers .
 To test the reputation theory, therefore, I use observable indicators to estimate the credibility that decision makers give to an adversary's threats .
 The first of these indicators is the private statements that decision makers make about their adversary's credibility . The first is a private statement that the government makes about the credibility of its opponent .
 Decision makers make explicit assessments of the likelihood that an adversary will carry out its threats and promises . Decision makers often assess the likelihood of an adversary carrying out its promises and promises in crises .
 I use these statements to track a country’s credibility throughout a crisis, I use them to track the credibility of a country, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "These statements are used to track credibility throughout the crisis"
 First, I look for evidence about the type of reasoning that decision makers used to assess the adversary’s credibility . Second, I find out about the reasoning behind the decision makers' decision to assess an adversary's credibility .
 If an adversary's past actions affect its credibility, I should see decision makers discussing the adversary’s past actions during deliberations, I say . Decision makers should also consider whether the adversary is credible .
 I should see decision makers discuss the current balance of power and interests . Public assessments are more likely to be made for political purposes and are likely to differ from actual beliefs about the adversary's credibility .
 I use the policies that the decision makers adopt during a crisis as an indicator of how they assess their adversary’s credibility . The policies adopted by decision makers are an example of how to assess their adversaries’ credibility .
 The credibility of an adversary's threats affects the policies that decision makers adopt . These policies can be used to reason backwards about the decision makers’ perceptions of the adversary's credibility .
 A state's willingness to accommodate an adversary’s demands depends on the seriousness of the threat it faces, he says . I assume that a state’ll accommodate its enemies' demands will depend on seriousness of its threat, he adds .
 The more credible an adversary’s threat is, the more accommodations a state will make . Holding other things constant will be constant, holding things constant . Holding things constant is the more credible a state's threat is .
 If decision makers advocate making substantial concessions in the face of a threat, this is a sign that the threat is credible . If you want to make concessions, it's a good sign that it's credible, says David Cameron .
 If decision makers adopt hard-line policies, this is evidence that the threat is not credible, says Simon Tisdall . The threat is 'not credible' says Tisdale .
 Many things besides the adversary's credibility affect a state’s choice of policies during a crisis . This third measure of credibility is less reliable than the other indicators, the author says .
 Looking at the policies which decision makers adopt during a crisis helps ensure that the statements I use in the first test are not cheap talk . Nevertheless, looking at the . policies which . decision makers adopted during a . crisis helps . ensure that . the statements . I use the statements in the
 If decision makers say they do not believe an adversary’s threats, but they act with extraordinary caution, this raises a cautionary flag that the statements may be misleading . This raises a warning flag that such statements could be misleading.
 If decision makers’ statements suggest that a threat is believed but policies seem to disregard the threat, this would raise the same cautionary flag . And if . decision makers' statements suggest . that a . threat is . believed but the policies seem . to disregard it, it would raise
 First, it would permit a test of a very narrow version of the reputation hypothesis . The reputation hypothesis would be tested by a small group of people .
 Research should focus on the narrowest versions of the reputation hypothesis, according to the researchers .
 If the narrow versions pass several tests, further research should seek to identify whether broader versions of the theory are true .
 An ideal case will present an ‘easy test’ for the reputation hypothesis . Second, an ideal case would present an easy test for the hypothesis . Third, the ideal case presents an ideal test of the reputation theory .
 An ideal case would be one in which the reputation hypothesis should be right, if it is ever right . The reputation hypothesis is an ideal case in which it should be true .
 A significant problem with case studies is that the small number of cases makes it hard to determine whether the sample of cases being studied is representative of the total population of cases . A study of case studies can be difficult to determine if the sample is representative .
 Large-N studies either study an entire population of cases or a statistically representative sample of the population . The study is based on large numbers of cases and small sample sizes .
 Results which are true of the sample should, therefore, be generalizable to the population . Results should be based on the results of a study conducted by a group of volunteers .
 In projects that use case studies, there is no reason to believe that the cases are representative of the population of cases . But in projects using case studies there are no reasons to think that the population is representative .
 By testing theories against a sample of cases which present either very easy or very hard tests for a theory, we can draw inferences about how the theory would fare in the population of cases . We can test theories against cases that present either easy or hard tests to test theories .
 The policies a state adopts in response to a threat may be greatly affected by the expected consequences if the threat was carried out, as well as the credibility of the threat . If the theory passes a set of hard tests, we can infer that it would do well in the population of
 Other factors may affect a state’s response to a particular threat, like alliance politics and domestic politics, may also affect it .
 Failed hard tests or passing easy tests tells us little about the general strength of a theory . On the other hand, failing hard tests is not telling us about the strength of an important theory, it says .
 Cognitive psychologists argue that people are most likely to use history to draw lessons for the present if that history is easily recalled by them . Cognitive psychologists say people are more likely to recall history if they can easily recall it .
 Historical lessons are easy to recall if the historical episode is recent, and if it has surface similarities to the present case . According to the “availability heuristic”, historical lessons are easier to remember if the episode is recently .
 Decision makers are, therefore, most likely to use an adversary’s reputation to assess its credibility if there are recent past actions by the adversary in circumstances which share surface similarities to the present circumstance . Decision makers use the reputation of an adversary to assess whether or not its credibility .
 An easy test of this theory would be to arrange a series of chess matches between the President and several 6th-grade dropouts . The President and a group of 6th graders would play chess matches .
 The President would be expected to beat most of the dropouts whether or not he was one of the smartest people in America . This would be an easy test because the President is expected to win .
 If the President played five of these dropouts and lost to all of them, the theory would have failed a set of easy tests . We could reasonably infer that the President is not one of the smartest people in the United States without having him play many more games against a statistically representative sample
 If this theory passed a very hard test, if the President beat five Nobel prize winning physicists in chess, we could draw a strong inference that he is very smart even without a more extensive set of tests against a representative sample of Americans . On the other hand, if this theory passes a
 If the reputation hypothesis fails the tests, I can infer that broader versions of the theory are probably not right . I set up a set of tests that may tell a lot about all of the versions of reputation hypothesis .
 First, by selecting the easiest cases for the theory, I create a test which may tell me about more than just the cases I study . Second, by . selecting the . easiest cases, I created a test that may tell more about . than just one case, the test may tell
 If the theory fails the easy test I can infer that it is very weak and would perform badly against the population of cases . The theory would be very weak against the populations of cases.
 The Missile Crisis followed right on the heels of a series of superpower standoffs over Berlin . U.S. decision makers had recent Soviet behavior to use to assess Soviet credibility .
 U.S. decision makers were convinced throughout the CMC that the missile crisis was simply the opening move in the next crisis over Berlin . In fact, United States decision makers believed it was a move to prepare for the next one .
 If the U.S. adopted an overly conciliatory policy in Cuba, Khrushchev would be emboldened to attack Berlin . If the United States adopted an over-accommodation policy, it would have emboldened the Soviet Union . The United States would have had to
 There are innumerable papers, memos, and conversations which connect the missile deployment with the Berlin situation . But if the U.S. attacked Cuba, 21 missiles would have been sent to Berlin .
 The CIA believed, even after the crisis, that the standoff had been started by Khrushchev to get leverage over Berlin . The CIA still believed that the crisis was started by the Soviet-Krushchev .
 In the minds of U.S. leaders, the ‘issues’ involved in the Berlin crises and the CMC were inextricable . The CMC was the focus of the Berlin crisis in the United States .
 In fact, Khrushchev had been the Soviet leader throughout the past four years of Berlin crises . The Soviet leader had been in charge of the Berlin crisis .
 The risk in all of these crises was the possibility of escalation to global nuclear war, says David Cameron . Cameron: "The risk in these crises is that the risk of nuclear war is that it could escalate to war"
 The only criterion by which the CMC was not an easy test for the reputation hypothesis is that it occurred in a different part of the world than the Berlin crises . The only criteria is that the crisis occurred in the region of Germany .
 In every other criteria it qualifies as an easy test for the reputation hypothesis, and it tests a very narrow version of the theory . In the other criteria, it qualifies for the . other criteria .
 In the following section I briefly describe the crises that led up to the Cuban missile crisis, and the balance of power between the two superpowers . Soviet Past Actions and the Balance of Power are discussed .
 I use the information about Soviet behavior prior to the CMC, and about the balance of power, to derive predictions from the reputation and power/interests theories about American decision making during the crisis . I use this information to make predictions about the U.S. response to the crisis
 West Berlin could be turned into a demilitarized city, author says . The only way for the West to avoid this chain of events would be to turn West Berlin into a city of peace .
 If the Soviets signed their peace treaty, the Allies would have three unpalatable options . The Allies would be left with a choice of three options .
 West Berlin could give in to Soviet demands and pull forces out of West Berlin . They could pull forces from West Berlin and pull them out of Berlin .
 The second option was to let the deadline pass and negotiate with the GDR for continued access to Berlin . After the treaty with the East Germans, the Soviets signed their treaty, they would negotiate with GDR .
 Berlin is located in the center of what was East Germany . The third option was to refuse to deal with 23 Berliners . Berlin was located in what was known as East Berlin .
 The Western Allies used road, rail, and air corridors to cross East German territory and supply their garrisons in West Berlin . The Allies used the corridors to supply their forces in West Germany .
 The West could launch an airlift, like they did in 1948, to maintain access to West Berlin . For example, the West could have launched an airlifts to maintain West Berlin access .
 Allied forces could try to push their way through East German checkpoints to forcefully reestablish contact with West Berlin . Alternatively, Allied ground forces may try to force their way into East Berlin .
 They certainly did not want to pull out of Berlin, especially in the face of Soviet threats, says historian . They certainly didn't want to withdraw from Berlin .
 The second option --negotiating with the East Germans -- was unattractive, too . "Negotiations with East Germans" were unattractive .
 GDR might restrict times and frequency of Allied traffic as a way of slowly squeezing the West out of Berlin . The GDR may restrict times, frequency of traffic to allow Allied traffic to flow in .
 The most critical political issue in NATO at the time of the Berlin crises was to convince the West Germans that their best long term prospects for security and reunification were through membership in NATO . West German leaders warned NATO that negotiations with the East Germans over access to Berlin would amount to de facto
 At the time, this was a very serious concern for U.S. decision makers . But at the same time, it was a serious concern .
 The West did not want to negotiate with the East Germans for continued access to Berlin . The West, therefore, didn't want to . negotiate with . East Germans .
 The third option, supplying West Berlin without dealing with the East Germans, was dangerous . West Berlin would have to rely on East Germans to supply West Berlin .
 The Soviets threatened to shoot down any aircraft that violated East German airspace without East German permission . East German aircraft violated the airspace without permission from the Soviets .
 Forcing their way down the ground access routes could easily escalate to war . Forcing the way down access routes to the ground could be a problem .
 The Western Allies did not want to deal with the GDR, but neither did they look forward to risking war with the Soviets over Berlin . Western Allies didn't want to risk war with Russia over Berlin, but did they want to avoid war .
 American decision makers expected Khrushchev to sign the peace treaty and place the Allies in the difficult diplomatic position that he promised, but they did not expect him to allow the East Germans to cut access to Berlin because that step would likely start a war .
 The Allies decided to warn Khrushchev that they refused to recognize East Germany . Cutting the access routes would cause war, they said .
 The West had six months to negotiate an end to their occupation of West Berlin . Khrushchev threatened to sign his peace treaty and defend East German borders if he did . As it turns out, the U.S. and the Soviet Union both feared this possibility .
 Khrushchev might take significant risks to squeeze the West out of West Berlin . This time, U.S. decision makers were somewhat more worried that Khrushche might take risks .
 The United States held its ground, the deadline passed, and the Soviets backed down . Nevertheless, the U.S. held on to the deadline . The U.N. held its stand, and it was eventually forced to withdraw .
 Soon after the Kennedy Administration took office in January 1961, the Soviets trotted out their familiar threats over Berlin . The threat was made by the Soviets in 1961 .
 In June 1961, Khrushchev gave Kennedy a note that re-issued the same ultimatum, re-established a six-month deadline . Kennedy said he would sign a treaty with the East Germans and give them control of the Allies’ access routes to Berlin .
 He warned dire consequences if the West did not pull their troops out of West Berlin or recognize the East German regime . The West would have to pull out of the West Berlin and recognize the regime .
 The Allies expected Khrushchev to sign the peace treaty,30 and this time U.S. decision makers worried even more than in 1960 about the risk .
 Khrushchev let the deadline pass; he raised the Berlin Wall, but never signed the peace treaty with the GDR . He did not cut Western access to Berlin, and he did not sign the treaty .
 The Kennedy Administration discovered that Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles were being secretly installed in Cuba . By October 1962, the U.S. had plenty of experience with Khrushchev's threats .
 Three times in four years, Khrushchev had issued ultimatums, threatened nuclear war, and each time he had backed down . Three times this time, he backed down. Three times he had issued threats of nuclear war .
 For nearly a week, an ad-hoc group of advisors, later designated the Executive Committee of the National Security Council met in secret to formulate a response to the Soviet deployment .
 Khrushchev built the Wall to help East Germany staunch the flow of talented workers from East Germany into the West . Facing the fact that East Germany would have to live with West Berlin in its midst, Khruschev decided to build the Wall .
 For tests of these hypotheses using American and British decision making, see Press, “Testing 23 to “squeeze” the missiles out; a limited air strike against the missile sites to destroy them in a fait accompli; a large air strike that would hit a
 The next day, on October 27, three ominous events occurred in rapid succession . But the day after the events, three events occurred, three days later .
 Khrushchev recanted his earlier offer to Soviet Union leader in Moscow . First, the Ex Comm. received another note from the former leader recanting his earlier proposal .
 Khrushchev’s price was now higher; he would remove the missiles from Cuba only if the U.S. removed its Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The price of removing the missiles was now now higher .
 Reports that an American reconnaissance plane had strayed into Soviet airspace triggered the launch of Soviet and American fighter aircraft . Second, reports of a U.S. reconnaissance plane straying into the Soviet airspace, triggered a shoot-out .
 Air defense sites in Cuba shot down an American reconnaissance plane flying over the island, killing the pilot . The plane was shot down by Cuban air defense sites .
 American and British Decision Making During the Berlin Crises of 1958-61,” chapter 4,’s “American and British decision making during the Berlin . Crisis of 1958/61: Berlin, Berlin and Berlin Crisis .
 The U-2 had left Soviet airspace and was safe . Fortunately, they did not arrive until they had left the airspace and were safe .
 RFK was authorized to accept the second Soviet offer . The U.S. would trade the Jupiters to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . RFK says the U.K. was authorized .
 The U.S. agreed to Khrushchev’s first letter; privately they agreed to the second . Publicly the United States agreed to his first letter, but privately .
 Possibilities include the conventional military balance in the Caribbean, the conventional balance in Europe, and the strategic nuclear balance between the United States and the Soviet Union .
 The military balance in the Caribbean was important, because it determined whether the U.S. could blockade or attack Cuba . The balance was important to determine whether the United States could attack Cuba, historian says .
 The military balance in Europe was important because U.S. decision makers expected any Soviet retaliation for United States attacks on Cuba to occur in Europe . The Soviet response was expected to be in Europe, not Europe .
 The U.S. relied on its nuclear forces to deter attacks on its European allies and defend NATO and West Berlin from the Soviets . The strategic nuclear balance was important, because the United States relied on it to defend NATO, West Berlin .
 The balance of strategic nuclear forces was the paramount issue in the balance of power . While all three of these military balances were relevant to the crisis, the issue was the most important .
 Questions about the nuclear balance of power trumped considerations of the local military balances in the Caribbean and Europe . Questions also raised about the role of the U.S. in the Middle East .
 The United States enjoyed substantial conventional military superiority in the Caribbean . The U.S. had a substantial conventional advantage in the region .
 Naval forces could control the seas surrounding Cuba, or that aircraft flying from the southern United States would control the skies in a battle in the Caribbean .
 Berlin is located deep within what was once East German territory . It was defended by symbolic “tripwire” forces from the United States, Britain, and France . Berlin is now a tourist destination in Germany .
 There was no way for NATO to defend Berlin using conventional military forces, or to retake Berlin if it was seized by the Scholars . There was also no way to take Berlin back from the Scholars.
 These articles contain the text of both RFK's and Dobrynin’s memoranda recording the content of their meetings . The content of these articles will be published in the New York Times, Washington and New York .
 During the CMC, like in the Berlin crises that preceded it, the only U.S. hope for deterring a Soviet attack on Berlin was through the threat of nuclear war . The only way to deter Soviet attack was to use nuclear war to protect Berlin .
 If the U.S. had superiority in the strategic nuclear balance, it could coerce the Soviets in Cuba and still deter Soviet retaliation against Berlin . If the United States had superiority to the Soviet Union in Cuba, it would be able to coerce in Cuba .
 If the U.S. did not have nuclear superiority, or if the Soviets were superior at the level of strategic nuclear forces, the United States would have no way of preventing a damaging Soviet counterstroke in Berlin . The United States had to use force against Cuba if it used force against
 The links between American military superiority in the Caribbean, Soviet strength in Berlin, and the role of the strategic nuclear balance as the final arbiter, were understood by the Kennedy Administration .
 On October 18, in an Ex Comm meeting, the President and his advisors talked through the likely Soviet reaction to a U.S. blockade of Cuba . The meeting was held in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy assumed that the Soviets would likely retaliate by overrunning Berlin . Kennedy and his advisors assumed that they would likely overrun Berlin .
 This is not to say that NATO’s conventional forces in Europe were weak in 1961 . NATO's conventional forces were weakened in 1961, but they were still strong in 1961. NATO says it is not the first time it has seen a change in direction .
 In fact, they may have been sufficient to defend NATO from a conventional Soviet attack . NATO may not have been able to defend itself from conventional Soviet attacks .
 Airstrikes in East German territory were inadequate for a major offensive, say German officials . But they were inadequate to launch an offensive to retake a city deep within East Germany .
 Whether or not the U.S. could deter an attack on Berlin, or defeat the Soviets in a conflict over Berlin, would ultimately depend on the strategic nuclear balance .
 If U.S. decision makers were thinking about Soviet credibility the way that the power/interests hypothesis suggests, the balance that they should have focused on was the strategic nuclear balance . The balance of power should have been the balance of nuclear power .
 I think that “they’re just going in and taking Berlin by force” makes more sense and would sound identical on tape . I think it would be identical to “going in and out and out of Berlin” on tape.
 There has been controversy about the accuracy of the transcripts of the May and Zelikow transcripts .
 The text from The Kennedy Tapes quoted throughout this article is from the first edition of the book . The text is quoted from the original edition of this book .
 I am in the process of checking these quotes against the latest edition, which has been updated to fix many errors .
 If one country can launch a successful disarming strike against its adversary’s nuclear forces, it has nuclear superiority in a very real sense . If war came, it could strike first, disarm its adversary, and win .
 If neither country can launch a successful disarming strike, then neither side has superiority . Neither side has significantly more nuclear warheads than the other .
 This way of thinking about nuclear forces and deterrence is based on the observation that nuclear weapons are different from most other weapons . This is the view of the U.S. President Barack Obama's view of nuclear weapons .
 Most conventional military forces can only be evaluated in relative terms . Ten armored divisions are powerful compared to two divisions, but they are weak if the opponent has fifty . A ten armored division is powerful against two divisions .
 Their power is absolute rather than relative, because they terrorize by threatening to destroy the enemy’s cities rather than his military forces . They terrorize the enemy's cities, not their military forces, as they threaten to destroy them rather than their forces .
 This would present the least stable of all deterrent situations because both sides would have incentives to strike first in a crisis . Both sides would be incentivised to attack first in crisis .
 In this situation, neither side would have “superiority;” the advantage would go to whichever side attacked first . In this case, neither of the two teams would have the advantage . Neither side has the advantage, but it would be whoever attacks first .
 Assessing the the strategic nuclear balance between any two countries simply requires understanding the survivability of each country’s nuclear forces in the face of a disarming strike, and the ability of each nation to deliver its nuclear forces to its enemy's cities . Assessing nuclear balance requires understanding
 "As long as the nuclear forces of two countries are survivable and deliverable they are in a condition of nuclear stalemate," says South Korea's president .
 Nuclear superiority only exists when one country can destroy virtually all of its enemy nuclear forces before they are launched . The U.S. has the most powerful nuclear weapons in the world, the U.N. says .
 The Strategic Nuclear Balance of Power during the CMC occurred during a period of strategic transition . The CMC was during a strategic transition period .
 The decade prior to the crisis was characterized by United States nuclear superiority . U.S. nuclear superiority was defined by the U.N. in the 1950s .
 During the 1950s, the U.S. had a nuclear first strike capability against the Soviet Union, while the Soviets had neither an assured retaliatory nuclear force nor a first strike option against the United States . It is very unusual for countries to have high confidence that they can destroy all
 Because nuclear weapons are relatively small they can be easily hidden, they can't be hidden in the U.S. Because of their small size, they are relatively easy to conceal .
 Most nuclear balances will, therefore, quickly move into nuclear stalemate . numerical advantages are essentially meaningless . Most nuclear balance balances will move into stalemate, which is meaningless .
 The framework I use to assess the nuclear balance of power simplifies a complicated set of issues in a useful way, but important ambiguities remain . I use this framework to assess nuclear balance-power .
 A first strike capability is the ability to destroy enough of an opponent’s deliverable nuclear forces such that the remaining arsenal is too small to inflict unacceptable retaliation . One can answer this by saying that a first strike .
 The chance that 1-5 nuclear weapons might fall on one’s cities would probably deter any decision maker from considering a nuclear first strike . But when defending less-important national interests, the chance that one of the . nation's cities might fall . on one of them would probably
 In this project I allow the decision makers in the cases to determine for themselves whether they had a reasonable first-strike option which promised victory at acceptable levels of risk and cost . I allow decision makers to decide for themselves if they had the option .
 In the cases I describe the “actual’actual” nuclear balance of power, based on my 30 States . In the . cases I . describe the . ‘actual . balance of . power . based on the . "actual" nuclear balance .
 By 1962, American nuclear superiority had eroded considerably . The superpowers were entering an age of mutual assured destruction .
 In a first strike, the U.S. could have quickly launched between 1,000 and 2,000 nuclear warheads at the Soviet Union . In the 1980s, the United States could have launched more than 1,500 nuclear warheads .
 A U.S. first strike would have attacked other targets too, but the critical targets were only about 200 . Critical targets were those which might house nuclear weapons capable of striking the United States .
 The exact total would depend on the alert level of United States forces at the time of the attacks . Putting too many American nuclear forces on alert prior to a first strike could have tipped off the Soviets .
 For several reasons, simply counting the number of United States warheads and Soviet targets does not give a realistic picture of the United States ability to conduct a first strike on Soviet nuclear forces . Not all of these warheads would have been on alert at any given time .
 Other B-52s existed, but they were assigned to training units or were undergoing maintenance work .
 In the early 1960s, U.S. nuclear war plans were not optimized for a disarming strike against the Soviet nuclear arsenal . In the 1970s, the United States had no plans to use nuclear weapons against Soviet forces .
 Plans in the early 1960s called for an enormous strike, first hitting air defense sites in Eastern Europe, and then attacking targets further east in subsequent waves . U.S. plans called for a massive strike, which would hit Eastern Europe .
 The plan had not been fundamentally revamped since then to give the U.S. more ability to rapidly strike Soviet long-range nuclear forces . The plan was not fundamentally revamped .
 ICBM technology was not mature in 1962, and the missiles were relatively unreliable and inaccurate . ICBM missiles were not mature enough to launch ICBM ICB missiles .
 Bombers provided a much more reliable way of delivering nuclear weapons against Soviet targets than ICBMs . They are slow and would allow the Soviets to launch air defense aircraft as well as launch or disperse their nuclear forces .
 Another source of uncertainty was the reliability of U.S. intelligence on Soviet nuclear weapons and their bases .
 American leaders did not know whether their intelligence had missed a Soviet bomber base, ICBM battery, or submarine pen . We now know that American leaders had very good intelligence in 1962 about the location of Soviet strategic nuclear systems .
 “The U.S. Navy’s Silent Cold War Struggle with Soviet Submarines,” manuscript, March 2000, 46 .
 A first-strike against Soviet nuclear forces would hinge on the ability of the U.S. to conduct the attack in complete surprise .
 If the Soviets somehow learned of the attack a few hours before the strike, they could have taken emergency measures to reduce the vulnerability of their forces . The Soviet Union could have learned more quickly about the attack .
 Any attack on a nuclear force of this size would have been an extraordinary gamble . U.S. could have developed better nuclear war plans, but any attack on such a large force would be a gamble .
 In 1962, senior American decision makers understood that their nuclear first strike capability was either disappearing fast or had already disappeared . U.S. decision makers believed that their first strike capabilities were either fading fast or already disappearing .
 They were no longer confident that the United States could strike first at the Soviet Union without receiving unacceptable levels of retaliation from the Soviets . The U.S. no longer believed that the U.K. would strike first, they said .
 The intelligence community failed to anticipate the speed of development of the first Soviet atomic bomb, hydrogen bomb, or the launch of Sputnik . But the intelligence community had also failed in the other direction .
 The Kennedy Administration had also had its own recent unhappy experiences with U.S. intelligence . Kennedy Administration also had own unhappy experiences .
 A year before the CMC the U.S. intelligence community had given the Bay of Pigs operation a good chance of success . Kennedy felt betrayed by his military and intelligence advisors . A year later, Kennedy felt betrayal by the military .
 The intelligence community had assured the President that the Soviets would not put missiles into Cuba . More recently, the intelligence community has assured the U.S. that the missiles would not be put there .
 The Gilpatric speech has been misinterpreted by some historians as a statement of confidence by the Kennedy Administration that the U.S. still had a nuclear first strike option if it came to war .
 To determine whether the Kennedy Administration felt they had nuclear superiority one needs to know whether the Administration had any reasonable nuclear options if a crisis escalated to the verge of general nuclear war .
 The United States military did not give President Kennedy reason to be confident that the U.S. could launch a successful nuclear first strike . President Kennedy was not confident that a successful first strike would be possible .
 A year before the CMC, President Kennedy was briefed by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on United States nuclear war plans . He was told that if war came, the United States would “prevail” but “under any circumstances—even a preemptive attack
 A year before the CMC, the JCS told the President that he had a viable first strike option . This still meant some nuclear weapons would probably hit the United States .
 By September 1963, even the dubious achievement of “prevailing” with only a few nuclear weapons hitting U.S. soil was no longer achievable . The CMC was established in September 1963 .
 The military was not alone in their doubts about United States ability to conduct a successful nuclear first strike . The U.S. military was skeptical about the ability to carry out a first strike.
 "There was no reasonable chance that we could get away with a first strike unscathed," he said in 1989 . As he explained in 1989, “…there were no reasonable . chance that . we could . get away from the first strike,” he said .
 The words are quoted from General Lemnitzer’s briefing notes for the President . The words were quoted from the General's notes for President .
 He has written since the CMC about his conviction during the crisis that the U.S. had no meaningful nuclear superiority . He has also written about the crisis .
 Bundy’s comments during the CMC on the strategic nuclear balance of power were rare . Bundy's comments were rare, but Bundy said the nuclear balance balance was still at risk .
 In his recent book on the Cold War, John Lewis Gaddis agrees with my assessment of McNamara’s views during the crisis . McNamara's views on the crisis in the U.S. differ from that of the White House .
 On Bundy’s views about U.S. chances for a disarming strike during the CMC, see McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival, 448. On Bundy's views on U.N. chances of disarming strikes during CMC: "Danger and Survival"
 On October 19th the President met with the JCS to explain the reasons he was leaning toward a blockade rather than an air strike on Cuban missile sites . The President is leaning towards a blockade .
 "You get to put them on a city, whether it's 80 or 100, you're talking about the destruction of a country," he says . "Our problem is that we begin to duplicate that here. But you get to . Put them on . a city ... You're talking
 The President wasn't comparing the number of Soviet warheads to the U.S. warheads – a meaningless numerical comparison . More revealing is that the President wasn’t comparing the . number of . Soviet warheads . to the United States .
 The President explains why he doesn’t believe, from a strictly military sense, that the Soviet missiles in Cuba mattered much . Later in the conversation, the President gives another glimpse into his assessment of the nuclear balance of power .
 Kennedy’s statements about the balance of power are reinforced by what is known about his relationship with his military and intelligence advisors in 1962 . Kennedy's statements were reinforced by the knowledge of what is now known about the relationship between the president and his advisors .
 The CMC happened only 18 months after the failed failed Bay of Pigs invasion . The failed invasion was the most embarrassing foreign policy defeat of President Obama's administration .
 Kennedy felt that he had been let down by the military who had not been frank with him about the serious risks of failure at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy said he felt that the military had let down him .
 JFK asked JCS for their assessment of the chance that the operation would work . JFK had asked the JCS to assess the chance of the operation to work .
 May and Zelikow put these brackets into the text to make the converstation easier to follow . The brackets are used to make this article easier to read .
 Evidence suggests that the U.S. did not believe that it had any meaningful first strike options during the crisis . Other evidence gives another glimpse into United States beliefs about the nuclear balance .
 During the crisis the Kennedy Administration tried—successfully, to conduct coercive diplomacy . The Kennedy administration tried to use coercive diplomacy during the Vietnam War .
 The United States never warned the Soviets that the U.S. had nuclear superiority, or that the United States could prevail in a nuclear war . What is striking about the threats conveyed during the crisis is that they were not warned by the Soviets of superiority .
 The Kennedy Administration repeatedly told the Soviets, public and privately, that the U.S. could not win a nuclear war . To the contrary, the Kennedy Administration said the United States couldn't win a war .
 President Kennedy never reassured the American public that the U.S. could prevail in a nuclear war, nor did he warn the Soviets that they better back down because the United States knew it could win if the crisis escalated . Kennedy's October 22 televised speech about the missiles in Cuba never reassured
 RFK warned Dobrynin that an agreement must be reached immediately because an American strike against Cuba was imminent . The Kennedy Administration was putting tremendous pressure on the Soviets to get them to accept the latest U.S. proposal .
 If the crisis escalates “A real war will begin, in which millions of Americans and Russians will die," says Putin . Putin says a real war would begin if Russia and the U.S. go to war .
 RFK conveyed the President’s counter-proposal, which was a secret trade . RFK: "I’m sure it was a good trade. RFK was a great negotiator" RFK said the President's counter proposal was secret .
 The secret trade would appear to the world like another Soviet withdrawal under American threats . It would appear like another withdrawal under U.S. threats .
 If this hypothesis is correct, three things should emerge from the evidence on U.S. decision making . The evidence should be consistent with the hypothesis that the United States is making decisions on foreign policy .
 First, U.S. assessments of Soviet credibility should have been low throughout the crisis . First, the United States should have kept its assessment of the Soviet credibility low .
 U.S. decision makers should have discussed pattern of Soviet withdrawals with each other during the crisis, says John Avlon . Avlon says the United States should have been aware of Soviet withdrawal patterns .
 The Soviets, after all, would buckle in response to a blockade or a direct U.S. attack on Cuba . The Soviets would have to back down to a direct American attack on the island .
 The power/interests hypothesis predicts a very different set of events . The power and interests hypothesis is based on the power of interest and power .
 Years ago the U.S. could calmly threaten that Soviet attacks on NATO would provoke American nuclear escalation . But now the nuclear balance of power is no longer favorable, and that's changed dramatically .
 By 1962, the United States had no good response to Soviet attacks on Berlin . By 1962 the U.S. had no response to the Soviet attack on Berlin.
 The 44-year-old case is the result of a federal investigation into the death of 44 people . The case is not the only one in the history of the 44 cases .
 Private assessments of Soviet credibility during the crisis should have been high . First, the private assessments of the credibility of the Soviet government should be high .
 Decision makers should explain assessments of Soviet credibility to each other during the crisis by referring to the shifts in the balance of power . Second, decision makers should also explain their assessments of the Soviet credibility, they say .
 U.S. leaders should have adopted conciliatory positions in the crisis, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Testing the theories against United States Decision Making in the CMC . In the following section I test the reputation hypothesis against the power/interests hypothesis using U.S decision making during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Two theories make conflicting predictions about U.S. decision makers' assessments of Soviet credibility . Theories predict the reasoning United States decision makers used as they explained their assessments . They also predict the policies selected by United States leaders during crisis .
 At various points in the crisis, the Ex Comm considered a range of possible policies to get the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 An ultimatum to Khrushchev and Castro demanded that the missiles be removed from Cuba . A blockade of “offensive” military equipment into Cuba was also considered . A small air strike directed at the missile sites would be followed by a large air strike .
 There was no significant discussion about allowing the missiles to stay, officials say . There were no significant discussions about allowing them to stay .
 Fears about the loss of U.S. credibility, concerns over the effect of the missiles on the strategic balance of power, and some concern about Kennedy’s domestic political position, pushed the entire committee to agree from the outset that the goal was the elimination .
 The only questions were how the U.S. could get the missiles out and what price they would have to pay . The only question was how the United States could get it out and how it would be .
 Soviet credibility to resist any of these U.S. approaches was very high, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Credibility to resist [U.S.] is very high," Sutter says .
 In one version, the United States would tell Khrushchev that unless they were immediately dismantled and removed, the U.S. would enforce a naval blockade around Cuba . The U.K. would tell him that unless he removed the missiles, they would be subject to a blockade .
 A second version would threaten that unless Khrushchev removed the missiles, the United States would destroy them with air attacks . The U.S. would also threaten to destroy the missiles if they were removed .
 McNamara laid out a list of U.S. alternatives on the first day of the crisis . He did not expect an ultimatum to work . McNamara made it clear that he did not think an 'ultimatum' would work .
 This option, McNamara said, was “likely to lead to no satisfactory results…”90 This pessimistic assessment was never seriously challenged .
 The United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union and most respected Soviet expert in the room, Llewellyn Thompson, shared the skepticism . The U.S. ambassador to Soviet Union was skeptical of the proposal .
 Even Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, and George Ball, who favored the ultimatum, expected it to fail . The State Dept. expected it would fail .
 "No reason to expect that" Khrushchev would back down, says U.S. Rep. Ruben Navarrette .
 George Ball, the most frequent advocate of making an ultimatum to Khrushchev, did not expect the Soviets to back down . Ball: "I don't think the Soviets will back down" Ball: 'I'm not surprised'
 Future citations to the Kennedy Tapes will be made by simply indicating the page number of the citation in parentheses in the text .
 The most optimistic assessment of the ultimatum approach was made by McNamara . McNamara: "The most optimistic approach is that it will not be taken seriously seriously" McNamara said .
 The Ex Comm disagreed among themselves in their evaluation of the wisdom of an ultimatum . But they all agreed that the ultimiatum would likely fail . The Ex-Committe agreed that it would fail .
 Soviet credibility has high; no one expected them to fold in the face of U.S. threats . No one expected the Soviet government to back down in response to American threats, he says .
 Everyone, even those who advocated the blockade, expected the Soviets to resist and probably retaliate with military force elsewhere . Everyone expected the blockade to be successful, but it was not .
 McNamara, the loudest and strongest advocate of the blockade, did not expect it to bring Khrushchev to his knees . McNamara did not think the blockade would bring the Soviet Union to its knees .
 McNamara did not expect the Soviets to attack U.S. ships enforcing the blockade . The missile construction, he argued, would continue with supplies already in Cuba .
 The general view was that a blockade had a good chance of triggering Soviet escalation, probably against West Berlin . In fact, a blockade was thought to be the best chance of provoking Soviet escalation .
 Thompson said he preferred a blockade to immediate air strikes on Cuba . Thompson said air strikes would provoke Soviet retaliation and increase the risks of war .
 He would use the blockade as a pretext to “precipitate the real crisis,” over Berlin, he said . Instead he said he would use blockade as pretext to use Berlin as pretext for ‘real crisis’
 He was sure, by the 18th, that Khrushchev would not pull out the missiles or even stop building the sites because of a U.S. blockade of Cuba . He says he was sure by the end of the month that the blockade would not stop .
 McNamara asked President what he meant—whether he expected that Soviet troops would invade West Berlin . McNamara: "I don't believe that West Berlin would be invaded"
 JFK explained to the Joint Chiefs of Staff why each of his options was bad . JFK explained each of JFK's options to the chiefs of staff . JFK also explained why each option was bad. JFK explained that each option is bad.
 JFK reaffirmed that he expected that the blockade would provoke Soviet military retaliation . Another day later, on the 20th, he said he expected a blockade of Berlin . JFK also said that he expects that he would expect retaliation from the Soviet military .
 On the 21st, the day after the President had decided on the blockade option, he was still highly skeptical that it would work . The President is skeptical that the blockade will work .
 For a group of men who had, just the previous day, adopted the blockade as their preferred course of action, there was not a lot of confidence that a blockade would precipitate any Soviet concessions . The blockade was not expected to precipitate Soviet concessions, says the Russian diplomat .
 President Kennedy grew no more confident about the prospects for the blockade as the crisis continued . President Kennedy was growing increasingly confident that the blockade would be successful .
 The President’s skepticism about the blockade remained until the end of the crisis . He predicted that if, in the course of enforcing the blockade, the United States has to sink a ship heading to 91 .
 Throughout the 26th, during the morning and afternoon Ex Comm meeting, he stated repeatedly that the blockade would never get the missiles out of Cuba . He said that he would not be able to get them out .
 “The only thing that I am saying is, that we’re not going to get them out with the quarantine. For example, in the morning session on the 26th he stated emphatically, that . “We’ll not go out with quarantine. We�
 I’m not saying we should lift the quarantine or what we should do about the quarantine, he says . "I'm not saying ... what should be lifted or what should we do about quarantine," he adds .
 We're either going to trade them out, or we're going to have to go in and get them out ourselves. We’re not going to be able to do it,’s a good thing. We need to get rid of them. We have to get them
 This was typical of several similar statements by the President on the 26th and 27th . President Obama made a similar statement to the previous day .
 The clearest view of the Ex Comm’s assessment of the Soviet credibility to resist a blockade came during a meeting at about midnight on the 18th. The Clearest view was from a meeting during the night of December 18th in Moscow .
 Bundy argued against the blockade or any other option because “inevitably” the Soviets would retaliate against West Berlin . Bundy argued that ‘inevitable’ the Soviet response would be to retaliate against the West .
 Revealingly, no one on the Ex Comm—most of whom supported the blockade—disagreed . Most of the ex-Commons members of the U.S. support the blockade .
 In other words, Soviet credibility in the face of a blockade was very high . The blockade was a success in the Soviet Union's efforts to get around the world .
 Most members of the Ex Comm supported the blockade because they feared that a weaker response would just delay the conflict a few months . The blockade would occur on even less favorable terms, they say .
 Everyone agreed that the Soviets would not intentionally start a nuclear war over Cuba . The Soviet Union did not want to start a nuke war with Cuba, the author says .
 If some nuclear missiles survived an air strike, the Soviets would not authorize a nuclear attack from Cuba against the U.S. At the same time, the Administration was virtually unanimous that the Soviets . The risks of general war would be grave .
 Everyone agreed that the Soviets would not authorize nuclear attacks, and begin World War III, in retaliation for U.S. attacks on Cuba . The Soviets agreed that they would not attack Cuba, and the United States would not strike .
 Everyone agreed that the Soviets were very likely to retaliate against U.S. allies somewhere . But everyone also agreed that it was very likely they would retaliate against United States allies somewhere.
 JFK fully expected the Soviets to retaliate to an American attack on Cuba . Most importantly, JFK fully anticipated the Soviets would retaliate .
 Kennedy explained to congressional leaders on the 22nd, “If we invade Cuba, we have a chance that these missiles will be fired on us.” Kennedy said .
 An invasion would be even more dangerous because it would involve attacks on 7-8,000 Russians . An invasion of Russia would be more dangerous than an invasion of the country's capital, Washington .
 LeMay: "I don’t think they’re going to make any reply if we tell them that the Berlin situation is just like it’s always been.”
 The members of the Ex Comm did not share the General’s confidence . “I don’t think it changes the Berlin situation at all…” said the General .
 LeMay was also the only one of the group who believed that the United States had a clear first-strike capability . LeMay believed the U.S. had clear first strike capability, he said .
 93 Kennedy’s views on this did not change . In other words, the one person who thought that the U.S. had the Soviets decisively outgunned was also the only one who did not think .
 The Ex Comm agreed in their assessments of likely Soviet responses to an air strike or invasion of Cuba . An air strike would very likely lead to retaliation against Turkey or Berlin, the Ex Comm said .
 Those who advocated the air strike option did it because they felt that the blockade would be ineffective and that it would come down to war in either case . Those who did it did it to avoid war, they said .
 The historical record from the crisis does not confirm the prediction of either theory in this regard . History does not support either theory .
 U.S. decision makers rarely explained the reasons they believed what they believed about Soviet credibility . United States rarely explained why they believed the Soviet credibility was wrong .
 The transcripts of Ex Comm meetings and thousands of other documents in the archives show that decision makers talked frequently about their beliefs about Soviet credibility . Decision makers were almost never explicit about the evidence which they used to formulate or support these views .
 U.S. decision makers were nearly unanimous in their expectation that that that Soviets would not give in to a blockade . They were never very explicit about why they believed this, but they were never explicit .
 They were also united in their belief that the Soviets would retaliate if the U.S. launched airstrikes against Cuba . They never made their reasoning explicit on this .
 The Crisis offers little direct evidence to evaluate this prediction of the reputation and power/interests hypotheses . The crisis offers little evidence that this prediction is true .
 In more than six hundred pages of transcripts from Ex Comm meetings, I could only find three statements in which decision makers referred to past Soviet actions as they discussed what the Soviets would likely do in the future . The documents are from the archives at the Kennedy Presidential Library .
 All three instances occurred in a single conversation between the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff . All three of these instances occurred during the conversation .
 At another point in the same discussion the President said the Soviets were likely to retaliate to any hostile U.S. steps . This is consistent with my findings from the Berlin Crises.
 There were very few times when U.S. or British decision makers explicitly tied their assessments of Soviet credibility to past Soviet actions or to balance of power .
 He argued that the Soviets backed down when the U.S. showed resolve in the past over Lebanon . He said the United States should take a hard-line on Cuba .
 The striking thing about these examples is how much these quotes stand apart from the rest of the statements preserved in thousands of pages of documents on the crisis . It's not the first time these quotes have been preserved from the documents preserved .
 No other discussions revealed the decision makers trying to use history like this . "No other discussions" revealed the discussion .
 Soviet actions in Suez, Lebanon, and expulsion of suspected spies were not mentioned in any context in other discussions by senior U.S. leaders during the Crisis .
 There are hundreds of references to Berlin in the Ex Comm transcripts . Most of these statements explicitly connect Berlin with the issues of reputation and credibility . Berlin is a key part of the history of American diplomacy .
 LeMay was unique in his conviction that the U.S. had a good first strike capability during the Crisis . Remember that LeMay also believed that the United States had good first strikes capability .
 These statements always revolved around the feared effect of U.S. actions in the current crisis on America’s future credibility in Berlin . Seemingly any action (or 57) has been taken by the United States in Germany .
 Soviet past actions in Berlin suggest about Soviet future behavior in Cuba . They never reversed the formulation as the reputation hypothesis would predict .
 U.S. leaders were obsessed with concern about America’s reputation, but they never looked at past Soviet actions in Berlin . In other words, United States leaders were worried about America's reputation . They never considered Soviet actions to evaluate their adversaries' reputation .
 For years the Soviets had blustered and threatened the United States with war, each time backing down when the U.S. demonstrated resolve . For years, the Soviets have blustrated and threatened to go to war .
 If the reputation hypothesis is correct, the U.S. should have adopted hard-line policies throughout the crisis . The United States should have taken a hard line approach to dealing with the situation .
 If the power/interests hypothesis is correct, U.S. decision makers should have viewed the new Soviet threats with substantial concern . On the other hand, if the theory is true, the U.K. should have been wary of the Soviet threat .
 The balance of power had shifted and the U.S. non-action) that the United States might choose in the Crisis, they believed, would cripple United States credibility in Europe . They believed, they said .
 Letting the missiles stay would undermine U.S. credibility, decision makers believed . But so would trading away the Jupiters deployed in Turkey, they believed . Letting missiles stay undermined United States credibility, they said .
 Attacking missile sites would throw U.S. alliances into question, because the United States would appear to be reckless in its willingness to use force . Attacking the sites would also throw United States alliances in question, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The President is clearly 58 no longer had a good nuclear first strike option . President Obama is clearly not interested in the idea of a first strike strike . The President has been criticized for not having a good first strike .
 According to the power/interests hypothesis, U.S. decision makers should have looked for compromises and conciliatory steps that would defuse the crisis . The U.N. should have sought compromise, says Julian Zelizer .
 U.S. policies should have been on the “soft-line” end of the policy continuum . United States policies should be on the soft-line, not hard-line end of policy continuum, says Obama .
 The first major decision was made in the first week of the standoff when the United States selected the blockade as its initial U.S. policy . The blockade was selected in the early weeks of the crisis .
 U.S. leaders had to decide how to respond to the two Soviet notes as well as the attack on United States reconnaissance planes over Cuba . The crisis appeared to be spinning out of control .
 At the second decision point, the U.S. made two very conciliatory steps to try to end the crisis without further escalation . The United States made a conciliated effort to end Syria's crisis without escalation .
 The Ex Comm debated five options during the first week of the CMC, but really six routes were possible . Six routes are possible, including a new route to London .
 The United States adopted option #3 – the blockade . The U.S. adopted option number 3 – a blockade .
 The blockade option was a middle-of-the-pack option . It was neither one of the most conciliatory nor the most hard-line policies .
 The selection of the blockade does not provide strong confirming evidence for either hypothesis . It is consistent with my analysis that U.S. leaders believed that the Soviets were highly credible, he says .
 The policy chosen does not raise a cautionary flag to suggest that the statements in which U.S. leaders proclaimed high Soviet credibility were cheap talk . In other words, the policy chosen doesn't raise a warning flag .
 The blockade was adopted because the Kennedy Administration believed it was the most-conciliatory position possible which would not destroy U.S. credibility . It was adopted by the Kennedy administration .
 On October 27th, the United States had an important decision to make . The U.S. made a decision to take the lead in the decision .
 The Soviets had offered to remove their missiles in Cuba if the U.S. promised not to invade the island . The Soviets offered the United States a deal to remove the missiles if it was not invaded .
 The Soviets withdrew their offer and introduced a second proposal which raised the price for a deal . But then the Soviets apparently withdrew their proposal and introduced another proposal . The Soviets then raised their price for the deal with the British government .
 The Soviets, according to the second offer, would withdraw the missiles from Cuba only if the United States withdrew the Jupiters missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also offered to withdraw missiles if the U.K. withdraws the missiles .
 This second letter arrived amid other events that suggested that the crisis was escalating . Most serious was the attacks on U.S. reconnaissance planes over Cuba . The attacks on United States reconnaissance planes are most serious .
 The United States had eight main options at this stage in the crisis, all of which were considered . The U.S. had eight options, including a nuclear deal with Russia .
 The United States chose the second most-conciliatory option . Of these eight options, the U.S. chose to be the most likely option to end crisis .
 The President, and the secret subgroup of the Ex Comm sent Robert Kennedy to meet Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin on the night of the 27th to work out a deal and end the crisis . The U.S. would accept the second Soviet offer, but with one condition: the
 The Soviets would remove the Cuban missiles immediately and then the U.S. would remove them from Turkey . Within a few months, the United States would remove some of the missiles from Turkey. The Soviets removed the missiles immediately. The United States removed them from Cuba .
 The next morning the Soviets announced that they accepted the deal, and the crisis was over . The next day the Soviet Union agreed to accept the deal . The deal was the end of the crisis .
 It's hard to make the case that the U.S. actions on the 27th were hard-line policies . It’s hard to say that the United States .
 The United States gave the Soviets almost everything that they demanded . The U.S. gave the Soviet Union almost everything they demanded, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Evidence suggests that the U.S. would have given the Soviets an open trade of the Jupiters for the missiles in Cuba if the Soviets had pressed a bit harder .
 The note to Cordier was actually the text of a proposal designed to be made by U. Thant . The proposal was actually a proposal made by Thant.
 The United States and the Soviets agree to remove both the Jupiter missiles and the Soviet missiles in Cuba . In this proposal, the UN Secretary General would suggest that, in the interest of world peace, the U.S. and Soviet missiles should be removed together .
 The implication is that once U Thant made this proposal, the United States could accept the open trade under the guise of respecting the wishes of the United Nations . Cordier was only authorized to give the text to U. Thant if Rusk specifically asked him to do so .
 The Soviets accepted the “secret trade’s deal so Cordier was never asked to convey the message to U Thant . Cordier never received the message from the Soviets so the deal was accepted .
 This evidence does not prove that the U.S. was willing to openly trade the Jupiters to remove MRBMs from Cuba . This evidence, by itself, does not disprove that the United States .
 The fact that the President established a contingency plan does not mean that he had decided to execute it, but it does show that the ‘open trade” was, at least, being considered .
 A second piece of evidence suggests that the U.S. was willing to accept the open trade, if pressed a bit harder by the Soviets . The United States was able to accept trade, even though it was a bit more difficult .
 Evidence is in the transcripts of the Ex Comm meetings around the peak of the crisis . This evidence is in . transcripts of . the . transcripts . of the . Ex Comm . meetings around . peak of crisis .
 The President is told by a few of his advisors that trading away the Jupiters would be too damaging to U.S. credibility . But each time the President came right back to this idea, he said .
 By the 27th, several members of the Ex Comm had come around to the President’s view about trading the missiles .
 By the 27th the President was not alone in his willingness to compromise . Several members of the Ex Comm seem to have shifted to much more conciliatory policies than they had held only a day before .
 As described earlier, the policies that the United States adopted during the CMC offer somewhat weaker evidence than the direct assessments of Soviet credibility discussed by U.S. decision makers .
 Many factors affected the choice of U.S. policies during the crisis, only one of which was the credibility of Soviet threats .
 The decision to be conciliatory and trade the Jupiter missiles away is consistent with the predictions of the power/interest hypothesis than the reputation hypothesis . Nevertheless, the second major decision by the Kennedy Administration was clearly on the concilitatory end of the spectrum of options . The decision was clearly
 Gaddis agrees with his interpretation that the Cordier letter, along with the evidence from the tapes of the Ex Comm meetings, show that the President was repeatedly pushing for the trade .
 64 have had little credibility left when the CMC began . See Gaddis, We Now Know, 271. 64 . 64 have little credibility .
 Khrushchev’s modus operandi since 1958 was to back down . Bluffing and backing down during crises had been his modus opiate since 1958 . Bluffed and backed down has been Khrushche's modusoperandi since then .
 U.S. decision makers assessed Soviet credibility during the missile crisis . They were united in their conviction that the Soviets were quite resolved . Decision makers were unanimous in their assessment of the Soviet credibility .
 American decision makers considered the Soviet threat to risk a major war in 1962 to be more credible then Soviet threats to do this in any of the recent Berlin Crises . In fact, U.S. decision makers .
 In line with the predictions of the reputation hypothesis, Soviet credibility grew from 1958-62 . In direct contrast to the predictions, the credibility of the Soviet government grew in the 1960s . The reputation hypothesis was based on the power/interests hypothesis .
 United States leaders were focused on Berlin and obsessed with U.S. credibility and reputation, but they never connected past Soviet actions in Berlin with Soviet reputation . First, throughout the crisis, leaders were obsessed with Berlin .
 The Ex Comm. worried constantly about how U.S. actions in Cuba would affect United States credibility in Berlin . No one ever asked what past Soviet actions in Berlin revealed about Soviet credibility in Cuba .
 U.S. decision makers were remarkably unified in assessments of Soviet credibility throughout the crisis . Decision makers also were remarkably consistent in their assessments of the Soviet credibility .
 There were plenty of disagreements among the members of the Ex Comm. Some decision makers favored more hawkish policies than the group selected . Others wanted the United States to adopt even more than they did .
 Despite differences within the group, they shared a common view that the Soviets were highly credible . The Soviets were unlikely to bend to U.S. coercion, and would retaliate against United States allies, they said .
 There is virtually no dissent against this view. I wouldn’t be talking to anybody about it,” he said .