 As we stated in our introduction, we see them as the beginning of a more extended conversation between scholars, intelligence professionals, and policy makers, rather than as the final word on any topic in particular . We see it as the start of an extended conversation, rather as the end of a
 We make bold as to offer an interpretation of the collective import of the preceding pages, knowing full well that some of it must later stand to be corrected .
 We would like to try to grapple with deep and abstract questions having to do with the evaluation of intelligence performance, and the theory and practice of intelligence assessment . We shall evince some skepticism about the possibility of a 'theory' of intelligence .
 Not everything we will have to say on this score will be entirely novel, we hope that the perspective in which we will attempt to put it will be unfamiliar and fresh . We hope that we will try to put the perspective of this score into something new .
 We believe it would be fruitful to ease our way into these topics by having a closer look at some of the nuts and bolts of intelligence assessment in the missile crisis .
 We begin with unresolved or puzzling empirical questions that arise from the preceding essays questions first about what actually happened and then about why certain things happened and others did not . We then proceed to examine and evaluate certain important perceptions, judgments, and inferences, in these essays .
 This will help us frame and anchor the more abstract discussion to follow . This will be the first time we've seen this discussion in the U.S. history .
 This is not to say that the American intelligence story is an open book far from it merely that there are relatively few aspects of the American story that remain utterly mysterious to outsiders .
 Whether the United States had broken Soviet and Cuban codes and if so, what of importance, if anything, they learned from eavesdropping on Soviets and Cubans are some of the important pieces of information not yet on the public record .
 In the Soviet and Cuban cases, we have clear testimony to the effect that their capabilities were limited and not very useful . Neither do we have details of Soviet or Cuban Sigint, of course but it is at least ironic that in .
 "We do not even have a general characterization of this sort with respect to American Sigint," he says . "We have no idea what it is like to be able to do with Sigint. We do not know what it's like to think of Sigint"
 This would confirm the sense students of the missile crisis without security clearances have had that the U.S. probably did benefit from signals intelligence .
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali have done a remarkable job of painting what was until very recently an almost entirely blank canvas . But the Soviet intelligence picture is less complete .
 Three question in particular arise as a result of apparent inconsistencies between the accounts of Fursenko and Naftali on the one hand, and Domingo Amuchastegui on the other . A fourth question arises out of inconsistencies between documentary and testimonial records .
 They suggest that the KGB hedged its reports, even at the price of blatant inconsistency, so as to be able to defend itself in the face of any contingency . The KGB's reports suggest that they hedged their reports to protect themselves .
 The KGB never issued a clear warning that an invasion was imminent . Nevertheless, the KGB was unable to reach a firm determination of U.S. intentions .
 Aleksandr Feklisov, the KGB rezident in Washington, judged that Kennedy would have to be provoked into invading Cuba . Kennedy would not willingly attack otherwise, he said .
 Fursenko and Naftali imply that in judging an American attack unlikely, the KGB relied in part upon Cuban assessments . The KGB relied on Cuban assessments, they say .
 In 1961 Soviet intelligence began furnishing Cuba with 'constant, unambiguous, dire threat assessments ... for which there was no good-quality evidence' Amuchastegui readily acknowledges that the lack of Cuban documents represents a major obstacle for scholars .
 It is entirely possible, however, that Fursenko and Naftali on the one hand, and Amuchastegui on the other, are both correct . It is also possible that Furrenenko and Naftali are correct .
 The KGB may have deliberately skewed its reports to Cuba for some ulterior purpose . The KGB's reports may have been skewed to Cuba by the KGB .
 Amuchastegui reports Cuban intelligence eventually decided to take action . He says this is what the Cuban government eventually decided .
 The conclusion Cuban intelligence retrospectively drew from this that Khrushchev must have conceived the nuclear deployment in 1961, and that he made use of falsified KGB threat assessments to prime Castro to accept it is logically consistent with such dissimulation .
 Khrushchev may have had other goals in pursuit of which it would have been useful to persuade Castro that the Cuban Revolution was in imminent danger from the U.S.
 He might simply have sought to draw Cuba closer to the Soviet Union, for instance . He might also have been trying to make Cuba more friendly with Russia .
 Aleksandr Alekseev was the only KGB field officer who was briefed on the Cuban initiative . Fursenko and Naftali claim that Aleksander Aleksandr Aleksoev was only KGB officer briefed on initiative . Aleksandra Alekkoev was
 By all accounts, neither Georgi Bolshakov the GRU's man in Washington — nor Aleksandr Feklisov knew of the deployment before President Kennedy announced it .
 This implies that certain KGB units charged with transport and custody of nuclear munitions must also have been aware of the decision . The decision was made by the KGB at some point .
 Without knowing exactly who in the Soviet intelligence community knew of the deployment, when they knew it, and why they were informed, it is difficult to come to a refined assessment of the relevance and performance of Soviet intelligence in the episode .
 If the KGB was unaware of the missile deployment, then it could not have attempted to mask it by leaking accurate information about it . The KGB was not aware of the deployment of the missiles .
 If Fursenko and Naftali are correct that Alekseev was the only KGB field officer briefed on the deployment, then unless he personally directed it and he has never claimed that he did Amuchastegui must be mistaken .
 "Here, again, we must await further documentation for a definitive resolution," says CNN iReporter .
 It's entirely plausible to imagine that the KGB and Cuban intelligence did cooperate on such a campaign . But it is entirely plausible that it did .
 One possibility is that the KGB in Cuba did, in fact, know about the nuclear deployment . The KGB did, however, know that the Cuban government did, according to reports .
 It is difficult to imagine why the local KGB would not have been informed . But it is hard to think why the KGB wouldn't have been told .
 The cadre would have been the most useful cadre imaginable for protecting the secrecy of the deployment . They would have helped protect the security of the operation .
 It's easy to imagine that Fursenko and Naftali err to imply that only Alekseev knew . It's a mistake to imply only Aleksieev knew about the affair .
 It is equally easy to imagine, however, that Amuchastegui errs in recalling or perhaps in assuming that the KGB could only have conceived and carried out such a plan if they knew that the deployment actually included strategic nuclear missiles .
 The KGB officers involved in designing the campaign could have believed that the Soviet Union was only deploying conventional military forces to the island . Yet still would have appreciated the value of tales about nuclear missiles .
 The CIA's low estimate of Cuban credibility was based on a low estimate . Their task was to capitalize on that low estimate, the CIA says .
 This particular question is shaping up to become one of the enduring mysteries of the Cuban missile crisis . The question remains a mystery as to what happened in Cuba .
 Fursenko and Naftali do an excellent job of summarizing what we know, and sketching out plausible scenarios .
 We fully concur with their judgments, and have nothing to add to their discussion . We have no comment on whether or not we agree with their views .
 Two additional 'what' questions arise from Domingo Amuchastegui's essay . One of which has important implications for the accuracy of the historical record, and one of which does not. One of the questions is whether or not the history is accurate . Another question is whether
 The minor issue is whether Cuba accepted Soviet offers of intelligence assistance, as Fursenko and Naftali state, or whether Cuba requested it, as Amuchastegui implies . The issue of Cuba's intelligence assistance is a minor issue .
 Nothing of real importance would seem to turn on the answer . Divergent representations may be evidence of the turbulent undercurrent of national pride that complicated the Soviet-Cuban intelligence .
 The important question is whether Che Guevara traveled to Moscow in April 1962 . The question has been answered since then: "Che Gueverara went to Moscow"
 Amuchastegui provides a detailed account of the mission, and characterizes it as a crucial turning point in Soviet-Cuban relations .
 According to Amuchastegui, the purpose of the trip was not only to request increased levels of military aid, but also military aid of a 'qualitatively different' character . The trip was aimed at asking for increased military aid .
 Amuchastegui claims that Che 'left it up to IChrushchev himself to make a concrete proposal' Khrushchev understood Che to be probing for an offer of nuclear assistance .
 The difficulty is that we have been unable to confirm Amuchastegui's claim that any such trip took place . We have not been able to confirm any such a trip to Spain .
 We cannot locate any reference to such a mission in any of the published literature . knowledgeable Cubanologists whom we have consulted on the matter have no recollection of it .
 Oleg Daroussenkov was Che's special assistant in 1961 and 1962, a former staff member and interpreter in the Soviet embassy in Havana . Neither Alekseev nor Oleg. Che's Special Assistant in 1961 or 1962, can remember such a visit .
 It is not out of the question that Che undertook such a mission, but it is highly curious that this particular trip would be shrouded in such secrecy . Other trips to the Soviet Union by high-ranking Cubans dealing with equally sensitive topics have been public record for some time .
 Che did travel to Moscow in April, something far more sensitive than Amuchastegui suggestions must have transpired something of the order of an explicit request for nuclear assistance . This would suggest that if Che did go to Moscow it would have been a request for assistance .
 Castro evinced surprise when Biryuzov suggested a nuclear deployment during his trip to Cuba at the end of May . By all accounts, however, Castro evined surprise when he spoke to the Russian president .
 Che and Fidel Castro were very close, but they were close, and it's difficult to imagine that Che would make such a request without at least vetting it with Fidel . Che and Castro certainly had their share of disagreements, but had their disagreements but shared a close relationship .
 The Soviets would not have known the purpose of Che's visit in advance, he says . Che would have been unaware of the fact that Che intended to go to Moscow, he adds .
 Soviet documents show that the visit was not entirely without mention in Soviet documents . Nor would there have been any reason for the visit to the Soviet Union without mention .
 If the trip indeed took place, then we must wonder very seriously about the recollections of former Soviet officials, the accuracy and completeness of the Russian archives that have been opened to scholars .
 "We find it difficult to imagine what personal, professional, or national interest would be served by fabricating such a story"
 "Nothing in it smacks of personal or professional accomplishment, let alone triumph," he says . "It's not an accomplishment, it's a failure," he adds. "It doesn't seem to be a triumph"
 The story does not tend to cast Cuba, Cuban intelligence, Che Guevara, or Khrushchev in either a favorable or unfavorable light . The story doesn't tend to be cast in a favorable light .
 It provides no basis for explaining away an embarrassment, or escaping some blame, or escape some blame . It provides . no basis to explain away embarrassment or escape blame, it says .
 Che did travel to Moscow in late 1960 for the purpose of requesting increasing levels of military aid . There are at least some indications that, while in Moscow, he did float a trial balloon about a nuclear deployment in Cuba .
 Amuchastegui distinctly connects Che's trip and the Escalante affair . Che would have to be confused between the two significant events separated by almost a year and a half .
 A second possibility is that Amuchastegui is thinking instead of the trip to Moscow by Ramiro Valdes in March 1962 . The trip was made by Valdes, who was in charge of the Spanish Embassy in Moscow .
 The timing is much better; but on first glance the context would appear to be wrong . The timing was much better, but the context was wrong .
 Valdes was certainly a member of Castro's inner circle, and it is entirely possible that he could have been charged with the task of requesting increased military assistance . Valdes failed utterly, much to his disgust .
 He could easily have approached Khrushchev secretly on this, and it would not be surprising that no mention of it appears in the available accounts .
 Valdes was one of the five Cuban leaders (along with Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, Che Guevara, and Osvaldo Dorticos) who met to decide whether to accept the demarche . It may also be significant that when Rashidov and
 Of the two facts that must be adjusted, one the date of the trip requires a trivially minor adjustment . Additionally, of the two . facts that . must be . adjusted, the dates of the . trip must be changed .
 This is not a question that concerns intelligence specifically, but it is one that bears on the genesis of the crisis . It is not only a question about intelligence but it also bears on how the crisis began .
 If Amuchastegui's story is correct, Castro may have deliberately sowed the seed that germinated in Khrushchev's mind . Castro may not have deliberately planted the seed in the Soviet Union .
 For now, though, we wish to put them aside and ask why certain things happened, and why others did not . We wish to ask why some things happened to happen in the world .
 All five of the preceding essays do this throughout, of course, in somewhat different ways, and space prohibits a comprehensive review of them .
 We would like to flag and explore some of the more interesting and more important puzzles before we move on to consider deeper issues, such as what constitutes a 'good answer' to questions of this kind . Nevertheless, we would rather rather than focus on the 'good answers' to these puzzles
 For the moment we are still concerned with fairly nitty-gritty matters of historical detail that emerge from the three empirical essays . For the rest of the time we are concerned with the nitty, grittittly details of the three essays .
 To help answer larger 'why' questions, it would be helpful to know the answers to two related nitty-gritty questions .
 Task Force W concluded in September 1962 that there were 45,000-50,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba . Samuel Halpern has testified that Task Force concluded that . Task Force had concluded that the Soviet military was in Cuba in 1962 .
 The official American estimate in early October was 4,000-4,500 an order of magnitude lower . The official U.S. estimate of the earthquake in October was about 4,500 .
 Halpern is certain that CIA analysts received the Task Force W estimate in September, but does not know what happened to it . He says he is certain the CIA analysts got the estimate, but doesn't know where it was .
 The only defensible reason would be that they had some contrary evidence to suggest that the estimate must have been off by about an order of magnitude . The only reason for the estimate is that it must be wrong by about a magnitude .
 The CIA did not believe at that time that the Soviets intended to deploy a substantial nuclear deterrent and a full battle-capable conventional force to defend the island .
 A training mission would have required no more than a few thousand Soviet troops, but many times more would have been needed to mount a proper deterrent and defense . The mission was no less than a training mission .
 We cannot say for certain which of these explains the error, singly or in combination, but our sense is that the cognitive explanation is most plausible . The bureaucratic explanation is somewhat less no, and the motivational explanation unlikely .
 There were literally thousands of reports of missiles in Cuba in the period before any missiles were actually brought there . Most of the reports were of no value, or perhaps negative value .
 Only in late September and early October were a few reports from Opa-Locka received in Washington that, in retrospect, probably were valid sightings of the medium-range missiles . That could not be determined at the time .
 The existence of hundreds of other reports that were found to be not valid, and many hundreds of others of undetermined validity, made it ever more difficult to credit the few that were later discovered to be true . Hundreds of thousands of reports were found not valid .
 It is one thing to question the accuracy and usefulness of a report because it is vague, confused, insufficiently detailed, self-contradictory, or inconsistent with other reliable information . It is entirely a different thing to ask the accuracy of the report because one suspects the motives,
 The poor quality or suspiciousness of one Cuban refugee report provides no valid logical ground for discounting another, high-quality report . Neither does 50 low-quality or suspicious reports provide twice the reason to discounting the 51st report as do 25 .
 Reports from Cuban sources were gems very precise and detailed descriptions of what, in retrospect, almost certainly were Soviet MRBMs . We do know that a few reports from Cuba were very precise .
 We also know that some of these reports reached Washington well before the photographic discovery of missiles on 15 October . Some of the reports reached D.C. well before they were published .
 If Khrushchev truly believed that the U.S. would take measures dramatically increasing the danger of both outcomes, he would not have undertaken it . It is fair to assume that if the United States, in response to a covert nuclear deployment, would have taken measures that would increase the
 Khrushchev could not reasonably consider himself an expert on American politics, or on President Kennedy . So it would be natural if he were reasonable for him to ask those better qualified than himself to prepare an assessment .
 Oleg Troyanovsky was the son of the first Soviet ambassador to the U.S. He grew up in Washington, attended Swarthmore College, and knew the American political scene extremely well .
 I recall the day when another adviser told me that we were contemplating the idea of deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba if the Cuban leadership agreed . I recall perfectly well the day that another adviser ... told me of the day . Another adviser said .
 "I was definitely taken aback with this information, because being someone knowledgeable of U.S. affairs, and realizing the importance of such a step, I knew this would entail serious consequences," she says .
 I was faced with the dilemma of discussing this with Khrushchev or not, although colleagues in the Secretariat told me that there was no sense in discussing this because the decision had been made and a change in the decision would be impossible .
 "I was doing this just to calm my own conscience, and when I found the appropriate time I talked to Khrushchev. However, I was doing . This was just a matter of time, and I was just trying to calm myself," he says .
 The Monroe Doctrine did not just call for the non-intervention of European states in U.S. affairs, but also called for non-Intervention of the United States in European affairs . He even said that the Americans appealed to the Monroe Doctrine every so often .
 What is interesting here is Khrushchev's academic, legalistic, and deductive approach to the problem . What is really interesting is his legalistic approach to solving the problem, he says .
 Khrushchev thought that if the Americans were reasonable, they would tolerate the Soviet deployment . In effect, Khrushchev thought if the U.S. was reasonable, it would tolerate it, he said .
 The Americans were reasonable; ergo, they would tolerate the deployment . The U.S. was reasonable; therefore, it would be OK with the deployment. The Americans would be reasonable, and that's why the deployment was OK?
 Even if Khrushchev's minor premise were correct, the major premise evinced an astonishing naivete about U.S. sensibilities . The Soviet leader's naivety about American sensibilities was astonishing .
 Fursenko and Naftali were tasked to provide an assessment of U.S. intentions toward Cuba . In some of these assessments, the KGB attempted to identify hypothetical conditions under which the United States might attack Cuba .
 While it may well have been unusual for Soviet leaders to pose direct 'what i f f questions to the KGB, it was not unusual for the KGB to consider them .
 He was the kind of man headstrong and brimming with self-confidence — who did not feel the need to ask the experts . He was a headstrong headstrong man who didn't need to question experts .
 Troyanovsky's testimony highlights Khrushchev's deductive approach to forecasting . But there was intelligence available that could have buttressed his confidence . Troyanov's testimony shows Khrushchevsky's approach to forecasts .
 A 'highly regarded source' indicated to Feklisov in March 1962 that Kennedy would not risk military action against Cuba before the mid-term congressional elections in November . Kennedy would have not risked military action before mid-November congressional elections .
 The KGB provided the Kremlin with ample material that could just as easily indicate American hostilities were likely at any time . Of course, as Fursenko and Naftali note, the KGB provided ample material to indicate that American hostilities would be likely .
 If Khrushchev had been paying attention to Soviet intelligence when he was trying to gauge the likely American response, he was clearly paying attention selectively . Therefore, he may have been listening to intelligence when assessing the likely response .
 The question of whether the U.S. would tolerate Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba was not answered . Quite distinct from whether the United States would tolerate them, the question was whether the Soviets stood a decent chance of transporting them .
 Khrushchev believed it was necessary to deploy covertly and confront the U.S. with a fait accompli . He believed that it was needed to confront the United States .
 He energetically resisted when Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones pleaded with him to go public with the deployment . He stressed the sovereign right of the Soviet Union to supply, and of Cuba to accept, any armaments whatsoever that they deemed necessary .
 They proposed this so as to deprive the United States of a pretext for action, they said . The U.S. should not be given a pretext to attack, the authors said .
 Khrushchev thought Americans were reasonable with guns pointed at their heads, but not otherwise . Presumably he thought Americans would be reasonable with a gun pointed at them .
 Soviet military intelligence would have been the most competent body to assess the feasibility of a secret deployment . Soviet military Intelligence would have considered the possibility of the deployment .
 There is no indication that the GRU was asked to conduct a study and make a report . The GRU has not been asked to make such a report, however .
 Khrushchev was satisfied to allow Biryuzov to make that determination himself . Khrushchev was in Cuba in late May and early June .
 Biryuzov appears to have concluded that MRBMs could easily be hidden in Cuba, in caves and mountains, or disguised as palm trees .
 It is unclear what, if anything, Biryuzov thought about the feasibility of hiding the roads, buildings, and launch pads associated with the sites . The U.S. should not have noticed the removal of already-deployed weapons from the Ukraine .
 The problem of maskirovka was simply left to the planners of Operation 'Anadyr' and treated as an operational detail . The problem was left to be treated as a detail in the planning stages of Operation Anadyr .
 The best explanation for the failure to task the GRU with a more intensive study may be Khrushchev's over-confidence and commitment . As with the first Soviet puzzle, the best explanation may be the failure of the first .
 It would appear that the Soviet leadership did not appreciate the difficulties of a secret deployment . It may reflect ignorance of logistical technicalities and/or American capabilities, the author says .
 It would be interesting to know what the GRU would have concluded about the prospects for covert deployment if it had been given the opportunity to study the problem closely .
 Fursenko and Naftali give an account of Soviet intelligence during the Cuban missile crisis . It is astonishing given the KGB's reputation for competence given the reputation of competence .
 Even when measured against a more realistic standard, the KGB appears to have performed poorly in this episode . Students of intelligence will know that laymen and outsiders consistently overrate the capabilities of intelligence services .
 Fursenko and Naftali describe an organization obsessed with espionage, unable to integrate secret and open sources, unwilling or unable to synthesize and interpret, ill-informed about Soviet policy, lacking well-placed informants . If one of the more plausible versions of the Scali-F
 Khrushchev cannot be held responsible for supply-side failures, writes David Frum . He says he cannot be responsible for demand-side intelligence failures . Frum: "We can certainly blame ourselves for certain intelligence failures"
 We're inclined to credit Fursenko and Naftali's organizational culture explanation here .
 This goes quite a long way toward explaining why the KGB fared so poorly . The KGB fared poorly in the Soviet Union in the 1980s and '90s .
 The KGB suffered from technical shortcomings that made its performance seem all the worse . But in addition to this, it is worth noting that the KGB suffered some technical shortcomings .
 The KGB's inability to fathom the mind of John F Kennedy did not reflect institutional incapacity per se . A different ethos, and a different set of procedures, could not have compensated for a lack of quality sources at or close to the White House .
 The CIA was equally unable to fathom the mind of Nikita Khrushchev and had no good sources close to the Kremlin . The KGB could not fall back on impressive technical collection of intelligence in order to contribute to policy making .
 Amuchastegui emphasizes the stark disagreement between Soviet intelligence and the Direction General de Inteligencia on the likelihood of an American attack on Cuba .
 Amuchastegui's discussion of the various possible explanations for that disagreement is both fascinating and instructive . He discusses the various theories of the relationship between the two cultures .
 Amuchastegui's claim that Cuban military intelligence the Direction de Inteligencia Militar consistently echoed the Soviets' dire threat assessments .
 Both organizations had high-level Soviet advisers, so it seems unlikely that the difference can be accounted for simply by a closer professional relationship between Soviet and Cuban personnel .
 DIM fell under the Ministry of the Revolutionary Armed Forces led by Raul Castro . Raul's pro-Soviet sympathies may have had some influence on DIM's willingness to accept Soviet assessments .
 DIM's professional focus on military threat assessment led it to rely heavily on U.S. military capabilities as an indicator of political intent . Another possibility is that DIM relied heavily on American military capabilities to assess political intent, as a result .
 A second puzzle is Fidel Castro's failure to inform his own intelligence services of the true nature of the Soviet deployment . Castro failed to inform the CIA of his failure to tell them about the Soviet operation, he says .
 It is not clear why Castro would wish to keep his own intelligence service in the dark . One obvious possibility is that he wished to limit dissemination of this information to reduce the danger of leakage .
 Given the state of unrest in Cuba and the intense activity of counterrevolutionary groups, it would have been reasonable for Castro to fear that the CIA had informants within his intelligence services . The CIA would have had informants in Cuba .
 Cuban intelligence could not properly fulfill its primary mandate warning of an American attack without knowing what the Soviets in Cuba were up to that might provoke one . Yet Cuban intelligence would not be able to adequately warn of a U.S. attack .
 Amuchastegui explains this in terms of Pineiro's 'reluctance to submit to the Cuban leadership assessments that would challenge or even contradict Fidel Castro's own thinking'
 Castro was concerned that the Soviet deployment could precipitate an American attack . Castro himself must have been concerned that an American strike could lead to an attack .
 It is far from clear that on this score the judgment of Cuban intelligence would challenge or contradict Castro's thinking . Cuban intelligence is not likely to challenge Castro's views .
 Pineiro may have known that, of course, in which case he would have been wise not to pass on a report containing nothing Castro did not already know or believe . Pineiro's report may have been a mistake .
 This would only irritate Castro, and in Cuban politics, that would be a mistake . Castro would be irritated by the idea, but that's not a good idea, he says .
 Amuchastegui insists DGI did not provide Castro with information to that effect . DGI insists it did not give Castro information about that .
 It's unusual for political leaders to warn intelligence analysts of an impending assault . Certainly it is unusual for them to warn of an imminent attack .
 Castro issued precisely the same warning to Khrushchev . Amuchastegui is probably correct to infer that the information did not come from Soviet intelligence .
 Castro himself has never identified a particular source for his judgment . Castro has not identified a specific source of his judgment, but he has never said that . Castro is known to be a member of the Castro clan .
 The Stennis Committee and the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board probably would have given the CIA a grade of B-; 53 DCI McCone, in his response to the PFIAB report, a B+. 54 We know of no official Soviet intelligence post mortems, so we
 Amuchastegui notes that there were major changes to Cuban intelligence after the crisis . Many of these changes simply sought to reduce Cuba's reliance on Soviet and East European intelligence, he says .
 It is natural to try to judge the performance of intelligence communities, yet it is very difficult to know what standards or benchmarks to employ . It is difficult to say what standards should be used to judge intelligence agencies' performance .
 Even an intelligence service operating at peak efficiency and unhampered by resource constraints will make mistakes and fail to anticipate important events every once in a while . Even intelligence services operating under resource constraints make mistakes .
 Beth Fischer argues that perfectly normal human psychology imposes a 'performance limit' on intelligence . Fischer argues this is because of the 'performance limits' of human intelligence .
 Richard Betts identified a number of other insurmountable obstacles to perfection, psychological and otherwise . Betts has been critical of perfection in the past, but he says it's not enough .
 We cannot design meaningful tests of real-world performance, as we can for student drivers, as well as student drivers . We can't design meaningful test results for students, we can't for students . We need to be tested for real-life performance, we say .
 U.S. officials wanted to test CIA's forecasting skills, but there would have been no way to secure Khrushchev's compliance . This would have led to a perverse idea for the CIA to try to test its forecasting skills .
 Second, since we cannot predict the future, we cannot know the 'right answers' before we administer a test . Third, we can't know the right answers before administering a test. Second, they can't predict future, they cannot know 'the answers'
 Intelligence service misses something in real time when it comes to real-time intelligence . It is possible to know in real-life when intelligence services miss something .
 The intelligence community's job is to acquire crucial information of the kind it is the job to acquire . From time to time crucial information reaches national leaders through entirely different channels, intelligence officials say .
 This does not, however, provide a basis for determining whether intelligence communities are performing well or poorly in general, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "An intelligence community that is performing extremely well in general will, unavoidably, miss certain things," he says . The intelligence community is performing very well, he adds .
 Most judgments about the performance of intelligence arise from retrospective evaluations, such as official post mortems and academic studies . Three Temptations is a series of books written on intelligence .
 Retrospective evaluation has the crucial advantage of a fixed historical record against which to assess analysts' perceptions, beliefs, and inferences . Retrospective evaluations can be used to assess analyst's perceptions and beliefs .
 There is always some irreducible element of uncertainty about what actually happened, of course, but this degree of uncertainty cannot compare with what is happening now and what will happen in the future . There is no doubt about what happened, but uncertainty about the future cannot compare to uncertainty about
 We submit that the answer is 'not very', largely for straightforward epistemological reasons . The answer to the question is not 'very' for the answer, but it's not very simple .
 We would like to suggest that retrospective evaluation though imperfect can be useful if we have a particular understanding in mind of how we can benefit from it . However, we would rather rather than rely on retrospective evaluation, we need to be able to understand how we might benefit .
 It is almost irresistible to focus on particular dramatic failures when assessing intelligence performance retrospectively . It is also almost impossible to focus attention on specific dramatic failures .
 It may be doubted whether studies of intelligence successes could compete for our attention . One of the chief things that makes a failure spectacular is that it has a dramatic consequence .
 A properly-exploited intelligence success may lead to the prevention of something spectacular, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Success does not provide the occasion for public angst about intelligence capabilities, and would not normally spawn public review or discussion . Moreover, a success does not . provide the opportunity for public . discussion .
 In principle, we could avoid this temptation by making an effort to study a representative sample of intelligence episodes selecting not on the outcome of the outcome, but randomly .
 Successes leave less of a documentary trail than failures, and mundane episodes attract less attention than dramatic ones . Successes and failures tend to leave less documentary trails behind .
 There may not be enough information available to conduct a truly balanced study . There may be not enough information to conduct such a study .
 The combination of inherent allure and available information means spectacular intelligence failures have an almost irresistible gravitational pull . Intelligence failures have a gravitational pull, says CNN.com .
 Hindsight tends to color our judgments of how intelligence analysts should have interpreted information . Hindsight may have led us to think differently about intelligence analysts' decisions .
 To intelligence analysts attempting to anticipate events, signals may be barely perceptible . But to intelligence analysts, those same signals may not be noticeable .
 After the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, it was easy to see that there was plenty of information available on the basis of which United States intelligence might have anticipated the attack .
 Hindsight provides such a powerful prism that the intellectually frail often cannot resist the conclusion that the U.S. intelligence must have known about Pearl Harbor in advance .
 It is in the nature of Monday-morning quarterbacking to argue that intelligence had done X rather than Y, they would have plucked the signals from the noise and correctly anticipated events .
 If U.S. intelligence had concentrated on certain targets, relied more heavily on certain methods of collection than others, handled information differently, made use of different working assumptions, etc., etc. etc. The Japanese were about to attack Pearl Harbor in time to do something about it .
 The problem is that we cannot know this, even with the benefit of hindsight . The problem was that we can't know this even with hindsight, it's impossible .
 All choices have trade-offs and opportunity costs that are difficult to estimate, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "All choices are tradeoffs, opportunity costs are hard to estimate"
 To conclude that intelligence should have done X rather than Y begs additional questions, it begs more questions .
 Klaus Knorr attempted to understand why U.S. intelligence failed to anticipate the Soviet deployment of the Soviet missiles . Knorr's essay was published shortly after the Cuban missile crisis . He attempted to put that failure in a context that would permit a meaningful evaluation of intelligence performance .
 In a nowfamous passage, he stated that 'the practical problem is to improve the ""batting average"" say, from .275 to .301 rather than to do away altogether with surprise' We believe this to be misguided .
 It is a natural temptation to think of 'good' intelligence performance in terms of a high rate of success, and 'poor' intelligence . 'Good' intelligence is good but poor intelligence is poor, and poor is bad, says Simon Tisdall .
 An intelligence agency that fails rarely must be doing well, and one that fails often must often be doing badly . A player batting .350 needs serious work, but intelligence agencies that fail often must do well . Intelligence agencies often fail to do well, but often do badly .
 It is natural to think that retrospective evaluation, despite its various pitfalls and difficulties, at the very least permits us to gauge the relative frequency of correct and incorrect judgments . It is also natural to believe retrospective evaluation gives us an accurate view of our decisions .
 The moment we begin to think about operationalizing these assessments, however, we quickly discover that the metaphor is both meaningless and unworkable . The metaphor is not only meaningless but also unworkingable .
 The USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba, or from establishment of a Soviet submarine base there . Cuba could also benefit from a submarine base .
 As between these two, the establishment of a submarine base would be more likely, it is more likely to be established .
 Either development would be incompatible with Soviet practice to date and with Soviet policy as we presently estimate it. Either development, however, would be compatible with . Soviet policy would not be .
 It would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations than the USSR has displayed thus far . The move would have important policy implications with respect to other areas and other problems .
 In effect, it said that a nuclear deployment was unlikely, but not impossible . The U.S. government said it was unlikely to deploy a nuclear weapon .
 SNIE 85-3-62 meant to communicate that there was a 0.0. probability that the USSR would deploy MRBMs to Cuba . It did not assign probabilities, but, for the sake of argument, it did not .
 Khrushchev consulted with his American specialists earlier in the game, got cold feet, and decided to subtract the nuclear component from the Soviet deployment . The U.S. nuclear component was added to the Soviet plan to replace the Soviet component .
 There is nothing that the CIA would have done differently in this scenario, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The DGI predicted that the United States would not tolerate the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. did not accept the existence of the Soviet missiles .
 The DGI was correct to predict that the U.S. would not tolerate the missiles, but it did not anticipate the blockade . The U.N. did not expect the blockade, but the blockade was the result .
 DGI's decision will have 'dramatic implications' for DGI batting average . The decision will 'certainly have dramatic implications'
 It is clear that there is no non-arbitrary, rigorous way to gauge the relative frequency of successful and unsuccessful judgments, even in retrospect . It's clear there is there no way to measure success and failure of judgments .
 We could not be certain that this would be a valid indicator of the competence of an intelligence community. Even if there were, it would not be an indicator of intelligence community competence .
 Sloppy estimates are sometimes right, and careful estimates sometimes wrong, for reasons over which estimators have no control . Sloppy estimate is sometimes right and careful estimate is wrong, but it's sometimes wrong for reasons .
 It is possible to argue that a batting average is an imperfect indicator of skill even in baseball . Indeed, it is possible that batting average may be an imperfect indication of skill .
 Batters who play more games on artificial turf, against weaker pitchers, and against weaker defensive teams will have higher batting averages . Better batters who play on grass against stronger pitchers and better defensive teams have higher averages .
 A batting average can be a reliable indicator of skill for players who play in a league with a balanced schedule . Over a long season, a batting average is a reliable indication of skill . A balanced schedule can be an accurate indicator for skillful players .
 A batting average is only a relative measure of skill, and the valid comparison group is limited to other players in the league . But even then a batting average can be used to measure skill, such as skill, it is only relative .
 Intelligence analysis takes place under comparatively few parametric constraints . Intelligence analysis is often based on a single point of analysis .
 Different intelligence communities may face radically different challenges as James Wirtz discusses in his essay . One intelligence community may face consistently more difficult tasks than another, he says . Different intelligence community faces different challenges .
 In intelligence assessment there is no 'standard equipment' and cork bats are encouraged . Cork bats, far from being forbidden, are actively encouraged, in intelligence .
 Intelligence 'batting averages' would be meaningless measures of relative performance even if it were possible to calculate them in a rigorous, non-arbitrary way . Intelligence 'average' is meaningless if it is calculated in rigorous way .
 Knorr might reply that Knorr did not intend for us to take him so literally . Knorr may reply that he didn't intend to take it so literally.
 Perhaps he simply meant his metaphor to imply that the practical problem is to minimize the number of errors . Perhaps he just meant that he meant that the problem was to minimize errors .
 It may not be the number of errors that best measures intelligence performance, but the kind of errors . It may be the type of errors you get into the intelligence system, say experts .
 The U.S. 'failure' to predict the Soviet deployment will serve well, says historian . Because of the richness of the available record, there is no easy way to predict it, he says .
 The Stennis Report concluded that the 'predisposition of the intelligence community to the philosophical conviction that it would be incompatible with Soviet policy to introduce strategic missiles into Cuba' was the primary cause of its failure to predict the deployment .
 This preconception prevented the intelligence community from giving 'proper weight' to 'indications to the contrary'66 The implication is that the U.S. intelligence should not have been so firmly wedded to its preconceptions .
 The Stennis Report's conclusions provide an interesting example of Monday-morning quarterbacking . The report's conclusions are an example of a Monday morning quarterback .
 DCI McCone was so concerned about stepping up photographic coverage of the island that he would not have been willing to conclude that the Soviets were deploying missiles to Cuba without photographs of Soviet missiles .
 The Stennis Report concluded that a contributing cause of the failure was the CIA's tendency 'to discredit and downgrade the reports of Cuban refugees and exiles'69 As we have already suggested, if the CIA discounted reports simply on the ground that they came from Cuban sources, this would be
 If the CIA could not see that a deployment was underway, it would have to try to read Soviet minds . The CIA would then have to read the Soviet minds of the Kremlin .
 The CIA had no sources in the Kremlin, and hence no good information on whether Khrushchev and his colleagues were contemplating a nuclear deployment . The CIA did not have good sources in Russia, and therefore had no good knowledge of the situation .
 The CIA was attempting to ascertain the likelihood of something that had never happened before, and to do so relied upon a principle whose strict application will always result in failure to anticipate the unprecedented . First, the CIA was . attempting to . ascertain the . likelihood of an unprecedented event .
 CIA made the logical mistake of inferring intentions from behavior, writes CNN. Second, the CIA made a logical mistake by inferring intent from behavior.
 It is fallacious to infer present intentions from present behavior, let alone to infer past intentions from past behavior . It's fallacious for inferring present intentions and past behavior from past behaviors .
 Even if past behavior could predict present intentions and future behavior, the inference would be arbitrary . An act, a practice, or a policy may be consistent with a variety of incompatible purposes .
 CIA: Soviet Union had never before deployed nuclear missiles beyond its borders . CIA: It is correct, as the CIA noted, that the Soviet Union never had deployed such a missile .
 The Soviet Union never failed to extend its nuclear umbrella over a friendly Marxist-Leninist state . But neither had the Soviet Union ever failed to . Neither had the . Soviet Union .
 'Past Soviet behavior' was a composite of the behavior of several Soviet leaders, only one of whom was Khrushchev . Only one of those leaders had not yet had much of an opportunity to leave his imprint on the Soviet Union .
 CIA might have attempted to base estimate on assessment of Khrushchev's intentions and risk-taking propensities, not some generic 'Soviet' characterization .
 There was no guarantee that Khrushchev would do what Lenin or Stalin would have done had they been in his shoes instead . Khushchev would not have done the same thing if he were in his own shoes .
 Most U.S. officials were shocked by the discovery of the deployment because it seemed to them to be so out of character . Most United States officials said it was so out-of-character that it was 'out of character' for them .
 Some of these retrospective assessments cut the Gordian knot simply by assigning blame to Khrushchev for failing to appreciate the nature and intensity of American concerns about Soviet forces in Cuba .
 The current record shows that Khrushchev erred, but it is interesting to note that these retrospective assessments while in this respect quite accurate themselves made various indefensible logical leaps .
 Knorr concludes that there was nothing wrong with the set of expectations about Soviet behavior prevalent in the U.S. intelligence community in 1962 . Knorr argues that the Stennis Report erred in finding fault with it .
 The USSR seemed to have adopted a course of behavior that was inconsistent with U.S. expectations, but, in fact, was not . Instead, Knorr considers the failure to anticipate the deployment a case of 'apparent behavioral surprise'
 Moscow's underestimation of the risk of the deployment can most probably be attributed to Soviet intelligence failure, says Knorr . Knorr says the lengthy planning and preparation involved in the deployment was 'not conducive to a strong component of emotional or irrational decision-making'
 Knorr is undoubtedly correct to suppose that there were Soviet intelligence failures . But we now know that the mistake was over-determined, and that emotional or 'irrational' factors most certainly played a role .
 Khrushchev 'must' have been operating that would have made the covert deployment appear to be a rational gamble . Other retrospective assessments downplayed Soviet errors downplayed .
 Khrushchev had a low estimate of Kennedy's resolve because of his youth, his 'liberalism', his failure to follow up the Bay of Pigs disaster with full-scale American intervention, his overly-intellectual performance at the 1961 Vienna summit, and so on and/or the
 Even nuanced retrospective analyses that made some allowance for Soviet miscalculations tended to make indefensible assumptions and inferences that we now know, on the basis of a much richer record, to have been in error .
 U.S. post mortems consistently neglected or downplayed the extent of Khrushchev's behavior was consistent with defensive or deterrent purposes . Most strikingly, as Garthoff discusses at length, he says, the United States should not have ignored the extent to which it was consistent .
 Analysts raised the possibility in real time or in retrospect that Khrushchev might be operating on the basis of defensive motivations, they let this possibility wither on the vine .
 The conclusion we must draw, then, is that there was no logically valid way for the CIA to infer Khrushchev's intentions from the information available . The conclusion is that the CIA had no way of inferring the intentions of the Soviet leader .
 The information was consistent with any number of possible explanations, predictions . The information is consistent with many possible explanations .
 The best the CIA could do, as a matter of logic, was to say that Khrushchev might deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba, but that he might not . The CIA could only say he might deploy nukes to Cuba but not deploy them .
 The difficulty is that it tells us a great deal about the CIA, but very little about Khrushchev . The difficulty of the CIA's role in the Soviet Union is to be understood, says historian John Avlon .
 It's difficult to specify exactly what the CIA should have done differently, given existing constraints on information . And yet it is difficult to say exactly what should have been done differently .
 President asked whether the Soviet Union was likely to station nuclear missiles in Cuba, the CIA had a duty to try to answer . The CIA was tasked with answering the President's question .
 CIA would have had to assume a number of cockamamamie things, including that Khrushchev would not ask any of his experts about how the U.S. would react to a nuclear deployment in Cuba . To predict the deployment correctly, the CIA has to assume that Kh
 It is easy to imagine how the President of the United States would have reacted to an estimate that stated these two assumptions explicitly . The estimate is based on the two assumptions .
 Even if the CIA had fully factored Khrushchev's risk-acceptance and his defensive or deterrent motivations into its estimates, it is not at all clear that such a deployment was, on balance, probable .
 We are inclined to agree with Garthoff that, even taking into account what was not then known, the estimate might have concluded that Soviet leaders probably would not place nuclear missiles in Cuba . But it is unlikely that this would have made any practical difference to a President already keenly intent
 It is ironic that the U.S. intelligence community made such an intense effort to look for something that they did not expect to see, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States intelligence community tried to find out what it was looking for"
 It failed to make a clear prediction that the Soviet Union would attempt to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba . It certainly failed to predict that it would try to deploy such a weapon .
 U.S. policy makers have long dreaded the prospect of a nuclear deal with Russia . But it did not fail American policy makers who deeply dreaded it .
 The CIA was vigilant, and told the President all that he really needed to know . The CIA told him all he really needs to know, and he did .
 We can call these failures if we like; but we are not certain that we see the point of doing so . We can . call these . failures if . we like, but we can call them failures if they like; . but we . not certain . that we . see the
 Only the CIA could have been able to divine given its existing capabilities, and given the information at its disposal . Only the last thing was something the CIA would be able to do . The CIA has been accused of being complicit in the CIA's actions .
 The CIA could only have known these had it been lucky in data collection . The others are very difficult tasks, and the others are difficult .
 The White House, the Pentagon, and the CIA assumed in prudence that the Soviet missiles were operational and that warheads were present . Given the nature of U.S. contingency plans for military operations against Cuba, it is unlikely that the underestimate of the number of Soviet soldiers there would have
 The only significant lacuna is the presence of tactical nuclear weapons, the U.S. State Department says . The U.N. has no nuclear weapons .
 American officials did not presume that Soviet forces in Cuba would be equipped with tactical nuclear weapons . Had Kennedy sent American forces into Cuba, they would not have been equipped with similar weapons themselves .
 The CIA's failure to establish the presence of tactical nuclear weapons did not have negative consequences . Since he did not choose to invade Cuba, the CIA did not find out the existence of the weapons .
 It may be an unusual circumstance when intelligence serves policy better by knowing less rather than more . This is a useful reminder nonetheless that the task of intelligence is not to know everything, but to serve policy, and that intelligence can serve policy well even when it does not know everything .
 What we see on the American side of the Cuban missile crisis, at least, is a constructive intelligence-policy dynamic . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in Cuba since the 1960s .
 Communications between the White House and the CIA were far from perfect . There was a great deal of uncertainty in the air .
 CIA did not predict a Soviet nuclear deployment, but did not fully appreciate the size, purpose, and battlefield capability of the Soviet expeditionary force . CIA avoided communicating any overconfidence in what it did know that would have either encouraged recklessness, or undercut the President's respect for the intelligence
 CIA "did quite an impressive job of serving U.S. policy," authors say . CIA's assessment of the crisis was broad and accurate, they say . They say it did a "impressive job" of serving the United States policy .
 We can try to learn from its failure to predict the Soviet nuclear deployment, but it should not bear more than marginally on its performance over the course of the crisis as a whole .
 There is a sense in which Soviet intelligence was never really given a chance to fail, at least prior to the acute phase . There is also a sense that Soviet intelligence never really had a chance of failing, says historian .
 Intelligence cannot serve policy when policy makers do not take it into their confidence and ask it policy-relevant questions . Intelligence can't serve policy if policy makers don't take it in confidence, experts say . Intelligence is a vital tool for policy makers to make sure they have confidence in the intelligence
 Once the crisis broke, it would appear that Soviet intelligence strove to give the Kremlin information useful for managing the crisis, but came up with very little . The crisis broke in 1991, when Soviet intelligence was trying to help manage it .
 The KGB and GRU cannot be faulted for not having technical capabilities to rival CIA's or NSA's . Certainly the KGB and the GRU have not been faulted .
 Given the Soviet investment in Humint, one might have expected a better performance . Fursenko and Naftali describe Humint's performance as disappointing .
 We will never know what contribution to policy Soviet intelligence might have made had it better integrated and synthesized sources, and had it not engaged in self-censorship .
 We do know that these shortcomings deprived it of any real possibility. But we also know that we have to deal with them. We do not know how much of this is possible .
 Even when measured against a lower standard of reasonable expectations, Soviet intelligence hardly acquitted itself well . Nevertheless, even when measured with a low standard of expectations, the Soviets acquitted themselves well .
 We may say in its defense, however, that while it had great difficulty being relevant, at least it cannot be held responsible for disastrous policy . The U.S. government cannot be blamed for disastrous policies, however .
 "We cannot hold Cuban intelligence up to a standard of performance appropriate either to American or Soviet intelligence," says President Obama . "The Cuban intelligence is not up to standard," says Obama .
 It was a nascent community operating under severe technical and resource constraints . It was operating under . severe technical . and resource . constraints .
 Cuban leadership was selective in what questions it asked its intelligence community, how it listened, and how it used intelligence . Cuban leaders were selective on what questions they asked, how they listened and how they responded .
 Amuchastegui's account suggests that most of the pathologies evident in the Cuban intelligence-policy relationship lay on the policy side . Amuchstegui: Most of the problems evident in Cuba's relationship with the U.S. government lay on policy .
 Cuban intelligence did make mistakes, Amuchastegui says . Nevertheless, he says, the Cuban intelligence made mistakes .
 Amuchastegui's tale indicates to us that Cuban intelligence had a remarkably mature demeanor throughout the episode in question . They were not, however, mistakes of the kind that would encourage faulty policy .
 It was circumspect, relatively open-minded, and acutely aware of the structural and domestic political challenges it faced . It was also aware of its own political challenges and was aware of it .
 Evaluating the performance of an intelligence community in this way has, we believe, at least four merits, including second-guessing analysts with the benefit of hindsight, or gauging a rate of success . Evaluating performance of intelligence community has merits, we say .
 First, it forces us to factor into our evaluations some baseline expectation of performance . It forces us into some baseline expectations of performance.
 Clearly intelligence communities differ from each other in raw capability and challenges they face . Intelligence communities differ in raw capabilities and challenges faced by them .
 Simply counting successes and failures even if we could do it meaningfully could tell us nothing about how well they are doing relative to each other . Simply counting success and failures is not a good measure of success .
 The intelligence community is doing well relative to its own performance in the past . But at least we can determine roughly how well an intelligence agency is doing relative to the performance of its own .
 While judgments of what is a 'reasonable' expectation are bound to be somewhat impressionistic, this style of evaluation has the virtue of highlighting the notion of a performance limit . Second, while judgments of this kind can never be scientific, this type of evaluation highlights the notion that performance limits are
 Third, by forcing us to think about performance over an extended period of time, rather than with respect to a specific judgment, it makes it easier to bear in mind that at the end of the day the crucial judgment we wish to make is how well intelligence serves policy, not how well
 No clear practical implication follows from the conclusion that the CIA failed to predict the Soviet nuclear deployment, the author says . "No clear practical implications follows from this conclusion," he says .
 Cuban intelligence depended too heavily on Soviet and East European technical services . CIA was excellent at technical monitoring but weaker at political analysis, says author . CIA also relied heavily on the KGB and KGB for espionage .
 Monday-morning quarterbacking and attempting to improve the batting average are misguided approaches to evaluating intelligence performance . Monday morning quarterbacking is not the best way to evaluate intelligence performance, he says .
 We offer a third sporting metaphor drawn from the only game harder than life itself . We offer instead of a sporting metaphor, we offer instead a third sport metaphor .
 As a metaphor, it has a few obvious weaknesses, but we believe that it also has much to commend it . We believe that as a metaphor it has much of a good thing to say, but it has many flaws .
 There is a sense, then, in which their scores are directly comparable to one another . There is also a sense of their scores .
 Excellent golfers will consistently beat par, but no golfer can even in principle score lower than 18 in one round of golf . No golfer playing a par-72 course with regulation equipment could ever hope to score 36 .
 A 'good' round of golf is one in which one scores lower than usual; a 'poor' round is one that one scores higher than usual . 'Good' rounds are one where one scores less than usual and one is a poor round . A 'poor round' is one
 A round without a single poor shot is almost unheard of, even for professional golfers . Indeed, a round of golfing with no poor shots is almost impossible to do so .
 The best golfers are those who make relatively few poor shots, and recover from them well . Golf's best golfer is those who recover from poor shots well, says Rory McIlroy .
 Players with beautiful swings who consistently choose the wrong clubs or make poor decisions about where to aim may score worse than players whose swings are technically inferior, but who play a smarter game . For example, players who refuse to acknowledge the existence of tall trees and water hazards can score worse .
 Some golfers are better off the tee; others are better around the green . Others are better on the green; some are better at the tee and around the hole . Golf is a form of golf for the first time in golf history .
 Some have no difficulty with sand traps and do not take pains to avoid them . Others have great difficulty avoiding them at all costs . Some sand traps are more difficult to deal with .
 They enjoy the challenge of playing new courses, though they understand that, given two courses of approximately equal difficulty, they cannot expect to score as well on the course that they have never played before . They enjoy playing new golf courses, but they know that they can't expect to win as
 "When they score poorly, they reflect solemnly upon their poor shots," they say . "They may not choose to choose to do so publicly," says one of the NBA players .
 Golfers try to cultivate practices that work well, and to eliminate bad habits . Golfers have a long list of golfing habits that they want to eliminate . Golf's best-ever golfer says he wants to be a pro golfer .
 Betts suggested that '[njegative or descriptive theory the empirical understanding of how intelligence systems make mistakes is well developed,' but that positive theory and normative theory were not . Betts said that positive theories and normative theories were not well developed .
 It is impossible to identify anything in the open literature that would count as a 'theory' of intelligence assessment . Certainly if by 'positive theory' we mean a robust and heuristic set of propositions relating causes and effects - e.g., condition x predicts y predicts y with probability
 We may justly wonder whether any such thing is possible in principle . And we may also wonder whether such a thing could be possible in theory .
 The very difficulty of operationalizing the notion of 'success' and 'failure' would seem an insurmountable obstacle, the author says .
 Intelligence analysts are not in the business of drawing logically-necessary conclusions about behavior on the basis of evidence generally knowable to be sufficient for that task, they say .
 Leaders of states do not make decisions under constraints sufficiently numerous and sufficiently knowable to make talk of the 'probabilities' of their choosing alternative courses of action objective meaningful . Leaders of state do not discuss the 'possibility' of choosing alternative course of action, they say .
 Such language conveys information not about the target, but about the analyst, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Sutter: "I'm not sure what I'm looking for, but what I want to know"
 McCone and his subordinates at the Office of National Estimates debated whether Khrushchev was 'likely' or 'unlikely' to deploy MRBMs to Cuba . They articulated differences in their own fears and beliefs .
 There was no objectively knowable 'likelihood' that he would do anything in particular, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev was a complicated man with a mind of his own, not some automaton preprogrammed according to a 'Soviet' behavioral algorithm . McCone was right for bad reasons, and analysts were wrong for less-bad reasons .
 Betts is clearly correct that 'egative or descriptive theory the empirical understanding of how intelligence systems make mistakes is well developed' if by this he means there are many different bodies of theory upon which to draw in order to try to explain errors .
 The style of argument whereby one assesses the 'goodness of fit' of a body of propositions well-established in one domain with the empirical details of a particular case in another does not lead to the kind of cumulation or generalization to which positive science aspires .
 Theory supplies us with concepts and cause-effect propositions in terms of which to understand it . It is often possible to say that a body of theory can help us make sense of an otherwise puzzling event .
 Without a positive theory of intelligence assessment, it is difficult to know how to construct normative theory . The author says that intelligence assessment is a "positive theory"
 'Official post mortems of intelligence blunders inevitably produce recommendations for reorganization and changes in operating norms' 'Not only can we not be certain that we would have avoided one mistake had the organization and process of intelligence been different in the particular case at hand, but our tinkering may
 Recognizing that there is a performance limit to intelligence, and that intelligence assessment is an art rather than a science, should certainly induce caution against lofty expectations .
 The greater appreciation of human judgment and perception can cultivate a useful circumspection in intelligence assessment . But there is one general phenomenon characteristic of human judgement and perception that can cultivate circumspection, intelligence assessment.
 Before closing, we will touch upon it and reflect upon how it might bear on practice . We will touch on it again and reflect on it .
 Meno asked Socrates, 'How will you look for it ... when you do not know at all what it is?', he did not make the mere 'debater's argument' for which Socrates chided him . Meno made the same argument as Socrates .
 We court infinite regress and the disturbing conclusion that knowledge is not possible at all . Once we allow some prior familiarity, we court infinite regression .
 In any case, the metaphysical presuppositions of Socrates's answer seem in no less want of justification than the answer itself . Socrates's answers seem to be in no more want for justification than that of the question .
 The paradox remains unresolved, though its contours and implications are now clearer, thanks to the efforts of Gadamer, Quine, Chomsky, and others . The paradox is unresolved, but the contours of the implications of the paradox remain clearer .
 There are many vocabularies to use when describing and exploring the phenomenon . Many angles from which to look at it can be used to explore it .
 Fischer describes it in the language of cognitive psychology, but we could just as well do so in structural sociology, semiotics, cultural anthropology, or hermeneutics . Fischer describes the situation in a language of structural sociology or semiotics .
 This does not necessarily mean that analysts will have an easy time trying to achieve some 'perspective on perspective' However, analysts will not be able to predict how the world will react to the latest developments .
 There was a failure of estimative empathy, of viewing the situation as the Soviet leaders did as they made their decision to place missiles in Cuba . Today, I believe it is clear that there was a . failure to . estimate the situation, he said .
 It is now evident that deterrence of a US attack on Cuba was also a consideration of major if not equal importance . In particular, even if Soviet considerations of redressing the unfavorable strategic global balance for defensive and offensive purposes was paramount .
 The failure to see the situation through Soviet (to say nothing of Cuban) eyes blinded the U.S. intelligence community as a whole to that significant factor . Yet the failure to . see the . situation through . Soviet eyes blinded the United States intelligence .
 American intelligence estimators should have recognized a Soviet incentive to defend Cuba against a plausible American threat well before the Soviet decision to deploy missiles was made . U.S. intelligence estimates should have been able to predict a plausible threat from Russia .
 Garthoff supposes this might have given the President additional reasons to try to forestall it by means of earlier and stronger warnings .
 Garthoff suggests that this was an avoidable mistake, however, we are not so sure . If he means to suggest this was avoidable, it would be a mistake, we would be surprised .
 There were many reasons why U.S. intelligence did not and could not easily empathize with Khrushchev . There were also reasons why United States intelligence didn't want to empathize .
 It took the shock of the Cuban missile crisis to demonstrate to U.S. officials that they badly misunderstood him . Even then they did not appreciate exactly how they had misunderstood him, he says .
 The paradox of knowledge must incline us to disagree with Fischer that there is a useful distinction to make between theory-driven and data-driven thinking . It is difficult enough to empathize with an adversary in retrospect; it is asking a great deal of analysts .
 We can only make sense of the world on the basis of some prior understanding . We can't understand the world without prior understanding. We need to be able to understand it better. We are here to make sense .
 Understanding must always, at the same time, be frustrated by them . Yet understanding must always be frustrating by them, as well as being frustrated .
 All intelligence communities would like to minimize the frustration, and to tip the balance between knowledge of self and knowledge of other in the direction of the latter . Intelligence communities want to minimize frustration .
 Betts is certainly correct that intelligence failures are inevitable, but he concludes that the inherent limits of intelligence assessment suggest that we are unlikely to realize more than marginal benefits from procedural innovation . Betts concludes that intelligence assessment is unlikely to be able to achieve more .
 Fatalism may be appropriate if we insist upon thinking of 'better' intelligence as an improvement in success, or as a purely intellectual measure of the accuracy of an intelligence community's judgments .
 Intelligence may be able to improve the effectiveness of intelligence simply by keying on possible sources of intellectual error . But we may also improve intelligence dramatically simply by identifying intellectual errors .
 Intelligence assessment is heavily dependent upon assumptions and specific modes of inference . Policy makers should be more fully aware of these assumptions, policy makers should know them .
 National leaders operate on the basis of certain assumptions about the world, writes Andrew Hammond . National leaders are often sophisticated analysts in their own right, he says .
 Khrushchev appears to have relied upon his own analysis most heavily, and Kennedy least . There is ample evidence of this on all sides in the Cuban missile crisis, certainly .
 All leaders are, some extent, their own analysts, and are confronted with the task of having to make sense of intelligence assessments . But leaders are also confronted with making sense of assessments which may reinforce their own expectations .
 Most, perhaps, are too busy to do this even should they wish to do so, and must be content to receive the intelligence community's distilled wisdom . Most of the world's intelligence community is likely to be content with its distilled wisdom.
 Few, we suspect, think hard about their own assumptions, beliefs, and modes of inference, let alone those of their intelligence analysts . But relatively few think about their assumptions, and even those of intelligence analysts, and accordingly most have but dim appreciation of the underlying points of, and reasons
 A political leader with strong beliefs and a high degree of selfconfidence may simply dismiss as flawed an intelligence report . The intelligence report may be dissonant with his or her own judgments, a political leader may dismiss it as flawed .
 Given enough points of disagreement, this would naturally lead to an intelligence-policy rift . Over time, given enough disagreement, it would lead to a rift in the U.S.
 Intelligence analysts should flag the assumptions and inference patterns undergirding their estimates . This would enable policy makers to see more easily why they agreed or disagreed . Intelligence analysts would be able to improve the rigor and consistency of estimates .
 In some cases this might even lead to a productive dialogue between policy makers and analysts on crucial assumptions . In other cases, it could lead to productive dialogue on key assumptions .
 Former Chairman of the National Intelligence Council, Joseph S Nye Jr, required intelligence estimates to identify and flag the crucial assumptions upon which they were based . This was precisely the rationale for an intriguing innovation instituted by the former Chairman of . the former chairman of the . Intelligence Council .
 Intelligence community initially resisted the requirement, but came to regard it as salutary for helping structure and clarify their own assessments . The intelligence community now regards the requirement as useful for their own assessment .
 For policy makers, it provided several points at which to engage an otherwise terse and remote summary document . The document is a remote and remote document, but it has several key points to engage policy makers .
 As policy makers bear the ultimate burden of responsibility, anything that helps them to better understand intelligence and the presuppositions of policy is a potentially important contribution .
 These practices would help prime policy makers appreciate the performance limits of intelligence, and to integrate estimates more fully with their own judgments .
 The changes would preserve intelligence estimates intact for policy makers . They would preserve the intelligence community's distilled wisdom, but also preserve appendices . The change would be good for policy-makers who have neither the time nor inclination to peruse appendices.
 The main attractiveness of the practice lies in its potential for engaging decision makers in the intelligence-policy process . The practice could be used to engage decision makers with the intelligence process .
 No adjustment to the presentation and content of estimates stands even a remote chance of improving intelligence performance . Political leaders ignore, manipulate, lead, or censor their intelligence services, writes Peter Bergen .
 Both Amuchastegui and Fursenko and Naftali provide ample evidence of pathological intelligence-policy relationships caused by meddling or overconfident leaders .
 This serves to underscore the importance of recalling that effective policy requires a certain disposition on the part of political leaders, as well as a certain competence from professional intelligence analysts .
 The wide variation evident in the three intelligence policy relationships examined in this volume strikes us as utterly typical of intelligence-policy relationships in general . The wide variations evident in these relationships struck us as "typical" in general.
 If so, this may be the only sense in which the Cuban missile crisis was run-of-the-mill . It may be only sense that the Cuban crisis was a run-on-mill.
 Certain events reflect the significant dimensions of all your life, mirroring your entire history in a passing moment . Certain events may mirror the dimensions of your entire life .
 Throughout we will cite the essays in this volume by author, without title . Throughout the essays are cited in the book by author without title.
 Two years later, he still believed this, despite the change in administration and the experience of the Bay of Pigs . He still believed that, even after the change of administration .
 Cuba on the Brink: Castro, The Missile Crisis, and the Soviet Collapse passimim. Noonday 1990; . James G Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch, . and . Bruce Allyn . Welch, James G. Blight .
 Evidence suggests Khrushchev did not seriously begin to consider a nuclear deployment to Cuba until April or May 1962 . Planning for the operation did not begin until shortly thereafter, according to the report .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that Khrushchev must have conceived the deployment much earlier . The Soviet Union a notoriously sluggish and bureaucratic state could not have planned and carried out such an ambitious redeployment in a mere 90 days .
 Cuban intelligence apparently believed that the deployment was substantially complete by mid-September, but did not appreciate that the first Soviet MRBMs in Cuba only became operational in late October .
 While this would still be a significant accomplishment for a notoriously sluggish state, it could not be considered downright unbelievably rapid . The state is notoriously sluggish and bureaucratic state .
 The delegation assesses the prospect that strategic nuclear missiles could be deployed in Cuba without the U.S. discovering them . The delegation also assessed the prospect of deploying them without the United States finding them .
 Fursenko and Naftali are correct to state that Alekseev 'was consulted on the project' if by this they mean he was not brought in on the deliberations before Khrushchev had made up his mind to propose the deployment to Castro .
 Khrushchev asked Alekseev how he thought Castro would react to the offer, but he didn't know how he would react . Khrrushchev made the decision to make the offer to Castro . The story goes back to Khrushchchev's visit to Moscow .
 Cubans like the Americans understood the Soviet Union as a coherent rational actor . But even if it were incorrect, it would be natural, because the Cubans understood it better than the Americans .
 Che's next documented voyage to the Soviet Union took place in late August 1962 . Che made his first voyage to Soviet Union in August 1962, when he was in Moscow .
 The chief purpose of that trip was to propose making the deployment public . It was the first time the U.S. government has made such a public announcement . The U.N. Security Council is considering making the decision public .
 It seems unlikely that Amuchastegui is thinking of this particular trip, as increasing levels of military aid were not on the agenda . The trip was not expected to take place at all .
 There is ample evidence that the KGB played at best a minor role throughout the Cold War . The KGB played a major role in the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 It would appear from the somewhat thinner testimonial and documentary record on Soviet military intelligence that the GRU was marginalized as well . The GRU may have been marginalized as also, according to the documentary .
 President James Monroe warned European states against any future attempts to colonize the Americas . Monroe declared that any attempt by the nations of Europe to extend their system into the hemisphere was 'dangerous to our peace and safety'
 Khrushchev believed that American participation in World Wars I and II represented a renunciation of the Monroe Doctrine . Troyanovsky would have known that no one in the U.S. so considered it .
 The KGB seems to have had a fairly good understanding of President Kennedy, his attitude toward Cuba, and the constraints under which he operated domestically . The KGB, despite a lack of highly-placed sources, seemed to have been able to understand Kennedy's thinking .
 Senior members of the Kennedy administration unanimously agree that had Khrushchev attempted to deploy the missiles openly, the U.S. would have been in a much more difficult position . It is interesting to note that .
 The secrecy and deception surrounding the deployment enabled the U.S. to characterize it as sinister and aggressive . It enabled the United States to characterize the deployment as sinister, aggressive, and to deflect attention from the fact that what the Soviet Union and Cuba were doing was entirely legal .
 Graham Allison has suggested that organizational routines may explain the failure of the Soviet military to camouflage the missile sites effectively . Allison suggests organizational routines could explain why the military was unable to camouflage missile sites .
 An explanation more consistent with the available evidence is incompetence . An explanation is incompetence, not incompetence .
 Castro has spoken in general terms about his conviction that the United States, once ready, would pounce . Castro has said he believes the U.S. would seek to do so without warning .
 Evidently he was determined not to make the mistake Stalin had made in 1941 of failing to prepare to meet an assault that could be launched at any time . Stalin made the same mistake in 1941 .
 Fischer discusses in her essay, although his study predates much of the research upon which Fischer draws . Fischer's essay is based on his study, which she says predates some of her research .
 Intelligence communities are often engaged in a zero-sum strategic interaction . Success for one logically implies failure for the other, Betts says . Betts also draws attention to the fact that intelligence communities often engage in a 'zero-sum'
 Michael Handel, 'Intelligence and the Problem of Strategic Surprise', Journal of Strategic Studies 7/3 230 . Handel: Intelligence and the problem of strategic surprise .
 Several Soviet merchant ships with large hatches en route to Cuba were riding high in the water, indicating bulky but relatively light cargo, such as missiles . In particular, it was observed that several Soviet ships were riding in high water .
 Some of these ships were seen unloading normal cargoes, but others were reported to be unloaded at night, again a possible indicator of a cargo of special sensitivity . Some of the ships have been reported to have been unloading at night .
 US intelligence did notice all of this at the time, but it may be doubted whether the CIA had compelling reasons in 1962 to regard it all as more significant than they did .
 Monday-morning quarterbacking is much easier for football fans than for critics of intelligence, because in football it is possible to play the percentages . In football, it's possible to use the percentages to win the game .
 Critics of intelligence do not ordinarily have good-quality base rate information with which to second-guess intelligence professionals . Critics don't have good quality base rate data with which they can secondguess the intelligence .
 One possible rebuttal is that the CIA should have known that Khrushchev would not consult his American specialists, and that they should have factored this into their estimate . The CIA should've factored in that factoring this into the estimate .
 This reply begs all the difficult questions to which we allude under the previous head. This reply, however, begs all of the . questions to be answered, but it begs all . the . difficult questions .
 President Kennedy chose to deliberate for a week before deciding his response to the Soviet deployment . He might have done as Cuban intelligence had anticipated .
 On 16 Oct., the mood in the White House cabinet room was decidedly belligerent . The mood was so belligerent that the mood at the cabinet room became belligerent.
 The timing of the U.S. response was not something Cuban intelligence controlled, it might well have had a significant effect on our retrospective assessment of their performance, it has been suggested .
 We are technically still not in a position to determine whether that estimate was correct . Since this was an open-ended prediction, we are still not able to determine if it was correct.
 Note that Garthoff does not make this statement specifically in reply to the Stennis Report . The Stennis report is published by CNN iReport.com .
 The large number of false reports of missile sightings by Cuban agents and refugees had led CIA analysts to believe that Cuban sources were unreliable, and that their reports had ulterior purposes . CIA analysts had believed that Cuban reports were unreliable .
 It might be replied here that certain kinds of behavior unambiguously telegraph intentions . It might also be replied that certain kind of behavior clearly telegraphs intentions .
 We can infer reliably that a leader who masses troops on the border in a full battle-ready posture intends to attack. For example, we can infer that a . leader who . masses troops in a battle ready posture intends . to attack .
 This behavior, however, is fully consistent with other intentions, such as to provoke an attack, to intimidate, to signal acute concern, and so forth . This behavior is consistent with others' intentions, e.g., to provoke or to intimidate .
 U.S. analysts and policy makers had insufficient evidence to draw reliable conclusions about what Soviet leaders might be willing to consider by way of retaliation for American military action against Cuba .
 N.B. that Garthoff argues, on the basis of present knowledge, that this is what the estimate should have concluded, 80 per cent of the world's population would have died .
 U.S. agreed secretly to withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey as a quid pro quo . We would choose some word other than 'compel', in view of the fact .
 We should qualify this last statement by noting that we do not know whether U.S. signals intelligence had collected anything that would have clarified any of these matters . We should also note that we don't know whether United States intelligence collected anything .
 Defining 'an event' spatio-temporally is, to some extent, arbitrary, and is perhaps usefully understood as a function of socio-cultural propensities . Defining an event is, by definition, is an attempt to make it an event .
 We have remarked before upon the different understandings of the crisis in the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba, and the significance of the different names by which it is known in each country . We have also remarked on the different understanding of the situation in the U.S. and
 We have argued that culturally-rooted differences in problemrepresentation help account for its genesis and greatly complicated its resolution . We have also argued that cultural-rooting differences in the problem are to blame .
 By contrasting US intelligence performance with respect to Cuba over the period 1958-61 and 1961-62 — with the Bay of Pigs and the Cuban missile crisis as foci — we can meaningfully conclude that the CIA performed poorly in one period and well in another . We can learn something of
 Military shipments from the USSR, after a buildup in 1961, were lower in the first half of 1962 . Military shipments to the USSR were lower than in 1961 .
 The purge itself was consistent with diametrically opposite motivations, the U.S. intelligence simply leapt to the conclusion that it implied one in particular . The purge is consistent with the opposite motivations .
 Garthoff considers the U.S. judgment 'intuitive', but this, of course, is merely another way of saying that it was more consistent with suppressed assumptions . The United States judgment was 'intuitive' but it was 'more consistent'
 This is a complicated claim whose full exegesis would take us very far afield . The claim is complicated, but it is worth a lot of thought to consider . This is not the first time we have seen this claim .
 Leaders of states make decisions on the basis of idiosyncratic beliefs and judgments about the lessons of history and how the world works . They do so consciously in reaction to the historical record, often precisely so as to surprise .
 Important choices are often unprecedented, or have important unique features, such as the historical record provides no basis for estimating a probability distribution .
 'Expected utility theory' can serve as the basis for intelligence assessment, political scientists say . Political scientists say it can be used as a basis for an intelligence assessment . Political scientist says 'expected utility theory can be applied to intelligence assessment'
 Black's point-prediction rate of over 90 per cent is based on a particular expected-to-be model based on Black's median voter .
 Bueno de Mesquita's model is not an 'expected utility' theory at all . It is merely a computational device for aggregating subjective judgments of actors' weighted preferences .
 Lakatos argued that we should prefer theory x to theory y when x explains everything y explains, plus additional facts . Lakatos argues that theory y explains everything in theory x explains, but not everything else .
 'Intellectual culture' has a profound effect on political judgments of all kinds, including intelligence assessments . It would certainly appear that what might be thought of as 'intellectual culture', has an impact on intelligence assessments.
 In the Western world, at least five stock assumptions about how international politics works, and about how leaders make decisions, tend to dominate . The 'Realist' understanding of international politics tends to dominate.
 All states always seek power; that leaders are rational and rational; that all leaders understand and respond to threats and incentives . The adversary's behavior is always intentional; that the adversary's actions are always coordinated and meaningful .
 Leaders and analysts try to make sense of an adversary's behavior, they infer evil intent from actions they dislike . They dismiss as disingenuous and instrumental arguments adversaries make that appeal to notions of justice or fairness .
 These assumptions exert a powerful spin on ambiguous data, and can lead to tragic misjudgments . The assumptions are powerful enough to make a tragic mistake, experts say .
 Khrushchev's anxieties may not have been effective in the absence of credible offers to alleviate his anxieties . It is difficult to imagine what those offers might have been, given the political realities of the day .
 Kennedy did not need the impetus of an intelligence assessment to communicate more clearly with Khrushchev . Kennedy's intelligence assessment was not the impetus for the intelligence assessment . Kennedy did need to communicate clearly with the Soviet leader .
 The CIA raised the alarm earlier, it might have been able to serve policy even better than it did . Yet, conceivably, had the alarm been raised earlier, the CIA might have served policy better if it had raised alarm .
 Even after the shock of the missile crisis, retrospective evaluations consistently underestimated Khrushchev's deterrent and defensive motivations . But as Garthoff also notes extensively, as well as the shock, even after the crisis, they underestimated his deterrent .
 It seems to us undeniable that the self-awareness of the U.S. government perhaps of the entire country was deficient, and so deficient with Cuban perceptions of the United States, as to be laughable .
 From the American perspective, Cuba was simply absent from the Cuban missile crisis . From the U.S. perspective, the crisis was not a crisis, but a crisis .
 It is difficult to imagine this having had much effect on America's Cuba policy, given the grip that the rational deterrence/Cold War perspective had on the American imagination at the time .
 Cuban intelligence concluded that an American attack was not imminent after the Bay of Pigs . The pattern of activity conducted under the rubric of Operation 'Mongoose' seemed ill-designed to prepare for an American invasion .
 Clearly DGI drew heavily upon assumptions about American behavior when attempting to predict American behavior . DGI also drew heavily on assumptions that American behavior would be different .
 Data-driven thinking, even if it were possible, would have led to no particular conclusion at all . Since American behavior was consistent with different interpretations, there would have been no conclusion from the study, he says .
 Khrushchev would have reached the same conclusion as Cuban intelligence if he had relied upon a different set of assumptions with which to interpret ambiguous U.S. behavior . Instead, we would suggest that we would have found the same conclusions .
 Cuban intelligence, on the other hand, inferred Soviet motives from the available data . The discrepancy between the dire Soviet assessments of the American threat and Cuban assessments that such a threat was receding was a mystery .
 We understand Cuban judgments here as no less theory-driven than American judgments . Cuban judgments are no more theory driven than U.S. judgments, Cuban officials say .
 According to Amuchastegui's account, Cubans had been somewhat suspicious of Soviet intentions all along . The hypothesis was that Soviet policy with respect to Cuba was driven by narrow self-interest rather than altruism .
 Cuban intelligence was never wedded to the altruism assumption and had no difficulty assimilating the available evidence to an alternative assumption . Cuban intelligence always had an alternative to the assumption of altruism .
 Soviet dissimulation did not logically imply that the Soviet motive in deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba was to gain a strategic advantage over the U.S. Note also that Soviet dissimulation did not logically necessarily imply that the Soviet .
 We are not clear on the chief reason for the resistance, though it is possible to imagine that estimators feared it would be onerous, distracting, or superfluous . It is not clear why the resistance to the project was being resisted .
 U.S. intelligence assessment and White House decisionmaking during the Cuban missile crisis was the partial success achieved in relaxing certain common assumptions . The assumptions that the adversary is a 'unitary' and 'rational' actor were made during the crisis .
 US policy makers 'prudently allowed for the possibility that even if Moscow instructions prohibited initiative of Soviet forces in Cuba to fire the nuclear missiles there' in case of an American air strike or invasion any surviving Soviet missiles might be fired .
 U.S. policy makers were encouraged to relax assumptions about Soviet behavior in part because of their own experience during the crisis . In our view, United States policy makers relaxed these assumptions because they had own experience of Soviet behavior .
 It would have helped minimize the dangers of post-hoc rationalization characteristic of several prominent retrospective studies that attempted to make sense of Khrushchev's calculations .