 In letter of President Kennedy on Ootober 27 and of Presiisr Khrushchev on October 28, 1962, undertakings were iscde regarding the settlemnt of the Cuban crisis .
 USSR would agree to renove from Cuba, under appropriate United Hations observation and supervision, all weapons systems capable of offensive use . The USSR would undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba .
 The President expressed his confidence that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would bs prepared to do likewise . The President also expressed his . confidence that others of the . Western . Hemisphere would also do likewise, he said .
 U.S. notes the statement made by the Soviet Union that all msdiun and intermediate range missiles, all nuclear weapons *u.i components have been removed from Cuba,"" that all IL-28 bomber aircraft will be removed by December 20th .
 USSR has stated its intention to withdraw all military units and personnel plaoed there for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems . It notes also that the USSR has said it intends to withdraw .
 The U.S. notes further the Btatehients of the USSR that no weapons capable of offensive use will be introduced into Cuba in the future .
 The undertakings in the President's letter of Ootober 21, thsrt the United lationa wcaLd be enabled to verify the removal of missiles and bombers and the destruction of sites, have not been fulfilled . United Hations safeguards would be agreed upon to ensure
 The undertakings u 'k do not alter or impair the rights and obligations contained in the United nations Charter, £p£J the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, or other treaties to ^B*oth off which the United States is a party .
 U38 end would undertake, with, suifcabla aafaguarda, to halt the further introduction of auch vacpona aystoos into Cuba . United Nations obaarvation and supervision, all '^sapcna zj^:-:
 02NY Non-responsive Info. In PAI^ - "I'm not responding to any of the above's requests for assistance"
 A niniaua inspection procedure arr*"" f ;.o]-.eratica vlth thj US3H, undav :z\v* ur.i:ad St^o naval '•• . n#&V ttfflS 53**