 PUB Type Guides Classroom Teacher Guides Guide Guide . Price MF01/PC01 Plus Postage .
 Both countries feared that one would target the other with atomic warheads placed on missiles . Both feared that they would target each other with nuclear warheads placed in missiles . The two countries fought over nuclear weapons .
 Fear of a nuclear holocaust occupied the thinking of many people as they went about their daily activities . Fear of the holocaust filled the minds of people around the world with the fear of nuclear war .
 As a member of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during President John F Kennedy's administration, you are familiar with these fears that U.S. security could be so compromised or even lost by the presence of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles in the hands of enemies .
 A U-2 airplane flyover has provided aerial photographs of Soviet missiles in Cuba, 1962 . The U.S. President's office says a flyover of Cuba provided aerial photos .
 Your task is to advise President Kennedy about an appropriate and effective U.S. response to the apparent Soviet missile installation in Cuba . Your task was to advise the president about the appropriate response .
 Your duty is to prepare a policy brief with recommendations for U.S. reaction to the news from the U-2 airplane .
 Policy brief contains background information to support a particular position which you recommend to the President . Policy brief is a policy brief with a brief of support for a position you recommend .
 Activity Plan outlines the process for implementing the task . Provides an extensive resource list, gives learning advice; discusses evaluation and evaluation questions .
 The teacher notes give grade level/unit; discuss California history/social studies standards; state a lesson purpose; suggest length of class periods; and list teacher resources .
 Plan outlines detailed teaching steps and suggests lesson extensions . Plan also outlines detailed lesson plans .
 Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made from the original document . Reproductions of this article have been made from a reproduction of the original article .
 Points of view or opinions stated in this document do not necessarily represent 1 official OERI position or policy . To the EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES. Information Center 2 .
 The relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union has grown increasingly strained . The relationship has been strained since the end of World War II . This week's episode explores the relationship between Russia and the United States .
 American civilians are engaged in sky-watching to provide warning that missiles are on the way . Both countries fear that the other will tar, enemy with atomic warheads placed on missiles .
 Schoo are taught to ""duck and cover"" to ""protect themselves from an attack . Schoo have been taught to 'duck' and 'cover' to protect themselves from attacks .
 The generation born in the late 1 in the 1950s has become known as the first atomic or nuclear generation . Generation born in 1950s is known as "the first atomic generation"
 Fear of a nuclear holocaust oc thinking of many people as they go about their daily activities . Fear of the holocaust is thought to be thought of by many people in the world .
 Some individuals and families even are l costly fallout shelters in cellars or backyards . Some individuals are even using cellars and backyards as fallout shelters .
 As a member of EX -COMM, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during Preside Kennedy's Administration, you are very familiar with these fears that United States' security could be compromised or even lost by the presence of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles .
 The Bay of Pigs 3 BEST COPY AVAILABLE the construction of the Berlin Wall seem to be occurring frequently in the 1960s .
 CNN's John Sutter says something very significant is afoot in the White House . He says it's a sign that something is very significant in Washington .
 Aerial photographs of U-2 flyover Cul provide compelling evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . U.2 flew over Cuba in 1950s and '60s .
 Declassified January 15, 1989, this document reveals details of a proposed overthrow of Castro . You are a member of EX-COMM .
 Your task is to advise Presideni about an appropriate and effective U.S. response to the apparent Soviet missile installations in Cuba . Your task was to advise President Obama on an appropriate response .
 TI President will address the nation and the world on Monday, October 22, 1962, revealing the existence Soviet missile capacity in Cuba and detailing the U.S. response . TI President reveals the existence of the Cuban missile capacity .
 Your duty is to prepare a policy brief your recommendations for the United States reaction to the U2 news .
 Policy brief contains background infon support for a particular position which you will recommend to the President . Policy brief is a policy brief with a background background to support a position .
 You will read from this I important meeting, or possibly a series of meetings, in which you make the President aware of the resul research . You will also be able to make a meeting with the President .
 You and the other members of EX-COMM will present your briefs to President Kennedy on October 2 . Following this presentation, there will be a debate on the primary and secondary issues involved in draf United States response to the potential missile threat .
 For specific requirements the brief must meet, see Student Handout #2 which is at the end of the section of this lesson . The brief is required to meet specific requirements .
 This committee is chaired by John F Kennedy, to discuss and list the information you need to know to properly address the task .
 There is not enough time for each member of Ex-COMM to research everything, it will be necessary each member to do a piece of the research . Ex-ComM members will be required to do the research themselves .
 EX-COMM will discuss the kinds of information that each member of the group brings to the table . The group will also discuss the types of information they bring to the the table. Then, the group will discuss what each member has to say .
 Include the information in your brief statements of the question involved in th crisis . Include a brief statement of interest in the crisis .
 You should expect your perceptions of the question to change as more information becomes available .
 This listing of Need-to-know Questions will form the first page of your brief . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Remember that you are arguing for an historical position from a particular point of view . Remember that it is not just arguing for a historical position .
 Ex-COMM will agree on a problem statement and then have a debate 6 the possible responses to the problem . They will then agree on the possible solutions to each problem .
 Organize and write the speech that the President will give to the nation on October 22,191 7 . Write the speech for the President on October 7 . Organize, write and write a speech for President Obama .
 The following World Wide Web addresses will provide detailed and useful information to get started . The following Web addresses provide you with detailed information about how to use the Web .
 Remember that your research time is limited and that you may use search engines such as Yaho AltaVista to locate specific information beyond what is provided below .
 You will learn much about team crisis-management, nuclear warheads and nuclear threats, damage control using careful writing and speaking, constructing a logical and cohesive argument .
 Keep in mind that there is a deadline and that research time on the computer during class time limited . Research time is limited during class .
 Careful use of words and ideas must dominate your brief and your presentation/debate to the committee . Use the appropriate language and ideas to dominate the brief and presentation .
 Your opinion means very little unless it is supported with solid evidence/reasoning . Your opinion should be supported by solid evidence and reasoning, says author .
 If you are new to the Internet, ask questions of teammates who have some of this knowledge . If you want to learn more about computers, ask them to share your knowledge with others .
 Your teacher is also playing a role in this simulation-- the role of observer/coach/advisor .
 "I feel I to ask for help, especially with the Internet, but not for solutions," he says . "I'm not asking for help. I'm asking for solutions, but for help," he adds .
 The Ex-COMM will develop a rubric to evaluate each member's contribution to advising the President . The rubric will be developed to assess the effectiveness of each member of the Ex-Comm .
 The students in the class will also use the rubric to assess each team's contribution to the fina President Kennedy's speech .
 It is time to reflect on our experience Ex-COMM member and to write some notes for our memoirs .
 Describe the sequence of events during the last two weeks of October, 1962, in as much detail as possible . Describe your contribution to the team effort as well as the quality and quantity of your contribution .
 Background information from your perspective and relevant to the crisis at hand . Background information for your perspective .
 Your rating is that of the severity of the crisis and a rationale for your rating . Your rating includes that of crisis severity and a reason for rating .
 Include a Need-to-Know page and include various statements of the problem . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Students will simulate or at least complete some research on one of the most important two-week perio( American History) American History .
 Five to eight class periods of research and four class periods to simulate EX-COMM's meetings/debates/creation of speech for Kennedy . Four to eight classes periods simulated EXCOMM meetings/Debates .
 Varying the team configuration from one committee member having research aides to multiple EX-COMMs will alter the time allotments needed . Variesing the time allotted to each member of the committee can alter the amount of time needed .
 If studen some or all of their research outside of class, the research time would be unnecessary . Students should be able to use their research time to find out more about themselves .
 The number of a( may also be changed in order to alter the time constraints . The time constraints are also changed .
 This process could also be shortened to two ( students research out of class and if only the EX-COMM debate is performed . This process is also possible to shorten to two .
 The Missiles of October is a made-for-television drama of the actual EX-COMM meetings durir crisis . The show is set to be shown in London .
 It may be shown before or after the simulation or be assigned as homework and/or extra cr. It may also be shown as homework or assigned as extra crs .
 Teacher asks class to imagine the most horrible crisis the world might face . Teacher asks students to imagine what the world would be facing .
 Allow people to express their fears and to separate what they know about such from what they do not know . Allow them to express fears and separate what you know from what you don't know .
 Narrow discussion to the idea of a nuclear threat/end-of-world scenario . "End of-world" scenario is a nuclear-threat scenario .
 F class consider how a government crisis management team might try to avert such a crisis . F class considers how a crisis might be averted by a government team of experts .
 Students should be familiar with the concept of War, the origins of the superpowers, communism and the Red Scare . Students should also learn about the origin of War .
 The student resources mentioned above are fairly equal beginning places for students . Students are encouraged to start with them at the beginning of the year .
 Students with a wide range of knowledge and abilities should be formed by the teacher . The teacher should form a group of students to form groups .
 Take time to learn about student computer knowledge and usag( the World Wide Web) Learn about students' knowledge about computer technology .
 At least one person in each group must be able to use Netscape Navigator Explorer to get around the Web .
 Simply playing with the Web is very different from doing it on-line . Simply playing . with the . Web is different from playing with . the Web .
 Students may teach themselves much of this knowledge while doing this project, but the2 will not be efficient immediately . Students may learn much of it while doing it, but they will not learn it immediately .
 Help them increase their ability to hit the needed targets by providing instruction in keyword and phrase searching . Help them use keywords and phrases to increase their accuracy .
 Encourage students to take the time to re-search instructions that each engine requires . Students should also take a look at the search instructions for each engine .
 Try to place students with learning/language deficiencies with more capable students . Also try to place pupils with learning and language deficiencies with capable students.
 Ask them to use a scale of 1 to 4 with 1 being the lowest point and 4 being the highest . 1 is the lowest and 4 is the highest point of a scale .
 Ask them to suggest what a student would do if he could earn a 4 for historical research .
 Focus on products since interior motivation cannot be observed al therefore evaluated by others . Focus on . products since . interior motivation can be observed by others, therefore evaluation can be . evaluated by other .
 Doing this step, though it will take some time, will most likely produce a higher quality product/performance than skipping it . It will be more likely to produce a better quality product than skipping the step .
 Be sure students have a provisional but clear understanding of what the problem is and what th need to know . Students should be prepared to deal with the problem .
 Help students create a speech that is appropriate to the 1960s and that contains a clear Ameri response to the crisis . Help students to create a . speech that . includes a . clear response to . the crisis.
 Students work out an efficient way to write the speech their JFK will give . Help students work out how to write their JFK's speech .
 Use the questions in the Reflection and Conclusion sections of this unit to discuss what student learned in terms of historical content and crisis management and team process . Use the Questions and Reflection sections to discuss the lessons students learned .
 Students should have some computer literacy skills before attempting this unit . Information Literacy skills should be required for the research component .
 The teacher should alert the librarian to make available materials on this topic . The librarian should also alert the teacher to make a list of materials .
 Specific skills addressed include defining a problem; planning a research strategy or strategies; judging the quality of information/resources located .
 Suggestions can be done by the entire class, by different groups, as extra credit or make-up assignments for students absent during the simulation .
 They can be an addition to the simulation or can be performed afterward . The simulation can be added to or performed after . They can also be added into the simulation .
 Have students conduct an oral history interview with one or more people who were of various agf this crisis . Students conduct oral history interviews with people of various backgrounds .
 It is important to instruct students in proper oral history techniques . It is also important to teach students how to use oral history .
 Have individuals or groups research the responses of other than intelligence community and/or governmental individuals and report to the class . Have individuals research responses to other people's responses .
 See the SCORE 10th grade Unit , World War II and its Consequences . after it is posted on the W4 mirror unit on the international responses of countries or individuals .
 Have the class discuss how a crisis like this, if it occurred today, would be similar or different . Have a class discussion about how it would be different or different if it happened today .
 Dr. Carol Krup Poly High School,Riverside Unified School District SCORE-CH/SSP Technology Academy 1997 .