 Malietoa Tanumafili II and Tupua Tamasese Mea'ole were named as the two heads of state . The two fautua were named by the two head of state.
 Brian Poole and the Tremeloes auditioned for Decca . Decca opted to sign the other group that auditioned .
 The Anglican Church of Australia became autocephalous, separate from the Church of England . It was headed by its own primate, the Archbishop of Brisbane, Sir Reginald .
 Alabama Crimson Tide defeated Arkansas Razorbacks 10-3 in the Sugar Bowl . The Crimson Tide was crowned the unofficial national college football champion .
 Illinois becomes the first United States State to decriminalize homosexual activity . Illinois is the first U.S. state in the history of decriminalizing homosexual activity.
 In his annual report to the NAACP, Executive Secretary Roy Wilkins praised United States President John F Kennedy's ""personal role"" in advancing civil rights, but said that he was ""sorely disappointed"" by the President's failure to honor his promise to ban racial discrimination in federally assisted
 Trevor Taylor won the 1962 Cape Grand Prix in South Africa . Trevor Taylor finished 0.2 seconds ahead of Jim Clark .
 Fidel Castro and several other officials received a decree of excommunication from the Roman Catholic Church in 1961 for impeding bishops in their work and for violence against clergymen . Joseph Edward Woodall, 65, English recipient of the Victoria Cross, died in Alba Adriatica .
 The ad contained favorable quotes, citing the names of seven well-known theater critics . The ad was published in New York City on Broadway .
 André Rouvoet, Dutch politician, Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands 2007-10; in Hilversum Died: Hans Lammers, 82, Nazi leader and Chief of the Reich Chancellery, 1933–1945 .
 Clarence Gideon sent a letter, written in pencil, to the U.S. Supreme Court, asking them to reverse his conviction for burglary . Gideon said he had not been given the right to an attorney . Gideon was convicted of burglary on the grounds that he should have been given an attorney
 The Supreme Court granted certiorari and issued the landmark decision of Gideon Wainwright in March 1963 . Gideon held that the Sixth Amendment guarantee of the right to assistance of counsel required the appointment of a lawyer for any person unable to afford one .
 The Los Angeles Mirror-News was started in 1948 as an afternoon tabloid newspaper printed by the owners of the Los Angeles Times . Massouda Jalal, Afghan politician and women's rights activist in Afghanistan, died January 6, 1962 .
 Kim Weon-Kee, South Korean Olympic wrestler, gold medalist in 1984, in Hampyeong Idrissa Djaló, Guinea-Bissau politician and one time presidential candidate . Marziyya Davudova, 60, Azerbaijani actress and People
 Overnight temperatures of 0.18 °C recorded during the morning at Benson, Oxfordshire and Woodford, Greater Manchester .
 A bomb exploded at the Paris apartment building where controversial existentialist author Jean-Paul Sartre lived . The bomb exploded in the building where the author lived . Jean-Sartre was a member of a group of prominent French intellectuals .
 Sartre was not home at the time, and his mother was not injured . Most of his unpublished manuscripts were destroyed in the fire .
 Lev Landau was seriously injured in an auto accident, leaving him in a coma for two months . Landau would win the Nobel Prize later in the year . The accident left Landau in a two-month coma .
 Landau survived, but was never able to return to work, and died on April 3, 1968 . Landau died in 1968 at the age of 50 .
 In the Harmelen train disaster, two trains collided, killing 91 people in the worst rail crash in Netherlands history . Aleksandr Dugin, Russian ideologist and advocate of reclaiming the former Russian Empire; in Moscow .
 An express train running from Leeuwarden to Amsterdam and a slower moving commuter train from Rotterdam struck each other at the same switching point after 9:18 am in a heavy fog .
 SEAL Team One, based in Coronado, California, served the Pacific Fleet . SEAL Team Two served the Atlantic Fleet out of Little Creek, Virginia . SEAL Teams One and Two will serve the Pacific and Atlantic Fleet .
 Khrushchev used the analogy of a wineglass filled to the point that it could overflow at any time . In a closed session at the Presidium, he delivered what was later referred to as the ""meniscus speech" The speech was made in a closed-door session at
 Khrushchev told the ministers that the U.S.R. was weaker militarily than the United States . He said the only way to compete was to maintain the threat that world tensions could spill over .
 Yugoslavian freighter Sabac was cut in two by the British steamer Dorington Court in a collision in the English Channel . The Yugoslavian ship was cut into two in the collision with the British ship .
 Rashidi Kawawa was appointed as the last Prime Minister of Tanganyika by President Julius Nyerere, who had formerly had both posts . Maximilian, Duke of Hohenberg, 59, was eldest son of Archduke Franz Ferdinand .
 The position of Prime Minister would be abolished on December 9, after which Tanganyika and Zanzibar had merged to form Tanzania .
 Kawawa would become the first Prime Minister of Tanzania when that post was created in 1972 . Kawawa became the first President of Tanzania in 1972 after becoming a member of the Tanzanian parliament .
 An avalanche on Mount Huascarán, the tallest peak in Peru killed 4,000 people . Cuba and the Soviet Union signed a trade pact in 1962 .
 Ranrahirca, which had only 50 survivors, would be rebuilt, then destroyed again in an earthquake and an even larger avalanche on May 31, 1970 . The town was destroyed by an earthquake, an avalanche and an avalanche .
 Majority Leader John W McCormack of Massachusetts is the 53rd Speaker of the House . Majority Leader McCormack was elected to fill the vacancy created by the death of Sam Rayburn .
 Eleven coal miners were killed in an explosion at a mine near Carterville, Illinois, in 1962 . The explosion killed 11 miners . The submarine was moored at Polyarny, conducting maintenance and pressurizing .
 At 8:20 am, a fire in the torpedo compartment detonated all twelve torpedoes, instantly destroying the submarine . The submarine was the first submarine to be destroyed by the explosion .
 Captain Anatoly Begeba, who had been outside, inspected the top of the sub, survived . Captain Anatole Begebi, who was outside, survived the crash .
 The 78 men inside the sub drowned as it sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea . 78 men were killed in the sinking of the sub .
 B-52H Stratofortress crewmembers broke 11 non-stop distance and course-speed records . Crewmembers successfully completed a more than 21-hour non-refueled flight over 12,500 miles .
 Nelson Mandela secretly left South Africa for the first time, as he was driven across the border to Botswana . Mandela was taken to the border in Botswana on his first trip to South Africa . Nelson Mandela was driven by a car driven by his wife and children .
 He went to Ethiopia to speak at a conference in Addis Ababa .
 President Kennedy told reporters at a press conference that American troops were not being used in combat . Three days later, President Kennedy said U.S. forces were not in combat in Vietnam .
 Indonesian soldiers have begun landing on West Irian, the semi-independent western side of New Guinea . The area is under the administration of the Netherlands, which is under Dutch rule .
 Ernie Kovacs, 42, was killed in a car accident while driving on Santa Monica Boulevard in 1962 . Richie Richardson, Antiguan cricketer and one time captain of the West Indies cricket team; in Five Islands Village, West Indies Village .
 Kovacs and his wife, Edie Adams, were driving home separately from a baby shower in honor of Mrs. Adams . Kovacs was driving home from the baby shower with his wife .
 At 2:00 in the morning, his station wagon skidded and crashed into a utility pole . The accident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 With the United States having halted its U-2 flights over the Soviet Union, the Republic of China began regular surveillance flights . The Black Cat Squadron was nicknamed by the U.S. Air Force .
 Albania allied itself with the People's Republic of China, as the two nations signed a trade pact . Albania's trade pact with China is the first of its kind in the world . Albania and China signed a pact in 2008 .
 Jackie Kennedy brought Charles Collingwood and a CBS News television crew into the White House for an unprecedented look at the American presidential residence . First Lady Jackie Kennedy invited the team to visit the president's residence .
 The tape of the visit was edited into the program ""A Tour of the White House with Mrs. Mrs. Obama" The tape was edited in the program .
 Dutch warship sank an Indonesian torpedo boat after it approached the disputed territory of West Irian, a Dutch colony claimed by Indonesia . Indonesia claims the territory, which is disputed by the Netherlands, and is claimed by the Dutch .
 After the United Kingdom sought to join the European Economic Community, the Meteorological Office first began using Celsius temperature values in its public weather information, following the Fahrenheit values .
 In October, the Celsius values were listed first, and by January 1, 1973, the government entered the EEC and completed its conversion to the metric system . Fahrenheit numbers were only used occasionally .
 Portugal abandoned the U.N. General Assembly due to the debate over its East African colony in Angola . Portugal left the United Nations General Assembly over the issue of its colony .
 The papyrus roll contains a commentary on philosophy and religion . It is the oldest surviving manuscript in Europe . It was written in the early 1800s and is the world's oldest surviving text book .
 The Our Lady of the Angels School fire killed 92 children and 3 nuns on December 1, 1958 in Chicago . A 13-year-old boy testified before a Chicago juvenile court judge and confessed .
 The boy said that he had asked to be excused from class, then tossed lit matches into a cardboard waste barrel filled with paper . He said he tossed the matches into the bin filled with cardboard .
 No charges were ever filed against the boy . After an investigation, the court concluded that the evidence did not support the boy's confession .
 A military coup in the Dominican Republic forced President Joaquín Balaguer to resign and to go into exile . Kenneth MacKenna, 62, American actor and film director, is credited with leading the coup .
 Earlier in the day, soldiers fired into a crowd of people protesting against the new regime, killing 8 people and wounding many more . Earlier in Santo Domingo, soldiers opened fire on a crowd protesting against a new regime .
 Balaguer had been the leader of a council of state with seven civilians, and had pledged to hold elections on February 27, 1963 . Balaguers had been leader of council of states .
 The junta consisted of two former state council members, two civilians from the old Trujillo government, and three military officers . No presiding leader, but had no presiding leader . Junta was formed by two former members of the state council and two civilians .
 Sutan Sjahrir was the first Prime Minister of Indonesia . He was arrested on orders of the President he had served, Sukarno . He had served as the President of Indonesia from 1952 to 1958 .
 He would remain incarcerated for three years, until Sukarno sent him into exile for reasons of health, and would die in 1966 . He would stay in exile for three more years, before being sent back to Indonesia .
 After a four-day search, wreckage was spotted in the Adirondack High Peaks . Wreckage was found after four days of search .
 The bomber had clipped the top of Wright Peak after veering 30 miles off course in inclement weather, high winds and high winds .
 Airman First Class Kenneth R Jensen KWF was never recovered . Albert W Kandetski was found after a search, but his remains were never recovered from the scene .
 A memorial plaque was later erected on a rock near the summit by the 380th Bomb Wing . The 380th bomb wing later erected a memorial plaque on the summit .
 The Jackson State Times, a afternoon daily newspaper in Jackson, Mississippi, published its last issue . The city now has two dailies owned by Mississippi Publishers, the Daily News and The Clarion-Ledger .
 Ivan Meštrović, 78, Croatian sculptor, died January 17, 1962 . U.S. government workers were given the right of collective bargaining by President Kennedy in 1962 .
 Ten former game show contestants pleaded guilty to perjury to perjury . They had testified under oath that they had not been given answers in advance of their appearances .
 A furniture warehouse fire in the German city of Nuremberg killed twenty employees, including four who jumped from the fourth story of the building . Four people were killed in the fire, four of whom jumped from a fourth story .
 Police arrested one of the survivors, a paper press operator who had worked in the basement . He is believed to have accidentally caused the blaze by throwing a cigarette .
 Frank Sinatra completed the recording of his album All Alone, in Los Angeles . Sinatra recorded the album in the city of Los Angeles, California .
 Two days after seizing power in the Dominican Republic, General Pedro Rodriguez Echavarria was overthrown in a counter-coup by his own officers . Gerrit Achterberg, 56, Dutch poet, died in Newmarket, Ontario .
 The council accepted Balaguer's resignation, with Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly as his successor . The council's first act of business was to accept the resignation .
 The drawing, to determine the arrangement of the 16 teams of the 1962 World Cup, took place at Santiago in Chile . Chile was host of the world soccer football championship in 1962 .
 Uruguay, Colombia, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia in Group 1 . Italy, Chile, Switzerland, Switzerland and West Germany in Group 2 . Brazil, Czechoslovakia, Mexico and Spain in Group 3 . England, Argentina, Bulgaria and Hungary in Group 4 .
 Irish Prime Minister Seán Lemass addressed the members of the other EC governments at their headquarters in Brussels . Lemass spoke in the lead-up to the opening of negotiations on Ireland's entry to the EU .
 Former Nazi German General Karl Wolff was arrested by West German police at his lakeside vacation home in Kempfenhausen . Wolff had been chief of staff to Heinrich Himmler and overseer of the SS Einsatzgruppen .
 Chisholm, had first seen the two together on December 30, and followed Penkovsky to his apartment . The two were first seen together December 30 .
 Surveillance determined that Colonel Penkovsky, a high clearance official with the Soviet military intelligence agency GRU, had been bringing home classified material relating to ballistic missiles, photographing it, and giving it to British intelligence agency MI-6 .
 The original Lt. John Beals Chandler, 74, former Lord Mayor of Brisbane Onn Jaafar, 66, Malay politician Snub Pollard, 72, American silent film comedian Snub. Pollard was a silent film star .
 Murder, by Richard Levinson and William Link, was first presented with the premiere at the Curran Theatre in San Francisco . Murder first presented in the U.S. in 1994 . The play is based on Levinson's novel, "Murder"
 Character actor Thomas Mitchell portrayed a disheveled police detective named Lt. Lt. John Doe . Mitchell portrayed the detective in the series .
 Peter Falk portrayed the detective when the play was made into a TV movie in 1968 . Falk also played Columbo in the title role of Columbo, one of the recurring segments of the NBC Mystery Movie .
 Columbo had been seen once before, on July 30, 1960, in the presentation ""Enough Rope"", part of The Chevy Mystery Show . Columbo also appeared on the show .
 The Organization of American States began its Eighth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in the course of which the United States agreed to resume aid to Haiti in return for its support of sanctions against Cuba . Spencer Love, 65, who
 Haiti's participation was essential because the U.S. was short of having the 2/3rds majority of the 21 member nations . The United States was a vote short of a 2-3rd majority of nations . Haiti was the only nation to participate in the vote .
 They divorced their respective spouses, Sybil Burton and Eddie Fisher, and married in 1964, 1974, and 1975 . They remarried in 1975, and divorced again in 1976, respectively . They have been married since 1964 .
 Organisation Armée Secrète placed a time bomb inside a truck that was going into the compound . Organisation opposed to the independence of Algeria bombed the French Foreign Ministry in Algeria .
 A mailroom worker was killed, and three people were seriously injured by the shattering of hundreds of windows at the Quai d'Orsay . Three people are seriously injured in the blast at the site .
 The Cuban government was denied the rights of representation, attendance at meetings and participation in OAS activities . Whilst technically still a member of the OAS, Cuba was denied rights to representation and participation at meetings .
 Robinson was the first black MLB player of the modern era . Robinson had also been a six time All-Star, the 1947 Rookie of the Year, and the 1949 MVP for the National League . Robinson was also the 1947 rookie of the year .
 Cleveland Indians pitcher Bob Feller, elected in his first year of eligibility, was also inducted . Feller was inducted in the same year as Feller . The Hall of Fame inductees were elected on the same day .
 First time since original five selections that anyone had won 75% of the votes on their first try . It was the first time since the original five selection that anyone has won 75%.
 Tony Bennett first recorded what would become his signature song, I Left My Heart, in San Francisco . Bennett recorded the song in the San Francisco area . Bennett's signature song was "Left My Heart"
 Ralph Sharon, who accompanied Bennett's songs on the piano, had been shown the song in 1959 by writers George Cory and Douglass Cross, then put it away in a drawer .
 Sharon ran across it again when Bennett was invited to perform in San Francisco, and Bennett sang it in December . Sharon says she ran across the song when she heard Bennett sing it again .
 The song was released as the B-side of Once Upon a Time . The song went on to sell two million copies and to win two Grammy Awards . It was released in 1991 as a single single .
 American inventor Thomas Townsend Brown received United States Patent 3,018,394 for an ""Electro-kinetic Transducer" Brown used an electric field as a means of propulsion of aircraft . Brown received the patent for an 'electrokinetic' device .
 The East German government instituted conscription into its armed forces in 1962 . Natalia Sedova Trotsky, 79, widow of Leon Trotsky, died January 24, 1962 at age 79 .
 Western sources speculate that the East Germans had waited until the completion of the Berlin Wall before announcing the draft . Western sources speculated that the draft had been announced before the Wall was completed .
 Brian Epstein made a verbal contract with the four members of The Beatles . Epstein became their manager in return for receiving up to 25 percent of their gross earnings . Epstein made the deal with the Beatles in exchange for a 25 percent share of earnings .
 An attempt by the U.S. to launch five satellites into orbit from the same rocket failed . The final stage of the Thor-Able-Star rocket failed to provide sufficient thrust to break gravity .
 Falling into the Gulf of Mexico ""well south of Cuba"" were the 80 foot rocket and the satellites SR-4, Injun II, Lofti II, Secor and Surcal, worth $3,500,000 .
 Governor of Montana Donald G Nutter was killed, along with five other people, in a plane crash in 1962 . Stanley Lord, 84, Captain of the SS Californian, at the time of the sinking of RMS Titanic nearly 50 years earlier .
 Nutter's C-47 plane went down in a mountain canyon near Wolf Creek . Nutter had been on his way from Helena to a speaking engagement in Cut Bank when his plane crashed .
 Anandyn Amar was posthumously rehabilitated more than 20 years after his execution by the Soviet Union . Amar had served twice as Prime Minister of Mongolia and Chairman of the Presidium of State . He was a victim of a purge by Joseph Stalin .
 The American space probe Ranger 3 was launched from Cape Canaveral at 3:30 pm local time on January 26, 1962 . Ranger was launched with the objective of duplicating the Soviet feat of landing a satellite on the Moon .
 Hours later, NASA announced that the Atlas rocket had hurled Ranger 3 into its trajectory too quickly, and that the probe would miss its target by 22,000 miles . The probe would have missed its intended target by more than a half a mile .
 The spacecraft arrived too soon and got no closer than 22,862 miles from the Moon . Intersecting the Moon's orbit after 50 hours instead of the planned 66 hours, the spacecraft went into orbit around the sun .
 A ladle of molten steel poured down upon them during the morning shift at the National Steel Company in Volta Redonda, Brazil . Seventeen employees were killed when the ladle poured down on them .
 Charles ""Lucky"" Luciano, 64, was deported from the United States months earlier . Luciano was a Sicilian-born American mafioso who had been deported from U.S. months earlier.
 Exiled in Italy, Luciano had just greeted film producer Martin Gosch, who had arrived at the Capodichino Airport in Naples to discuss plans for a film about Luciano's life .
 Luciano, who had ordered the murder of more than 40 rival gangsters during his career, collapsed from a fatal heart attack at 5:25 pm . Luciano had ordered murder of over 40 rivals .
 A deputy commissioner of the United States Narcotics Bureau said Luciano had been facing re-arrest for his role in a major drug ring . Luciano is accused of involvement in a drug ring in New York City .
 The film, Lucky Luciano, was made eleven years later and released in 1974 . Italian actor Gian Maria Volonté portrayed Luciano in the film .
 Gerald Rudolff Ford, 71, adoptive father of future U.S. President Gerald R Ford, died of injuries after slipping on an icy sidewalk . Ford was owner of paint and varnish manufacturing company in Grand Rapids, Michigan .
 In 1917, the elder Ford had married Ford's mother and then changed the name of her 3-year-old son, Leslie Lynch King, Jr. to his own, with the exception of spelling the middle name as Rudolph . The elder Ford married his mother in 1917 and changed the
 Eunice Gray, 77, died in a fire at the Waco Hotel in Fort Worth, Texas, which she had operated for 40 years . Gray had operated the hotel for more than 40 years before her death .
 The Azerbaijan SSR city of Molotov would become Oktyabrkend, and the city of Perm had reverted to its name after Perm's ouster in 1957 . Voroshilovgrad was renamed Luhansk and Voroshillov in the far east
 John H Glenn, Jr. was postponed after the countdown clock stopped 20 minutes before liftoff . The Glenn Jr. mission was postponed 20 minutes earlier . Glenn was the first to carry out a mission in space .
 Glenn had been in the capsule since 5:10 am and was prepared to become the first U.S. astronaut to orbit the Earth . Glenn was the first astronaut from the United States to orbit Earth .
 After technical difficulties halted the countdown, the skies became overcast with thick cloud cover, and the mission was scrubbed at 9:20 am . The mission is scrubbed .
 Peter Snell set a new world record for the mile at Cook's Gardens, Wanganui . Snell ran the distance in 3 minutes, 54. seconds, at a distance of 3 minutes and 54 seconds .
 Chairman Mao made a rare self-criticism three days later, and eventually took revenge on Liu . Liu disappeared in 1968 and reportedly died in 1969 . Chairman Mao reportedly took revenge for Liu's death .
 The last streetcar in Washington, D.C. ran for the final time at 2:00 am . The transit company retired its 27 car fleet in 1962 .
 The day before, free rides were offered for all children accompanied by a paying adult . Thousands took advantage of the offer and thousands of people took advantage .
 Wasfi al-Tal, who would later be assassinated, succeeded Bahjat Al-Talhouni as Prime Minister of Jordan . Wasfi was assassinated by the assassination of his successor, Wasfi .
 The Automobile Manufacturers Association of the United States announced that all 1963 model American vehicles would be equipped with amber-colored turn signals on the front . The signals had been the standard since the signals had first been introduced in 1938 .
 Manufacturers lobbied for the repeal of bans in 25 states against amber-colored lights . The change was made after the manufacturers had lobbied for repeal of the ban .
 The Miss Dominican Republic competition was held in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic . Sarah Olimpia Frómeta Pou won the title . Sarah was the first Miss Dominican Dominican Republic to win the competition .
 Two of the high-wire ""Flying Wallendas"" were killed when their famous 7-person pyramid collapsed during a tightrope walking performance at the Shrine Circus at the State Fair Coliseum in Detroit .
 Dieter Schepp, who lost his footing and caused the group to topple, and Richard Faughnan both died of head injuries after falling 36 feet to the concrete arena floor . Schepp and Faughn both died from head injuries .
 Mario Wallenda was paralyzed as a result of the accident . Karl Wallenda and Jana Schepp were hospitalized for their injuries . Jana and Mario were hospitalized .
 Fourteen of the 21 member states of the Organization of American States voted to oust Cuba . Cuba is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Cuba voted against the resolution, which barely passed by a 2/3rdrds majority . Six other nations abstained, and Cuba voted for the resolution .
 Three students at a girls' boarding school in the Tanzanian village of Kashasha began laughing, and other students reacted . In what became known as the ""Tanganyika laughter epidemic"
 The mass reaction spread to villages of Nshamba, Ramanshenye, and Kanyangereka . It affected hundreds of people before halting in 1963 .
 Prince Abdullah of Jordan, to King Hussein and Princess Muna al-Hussein, formerly Antoinette Avril Gardiner of Britain . Prince Abdullah was born to Queen of Jordan and Princess of Jordan .
 Gunther Wallenda and his father, Herman Wallenda walked the high wire at the Shrine Circus in Detroit, 24 hours after the disaster had killed two members of the troupe . He would succeed his father as King Abdullah II in 1999 as King of Saudi Arabia .
 28 people have been killed by the fourth day of an unusually heavy fog in the San Joaquin and Sacramento valleys . 11 people were killed on their way to a labor camp in Mendota, California .
 Snowfall with accumulation recorded on the Mediterranean island of Malta . Snowfall recorded on Malta .
 "Boy Admits Fire Fatal To 95" - "Clears Boy, 13 in School Fire He Confessed" - Chicago Daily Tribune, March 14, 1962, p3 .
 James M Cannon, Time and Chance: Gerald Ford's Appointment with History p72 ^ Leonard Sanders, Fort Worth p511 ^ ""Order Molotov Name Removed from Towns"", Youngstown Vindicator, January 27, 1962, p1 ^ ""Clouds Stop Glenn Orbit