 The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war . The confrontation was often considered to be the closest to escalating to a nuclear war.
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion . In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, the Soviets agreed to place the missiles .
 An agreement was reached during a secret meeting between Khrushchev and Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro in July 1962 . Construction of a number of missile launch facilities started later that summer .
 The White House denied charges for months that it was ignoring dangerous Soviet missiles 90 mi from Florida . Meanwhile, the 1962 U.S. elections were under way, and the White House was under way .
 Air Force U-2 spy plane produced clear photographic evidence of missile facilities . U-12 and intermediate-range R-14 ballistic missile facilities were confirmed by U.S. spy plane .
 During this meeting, President Kennedy was originally advised to carry out an air strike on Cuban soil in order to compromise Soviet missile supplies, followed by an invasion of the Cuban mainland . Kennedy was also advised to attack Soviet missile bases in Cuba .
 President Kennedy chose a less aggressive course of action to avoid a declaration of war . After careful consideration, Kennedy chose to avoid declaring war .
 Kennedy ordered a naval ""quarantine"" on October 22 to prevent further missiles from reaching Cuba . Kennedy ordered the 'quarantine' after consultation with Cuban officials .
 By using the term ""quarantine"" rather than ""blockade"" the U.S. avoided the implications of a state of war . The United States was able to use the term 'quarantine' rather than 'blockade'
 The United States announced it would not permit offensive weapons to be delivered to Cuba . The U.S. demanded that the weapons already in Cuba be dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union .
 After several days of tense negotiations, an agreement was reached between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The agreement was signed by Kennedy on March 4, 1962 .
 The Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a U.S. public declaration and agreement to not invade Cuba again . Publicly, the Soviets would return the weapons to the U.N. subject
 The U.S. agreed to dismantle all of the Jupiter MRBMs deployed in Turkey against the Soviet Union . Secretly, the United States agreed that it would dismantle all the Jupiter missiles .
 There has been debate on whether or not Italy was included in the agreement as well . There has also been debate over whether Italy should have been included in it .
 While the Soviets dismantled their missiles, some Soviet bombers remained in Cuba . The U.S. kept the naval quarantine in place until November 20 of that year .
 All offensive missiles and the Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers had been withdrawn from Cuba . The blockade was formally ended on November 20, 1962 .
 The negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear, and direct communication line between the two superpowers . The U.S. and Soviet Union had a direct line of communication .
 A series of agreements later reduced US–Soviet tensions for several years . Both parties eventually resumed expanding their nuclear arsenals .
 1962 confrontation between the U.S. and Soviet Union over ballistic missiles in Cuba . 1962 confrontation was over ballistic missile technology .
 The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war . In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, the Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles .
 The United States kept the naval quarantine in place until November 20 of that year . While the Soviets dismantled their missiles, some Soviet bombers remained in Cuba . The blockade was formally ended on November 20, 1962 .
 In popular culture 12 Media representations 12 media representations 12 . Human casualties 10 Later revelations 10 later revelations . Media representations are considered important in popular culture .
 Aftermath of the Cuban Revolution and Berlin Crisis of 1961 . U.S. had grown concerned about the expansion of communism . After the end of World War II and the start of the Cold War .
 A Latin American country openly allying with the Soviet Union was regarded by the United States as unacceptable by the U.S. The United States considered it unacceptable to ally with Russia .
 It would defy the Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy limiting U.S. involvement in European colonies and European affairs . The Western Hemisphere was in the United States sphere of influence, but not in Europe .
 The Kennedy administration was embarrassed by the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 . The failed invasion had been launched under President John F Kennedy by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles .
 Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weaknesses was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . United States covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the unsuccessful Operation Mongoose .
 In January 1962, General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban government in a top-secret report . A monument in the Little Havana neighborhood of Miami to the men who died at Playa Giron is located in the area .
 CIA agents or ""pathfinders"" from the Special Activities Division were to be infiltrated into Cuba to carry out sabotage and organization, including radio broadcasts . CIA agents were to infiltrate into Cuba, carrying out sabotage .
 In February 1962, the United States launched an embargo against Cuba . Lansdale presented a 26-page, top-secret timetable for implementation of the overthrow of the Cuban government, mandating guerrilla operations to begin in August .
 Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged ""missile gap"" with the Soviets leading . One of Kennedy's key election themes was the 'missile gaps'
 The United States at that time led the Soviets by a wide margin that would only increase . Actually, the U.S. actually led the Soviet Union by a large margin .
 By October 1962, they may have had a few dozen, with some intelligence estimates as high as 75 . Some intelligence estimates say they had as many as 75 members of the family .
 Khrushchev boasted to the world that the Soviets were building missiles ""like sausages"" but Soviet missiles' numbers and capabilities were nowhere close to his assertions . Khruschev increased the perception of a missile gap when he loudly boasted that he was building missiles like sausage .
 The United States had a considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads and in the technology required for their accurate delivery . The U.S. had a much larger technological advantage than any other nation .
 Soviets had a 2–1 advantage in conventional ground forces, more pronounced in field guns and tanks . The United States also led in missile defensive capabilities, naval and air power .
 Khrushchev was persuaded by the idea of countering the US's growing lead in developing and deploying strategic missiles . Despite misgivings of the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, Alexeyev argued that Castro would not accept the deployment of the missiles .
 Khrushchev faced a strategic situation in which the United States was perceived to have a ""splendid first strike" capability that put the Soviet Union at a huge disadvantage . The United States perceived to be having a 'splendied first strike'
 In 1962, the Soviets had only 20 ICBMs capable of delivering nuclear warheads to the U.S. from inside the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union had only one ICBM capable of carrying nuclear warheads .
 The poor accuracy and reliability of the missiles raised serious doubts about their effectiveness . The missiles were launched in the 1980s and 1990s . They were launched by the Soviet Union, Russia and China .
 A newer, more reliable generation of ICBMs would become operational only after 1965 . A newer generation of IBM would be operational only in 1965 .
 The missiles could hit American allies and most of Alaska from Soviet territory but not the Contiguous United States . They could hit U.S. allies, most of the Alaska region, but could not be hit by the Soviet Union .
 In order to meet the threat it faced in 1962, 1963, and 1964, it had very few options . The government had to adapt to the situation in order to cope .
 Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin, controlled by the American, British and French within Communist East Germany, into the Soviet orbit . A second reason that Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba was because he wanted West Berlin to be brought in .
 The East Germans and Soviets considered western control over a portion of Berlin a grave threat to East Germany . The East German government considered west control over Berlin a threat to their country .
 Khrushchev believed that if the United States did nothing over the missile deployments in Cuba, he could muscle the West out of Berlin using said missiles as a deterrent to western countermeasures in Berlin .
 If the U.S. tried to bargain with the Soviets after it became aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin . If the United States tried to trade the missiles with the Soviet Union, the missiles would go to West Berlin instead .
 The U.S. wanted to increase its presence in Cuba, it seems to have done so . The United States also seemed to want to increase the presence of the Soviet Union and of Cuba, he says .
 With actions including the attempt to expel Cuba from the Organization of American States, placing economic sanctions on the nation, directly invading it in addition to conducting secret operations on containing communism and Cuba, it was assumed that America was trying to overrun Cuba .
 The USSR would place missiles in Cuba and neutralise the threat . As a result, to try and prevent this, the USSR would put missiles on Cuba . The Soviet Union would neutralise this threat .
 This would ultimately serve to secure Cuba against attack and keep the country in the Socialist Bloc . Cuba is currently in a state of war with the Cuban government .
 Khrushchev planned to place missiles on Cuba undetected was to ""level the playing field"" with the evident American nuclear threat . Another major reason to place missile on Cuba was to level the playing field with the evident American nuclear threat . Khrush
 America had the upper hand as they could launch from Turkey and destroy the USSR before they would have a chance to react . America would be able to launch from the Turkey before they had a chance of reacting .
 Khrushchev had established mutually assured destruction, meaning that if the U.S. decided to launch a nuclear strike against the USSR, the latter would react by launching a retaliatory nuclear strike . Placing nuclear missiles on Cuba was a way for the USSR to show their support for Cuba
 In early 1962, a group of Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied an agricultural delegation to Havana . The group included agricultural experts from the Soviet Union .
 The Cuban leadership had a strong expectation that the U.S. would invade Cuba again, the Cuban leadership approved the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Cuban leaders approved the plan .
 Castro objected to the missiles' deployment as making him look like a Soviet puppet, but he was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be an irritant to the United States and help the interests of the entire socialist camp . According to another source, Castro objected .
 The deployment would include short-range tactical weapons that would provide a ""nuclear umbrella"" for attacks upon the island . Also, the deployment would also include short . range tactical weapons .
 By May, Khrushchev and Castro agreed to place strategic nuclear missiles secretly in Cuba . By May the two sides had agreed to secretly place the missiles in Cuba, Cuba .
 Khrushchev felt that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was imminent . To lose Cuba would do great harm to the communists, especially in Latin America, he said . Like Castro, he felt that an invasion was imminent and that losing Cuba would harm the communists .
 All the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles was carried out in the utmost secrecy . Only a very few were told the exact nature of the mission .
 Even the troops detailed for the mission were given misdirection by being told that they were headed for a cold region . They were given ski boots, fleece-lined parkas, and other winter equipment .
 The Anadyr River flows into the Bering Sea and flows into Chukotsky District . It is also the capital of the district and a bomber base in the far eastern region .
 Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators" and "irrigation specialists" arrived in July . The measures were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences .
 Chief Marshal of Artillery Sergei Biryuzov, Head of the Soviet Rocket Forces, led a survey team that visited Cuba . The Soviet Union visited Cuba in 1960s and 1970s .
 The Soviets continued the Maskirovka program to conceal their actions in Cuba . The program was used to conceal the actions of the Soviet Union .
 The Cuban government denied that the weapons being brought into Cuba were offensive in nature . They repeatedly denied that they were offensive weapons .
 On September 7, Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin assured U.S. Ambassador to United Nations Adlai Stevenson that the Soviet Union was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba .
 Soviet Union had no need or intention to introduce offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba . On September 11, the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union announced that the country had no intention of introducing offensive missiles into the country .
 On October 13, Dobrynin was questioned by former Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles . Bowles asked whether the Soviets planned to put offensive weapons in Cuba . The former Secretary of State of State said no weapons were planned .
 During that month, intelligence services gathered information about sightings by ground observers of Soviet-built MiG-21 fighters and Il-28 light bombers .
 Spy planes found S-75 Dvina surface-to-air missile sites at eight different locations . U-2 spy planes found the sites in eight locations in the area .
 On August 10, he wrote a memo to Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba . With important Congressional elections scheduled for November, the crisis became enmeshed in American politics .
 On August 31, Senator Kenneth Keating warned on the Senate floor that the Soviet Union was ""in all probability"" constructing a missile base in Cuba .
 He charged the Kennedy administration with covering up a major threat to the US, thereby starting the crisis . The Kennedy administration was accused of covering up the threat, he said .
 He may have received this initial information from his friend, former congresswoman and ambassador Clare Boothe Luce . Luce received it from Cuban exiles, who in turn turned it to ex-Cuban exiles .
 A later confirming source for Keating's information possibly was the West German ambassador to Cuba, who received information from dissidents inside Cuba that Soviet troops had arrived in Cuba in early August .
 U.S. Air Force General Curtis LeMay presented a pre-invasion bombing plan to Kennedy in September . Spy flights and minor military harassment from United States forces at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base were the subject of continual diplomatic complaints to the United States .
 First consignment of Soviet R-12 missiles arrived on the night of September 8, followed by a second on September 16, 1962 .
 The R-12 was a medium-range ballistic missile capable of carrying a thermonuclear warhead . The missile was launched by the U.S. in the 1960s .
 The missile could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon . It was a single-stage, road-transportable, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fuelled missile that could deliver megaton nuclear weapons .
 The Cuban populace readily noticed the arrival and deployment of the missiles and hundreds of reports reached Miami . Hundreds of reports of the missile deployment were published in Miami .
 U.S. intelligence received countless reports, many of dubious quality or laughable . Most could be dismissed as describing defensive missiles . Only five reports bothered analysts .
 Large trucks passing through towns at night carrying very long canvas-covered cylindrical objects that could not make turns without backing up and maneuvering .
 Defensive missile transporters, it is believed, could make such turns without undue difficulty .
 A U-2 reconnaissance photograph of Cuba shows Soviet nuclear missiles, their transports and tents for fueling and maintenance . The U.2 reconnaissance photo was taken by the U.S. Air Force in 1959 .
 The U.S. had been sending U-2 surveillance over Cuba since the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . U.2 surveillance had been sent to Cuba since failed invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 A U-2 operated by the U.S. Air Force's Strategic Air Command flew over Sakhalin Island in the Soviet Far East by mistake . The first issue that led to a pause in reconnaissance flights took place August 30 .
 Taiwanese-operated U-2 was lost over western China to an SA-2 surface-to-air missile . Nine days later, a Taiwanese-operated U.2 was also lost over west China .
 U.S. officials were worried that one of the Cuban or Soviet SAMs in Cuba might shoot down a CIA U-2, initiating another international incident . The U.2 was shot down by a Soviet or Cuban SAM in Cuba .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy heavily restricted further U-2 flights over Cuban airspace . In a meeting with members of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance on September 10, Secretary Rusk met with them .
 No significant U-2 coverage was achieved over the interior of the island . The U.2 was not able to provide significant coverage of the interior .
 Corona KH-4 mission on October 1 failed to provide any usable intelligence . U.S. officials attempted to use a Corona photo-reconnaissance satellite to obtain coverage over reported Soviet military deployments .
 Analysts noticed Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases . DIA lobbied for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island in 1962 .
 Pressure from the Defense Department led to that authority being transferred to the Air Force . Although in the past the CIA had conducted the flights, the CIA still had the authority .
 Following the loss of a CIA U-2 over the Soviet Union in May 1960, it was thought that an Air Force aircraft arguably being used for a legitimate military purpose would be easier to explain than a CIA flight . It was thought if another U.2 were shot down, an Air
 When reconnaissance missions were reauthorized on October 9, poor weather kept the planes from flying .
 U-2 reconnaissance images of missile bases under construction shown to President Kennedy on October 16, 1962 . CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center identified objects as medium range ballistic missiles .
 Oleg Penkovsky was a double agent in the GRU working for the CIA and MI6 . He was identified by a double-agent working for MI6 and CIA . He is believed to have been killed in the Ukraine in 1998 .
 NPIC analysts correctly identified the missiles on U-2 imagery . The CIA notified the Department of State and Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President .
 The next morning, Bundy met with Kennedy and showed him the U-2 photographs . Bundy briefed him on the CIA's analysis of the images . Bundy met Kennedy the next day .
 President Kennedy tape-recorded all of his meetings with EXCOMM . President Kennedy told Attorney General Robert Kennedy he was convinced the Soviets were placing missiles in Cuba and it was a legitimate threat .
 This made the threat of nuclear destruction by two world superpowers a reality . The threat of nukes by two superpowers was made a reality, according to experts .
 Robert Kennedy contacted the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy responded by contacting the Soviet ambassador . Dobrynins was an ambassador to the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev assured Kennedy that the Soviet Union had no intention of ""disrupting the relationship of our two countries"" despite the photo evidence presented before President Kennedy . Khrushchevsvs. President Kennedy said that the Soviets did not intend to disrupt their relationship with the United States .
 President Kennedy meets with General Curtis LeMay and the reconnaissance pilots who found the missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy meets in the Oval Office with General LeMay .
 The United States had no plan in place because until recently its intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba . Until recently, the U.S. had no plans in place to deal with the Soviets .
 Offer Castro the choice of splitting with the Soviets or being invaded . Offer Castro choice: Split with the Soviet Union or split with the U.S. Or being invaded?
 This game tree models how both actors would have considered their decisions . The game tree is based on the choices made by both actors and their actions .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed that a full-scale attack and invasion was the only solution . Joint chiefs of Staff agreed that the attack was only solution to the crisis .
 They believed that the Soviets would not attempt to stop the U.S. from conquering Cuba . The Soviets believed that they would not stop the United States from invading Cuba .
 "They can't, after all their statements, permit us to take out their missiles, kill a lot of Russians, and then do nothing. They can't," he says .
 Kennedy concluded that attacking Cuba by air would signal the Soviets to presume ""a clear line"" to conquer Berlin . Kennedy concluded attacking Cuba would signal a clear line" to invade Berlin .
 Kennedy also believed that United States allies would think of the country as ""trigger-happy cowboys" who lost Berlin because they could not peacefully resolve the Cuban situation . Kennedy also thought of the U.S. allies thinking of the situation as "trigger-hackers" who could not
 The EXCOMM then discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military . President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara met in the early 1960s .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would seriously alter the military balance, but McNamara disagreed . McNamara: "The Joint Chiefs believed that [the missiles] would seriously change the ... balance"
 An extra 40, he reasoned, would make little difference to the overall strategic balance . He reasoned that an extra 40 would not make a difference in the overall balance .
 The EXCOMM agreed that the missiles would affect the political balance . The missiles are expected to affect the balance of the country .
 Kennedy explained after the crisis that ""it would have politically changed the balance of power. Kennedy explained that it would have been politically political changeable to change the balance of power .
 On October 18, Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko in the Oval Office . He claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only . The weapons were used in the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile buildup . Not wanting to expose what he already knew and to avoid panicking the American public, Kennedy didn't reveal it .
 Army units in the United States would have had trouble fielding mechanised and logistical assets . The U.S. Navy could not supply enough amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armoured contingent from the Army .
 OPLAN 312, primarily an Air Force and Navy carrier operation, was designed with enough flexibility to do anything from engaging individual missile sites to providing air support for ground forces . The operation was designed to be able to engage individual missiles and ground forces in the area .
 A U.S. Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis . A United States Navy P.2H . Neptune was the pilot of the ship .
 McNamara supported the naval blockade as a strong but limited military action that left the U.S. in control . McNamara said the blockade was a strong military action . The blockade was backed by the United States in the 1960s .
 According to international law, a blockade is an act of war, but the Kennedy administration did not think that the Soviets would be provoked to attack by a mere blockade . The Kennedy administration thought that a blockade would provoke a Soviet attack .
 Admiral Anderson, Chief of Naval Operations wrote a position paper that helped Kennedy to differentiate between what they termed a ""quarantine"" of offensive weapons and a blockade of all materials . Admiral Anderson said that a classic blockade was not the original intention .
 Latin American participation in the quarantine now involved two Argentine destroyers . The two destroyers were to report to the United States Commander South Atlantic at Trinidad on November 9 . The quarantine now involves two Argentines .
 An Argentine submarine and a Marine battalion with lift were available if needed . An Argentine sub and an Argentine submarine were also available if required .
 Two Venezuelan destroyers and one submarine have reported to COMSOLANT ready for sea by November 2 . Two other ships have also reported to be ready for deployment .
 Colombia was reported ready to furnish units and had sent military officers to the U.S. to discuss this assistance . Colombia was said to have sent military officials to the United States .
 Argentine Air Force informally offered three SA-16 aircraft in addition to forces already committed to the ""quarantine"" operation . Argentina's Air Force says it has offered to provide additional aircraft to quarantine operation .
 This initially was to involve a naval blockade against offensive weapons within the framework of the Organization of American States and the Rio Treaty . The Rio Treaty was based on a framework of Organization of America States and Rio Treaty.
 A blockade might be expanded to cover all types of goods and air transport . Such a blockade might also cover all kinds of goods .
 On October 19, the EXCOMM formed separate working groups to examine the air strike and blockade options . By the afternoon most support shifted to the blockade option, most of the group shifted to air strike .
 Reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the October 21 . The paramount concern was that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles .
 The United States could find itself bombing operational missiles if the blockade did not force Khrushchev to remove the missiles already on the island . The U.S. would have to remove them from the island if it did not .
 President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962 . President Kennedy's speech to the nation was made in 1962 .
 At 5:00 pm, he met with Congressional leaders who contentiously opposed a blockade . Congressional leaders demanded a stronger response to the blockade .
 U.S. Ambassador Foy D Kohler briefed Khrushchev on the pending blockade and Kennedy's speech to the nation . U.K. Ambassador Kohler was in Moscow to discuss the blockade and the speech .
 U.S. delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, French President Charles de Gaulle and Secretary-General of the Organization of American States .
 During the crisis, Kennedy had daily telephone conversations with Macmillan, who was publicly supportive of U.S. actions . Kennedy called former President Dwight Eisenhower before his speech .
 The two also anticipated that Khrushchev would respond to the Western world in a manner similar to his response during the Suez Crisis . The two anticipated that the two would possibly wind up trading off Berlin .
 All U.S. forces worldwide placed on DEFCON 3 . Directive went out to all forces worldwide, placing them on the highest alert possible .
 The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade . USS Leary was Newport News's destroyer escort . Newport News and Leary were designated flagship ships .
 On October 24, at 11:24 am EDT, a cable was drafted by George Wildman Ball to the U.S. Ambassador in Turkey and NATO . Ball: The United States knew to be nearly-obsolete missiles from Italy and Turkey, in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from
 Turkish officials replied that they would ""deeply resent"" any trade involving the United States missile presence in their country . Turkish officials said they would "deeply resented" any trade with the U.S. missile presence .
 American journalist Walter Lippmann proposed the same thing in his syndicated column on October 25 . One day later, on the morning of October 25, he proposed the idea in his column .
 Castro reaffirmed Cuba's right to self-defense and said that all of its weapons were defensive . Cuba would not allow an inspection of the weapons, Castro said . Castro said all of Cuba's weapons are defensive .
 In West Germany, newspapers supported the U.S. response by contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months . West Germany's newspapers opposed the United States response .
 Some fear that the Soviets might retaliate in Berlin . They also expressed some fear that they might also retaliate .
 In France on October 23, the crisis made the front page of all the daily newspapers . In France, it was the first time the crisis had made headlines in decades .
 The next day, an editorial in Le Monde expressed doubt about the authenticity of the CIA's photographic evidence . The editorial also expressed doubt that the evidence was authentic .
 The photos were taken by a CIA agent who visited the newspaper two days later . Two days later, after a visit by a high-ranking CIA agent, the newspaper accepted the photos .
 Also in France, Raymond Aron wrote in support of the U.S. response to the crisis in Syria .
 On October 24, Pope John XXIII sent a message to the Soviet embassy in Rome to be transmitted to the Kremlin in which he voiced his concern for peace . The message was sent by the Pope to be sent to the Embassy in Rome . The Pope voiced his concerns for peace in the
 In this message he stated, ""We beg all governments not to remain deaf to this cry of humanity," he said . The message was posted on Facebook .
 Khrushchev warned that the United States' ""outright piracy"" would lead to war . TASS news agency broadcast a telegram from the Soviet leader to Kennedy .
 Khrushchev stated, ""if you weigh the present situation with a cool head without giving way to passion, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot afford not to decline the despotic demands of the USA"" and that the . Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression
 After October 23, Soviet communications with the USA increasingly showed indications of having been rushed . The Soviet-U.S. relations with the United States have since been strained .
 Khrushchev often repeated himself and sent messages lacking simple editing . Undoubtedly a product of pressure, it was not uncommon for him to repeat himself and send messages .
 Khrushchev rapidly sought a diplomatic compromise with President Kennedy . President Kennedy made his aggressive intentions of a possible air-strike followed by an invasion on Cuba known .
 Communications between the two super-powers entered into a unique and revolutionary period . The newly developed threat of mutual destruction through the deployment of nuclear weapons now demonstrated how power and coercion could dominate negotiations .
 Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations to the U.N. in 1962 . US alert level raised to the highest level of alert .
 The United States requested an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council on October 25 . The U.N. Security Council is scheduled to meet on October 26 .
 United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting of the Security Council . Stevenson challenged him to admit the existence of the missiles in the emergency meeting . The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union .
 The next day at 10:00 pm EDT, the United States raised the readiness level of SAC forces to DEFCON 2 . The U.S. raised the alert level of the U.N. forces to DeFCON .
 B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields and made ready to take off on 15 minutes' notice . The only confirmed time in U.S. history, B-52 bombers went airborne .
 "They did not increase their alert; they did not . increase any flights, or their air defense posture," officials say . The U.S. military says .
 We were never further from nuclear war than at the time of Cuba, never further . We were not further from war than in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 U.S. Navy's Atlantic Fleet used map to show position of American and Soviet ships at the height of the crisis .
 USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept Bucharest but failed to do so . Blockade challenged At 7:15 am EDT on October 25, USS Essex tried to block Bucharest .
 The U.S. allowed the tanker through the blockade . The tanker did not contain any military material, the United States said .
 Later that day, the commander of the blockade effort ordered the destroyer USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr. to intercept and board the Lebanese freighter Marucla .
 At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on . That took place the next day . Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked .
 CIA report said there had been no slowdown at all . CIA report was later verified by a CIA report that suggested there was no slowdown .
 Kennedy claimed that the blockade had succeeded when the USSR turned back fourteen ships presumably carrying offensive weapons . Kennedy claimed the blockade was successful when Russia turned back 14 ships carrying weapons . The blockade was believed to have been successful .
 The first indication of this came from a report from the British GCHQ sent to the White House Situation Room . GCHQ intercepted communications from Soviet ships reporting their positions .
 Kislovodsk reported a position north-east of where it had been 24 hours earlier indicating it had ""discontinued"" its voyage and turned back towards the Baltic .
 The next day, reports showed more ships originally bound for Cuba had altered their course . More ships were found to have altered course .
 The next morning, October 26, Kennedy informed the EXCOMM that he believed only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy told the next morning the next day that an invasion was necessary to remove missiles .
 He was persuaded to give the matter time and continue with both military and diplomatic pressure . He said he would continue to press the matter .
 Low-level flights over the island to be increased from two per day to once every two hours . He agreed and ordered the low-level flight to increase from two to once a day .
 He also ordered a crash program to institute a new civil government in Cuba if an invasion went ahead . The crash program was ordered by the Cuban government .
 The Soviets had shown no indication that they would back down and had made public media and private inter-governmental statements to that effect . The Soviets showed no indication of backing down .
 The U.S. had no reason to believe otherwise and was preparing for an invasion of the Soviet Union . The United States assumed it would respond militarily if it responded militarily, which the United States believed would .
 Kennedy had no intention of keeping these plans a secret . With an array of Cuban and Soviet spies forever present, Khrushchev was made aware of this looming danger .
 The implicit threat of air strikes on Cuba followed by invasion allowed the U.S. to exert pressure in future talks . Air strikes and invasion of Cuba allowed the United States to exert power in negotiations .
 It was the possibility of military action that played an influential role in accelerating Khrushchev's proposal for a compromise . The possibility of a military action played a key role in the proposal for compromise .
 Throughout the closing stages of October, Soviet communications to the United States indicated increasing defensiveness . The U.S. was under constant pressure from the Soviet Union during the fall .
 Khrushchev's increasing tendency to use poorly phrased and ambiguous communications throughout the compromise negotiations conversely increased U.S. confidence and clarity in messaging . The compromise negotiations also increased United States confidence .
 Leading Soviet figures consistently failed to mention that only the Cuban government could agree to inspections of the territory . They continually made arrangements relating to Cuba without the knowledge of Fidel Castro himself .
 According to Dean Rusk, Khrushchev began to panic from the consequences of his own plan, and this was reflected in the tone of Soviet messages . According to Rusk: "Krushchev 'blinked'"; he began to panic from the consequences .
 This allowed the United States to largely dominate negotiations in late October . The U.S. was largely dominant in negotiations .
 At 1:00 pm EDT on October 26, John A Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin, the cover name of Alexander Feklisov, at Fomin's request . Fomin was the KGB station chief in Washington, D.C. at
 Scali asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his ""high-level friends" at the State Department to see if the U.S. would be interested in a diplomatic solution . Scali: The United States is interested in diplomatic solution to the situation .
 Castro would publicly announce that he would not accept such weapons again in exchange for a public statement by the U.S. that it would not invade Cuba . He suggested that the language of the deal would contain an assurance from the Soviet Union to remove the weapons under UN supervision .
 Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 26, 1962 . On October 26 at 6:00 pm EDT, the State Department started receiving a message that appeared to be written personally by Khrushchchev .
 News of Fomin's offer to Scali was finally heard and interpreted as a ""set up"" for the arrival of Khrushchev's letter . News of the offer was heard at 6:45 pm EDT and was interpreted as being a 'set up' for the letter . Kh
 The letter was then considered official and accurate, although it later learned that Fomin was almost certainly operating of his own accord without official backing .
 Additional study of the letter was ordered and continued into the night . Additional study was ordered by the authorities .
 Direct aggression against Cuba would mean nuclear war, says U.S. Secretary of State Clinton . Direct aggression would mean war against Cuba, says Clinton administration .
 The Americans speak about such aggression as if they did not know or did not want to accept this fact . The U.S. should not have been aggressive enough, the U.N. says .
 Che Guevara: 'I have no doubt they would lose such a war' Che had S-75 Dvina with V-750V missile on a launcher .
 An installation similar to this one shot down Major Anderson's U-2 over Cuba . The installation was used to shoot down the U.S. aircraft .
 Castro sent a telegram to Khrushchev that appeared to call for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the United States in case of attack . Castro was convinced that an invasion of Cuba was soon at hand, and on October 26, he sent the telegram .
 Castro also ordered all anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba to fire on any U.S. aircraft . Previous orders had been to fire only on groups of two or more or more . Castro ordered the weapons to fire at any United States aircraft; previous orders had only been for groups of
 At 6:00 am EDT on October 27, the CIA delivered a memo reporting that three of the four missile sites at San Cristobal and both sites at Sagua la Grande appeared to be fully operational .
 Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev on October 27 . It noted that the Cuban military continued to organise for action but was under order not to attack .
 He also suggested relaying that information to the Soviets via U Thant at the United Nations . He also noted that they had not made the Soviets aware of the blockade .
 The aircraft in 1962 was painted overall gray and carried USAF military markings and national insignia . The aircraft was painted in gray and had military markings .
 At 11:03 am EDT a new message began to arrive from Khrushchev . The message was sent to the Soviet Union from Moscow .
 It is nine miles by sea from the coast of the United States of America . You say that this disturbs you because it is ninety-nine miles . by sea .
 Turkey has repeatedly stated that it would be upset if the Jupiter missiles were removed . Throughout the crisis, Turkey has said it would not be happy with the removal of the missiles .
 Italy's PM offered to allow withdrawal of missiles deployed in Apulia as a bargaining chip . Italy's Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani was also Foreign Minister ad interim .
 Ettore Bernabei, general manager of RAI-TV, gave the message to one of his most trusted friends . Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. sent the message . He gave his message to the general manager, Ettores Bernabeei .
 The United States regarded the Jupiter missiles as obsolete and already supplanted by the Polaris nuclear ballistic submarine missiles . Unknown to the Soviets, the U.S. regarded them as obsolete . The Jupiter missiles were already being replaced with the Polaris missiles .
 The engine of the Lockheed U-2 shot down over Cuba is on display at Museum of the Revolution in Havana .
 On October 27, a U-2F piloted by USAF Major Rudolf Anderson, departed its forward operating location at McCoy AFB, Florida .
 At approximately 12:00 pm EDT, the aircraft was struck by an SA-2 surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba . The missile was fired from Cuba at a Cuban airbase .
 The decision to fire the missile was made by an undetermined Soviet commander, acting on his own authority . Stress in negotiations between the Soviets and the U.S. intensified .
 Several U.S. Navy RF-8A Crusader aircraft, on low-level photo-reconnaissance missions, were fired upon . Later that day, at about 3:41 pm EDT, several U.N. Navy aircraft were fired on .
 At 4:00 pm EDT, Kennedy recalled members of EXCOMM to the White House . He ordered that a message should immediately be sent to U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out .
 General Maxwell Taylor delivered the news that the U-2 had been shot down . The U.2 was shot down by the U.S. Air Force .
 Kennedy had earlier claimed he would order an attack on such sites if fired upon . But he decided to not act unless another attack was made . Kennedy decided not to act until another attack made .
 We had to send a U-2 over to gain reconnaissance information on whether the Soviet missiles were becoming operational . The U.2 was sent to gain information on Soviet missiles .
 We believed that if the U-2 was shot down, it would be shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air-missile unit, the Soviets did . It would represent a decision by the Soviets to escalate the conflict, he says .
 We agreed that if it was shot down we wouldn't meet, we'd simply attack . And therefore, before we sent the U-2 out, we agreed that we would not meet, but would simply attack if it were shot down .
 Soviet commander in Cuba issued orders to instruct all of his batteries not to shoot down the U-2 . And therefore, he issued orders .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Drafting response to the response .
 Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . We are happy to provide an updated version of this article with additional information .
 Kennedy suggested to take Khrushchev's offer to trade away the missiles . Kennedy suggested taking the deal with the missiles in exchange for a trade deal .
 Robert Kennedy had been meeting with the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in Washington to discover whether the intentions were genuine . Unknown to most members of the EXCOMM, but with the support of his brother the president, the president had been .
 The EXCOMM was generally against the proposal because it would undermine NATO's authority . The Turkish government had repeatedly stated it was against any such trade .
 Kennedy was slowly persuaded by a new plan emerged . As the meeting progressed, new plans emerged, and Kennedy agreed .
 The new plan called for him to ignore the latest message and instead to return to Khrushchev's earlier one . The plan calls for him instead of ignoring the new message and return to the earlier one.
 Kennedy was initially hesitant, feeling that Khrushchev would no longer accept the deal because a new one had been offered, but Llewellyn Thompson argued that it was still possible . Kennedy was reluctant to accept the agreement .
 White House Special Counsel and Adviser Ted Sorensen and Robert Kennedy left the meeting and returned 45 minutes later, with a draft letter to that effect . The White House says the letter will be sent to the White House next week .
 After the EXCOMM meeting, a smaller meeting was held in the Oval Office .
 The group argued that the letter should be underscored with an oral message to Dobrynin . If the missiles were not withdrawn, military action would be used to remove them .
 Rusk added one proviso that no part of the language of the deal would mention Turkey, but there would be an understanding that the missiles would be removed ""voluntarily"" in the immediate aftermath .
 Fomin claimed that a response to the United States message was expected from Khrushchev shortly . He urged Scali to tell the State Department that no treachery was intended . Fomin said that an invasion was only hours away .
 Scali said he did not think anyone would believe him, but he agreed to deliver the message . Scali: "I don't think anyone will believe me, but I'm going to do it"
 The two went their separate ways, and Scali immediately typed out a memo for the EXCOMM. The two left the scene of the incident .
 All active duty Air Force personnel were recalled to their bases for possible action . Military preparations continued, with all active duty personnel recalled to bases .
 As Robert Kennedy noted, there was little expectation it would be accepted . Robert Kennedy: "There were little expectations it would have been accepted"
 At 9:00 pm EDT, the EXCOMM met again to review the actions for the following day . At 9 a.m. EDT, they reviewed the actions of the next day .
 Plans drawn up for air strikes on missile sites as well as other economic targets, notably petroleum storage . Air strikes were drawn up on the missile sites .
 CIA reported that all missiles in Cuba were ready for action at 6:00 am . CIA: All missiles in the country's Cuban territory were ready to attack .
 Later that same day, what the White House later called ""Black Saturday"", the United States Navy dropped a series of ""signalling"" depth charges on a Soviet submarine at the blockade line, unaware that it was armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo with orders that allowed it to
 As the submarine was too deep to monitor any radio traffic, the captain of the B-59, Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky, decided that a war might already have started and wanted to launch a nuclear torpedo . The captain decided to launch the torpedo as a precautionary
 The decision to launch these normally only required agreement from the two commanding officers on board, the Captain and the Political Officer . The decision was made by the captain and the political officer .
 The commander of the submarine Flotilla, Vasily Arkhipov, was aboard B-59 and so he also had to agree . However, he was aboard the submarine so he agreed to agree with the decision .
 On the same day a U-2 spy plane made an accidental, unauthorised, overflight of the Soviet Union's far eastern coast . The U.2 made a ninety-minute overflight on the same night .
 The Soviets responded by scrambling MiG fighters from Wrangel Island . The Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea . The U.S. also sent F-101s with nuclear missiles .
 Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in Turkey and possibly southern Italy, the former on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's cabinet agreed in October to remove missiles in Turkey, possibly Italy, and possibly Turkey .
 There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement . The missiles were removed from Italy in a secret deal .
 Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was when the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey .
 The shooting down of the U-2 by a Soviet missile violated direct orders from Moscow . Khrushchev also violated orders from Castro to shoot down other U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 Third, the Soviets and Cubans on the island would almost certainly have responded to an invasion by using nuclear weapons, even though Castro believed that every human in Cuba would likely die as a result .
 Khrushchev also knew but may not have considered the fact that he had submarines armed with nuclear weapons that the U.S. Navy may have known about . The United States Navy may also not have known that the submarines had nuclear weapons .
 President Kennedy had been told in early 1961 that a nuclear war would likely kill a third of humanity . Most or all of those deaths were likely to be concentrated in the US, the USSR, Europe and China .
 Khrushchev drafted his acceptance of Kennedy's terms from his dacha without involving the Politburo, as he had previously, and had them immediately broadcast over Radio Moscow, which he believed the U.S. would hear .
 At 10:00 am, October 28, Kennedy learned of Khrushchev's solution to the crisis with the United States removing the 15 Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviets would remove the rockets from Cuba . The U.S. removed the Jupits in Turkey, the
 Khrushchev had made the offer in a public statement for the world to hear . The offer was made in a statement to the world for the first time ever .
 Kennedy quickly embraced the Soviet offer . Despite almost solid opposition from his senior advisers, Kennedy embraced the offer .
 Kennedy deployed the Jupiters in March of the year, causing a stream of angry outbursts from Khrushchev . Kennedy had deployed the . Jupits in March, causing an angry outburst from the .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson was the first to endorse the missile swap offer . Others continued to oppose the offer .
 On October 28, Kennedy participated in telephone conversations with Eisenhower and Truman . The former U.S. President spoke to Truman and Eisenhower .
 Kennedy revealed that he thought the crisis would result in the two superpowers being ""toe to toe"" in Berlin by the end of the following month . Kennedy also expressed concern that the Soviet setback in Cuba would ""make things tougher"" in Cuba .
 He rejected the public Soviet offer to withdraw from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . He also rejected the offer to pull missiles from Cuba .
 The United States continued the blockade; in the following days, aerial reconnaissance proved that the Soviets were making progress in removing the missile systems . The U.S. continued to blockade Cuba .
 42 missiles and support equipment were loaded onto eight Soviet ships . The 42 missiles were loaded into eight Soviet vessels . The missiles were deployed in the Soviet Union .
 On November 2, 1962, Kennedy addressed the United States via radio and television broadcasts regarding the dismantlement process of the Soviet R-12 missile bases in the Caribbean region .
 The United States made a final visual check as each of the ships passed the blockade line . The U.S. made it clear that each ship was safe .
 The Il-28 bombers were loaded on three Soviet ships on December 5 and 6 . Further diplomatic efforts were required to remove them from the Soviet aircraft .
 The U.S. government announced the end of the blockade from 6:45 pm EST on November 20, 1962 . Concurrent with the Soviet commitment on the Il-28s, the United States ended the blockade .
 The initial plans were to recycle the missiles for use in other programs, but NASA and the USAF were not interested in retaining the missile hardware .
 The withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time . Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened .
 The perception was that Kennedy had won the contest between the superpowers and that Khrushchev had been humiliated . Kennedy had the perception that he had won . The perception is that he was humiliated by the Soviet Union .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite pressures from their respective governments . Both sides avoided full conflict in the 1960s and '60s .
 For the U.S., around 3,500 would have been used in attacking the Soviet Union . For the United States, about 3,000 would be used in the attack on Soviet Russia .
 The United States secretly agreed to withdraw the missiles from Italy and Turkey . The U.S. secretly withdrew the missiles . The missiles were withdrawn from Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 The letter invited counter-proposals and further exploration of these issues through peaceful negotiations . The letter invites counter-offer proposals .
 Khrushchev invited Norman Cousins, the editor of a major U.S. periodical and an anti-nuclear weapons activist, to serve as liaison with President Kennedy . Cousins met with Khruschev for four hours in December 1962 .
 Kennedy's response to Khrushchev's proposals was lukewarm . Kennedy expressed to Cousins that he felt constrained in exploring these issues due to pressure from hardliners in the U.S. national security apparatus .
 The United States and the Soviet Union created the Moscow–Washington hotline . The hotline was a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington . Further after the crisis, the U.S. and Russia created a hotline .
 The purpose was to have a way that the leaders of the two Cold War countries could communicate directly to solve such a crisis . The purpose of the project was to create a way to communicate directly with the two countries .
 The withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Italy and Turkey was a secret deal . The compromise embarrassed Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because of the deal . It was made in secret between Kennedy and Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev went to Kennedy as he thought that the crisis was getting out of hand, but the Soviets were seen as retreating from circumstances that they had started . Khrushchevkovsky: "Khrrushchev thought that he was going to Kennedy"
 Khrushchev's fall from power two years later was in part because of the embarrassment at the Soviet Politburo's embarrassment at its ineptitude in precipitating the crisis in the first place . The fall was due partly to the embarrassment of the Soviets' embarrassment at their ineptitude at
 Cuban leadership perceived the outcome as a betrayal by the Soviets, as decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev . Cuban leadership Cuba believed the outcome was a betrayal to the Soviets .
 Castro was upset that certain issues of interest to Cuba, such as the status of the U.S. Naval Base in Guantánamo, were not addressed . Castro was especially upset that some issues were not discussed . The Cuban leader was unhappy that the United States did not address the
 Bucharest's intentions of detaching itself from Moscow were confirmed by the U.S. government . This convinced the American administration of Bucharest to detachociate itself from Russia .
 The worldwide United States Forces DEFCON 3 status was returned on November 20, 1962 . The worldwide U.S. Forces DeFCON . status was . returned to . deFCON 4 status on November . 20 November .
 General Curtis LeMay told the President that the resolution of the crisis was the ""greatest defeat in our history""; his was a minority position . LeMay said resolution of crisis was a 'greatest defeat in our history'
 He had pressed for an immediate invasion of Cuba as soon as the crisis began . He still favoured invading Cuba even after the Soviets had withdrawn their missiles .
 At least four contingency strikes were armed and launched from Florida against Cuban airfields and suspected missile sites in 1963 and 1964 . All were diverted to the Pinecastle Range Complex after the planes passed Andros island .
 Anderson's body was returned to the U.S. and was buried with full military honours in South Carolina . Anderson was the first U.2 pilot to die in the war . Anderson's remains were returned to South Carolina and buried there with full honours .
 He was the first recipient of the newly created Air Force Cross, which was awarded posthumously . He was also the first person to receive the posthumous award of the Air Force Medal .
 Anderson was the only combatant fatality during the crisis . 11 crew members of three reconnaissance Boeing RB-47 Stratojets were also killed in crashes .
 Seven crew died when a Military Air Transport Service Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23 . The plane was carrying ammunition to the base when it crashed .
 Historian and adviser to Kennedy says Khrushchev pressured Castro to accept missiles . Schlesinger: Castro did not want the missiles, but Khruschev pressured him to accept them .
 The Soviet submarine was surrounded by American warships and desperately needed to surface . Running out of air, the Soviet submarine ran out of water . The submarine was forced to surface by the U.S. Navy .
 An argument broke out among three officers aboard B-59, including submarine captain Valentin Savitsky, political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov, and Deputy brigade commander Captain Vasily Arkhipov .
 Savitsky ordered that the nuclear torpedo on board be made combat ready . Savitski became furious and ordered the ship be equipped with a nuclear torpedo . The torpedo was the last of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons to be made ready .
 Fifty years ago, the Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster . The Cuban crisis was 50 years ago .
 During the standoff, United States President John F Kennedy thought the chance of escalation to war was ""between 1 in 3 and even"", and what we have learned from later decades has done nothing to lengthen those odds .
 The United States air strike and invasion that were scheduled for the third week of the confrontation would likely have triggered a nuclear response against American ships and troops, and perhaps even Miami . The U.S. air strike would have likely triggered a possible nuclear response .
 Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests . Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal .
 While in Havana, Mikoyan witnessed the mood swings and paranoia of Castro . Castro was convinced that Moscow had made the agreement with the U.S. at the expense of Cuba's defence .
 He defused the seemingly intractable situation, which risked re-escalating the crisis, on November 22, 1962 . The incident occurred in the Philippines in 1962 .
 Mikoyan convinced Castro that despite Moscow's desire to help, it would be in breach of an unpublished Soviet law, which did not actually exist, to transfer the missiles permanently into Cuban hands .
 The tactical nuclear weapons were crated and returned by sea to the Soviet Union in December 1962 . Castro was forced to give way and the weapons were returned to Russia .
 The American popular media, especially television, made frequent use of the events of the missile crisis in both fictional and documentary forms . In popular culture, the events were often depicted in a fictional or documentary .
 Sheldon Stern finds that a half century later there are still many ""misconceptions, half-truths, and outright lies"" that have shaped media versions of what happened in the White House during those harrowing two weeks . Sheldon Stern writes that a 50-year-old study finds that
 Soviet media proved somewhat disorganised as it was unable to generate a coherent popular history . According to Cold War historian Andrei Kozovoi, the media proved to be somewhat disorganized . The Soviet media was able to create a coherent history .
 Cuba was no longer portrayed as a heroic David against the American Goliath . Cuba no longer was portrayed as heroic David vs. American . Cuba is no longer seen as a hero against the U.S.
 One contradiction pervaded the Soviet media campaign was between the pacifistic rhetoric of the peace movement that emphasises the horrors of nuclear war and the need to prepare Soviets for war .
 Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's memoir of the crisis, posthumously released in 1969; It became the basis for numerous films and documentaries . It was the basis of numerous films, documentaries .
 Fiction Topaz, 1969 film by Alfred Hitchcock based on the 1967 novel by Leon Uris, set during the run-up to the crisis . The film is set in the lead up to the end of the first World War II .
 Red Alert 3 is a 2008 video game set in an alternate timeline where Einstein did not exist . The game was released in 2008 .
 The Kennedys is a 2011 production chronicling the lives of the Kennedy family . It is also a dramatisation of the crisis in which it was staged .
 The Courier tells the true story of British businessman Greville Wynne who helped MI6 penetrate the Soviet nuclear programme during the Cold War . The Courier, tells the "true story of the British businessman who helped . MI6 penetration of the Soviet . programme .
 Sven G Holtsmark, Iver B Neumann, Odd Arne Westad, Springer, 27 iul.16, The Soviet Union in Eastern Europe, 1945–89, 99, 99.16 . Neumann and Neumann wrote about the Soviet Union .
 Taiwan Air Taiwan Air Blog, updated April 11, 2007. Archived October 8, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Taiwan Air .
 United States Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of the Historian . U.S. State Department: "We are proud of our achievements"
 Anatoly F Dobrynin's Meeting with Robert F Kennedy, Saturday, 27 October 1962 . Dobrynins' meeting with Kennedy was held in 1962 .
 Archived archive.today from the original on March 29, 2022 . Archived archives.today . Archives.today: Archive.today.com .
 The 32nd Guards Air Fighter Regiment in Cuba S.Isaev. is a Cuban air force . It is based in Havana, Cuba .
 Thomas J McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S Painter William B Pickett Ronald E Powaski Yakov M Rabkin Yakov R Rabkin Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. Yakov Rabkin was the first person to be named in the U.
 Joseph P Kennedy Sr. Patrick Bouvier Kennedy Rose Schlossberg is the daughter of the late President Kennedy Jr. Tatiana Schlossenberg .
 The Kennedys Thirteen Days RFK Bobby RFK Must Die . Ethel Skakel Kathleen Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy Joseph P Kennedy Robert F Kennedy Jr. RFK Jr. Ethel Kennedy for President for President Ethel .
 David Kennedy, Michael Kennedy, Kerry Kennedy, Chris Kennedy, Doug Kennedy, Rory Kennedy, Maeve Kennedy McKean and Doug Kennedy . David Kennedy Jr. is the son of the late President Kennedy Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy Jr., Bobby Kennedy, Joe Kennedy, Jr. and Bobby Kennedy
 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply . Text is published under the same license as this article .
 Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization . Wikipedia is the world's largest online encyclopedia, with more than 1,000 entries each day . Wikipedia has been used in more than 50,000 articles since 2004 .