 President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 . President Kennedy's assassination was the focus of the assassination of the Cuban government . The evidence was used to strong arm reluctant leaders in the legislative and judicial branches of government to do what new president wanted .
 Earl Warren later explained in an oral history interview for the LBJ Library, that after he was asked to head the commission, he told them I thought I shouldn't do it, and I made suggestions to them as to people whom they might get who would fill the purpose .
 White House asked me to come up and see the President, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I got a phone call from the White House and was asked if I could come up to see the president"
 "He impressed upon me the great danger that was involved in having something develop from all this talk. And he impressed upon him the great risk," he said .
 The nuclear threat helped persuaded them to go with the Lone-Nut scenario because a foreign conspiracy had to be a foreign one . The Lone Nut scenario was the result of a nuclear threat .
 To accept the Lone-Nut scenario as possible or even plausible, all of the accused assassin&amp;rsquo;s intelligence connections had to be ignored . The assassin was portrayed as a sociopathic loser acting upon unknown psychological motives . To accept this scenario, all the accused
 Life magazine was one of the most prolific supporters of this fairytale . Life magazine has been a prolific supporter of the project .
 The assassination was used to get Congressional authorization for the war in Vietnam . And as it would after the assassination in anointing the disputed Tonkin Gulf Incident in order to get congressional authorization .
 Life was more influential than radio and TV news at the time . As the most popular magazine in America, Life was the most influential magazine .
 Life was the perfect platform to deliver any disinformation the CIA wanted widely distributed to a mass audience . Life was a perfect platform for the CIA to deliver its disinformation .
 It was used to influence key policy makers as well as the public, and also to discredit President Kennedy, as it tried to do on numerous occasions .
 Henry Luce, born in China to missionary parents, attended Yale and was a member of Skull &amp; Bones . He quit the Baltimore News to form Time Inc. in 1926, publishing Time Magazine in 1926 and Fortune in 1930 and Life magazine in 1936 .
 Henry Luce died in 1967, but his legacy continues to make an impact today . Luce was a pioneer of American cinema cinema and television .
 Luce surrounded himself with like-minded publishers, editors, photographers and writers . His second wife, Clare Booth Luce, was the publisher's second wife .
 Henry Luce is also said to have had an affair with Mary Bancroft, one of Allen Dulles&amp;rsquo; OSS agents and paramour, while Dulles is said .
 Clare Booth Luce was in many ways more of a player than Henry Luce himself . And in retrospect, she was more of the player than her husband himself .
 Clare Booth Luce has been described as, &amp;ldquo; one of the wealthiest women in the world, widow of the founder of the Time, Inc. publishing empire, former member of the House of Representatives, former Ambassador to Italy, successful Broadway playwright, international
 Luce will later claim that sometime after the Bay of Pigs she receives a call from her friend William Pawley who wants to put together a fleet of speedboats which would be used by the exiles to dart in and out of Cuba .
 Luce refers to the crew of this boat as &amp;lsquo;my boys . Luce will also maintain that it is one of these boat crews that brings back the first news of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 She sat in the same limo with LBJ on JFK's inauguration day . Asked him why in the world he took the Vice Presidential slot instead of staying in the more powerful position he held in Congress, she quoted him as saying, "One out of every four presidents has died in
 LBJ knew he could improve those odds, and it wasn't such a gamble at all . The true odds were one in five presidents, or twenty percent, died in office . I&amp;rsquo;m a gambler, and this is the only chance I got
 Luce brought aboard a new publisher, C D. &amp;ndash; Charles Douglas-Jackson, an OSS hand and President Eisenhower's personal administrative assistant on psychological warfare and Cold War strategy . With the new Democratic administration, Luce brings aboard a publisher, a publisher on
 Clare Booth Luce wrote a weekly column and an occasional photo feature for Life. Life.com .
 She says she had been told this by her boys, who ran commando missions in and out of Cuba . She says they were told by her sons .
 The Air Force liaison to the National Photographic Interpretation Center leaked the photos . She also apparently saw the U2 photos leaked by the Air Force .
 Philip J Corso, who later bragged about leaking it in his book The Day After Roswell, leaked it in 1992 . Philip Corso later wrote a book about how he leaked it .
 After the Cuban Missile crisis was successfully resolved, Luce began writing about Mongoose, the CIA&amp;rsquo;s covert operations against Castro . Life ran photos and stories about Operation Red Cross .
 They were based out of the CIA&amp;rsquo;s JMWAVE base in Florida, affiliated with the DRE and led by JulioFernandez .
 On the night of the assassination, Clare Booth Luce says she was awakened from sleep by a phone call by Fernandez . She says she awoke from sleep on night of assassination by phone call .
 There is no record of him having done so . But he didn&amp;rsquo;t, or at least there are no records of him doing so .
 The Luces could have slept soundly that night, knowing that Life was on top of the story . Life was "on top" for the Luces .
 Before the weekend was over they would have sole ownership of the single most desired peace of evidence in the case, the Zapruder film . And before the weekend, the film would be the most wanted peace of the evidence .
 They would also obtain the infamous Backyard Photos of the accused assassin, his &amp;ldquo;Historic Diary, his . exclusive photos of the Oswald family and then contractually tie up Marina’s story for decades . They would obtain . Also obtain . Exclusive photos
 The accused assassin would be killed while in police custody, and then branded the lone assassin . But before the weekend was out, police would kill the accused assassin .
 It was just a matter of whether he was going to be portrayed as part of a Cuban Communist conspiracy or a deranged, lone nut . The answer to which would depend on how it all played out in public .
 Texas bureau chief, Holland McCombs was in Austin, Texas, working on a story about the sex lives of college students .
 McCombs got the job after giving Henry Luce a raucous tour of Texas . He introduced him to cantinas, tequila and hot peppers .
 After Luce hired him, its rumored that his first job was to get a spy in the office of the president of Mexico . Luce&amp;rsquo;s interests also went south of the border .
 McCombs had served in the Office of Naval Intelligence so such an operation was within his wherewithal . McCombs served as an intelligence officer in the Navy .
 McCombs later helped abort Life&amp;rsquo;s belated investigation of domestic conspiracy . McCombs helped abort the investigation of a domestic conspiracy in 1967 .
 McCombs supported his friend Clay Shaw, a suspect in Jim Garrison&amp;rsquo;s case in New Orleans . His own team had developed evidence that supported a conspiracy against him .
 McCombs and Life had developed the fact that the McCurley brothers, who had assisted Oswald in handing out the FPCC leaflets in New Orleans, patronized the Black Lamp, a gay bar in Baton Rouge .
 The Warren Report claimed that there was no such person as Hidell, which was the name Oswald used as an alias . Oswald used the name Hidell as a means to get around the world .
 McCombs' information went uninvestigated by both Life and the Warren Commission . McCombs and Life developed the information, but it was never investigated by both parties .
 McCombs was in Austin at the time of the assassination . He had a young intern and stringer, Patsy Swank, who would come up with the scoop on the film .
 Stolley set up shop in a room at the Adolphus Hotel, just across the street from the Carousel Club . The Secret Service and White House Communications Agency had their base of operations during the President's visit .
 Oswald &amp;rsquo;s mother worked in a retail shop on the first floor of the Empire State Building . Oswald's mother worked at the British Security Coordination in New York City .
 Time-Life had Oswald&amp;rsquo;s address in their subscription file . Oswald's location was unknown to some of the authorities who were looking for him .
 Patsy Swank was tipped off about a film of the assassination at the Dallas Police Department . Thompson and Grant went to the Paine house in Irving, Texas .
 She called Stolley at the Adolphus on the phone and in a hushed voice so other reporters wouldn't hear her, told him about the movie of the assassination that was taken by a man whose last name began with a &amp;ldquo;Z. St
 Mr. &amp;ldquo;Z&amp;rdquo: had been driving around aimlessly thinking about what he had witnessed . Mr. Z&amp: "I'm not sure what happened to me," he said .
 Zapruder told him to meet him at his office early the next morning . Stolley wanted to meet with him immediately but Zapruders said he would not meet until the next day . Stlley said he was impressed by the film .
 The wife and mother of the accused assassin agreed to give them their exclusive story if Thompson would take them to see Oswald at the jail . Jackson persuaded her with cash, persuading her to go to the jail with an exclusive story .
 The Zapruder film, the Backyard Photos, the &amp;ldquo;Historic Diary, the . . Thompson & Grant's articles and photos that Life published, have all been examined extensively and deserve even further scrutiny .
 With the death of Oswald, his guilt or innocence in the eyes of the public depended on how she portrayed him for history . Oswald's guilt in the public's eyes depended on her portrayal of him .
 Marina's portrait of Oswald in Life wasn't really her own portrait of him . But it wasn&amp;rsquo;t really Marina's, it was her portrait of the real Oswald .
 Marina's portrait, as described, at least in part, by Marina in Russian, and translated by the author . It was the author&amp;rsquo;s portrait, and described, as well as a portrait by Marina, in Russian and translated .
 At first it was reported that Issac Don Levine, its in-house Russian defector and professional anti-communist propagandist, would ghost write the story .
 Levine would have been perfect for the job, if they were going to stick with the Cuban Communist Conspiracy Cover-story . Levine would be the perfect candidate for the CIA job .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite travel destinations to iReport.com/Travel .
 Mercader got to Trotsky in exile in Mexico City and stabbed him to death, was convicted for it, served time in prison and later released . Mercader stabbed Trotsky in the death and was convicted of it .
 Oswald had described himself as a Trotskyite, and subscribed to The Militant, the monthly publication of the Trotskyite party in the United States, which was founded by the father of Michael Paine, Oswald's benefactor at the time of the assassination .
 Michael Paine provided room and board for Oswald's wife and two kids . Paine also handled Oswald&amp;rsquo;s belongings, including the alleged assassination rifle . Oswald went to Mexico while Oswald went there .
 It&amp;rsquo;s still unclear what Oswald did in Mexico City, but with his fascination with Trotsky, one must wonder if he visited the apartment where Trotsky was killed, or knew the details .
 Issac Don Levine's Wikipedia biography fails to mention The Mind of the Assassin, possibly his most important work . Levine's work is considered the most important in the world .
 Priscilla, like George DeMohrenschildt, had the unique attribute of having made the acquaintance of both the President and his accused assassin . The President and the accused assassin were both men .
 Oswald&amp;rsquo;s good friend DeMohrenschildt knew the Kennedys from their support of the Cystic Fibrosis Charity that he established with his second wife, Dr. Dr. Robert Kennedy .
 Priscilla knew JFK from Massachusetts, where she worked for him in 1954, and a few years later she met Oswald in Moscow at the time of his defection . She worked for JFK in 1954 .
 She was already a player, and an integral part of the disinformation network that promoted the Dealey Plaza operation cover-story and protected those responsible for the murder of John F Kennedy .
 Lyndon B Johnson: "This is the only chance I got. I&amp;rsquo;m a gamblinin" He accepted the Vice Presidential nomination from JFK in 1961 .
 Kelin, John &amp;ndash; Holland McCombs; The Investigation That Never Was. Holland . McCombs . The investigation that never Was. was .
 Warren: McNamara told him McNamara had told him that if we got into a nuclear war that at the first strike we would lose sixty million people . “He said that he had just been talking to McNamara, who was Secretary of Defense then,” Warren continued,
 LBJ used the disinformation of Castro and Cuban complicity to convince the Chief Justice and congressmen to join the Commission . By threatening nuclear war if it were true, LBJ .
 To accept the Lone-Nut scenario as possible or even plausible, all of the accused assassin’s intelligence connections had to be ignored and the assassin portrayed as a sociopathic loser acting upon unknown psychological motives . To accept this scenario, the author of this article had to accept the
 Henry Luce was born in China to missionary parents . He attended Yale and was a member of Skull & Bones . He quit the Baltimore News to form Time Inc. with partner Briton Hadden .
 Henry Luce is also said to have had an affair with Mary Bancroft, one of Allen Dulles’ OSS agents and paramour, while Dulles is said to be intimate with Luce’s wife .
 Clare Booth Luce is the widow of the founder of the Time, Inc. publishing empire, former member of the House of Representatives, former Ambassador to Italy, successful Broadway playwright, international socialite and civic activist .
 Luce will later claim that she receives a call from her 'great friend' William Pawley – who wants to put together a fleet of speedboats which would be used by the exiles to dart in and out of Cuba on ‘intelligence gathering’ missions .
 Luce will maintain that it is one of these boat crews that brings back the first news of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Luce maintains that it will also be one of the boat crews who brings back news of the first Soviet missiles .
 She sat in the same limo with LBJ on JFK’s inauguration day . She asked him why in the world he took the Vice Presidential slot instead of staying in the more powerful position he held in Congress . She quoted him as saying, “One out of every four
 Luce brought aboard a new publisher, C D. – Charles Douglas-Jackson, an OSS hand and President Eisenhower’s personal administrative assistant on psychological warfare and Cold War strategy . Luce also brought aboard C D.-Jackson, who was Eisenhower's personal assistant .
 She says she had been told this by ‘her boys,’ who ran commando missions in and out of Cuba . ‘Her boys’ were commandos, who ran missions in Cuba, she says .
 After the Cuban Missile crisis was successfully resolved, Luce began writing about the CIA’s covert operations against Castro . Life ran photos and stories about Operation Red Cross .
 They were based out of the CIA’s JMWAVE base in Florida, affiliated with the DRE and led by JulioFernandez .
 The accused assassin would be killed while in police custody, and then branded the lone assassin . They would also obtain the infamous Backyard Photos of the accused assassin, his “Historic Diary,” exclusive photos of the Oswald family and then contractually tie up Marina’s
 It was just a matter of whether he was going to be portrayed as part of a Cuban Communist conspiracy or as a deranged, lone nut . The answer would depend on how it all played out in public .
 After Luce hired him, its rumored that his first job was to get a spy in the office of the president of Mexico . Luce’s interests also went south of the border, according to the report .
 McCombs helped abort Life’s belated 1967 investigation of domestic conspiracy . McCombs later helped abort a Life investigation of a domestic conspiracy in 1967 . Life's Life magazine later published a biography of McCombs .
 McCombs supported Clay Shaw, a suspect in Jim Garrison’s case in New Orleans, even though his own team had developed evidence that supported a conspiracy . Life had developed the fact that the McCurley brothers, who had assisted Oswald in handing out the FPCC leaflets in New
 Stolley set up shop in a room at the Adolphus Hotel, just across the street from the Carousel Club, where the Secret Service and White House Communications Agency had their base of operations .
 Oswald’s mother had worked in a retail shop on the first floor of the Empire State Building . The British Security Coordination was based in New York City . Oswald's mother worked in retail shop in the Empire Building .
 Time-Life had Oswald’s address in their subscription file . Oswald's address may have been unknown to authorities who were looking for him .
 Patsy Swank was at the Dallas Police Department, where she had been tipped off about a film of the assassination . Thompson and photographer Alan Grant went out to the Paine house in Irving .
 Stolley quickly found Zapruder’s name in the phone book, assumed it was him, and called his home every fifteen minutes until Zapruders finally answered . The film was the subject of a major television series .
 Mr "Z" had been driving around aimlessly thinking about what he had witnessed through the lens of his camera . Mr “Z’s” had been looking at the scene of the incident .
 The Zapruder film, the Backyard Photos, the “Historic Diary,” Thompson’s articles and Grant’�s photos that Life published, have all been examined extensively . Marina's story is the clincher .
 Marina's portrait was the author’s portrait, as described, at least in part, by Marina in Russian, and translated by the author . At first it was reported that Issac Don Levine would ghost write the story .
 Oswald had described himself as a Trotskyite, and subscribed to The Militant, the monthly publication of the Trotskyite party in the U.S. in the United States, which was founded by the father of Michael Paine, Oswald’s chief benefactor .
 Michael Paine also handled Oswald's belongings, including the alleged assassination rifle . Paine kept Oswald's wife and two kids in his garage while Oswald went to Mexico . Oswald had room and board for his wife and kids .
 It's still unclear what Oswald did in Mexico City, but with his fascination with Trotsky, one must wonder if he visited the apartment where Trotsky was killed, or knew the details .
 Issac Don Levine’s Wikipedia biography fails to mention The Mind of the Assassin, possibly his most important work . If you look up his Wikipedia biography, it fails to even mention that work .
 Oswald’s good friend DeMohrenschildt knew the Kennedys from their support of the Cystic Fibrosis Charity that he established with his second wife, Dr. Dr. Oswald .
 She was already a player, and an integral part of the disinformation network that promoted the Dealey Plaza operation cover-story and protected those responsible for John F Kennedy's murder .
 I'm a gamblin’ man, darling, and this is the only chance I got,” says Lyndon B. Johnson .
 Sitemap is dedicated to the political vision and legacy of John and Robert Kennedy, Martin Luther King Jr., and Malcolm X .