 On one hand, Soviet commanders were ready to launch nuclear weapons against the United States if it ever invaded Cuba . On the other hand, the U.S. was not ready to use nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 The war was averted after some signed agreements between the two countries . However, some of the agreements were made to avoid war .
 During that year, the Soviet Union seemed to be lagging behind the United States in terms of the arms race . The Soviet Union was lagging back behind the U.S. during that year .
 Missiles from the U.S. could strike the Soviet, but Soviet's missiles could only strike Europe . Missiles would only be able to strike Europe if they were fired at the Soviet Union .
 In April, Nikita Khrushchev, Soviet's Premier, had an idea of having missiles placed in Cuba . This would be advantageous to them since it would deter any attack against it . The idea of placing missiles in Cuba would be beneficial to them .
 Fidel Castro agreed to the plan since he wanted to prevent an attack from the U.S. Fidel Castro, Cuba's leader, agreed to it . Fidel Castro: "I want to prevent the United States from attacking Cuba"
 There were several planned attempts which failed, including the Bay of Pigs invasion, to invade the U.S.
 The Soviets were very quick and secretive in building the missile installations in Cuba . After the approval, the Soviets built the installations in the island of Cuba, Cuba .
 In October, reconnaissance photographs showed the Soviets building the missile installations . Contact us anytime to discuss the details of the order .
 President John Kennedy was informed of the events and agreed to enforce a naval quarantine around the small Island .
 This was aimed at preventing any more offensive weapons arriving from the Soviet Union . This was intended to stop the flow of offensive weapons into the country .
 Khrushchev proposed, in a letter, that they would remove the missiles if the U.S. agreed to not invading Cuba . It was then that they agreed to remove them if the United States .
 The United States received a second letter demanding that they also remove their missiles from Turkey . Things even got worse when the U.S. was also told to remove the missiles .
 The tensions were eased when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missile installations . The missile installations were removed from the Soviet Union in 1956 . The tensions between the two countries were eased by the removal .
 It is an important case because it came close to being a nuclear conflict . The case is important because of the close proximity to a nuclear war .
 Moscow-Washington hotline was created as a result of the Hotline Agreement . As a result, the hotline agreement was created .