 Administration’s announcement of direct talks between the U.S. and Iran should be welcomed as good news by those who don’t wish to see yet another bloodbath in the Middle East . Romney can be counted on to condemn the diplomatic breakthrough as insufficiently hawkish .
 President Kennedy first made public the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba 50 years ago . Obama has chosen dialogue over saber rattling . The sole foreign policy debate will be held on the 50th anniversary of the night .
 50 years ago, President Kennedy was able to move beyond his knee-jerk reaction to bomb and invade Cuba . President Kennedy, then President of the Soviet Union in Cuba, made a decision not to invade the island .
 Kennedy tempered his response by adding statesmanship to his brinkmanship . Fortunately, over the course of days Kennedy tempermed his response to the Obama administration .
 As the U.S. tries to assess the danger of Iran becoming a nuclear power the lessons of JFK's dealing with the Soviets over the change in the nuclear status quo are more relevant than ever .
 The bluster and war mongering of repeating the mantra “all options are on the table’s needlessly heightens tensions . It makes war more likely if it is not accompanied by face-saving ways out of the crisis, say experts .
 These kinds of intimidating tactics coming from a nuclear power that can lay waste to Iran, although favored by neo-cons who brought us the disastrous war in Iraq, if devoid of any links to a pathway out of the confrontation amount to little more than bullying and belligerence .
 In the case of Iran, the threat of ‘the use of force’ after years of George W Bush’s calamitous policies in the region do nothing to dissuade the Ayatollahs from continuing their nuclear enrichment program .
 Iran remains a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty has safeguards and allowances for civilian uses of nuclear power . Iran is signatory of the treaty .
 The best U.S. intelligence analyses conclude that Iran is not building an atomic bomb . The best United States intelligence analyses concluded that Iran was not building a bomb . Iran is the world's only major source of nuclear material .
 Kennedy offered Khrushchev sweeteners in the form of offering to remove the U.S.’s Jupiter missiles from Turkey and pledging not to invade the island of Cuba in exchange for the Soviets agreeing to take their missiles out of Cuba . Kennedy offered the Soviets a deal in exchange
 "Any public ultimatum against Iran absent of private offers of concessions amounts to nothing more than war mongering," writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 A wiser policy toward Iran would be to take the military option “off the table,” writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: Deal with Iran on terms of mutual respect and a realist recognition of shared interests .
 President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton are heading for a dual-track policy . This dual track policy appears to be where Obama and Clinton are going to go .
 In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks Iran offered to help the U.S. track down Al Qaeda and has assisted in stemming the drug traffic out of Afghanistan . Let’s not forget that in the . aftermath of . the 9.11 attacks, Iran has helped stem
 The United States overthrew the democratically elected government of Mohammad Mossadegh and installed the Shah Reza Pahlavi . The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency in August 1953 overthrewthe democratically .
 There has never been an adequate American acknowledgement that the United States was responsible for propping up a dictatorship in Iran under the Shah for 25 years .
 The recent history of American-Iranian relations, which has been a lengthy series of underhanded and failed policies, must be taken into account . The history of U.S. relations with Iran must be considered .
 Kennedy spent considerable political ‘capital’ in prodding the United States Senate to ratify the treaty . The Atmospheric Test-Ban Treaty also put the Atmospheric Test Ban Treaty on the front burner of Kennedy's priorities .
 Had Kennedy decided to bomb and invade Cuba it would have been popular with the hardliners around him and with U.S. public opinion . Kennedy would have made a bomb and invasion popular with hardliners .
 It is also highly likely that one of the 98 tactical nuclear bombs on the island would have been detonated over the heads of U.S. marines . But it is also likely that a tactical nuclear bomb was detonated .
 Khrushchev understood he would have to brush back hardliners in his own government . Yet he understood that he had to do so to appease the hardliners inside his own party .
 Robert F Kennedy was sent as his brother’s emissary to privately talk to the Kremlin-connected journalist, Georgi Bolshakov, and to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Imposing a U.S. Navy ‘quarantine’ of Soviet ships
 The United States offered to dismantle its Jupiter missiles in Turkey and agreed not to try to topple the Castro regime . The U.S. also agreed to dismantle the missiles and not try to overthrow Castro's regime .
 In late 1963, Kennedy sent out feelers to the Cuban government that normalizing U.S. relations might be a possibility if Castro agreed to certain conditions, such as limiting the Soviet military presence . Kennedy even sent feelers back to Cuba in late 1963 .
 Kennedy was willing to make substantial concessions and push against the Cold War orthodoxy of the period that took as gospel that the Soviets only respected threats of massive violence . Although these efforts were cut short by Kennedy’s assassination they illustrate that he was willing .
 The last thing this country needs is to blunder itself into another misguided war . President Obama is facing challenges in a more complicated world than existed a half a century ago .
 What’s needed when dealing with Iran and its nuclear program is the cautious pragmatism and willingness to bend and make concessions that characterized President Kennedy's strategy fifty years ago, says President Kennedy .
 Like the crisis of 1962 the tensions with Iran in 2012 can be lessened with a greater willingness to compromise . War will only bring added misery and hardship to the people in that part of the world who have already endured enough .
 Romney will no doubt go on the offensive against Obama’s new Iran initiative decrying it as ‘weak’ and not aligned with his neo-con proclivities .
 We musn’t allow their shrill, politicized whining about diplomatic overtures drown out the crucial need for a peaceful resolution of the conflict . The U.S. should not ignore the shrillness of the whining, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Neither candidate today could make the kind of speech that President Kennedy delivered in June 1963 without enduring considerable political fallout . Unfortunately, neither candidate today would be able to make such a speech without enduring political fallout.
 The tide of time and events will often bring surprising changes in the relations between nations and neighbors . However fixed our likes and dislikes may seem, however fixed our views may seem .
 For in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet . We all inhabit the small planet, and we all have a common common link, says the author .
 We shall do our part to build a world of peace where the weak are safe and the strong are just . And we are all mortal. . . . We shall . . e shall .