 If it is available for your country it will shown as book reader and user fully subscribe to all books . This includes the content of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Santamaría was a trusted member of Fidel Castro's inner circle and friend of Che Guevara . Virtually unknown outside of Cuba, Santamaria was a close friend of the Castro family .
 Following the Revolution's victory Santamaría founded and ran the cultural and arts institution Casa de las Americas . The institution exposed Cubans to some of the world's greatest creative minds and protected queer, black, and feminist artists from state repression .
 Santamaría's suicide in 1980 caused confusion and discomfort throughout Cuba . Despite her commitment to the Revolution, communist orthodoxy's disapproval of suicide prevented the Cuban leadership from mourning and celebrating her .
 Margaret Randall shows how one woman can help change the course of history . Margaret Randall's portrait of Haydée Santamaría shows her friendship with her friend .
 The volume depicts the origins of the conflict, details the middle years, and ends with Fidel Castro's victorious arrival In Havana on January 8, 1959 . The volume was published in 1959 .
 Based on a wealth of hitherto unpublished original material, including confidential military reports, letters from various leaders of the insurrection and data gathered from Interviews held .
 The authors challenge the traditional premise that Cuba's Insurrection began in the rural areas and only later expanded into urban areas . They challenge the idea that Cuba began in rural areas only expanded to urban areas in urban areas later .
 They argue that the insurrectionary struggle was based upon combined urban-rural guerrilla warfare against the regular army . Instead they argue that combined urban warfare was combined urban and rural guerrilla warfare .
 The Cuban Insurrection treats two major movements Involved In the struggle . It examines the growth, ideology, conflicts, and military strategies of their respective rural and urban organizations .
 The book includes a detailed analysis of combat, strikes, uprisings, and expeditions . The book is available for purchase on Amazon.com .
 Original maps and charts illustrate battles, maneuvers, and guerrilla political structures . Original maps illustrate battles and maneuvers, including guerrilla warfare .
 Until now, biographers have treated Castro’s life like prosecutors, scouring his past for evidence to convict a person they don’t like or understand . Castro's life has been treated by biographers as though they were looking for evidence .
 Young Castro challenges us to put aside caricature of a bearded, cigar-munching, anti-American hothead . Castro became the dictator who acted as a thorn in the side of U.S. presidents for nearly half a century . Castro challenged us to find out how he became
 In this “gripping and edifying narrative…Hansen brings imposing research and notable erudition” to Castro’s early life, says Hansen . Castro getting his toughness from a father who survived Spain's class system and colonial wars to become one of the most
 We see a boy running around that plantation more comfortable playing with the children of his father’s laborers than his own classmates at elite boarding schools in Santiago de Cuba and Havana .
 We discover a young man who writes flowery love letters from prison and contemplates the meaning of life . The film follows a gregarious soul attentive to the needs of strangers but indifferent to his own family .
 These pages show a liberal democrat who admires FDR’s New Deal policies and is skeptical of communism, but is also hostile to American imperialism . These pages also show the liberal democrat as hostile to U.S. imperialism .
 Pictures show audacious militant who stages a reckless attack on a military barracks but is canny about building an army of resisters . They show an audacious attack on the barracks but also show a canny strategy to build an army .
 Jonathan Hansen was able to secure cooperation from Castro’s family and closest confidants . Hansen was the first American historian in a generation to gain access to the Castro archives in Havana .
 He gained access to hundreds of never-before-seen letters and interviewed people he was the first to ask for their impressions of the man .
 No other book offers this inside look at the strategies of the Soviet leadership .
 This important and controversial book draws the missing half of the story from secret Soviet archives revealed exclusively by the authors . Includes files of Nikita Khrushchev and his leadership circle . The book is published in Russia and Ukraine .
 Documents contain details of over forty secret meetings between Robert Kennedy and his Soviet contact . Documents include records of Castro's first solicitation of Soviet favor, and plans, suspicions, and strategies of Khrushchev .
 This unique research opportunity has allowed the authors to tell the complete, fascinating, and terrifying story of the most dangerous days of the last half-century . The authors say they have been given a unique opportunity to tell their story .
 The revolutionary regime has provided vital support to the rest of the region, offering everything from medical and development assistance to training and advice on guerrilla warfare .
 Cuba and Revolutionary Latin America is the first oral history of Cuba's liberation struggle . The first oral story of Cuba and revolutionary Latin America will be told in an oral history .
 Dirk Kruijt looks at the role of both veterans and the post-Revolution fidelista generation in shaping Cuba and the Americas . Drawing on a vast array of original testimonies, he looks at both the veterans and post-revolution fidelistas .
 Cuba and Revolutionary Latin America offers unique insight into a nation which, despite its small size and notional pariah status, remains one of the most influential countries in the Americas . Featuring the testimonies of over sixty Cuban officials and former combatants, the book offers unique insights into Cuba .
 This insightful book, the most intimate and dispassionate biography of the revolutionary leader, shows that neither assessment is true . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 Leycester Coltman was British ambassador to Cuba in the early 1990s . He came as close to personal friendship with Castro as any foreigner was allowed to visit .
 Coltman was in a unique position to observe the dictator's personality in both public and private situations . Coltman: "With frequent contact and regular conversations, Coltman's presence was a unique vantage point to observe"
 For half a century he has been loved, admired, feared, and hated, but seldom really understood . Here he presents a close-up view of the man who for 50 years has been feared and hated .
 Coltman chronicles the Cuban leader's extraordinary life from the political activism of his university days in Havana to periods of exile, imprisonment, and guerilla warfare alongside Che Guevara, to the uncertainties of his old age .
 Antoni Kapcia focuses instead on a wider cast of characters . The ground-breaking work focuses on a wide range of characters in a novel .
 Kapcia looks at the many others who, over the decades, have been involved in decision-making and have often made a significant difference . Along with the obvious, albeit often misunderstood, contributions from Che Guevara and Raúl Castro, look at the others who have made
 Cuba has undergone an unusual, if not unique, process of change, says author . He interprets their various roles within a wider process of nation-building . Cuba is undergoing a unique process of country-building, he says .
 Cuba's history and its future are essential reading for anyone interested in Cuba's future . This is the first time Cuba has been granted freedom of expression .
 Tariq Ali provides a searing analysis of the relevance of Castro’s message for today . As Latin America experiences more revolutions in Venezuela and Bolivia, Ali analyzes Castro's message for the future .
 In 1961, at the height of the Cold War, the United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba . Cuba's revolution had taken power three years earlier . The U.S. severed diplomatic ties with Cuba in 1961 .
 For more than half a century, the stand-off continued through the tenure of ten U.S. presidents and the 50-year rule of Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of Cuba .
 His death in 2016, and the retirement of his brother and successor Raúl Castro in 2021, have spurred questions about the country’s future . Castro's death and his brother's retirement in 2021 have prompted questions .
 The relationship between the U.S. and Cuba has been a subject of debate once again . Meanwhile, politics in Washington continues to play a key role in the relationship with Cuba .
 Ada Ferrer delivers an “important” and moving chronicle that demands a new reckoning with both the island’s past and its relationship with the U.S. The book is published by award-winning historian Ada Fierrer .
 An American History provides us with a front-row seat as we witness the evolution of the modern nation, with its dramatic record of conquest and colonization .
 Ferrer explores the sometimes surprising, often troubled intimacy between the U.S. and Cuba . He also documents the many ways the island has been a recurring presence in the United States affairs .
 Filled with rousing stories and characters, this is a stunning and monumental account like no other . Draws on more than thirty years of research in Cuba, Spain, and the United States .
 This updated, second edition contains a new epilogue by the author that covers the last decade . The book includes such newsworthy events as the Elian Gonzalez controversy, the growing immigrant community of Cuban-Americans in Florida .
 I wanted him to find a solution to all the shortages of clothes; of meat, so it would again be distributed through the ration books . I wanted to find out a way to distribute meat, clothes, meat, and meat .
 'I kept writing him letters from a sweet and well-behaved child, a brave but sad girl,' she says . 'I was a sweet girl, a well behaved child, but a brave and sad girl'
 Fidel Castro would occasionally visit her house bearing gifts just for her . Alina Fernandez found nothing abnormal in the fact that Fidel Castro occasionally visited her house . Fernandez says she found nothing unusual in the visit .
 Ann Louise Bardach offers a spellbinding chronicle of the Havana-Washington political showdown . Bardach draws on nearly two decades of reporting and countless interviews with everyone .
 The result is an unforgettable dual portrait of Fidel and Raúl Castro -arguably the most successful and enduring political brother team in history . The result of this portrait is a double portrait of the brothers .
 Since 1959, Fidel Castro has been the supreme leader of Cuba, deftly checkmating his foes, both from within and abroad . Castro has outfoxed dozens of assassination attempts, vanquished only by collapsing health . Fidel Castro was the Cuban president of Cuba in the early 1950s .
 Bardach offers profound and surprising answers to these questions . Bardach chronicles Castro's protracted farewell and assesses his transformative impact on the world stage and legacy that will long outlive him .
 In Miami, she interviews scores of exiles including Castro's would-be assassins Orlando Bosch and Luis Posada Carriles . In Washington, she reports on the Obama administration's struggle to formulate a post-Castro strategy . In Havanah she permeates the bubble around the
 Bardach delivers a compelling meditation on one of the most controversial, combative, and charismatic rulers in history . Bardach's book is available on Amazon.com .
 Without Fidel includes never-before-published reporting on Castro, his family, and his half-century grip on the largest country in the Caribbean . Includes how his departure will forever transform politics and policy in the Western Hemisphere .
 America's fixation on the tropical socialist republic has only grown over the years, fueled in part by successive waves of Cuban immigration and Castro's larger-than-life persona . America has a fixation on Cuba .
 Cubans are now a major ethnic group in Florida . The exile community is so powerful that every American president has curried favor with it . Cubans have been a major factor in Florida politics .
 Julia Sweig updates her concise and remarkably accessible portrait of the small island nation . What Everyone Needs to Know® is What Everyone Need to Know!
 This edition contains a new foreword that discusses developments since Obama and Raul Castro announced the normalization of US-Cuba relations and restored formal diplomatic ties .
 A new final chapter discusses how normalization came to pass and covers Pope Francis' visit to Cuba, where he met with Fidel and Raul Castro . Pope Francis also meets with Fidel, Raul and Fidel Castro during his visit .
 Book looks back over Cuba's history since the Spanish American War before shifting to recent times . Expansive in coverage and authoritative in scope, the book looks back at the country's history .
 Focusing equally on Cuba's role in world affairs and its own social and political transformations, Sweig divides the book chronologically into the pre-Fidel era, the period between the 1959 revolution and the fall of the Soviet Union, the post-Cold War era .
 The best compact reference on Cuba's internal politics, its often fraught relationship with the U.S., and its shifting relationship with global community . Informative, pithy, and lucidly written, it is the best compact guide to Cuba .
 All sparked movements in the name of liberating their people from their oppressors—capitalists, foreign imperialists, or dictators in their own country . The movements were sparked by people who wanted to liberate their people .
 These revolutionaries rallied the masses in the name of freedom, only to become more tyrannical than those they replaced . The revolution was the work of revolutionaries who became tyrannical . They were replaced by those who were tyrannical rather than their predecessors .
 Much has been written about the anatomy of revolution from Edmund Burke to Crane Brinton Crane, Franz Fanon, and contemporary theorists of revolution found in the modern academy .
 What is missing is a dissection of the revolutionary minds that destroyed the old for the creation of a more harmful new . Yet what is missing here is the need to dissection the minds of revolutionary minds .
 Revolutionary Monsters explores basic questions about the revolutionary personality, and examines how these revolutionaries came to envision themselves as prophets of a new age . Revolutionary Monsters is available on Amazon.com .
 The titles in this series will be valuable resources for journalists, students, diplomats, business people, and anyone else who is interested in the politics of these richly diverse areas . The titles will be used to help students, students and business people .
 A confidential story imparted by a cousin draws together disparate threads and weaves a coherent explanation . The story weaves together together in a new book .
 Facundo Bacardi launched in Cuba in 1862, bringing worldwide fame to the island . Bacardi descendants participated in every aspect of Cuban life in the decades following .
 Gjelten brings to life the larger story of Cuba's fight for freedom, its tortured relationship with America, the rise of Fidel Castro, and the violent division of the Cuban nation . With his intimate account of their struggles and adventures across five generations, GJelten .
 The author of this book takes a highly original approach to understanding the past three decades of Cuban history . The author offers an analysis and interpretation of the prolific writings and speeches of Fidel Castro .
 Richard Sanderlin met Frank Sturgis, a Marine Corps veteran, Army Intelligence Officer, and future Watergate burglar . Sturgs was a future Marine Corps vet, Army intelligence officer, and a future Watergate burglar . Sanderlins met another Norfolk, Virginia native, Frank
 Richard, and Frank relocated to Miami, Florida where they ran an arms and munition smuggling operation into Cuba, bound for the rebels of Fidel Castro . Richard, Frank and Frank ran arms and ammunition smuggling operation .
 Richard Sanderlin traveled to the Sierra Maestra Mountains in Oriente Province Cuba, where he trained the rebels of Fidel, and Raul Castro, in military strategy, tactics, weapon handling, and hand to hand fighting .
 Richard led a guerrilla band into ten combat operations against the Batista army . After completing the training of Raul Castro’s Second Front, Richard became a member of the Second Front .
 This is the story of an idealistic young warrior who fought against the tyranny of dictatorship only to be betrayed by a communist conspiracy led by Fidel Castro . The film is based on the life of Fidel Castro in Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 The book traces the roots of the ‘Caribbean Legion’, a transnational network of anti-dictatorial revolutionaries . Castro and many of his allies in exile exploited this web during the struggle against Fulgencio Batista .
 Contacts in this network provided the Cuban revolutionaries with crucial military, financial, and diplomatic support from the democratic governments of José Figueres in Costa Rica and Rómulo Betancourt in Venezuela . Contacts entangled the Cuban revolution in a larger regional struggle between democratic regimes and
 Transnational involvement shaped the revolutionary regime of 1959 and had far-reaching repercussions for the larger geopolitical dynamics in the region, and for the Cold War as a whole . This transnational involvement .
 In the late 1990s, as the regime began sending its oldest comrades to the firing squad, he became A Man Who Knew Too Much . He became a man who knew too much about the regime .
 Fuentes has written a brilliant, satirical, and captivating “autobiography” of the Cuban leader . The book discusses everything from Castro’s early sexual experiences in Birán to his feelings about Che Guevara .
 This wickedly entertaining, true-to-life masterpiece is as imaginative and outsized as Castro himself . Akin to Gertrude Stein’s The Autobiography of Alice B Toklas, or Edmund Morris's Dutch, it's as imaginative as Castro .
 The goal of the leaders of the revolutionary movements in all three countries was to create a progressive, independent bourgeois-democratic state . However, contrary to expectations, the national bourgeoisie did not welcome a national democratic revolution . The goal was to become a progressive and independent state .
 It fought hard to re-assert its own and U.S. imperialism’s economic and political stranglehold, opposing increased democratic rights, greater social equality, agrarian reform and redistribution of wealth . Instead, faced with a mass movement, it fought hard .
 In all three countries, the national bourgeoisie joined forces with imperialism and used violent methods to reverse the progressive measures made, and when these attempts failed carried on a campaign of economic sabotage to starve the masses into submission .
 In Cuba the revolution was propelled forward by abolishing capitalism and enormous conquests were made . In Cuba, the revolution is propelled forward with abolishment of capitalism, says Jose Josefina .
 In Nicaragua and Venezuela, the revolution was stopped half way, leading to disaster and defeat . In Venezuela and Nicaragua, it was stopped halfway through the revolution . In Nicaragua, Venezuela, it has been stopped half-way leading to a disaster .
 As the world enters a decisive revolutionary epoch, reformists attempt to hold that revolution back . Reformists, just as they did in Nicaragua and Venezuela, are trying to hold the revolution back, he says .
 In the face of all experience, their solution to social crises is one which stubbornly remains within the narrow limits of capitalism . The solution to these crises is that they must remain within capitalism's narrow limits .
 This book is a contribution to the debate about revolutionary strategy . It is published by Simon Tisdall, a former member of the Socialist Party .
 It highlights the lessons to be learned from the recent past, argues against the failed reformist approach . Only through the workers coming to power and expropriating the oligarchy can we begin to overcome the exploitation and oppression of the masses, argues .
 In 1965 Cuba formed an alliance with the Angolan MPLA which evolved into the flagship of its global 'internationalist' mission . Cuba's spurious 'victory' at Cuito Cuanavale resulted in Cuba's fifteen-year occupation of Angola .
 This new book dispels myths of the Cuban intervention, revealing that Havana's decision to intervene was not so much an heroic gesture of solidarity, but rather a last-ditch gamble to avert disaster .
 This book examines Cuba's role in the Angolan War in a global context . It shows how the interaction between the many players in Angola shaped and affected Cuba's intervention .
 The volume foregrounds the experience of Cubans from all walks of life . It includes slaves, prostitutes, doctors, activists, and historians . The volume is published in New York and London .
 The Cuba Reader contains over twenty new selections that explore the changes and continuities in Cuba since Fidel Castro stepped down from power in 2006 . Combining songs, poetry, fiction, journalism, journalism and political speeches, this revised and updated second edition contains over 20 new selections .
 For students, travelers, and all those who want to know more about the island nation just ninety miles south of Florida, The Cuba Reader is an invaluable introduction . For students and travelers, the book is a valuable introduction .
 The Cuban Revolution took power from a national elite subordinate to foreign capital . It developed alternative structures of popular democracy that have functioned to keep delegates of the people in power .
 While Cuba has persisted, the peoples of the Third World, knocked down by the neoliberal project, have found social movement and political life . This is especially evident in Latin America and the Non-Aligned Movement, especially evident .
 The capitalist world-economy increasingly reveals its unsustainability, and the global elite demonstrate its incapacity to respond to a multifaceted and sustained global crisis . At the same time, the capitalist world economy reveals its unustainability .
 The dynamics establish conditions for popular democratic socialist revolutions in the North . These dynamics establish . conditions for democratic socialist revolution in the north .
 What neither superpower bargained on was that their puppets would come to life . Neither did they expect the puppets to live in the real world .
 Red Heat tells the gripping story of the men responsible for this rude surprise . From Cuba, the charismatic Fidel Castro and his mysterious brother Raúl . from Argentina, the ideologue Che Guevara . from the Dominican Republic, the capricious psychopath Rafael Trujillo .
 Alex von Tunzelmann shows her storytelling prowess yet again in a riveting narrative of clashing ideologies, the politics of fear, the machinations of superpowers, and the brazen daring of the mavericks who took them on .
 Based upon the author's firsthand knowledge as a journalist focused on Latin America, this book provides the latest information, historical or present, on such revolutions .
 Stephen Cushion argues that the Cuban working class played a much more decisive role in the Revolution’s outcome than previously understood . In this unique and stimulating book, he turns the conventional wisdom on its head .
 Cushion contends that significant portions of the Cuban working class launched an underground movement in tandem with the guerillas operating in the mountains . He says that the opposite is true, and that the working class is behind the underground movement .
 The book analyzes a wealth of leaflets, pamphlets, clandestine newspapers, and other agitational material from the 1950s that has never before been systematically examined . Developed during five research trips to Cuba under the auspices of the Institute of Cuban History .
 Cushion uncovers widespread militant activity, from illegal strikes to sabotage to armed conflict with the state . All of these culminated in two revolutionary workers’ congresses and the largest general strike in Cuban history .
 He argues that these efforts helped clinch the victory of the revolution, and thus presents a fresh and provocative take on the place of the working class in Cuban history .