 Final Judgment outlines the entirety of the conspiracy that took the life of John F Kennedy . Open-minded individuals who have dared to read Final Judgment have concluded that this book is the one book that most completely outlines the entire conspiracy .
 Final Judgment presents what the author, Michael Collins Piper, calls “the other side of the jigsaw puzzle” The long-ignored, but otherwise freely available details present a stark new light on the circumstances surrounding JFK’s assassination, Piper says .
 President Kennedy was working to prevent Israel from acquiring nuclear weapons of mass destruction, a fact that remained a dark secret for decades . This book demonstrates the strong likelihood Israel’s intelligence service, the Mossad, collaborated alongside the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate in the JFK assassination
 Once you’ ve read Final Judgment you will see the evidence of likely Israeli involvement is there . The evidence is clear in Final Judgment .
 Although first published in 1994, only one newspaper, a small Washington-based weekly, even mentioned the book .
 Final Judgment has now sold more than 40,000 copies, achieving he proverbial status of “underground” bestseller . Despite that, Final Judgment is now a "underground" bestseller, it has sold over 40,00 copies worldwide .
 Most Americans never heard of this groundbreaking historical bombshell or of its controversial thesis . Yet most Americans didn't hear of the controversial thesis, and most never heard the story .
 This edition was documented with 1069 footnotes and featured an extended new ""question and answer"" section . This edition of this edition of the World Series of Science Fiction was published in 1998 . It also featured a new question and answer section for the author .
 The cover of this volume featured photographs of a number of players in the JFK conspiracy . This volume was released in October 2013 .
 Some deletions of subheadings were made to accommodate important factual information added .
 This volume is the second printing of the 6th edition . It includes a number of textual additions not appearing in the first printing of this edition . This volume includes textual additions .
 The author continues to hope this will be his ""last word" on the subject . e This Jan 2007 ebook edition includes internal hyperlink navigation .
 This ebook makes some some some alterations and adaptions for the electronic format that are noted in the Erratum section . However, while reproducing all original text, this ebook reproduces the original text .
 Ebook page numbers are express at the top of various pages as plain numbers . The Ebook is written in black and white . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page .
 This ebook contains internal hyperlink navigation and external links . Use this ebook to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . At the bottom of the page, please share your knowledge of events in this ebook .
 All references to the Sixth Edition in the text refer to the soft cover edition, which was a substantially enlarged, updated, revised edition of Final Judgment, first published in January, 1994 .
 The author's web site is at mikepiperreport.com . Please visit the author’s web site for the latest contact information .
 Michael Collins Piper’s works are available in ebook form . Please also visit americaafirstbooks.com for the latest listings of the author's works in ebook .
 This may be the most unusual cover of any book about the assassination of John F Kennedy . There have been many versions of this cover of the book .
 Meyer Lansky, David Ben-Gurion, James J Angleton and James J. Angleton were CIA's counterintelligence and liaison for Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad . Angleton was the CIA's director of counterintelligence in 1963 .
 Over Angleton's shoulder is the logo of the Central Intelligence Agency . Angleton was the CIA director of the Cold War. Angleton is believed to have been killed by the CIA .
 Israel achieved its nuclear weapons capabilities precisely because of the assassination of President Kennedy, Israel says . President Kennedy's assassination was the trigger for Israel to develop nuclear weapons .
 At the bottom are shown Attorney General Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy and their father, Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy, founder of the Kennedy family's would-be dynasty .
 John Kennedy's assassination ended any possibility of another Kennedy reaching the White House . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was the first president to be elected to the presidency .
 For ten years Israeli propagandists called Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper a ""liar"" and an ""anti-Semite"" for charging that Israeli intelligence played a role in the JFK assassination conspiracy . JFK's bitter secret conflict with Israeli Prime Minister David BenGurion over Israel's
 Mordechai Vanunu charged that supporters of Israel's drive for nuclear weapons were involved in JFK's assassination precisely because of JFK's interference with their ambitions . Vanununu spent 18 years in prison for exposing Israel's covert atomic weapons program .
 The Israeli government dismissed Vanunu's allegations, but what he said received attention in newspapers worldwide, with the notable exception of the U.S. where one and only one newspaper, mentioned the charges . The United States was the only newspaper that mentioned VanUnu's charges .
 Stern was the closest friend of Clay Shaw, the longtime CIA asset charged by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison in the JFK conspiracy . Stern was also a friend of Shaw, who was charged by Garrison with conspiracy .
 Final Judgment had already documented Shaw's ties to Israeli intelligence . The NUMEC-Stern connection is all the more damning . Garrison ultimately concluded there was an Israeli connection behind the conspiracy .
 NUMEC investor was Pittsburgh's CIA-connected billionaire Richard Scaife, whose protééé, Joe Farah, a vocal supporter of Israel, promoted a JFK conspiracy book . The book was designed to distract attention from Final Judgment . NUMEC investors include Pittsburgh's "right wing
 JFK and Israel—No "Special Friendship" ""Israel need not apologize for the assassination or destruction of those who seek to destroy it," says JFK's widow .
 The murder of President Kennedy brought to an abrupt end the pressure being applied by the U.S. administration on the government of Israel to discontinue the nuclear program . In Israel and the Bomb, Avner Cohen demonstrates at length the pressures .
 Reuven Pedatzer in the Israeli newspaper, Ha'aretz, in 1999, reviewed Israel and the Bomb .
 Joseph Kennedy returned to the U.S. aboard an ocean liner that was also carrying Israel Jacobson, a poor Lubavitcher rabbi, and six of his yeshiva students, who were fleeing the Nazis . Kennedy .
 Paul Findley , in The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, March 1992 . Findley: "The Middle East has been a source of tension in the region for decades"
 Benjamin Givli, head of Israeli military intelligence, outlines an Israeli terror campaign to be blamed upon Moslem extremists . Head of Israel's military intelligence said the campaign will be blamed on Moslem extremist groups .
 Israeli intelligence did jobs for the CIA and for the rest of the American intelligence . Israeli state has been since almost the earliest days of the Israeli state and CIA a secret bond . Israeli intelligence has been involved in the CIA since the early 1980s .
 These are paintings, generally of wilderness landscapes, that, viewed up close, look like simple picturesque scenes . The paintings are generally of simple wilderness landscapes . They look like a lake with a snow-covered slope reflected on its surface .
 The mirrored rock assumes the shape of an eagle in flight, the flowers form themselves into a rearing stallion . The boles of the birch trees become the profile of an Apache warrior .
 Over the years . . . it has become virtually impossible to see what the truth is. Over the . years . It's become virtually . impossible to . see what is the truth .
 What ultimately faces us is a hydra-headed beast, but it is possible to come to grips at least with its claws . The world's biggest challenge is to find out how to deal with the beast .
 Upon the first release of his book, Final Judgment, a storm of controversy erupted in the U.S. with certain ""pressure groups" trying to have the book banned .
 Final Judgment has gone through three more printings . Since then, the controversy hasn't abated . Final Judgment was released in October .
 We believe that all theories on the JFK assassination should be heard, no matter whether you agree with them or not . We here in Australia believe that . all theories should be considered .
 Trying to get another book banned because you don't agree with it, or it isn't Politically Correct, is just the kind of thing we fight against . Censorship of the 1980s and 90s was the greatest censorship drive of the 80s and 1990s .
 FBI and CIA "redacting""” lines of text here and there . It's just the same as groups such as the FBI and the CIA ""redacting"’s .
 Probable Cause is proud to review Final Judgment and hope that we never go down the path of the ""American Model" "Freedom of speech and the First Amendment and all that" is fine, but until you start speaking out and stepping on other people's toes, he says . Prob
 Piper's thesis is that Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, played a key role in the assassination alongside the CIA and organized crime . Piper: Mossad played a major role in assassination alongside organized crime and the CIA .
 JFK was involved in an increasingly bitter behind-the-scenes dispute with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion over Israel's steadfast determination to build a nuclear arsenal . JFK was also involved in a bitter dispute with Ben Gurion over the issue .
 Well, actually, you'll be surprised how many wellknown ""JFK assassination players"" have links to the Mossad . We were quite impressed with the documented evidence within the book .
 Piper is under attack from the ADL in the U.S. for this book and, really, it's not warranted . Piper is the author of a new book, "Piper Piper"
 Final Judgment is the most thorough, most honest, most penetrating, most factual, and most analytically complete and systematic of all that I have read so far . Final Judgment will be published in the U.S. at the end of the year .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of the latest iReport gallery .
 At each level, the threads of the puzzle are woven together in such a way that the fog from the labyrinth is slowly but inexorably lifted . Eventually, the outlines of the conspiracy are laid bare in the game .
 While the links at some of the levels may be tenuous, the author refuses to “fake or fudge the data’ or to be “fatally selective’ in what is included or left out . As was so clearly the case in Gerald Posner's Case
 Piper is intrepid in following his analysis to every logical conclusion—wherever they lead and whatever the implications may be, he says . Piper: "I'm going to follow my analysis wherever it leads"
 He focuses on the “why and how’ of the conspiracy and unmistakably the threads all lead back to Israel, Israeli super-patriots, the Meyer Lansky led “Jewish branch of the mob,’ and the Mossad and the international “agents
 We knew that the truth would have its own context, its own smell, like Peter Dale Scott's Deep Politics and the Death of JFK did . We knew we would have to listen to the truth, but we didn't expect it to come out of the story .
 Michael Collins Piper has struck gold in his new book, The Yankee & Cowboy War . Piper's book has plenty of surprises and plenty of them in the grand tradition of Carl Oglesby's .
 He has hit the “mother lode,’ and in the process has pointed the finger at, if not tightened the proverbial noose around, the necks of the cabal of conspirators responsible for pulling the strings of the JFK assassination .
 Because of this book, future research will begin to focus more on the “big picture,’ and turn away from constantly grinding, ad nauseam, at inconsistencies in the Warren Commission's Report . Future research will now focus on "big picture"
 Compared to Posner's Case Closed, Final Judgment is a masterpiece."" —Herbert L Calhoun, Ph.D. retired as deputy division chief of the Policy, Plans and Analysis Office of the State Department .
 Gill was a journalist with United Press International and the Pittsburgh Press . Gill also wrote for Life, Fortune, the Saturday Evening Post, Reader's Digest and National Geographic .
 Kennedy was attempting to halt the development of nuclear weapons by the Israelis, while simultaneously planning to disband the CIA and disengage our military troops from the Indo-China area . Kennedy was also planning to disestablish the CIA .
 Donn De Grand Pre served as Deputy Chief of the International Division/Office of the Chief of Research and Development at the Pentagon . He is a veteran of World War II and Korea .
 Grand Pre was Director for Ground Weapons Systems in the newly-created office of International Logistics Negotiations . He was responsible for negotiating sales contracts with heads of foreign nations for military weapons systems .
 I started to read what I would not have purchased at a dollar book sale . So I started reading what I wouldn't have purchased if I had been at the sale . I'm not sure if I would have purchased a book like this .
 I am convinced that you have seen and now help others see the largest feature of the JFK assassination that has been missed by all up to this period . I am now convinced that . help others . see the most significant feature of JFK assassination .
 Final Judgment is a 'must' book because it raises and answers so many questions which we need to know about . Final Judgment will be a must-read book for all of us to read .
 Victory is not possible without information, and this book has given us the information we need. This book has helped us to win the war, and we need to know more about it .
 If read by enough people, the book will turn American politics upside down . Final JUDGment is the one book that will change American politics .
 The document focused on the specifics of how the Israelis could have influenced the events in Dallas . The document was apparently the work of a professional journalist .
 The data is quite explosive, particularly when contrasted with the mythology regarding ""Big D"" repeated ad infinitum in JFK literature . The data was quite explosive .
 Understanding the real Dallas—not the city of legend and of Hollywood drama—prepares one for the revelations laid forth in Final Judgment .
 The document buries the tired old myth that a clique of anti-Semitic White Anglo-Saxon Protestant oil plutocrats ruled Dallas . The document was written in the 1920s .
 Dallas was a major center of fundraising and arms smuggling on behalf of the Zionist cause, going back to the 1940s . Dallas had an immensely powerful Jewish community, but more importantly, the city had been a major fundraising center .
 Even Jonathan Pollard, the American spy for Israel, said he was inspired to pro-Israel activism by stories he heard of gunrunning for the Israeli underground in Texas .
 In fact, the Sonneborn Institute smuggled aircraft parts out of Texas to Israel . The official published history of a major Zionist arms smuggling operation reports its agents .
 Sonneborn's activities were at a zenith in 1947, the year prior to Israel's birth . This was happening when a then recently discharged Army Air Corps aircraft mechanic, Jack Ruby, was re-settling in Dallas in 1947 .
 Ruby bragged of having run arms to Israel and, in 1963, is now known to have been part of an arms smuggling operation overseen by an Israeli intelligence officer . Ruby is believed to have run arms smuggling to Israel .
 The Israeli connection to Texas was a lot more intimate than many today ever realized . Israel's connection to the U.S. was an intimate affair with Texas, the author says .
 JFK was, at that time, at loggerheads with Israel over its nuclear arms program . It's critical to recognize how JFK was lured to Dallas and who was in charge of his assassination .
 Little-noticed evidence shows that two of the three key figures who dominated the CC were Jewish . JFK's Dallas leg of his Texas trip was sponsored by the Citizens Council . The CC was the elite business group that ruled Dallas .
 These were the folks who really ran Dallas, not the conservatives affiliated with the John Birch Society, as the old myth suggests . The city was founded by the city of Dallas, Texas, in the 1920s .
 Julius Schepps was an outspokenly pro-Israel liquor wholesaler . Schepps held the distribution rights in Dallas for the Bronfman family's Seagram's products .
 There is evidence that Jack Ruby was on the payroll of the Bronfman family, whose fingerprints are to be found all over the JFK assassination conspiracy . And as we shall see, there is also evidence that there was evidence that Ruby was working for the family .
 The means by which the Dallas elite gained control of JFK's Dallas trip agenda is interesting . JFK's JFK trip agenda was interesting .
 Dallas Jewish leader and public relations man, Sam Bloom, was the CC's longtime executive director . Bloom was one of the least known but most pivotal figures in world history . The CC was founded by Jewish leaders in 1964 .
 Bloom, representing the Dallas elite, and Bruno, JFK's veteran advance man, confront each other . Bloom represents the city's elite, but Bruno is a veteran JFK advance man . Bruno was JFK's senior advance man.
 Bruno wanted the president to speak at the Women's Building, but the rulers of Dallas insisted JFK speak . JFK spoke at the Trade Mart . Bruno wanted JFK to speak to the women's building, but Dallas rulers insisted he did .
 Bruno fought long and hard, after much pressure, the Dallas elite prevailed . Bruno: "This was one of the few fights like this that I had lost" Bruno: "This was a fight like this. This was a battle of the night"
 JFK would have traveled two blocks farther away from the TSBD . JFK's advance man would have been able to get him out of the kill zone at greater speed . JFK was on his way to the preferred location .
 The Secret Service objected to the publication of JFK's motorcade route . Bloom made sure a map of the route was repeatedly published in Dallas papers .
 The 'patsy' knew JFK would pass by his workplace . Later, later, there was a plausible explanation as to how he knew JFK .
 That an assassin quite probably fired on JFK from the Dal-Tex Building is most relevant in the context of an Israeli connection . That assassination probably occurred in the same place as JFK .
 Dal-Tex was co-owned by David Weisblat, a major financial backer of the Israeli lobby's Anti-Defamation League . The firm housed, on different floors, firms that utilized the telephone number of Morty Freedman, an attorney, garment manufacturer, and activist in
 JFK was working to stop Israel's nuclear arms program . One Dal-Tex firm linked to Freedman was the Dallas Uranium & Oil Company .
 One of Freedman's Dal-Tex business partners was Abe Zapruder, the Jewish dress manufacturer who filmed the assassination and profited immensely . It is also intriguing that Freedman was also a partner with Zapruders .
 Some now believe Zapruder had advance knowledge of the assassination . Some believe he knew about the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Sam Bloom pressured Elgin Crull, the city manager, to pressure Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry into making Oswald accessible to the press and to move him publicly from the police station to the city jail . Bloom had earlier maneuvered JFK into the kill zone, and pressured Crull to move
 The situation was in place for Jack Ruby to move in for the kill . Thus, the situation was set up for Ruby to kill .
 There are several sources, including Dallas FBI agent James Hosty, who stated Bloom and his backers were the forces behind this . Hosty: Bloom and backers were behind this. There are a number of sources .
 When police searched Ruby's home, they found a slip of paper with Bloom's name, address and telephone number on it . Ruby is accused of stabbing Bloom to death in a car crash .
 This will be painful for those who thought the city was an anti-Jewish stronghold, ripe for Nazi revolution . The city was thought to be ripe for a Nazi revolution, according to the historian .
 Dallas was actually an outpost for the advancement of the interests of Israel and today it very much remains so . Instead, Dallas was an outpost of the Israeli interests of the country .
 JFK assassination truth seekers should take a new look at Final Judgment . Brown ignored details Brown ignored in terms of their ultimate context .
 Advance orders from book dealers—presumably—make this unusual phenomenon possible .
 There is much more to the story behind the story of ""best-sellers"" than meets the eye . Whatever the case, there's much more than a best-seller .
 Most of the major names in the publishing industry probably would prefer left untold . And it's a story that most of them would prefer to leave it untold .
 A number of books dealing with the JFK assassination have reached the Times’ list .
 Mark Lane's ground-breaking international best-seller, Rush to Judgment, did reach the Times list . Lane's book was never reviewed by the Times, which tells us that it is the source of ""all the news that's fit to print"
 In more recent years, several more volumes did reach the Times’ best-seller list . In the wake of the release of Oliver Stone’s Hollywood blockbuster, JFK .
 Nearly 8,000 copies of Final Judgment were sold within two weeks of the book's release in January of 1994 . This despite the fact that nearly 8,00 copies were sold in two weeks . This as a response to a single advertisement in a relatively small national weekly newspaper .
 Final Judgment is being sold across the country with more than 40,000 copies in circulation . Now, as a result of direct mail promotions, many thousands more copies of Final Judgment are being sold .
 When the book was temporarily out of print, there was so much demand that second-hand copies were being sold by used book dealers over the Internet for as much—at one point—as $185 a copy .
 That Final Judgment has already sold so well is quite remarkable, considering the general lack of publicity that the book has received . Final Judgment will be released in November .
 Blakey's book, Final Judgment, received no mass media promotion whatsoever . Yet, Blakey sold only some 20,000 copies of the book .
 Final Judgment will be the only book you ever need to read on the JFK assassination . Final Judgment is based on the assassination of JFK JFK in 1968 .
 Final Judgment is a new edition of a new series of books on the subject of Scientology . Final Judgment will be released in November 2014 .
 Final Judgment ties together little-known details that have been ignored or misunderstood by other authors . Dissecting the assassination conspiracy in its entirety is Final Judgment . Final Judgment: Final Judgment is an attempt to uncover the truth behind the assassination .
 Once you've read Final Judgment, you'll never look at the JFK assassination the same way again . Final Judgment is based on the assassination of JFK JFK in 1968 .
 You may never again trust the media to tell you all of the facts about any other important event that shaped the course of history . And you may not again trust them again, you may never trust them .
 You'll understand how the JFK assassination conspiracy evolved as it did and why—at least until the advent of Final Judgment—the truth had never been told . Above all, you'll understand why JFK assassination conspirators were secretive .
 Only a handful of minor errors have been brought to the author's attention since the first release of Final Judgment .
 The errors had nothing whatsoever to do with the thesis of the book and were based on the research of others . The errors, however, had nothing to do to the thesis, the author says .
 If anything, it's hysterical and malicious defamation—especially considering the sources—lends credence, in its own way, to the thesis of the book . The book's author says, "If anything, malicious defamation" lends credence to the book's thesis, "It's
 There is indeed much more to be learned about the assassination of John F Kennedy . So there is indeed more to learn from the assassination .
 Final Judgment points the direction for those who wish to pursue the matter further . Final Judgment offers the chance to pursue further matters further .
 Final Judgment is—at least for the time being— precisely what its title suggests . Final Judgment will be released this week at 9 p.m. ET .
 Michael Collins Piper has done the work necessary to assemble this volume . The volume will be published by Harper Collins Piper on October 31 .
 "Now it is up to the readers to make sure that the message imparted within these pages reaches the widest audience possible," says author .
 Order extra copies of this article to donate to libraries and give to opinion makers in your community . Use this copy of the weekly Newsquiz to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 This book, if read by enough people, could play a major part in reshaping the course of world affairs . It could reshape world affairs, just as did the assassination of President Kennedy, author says .
 The truth will only be revealed if enough people take action against the president . But that can only happen if they learn the truth .
 Now, prepare for a remarkable journey and learn who really killed John F Kennedy... and why .
 Robert L Brock is a U.S. Army veteran of World War II and a long-time laborer within the African-American community . He has a special interest in finding out who killed President Kennedy and why .
 John F Kennedy and his brother, Robert Kennedy, put a great deal on the line when they stepped forward . They identified themselves with the cause of justice for Blacks in America .
 To be sure, Jack and Bobby were savvy politicians, conscious of the growing and increasingly influential Black voting bloc in America . Jack was a savvy politician .
 They had made a conscious decision to align themselves politically with Americans of African slave descent . Thus, for reasons of their own, they had made an own decision .
 Jack and Bobby believed that it was time that the Black man and Black woman in America deserved an even break . However, at the same time they also truly believed that .
 The Kennedy brothers were bringing a previously-disenfranchised people under the protection of the Kennedy dynasty . Through their words and actions, the Kennedy brothers brought people under protection .
 Had John Kennedy lived and been elected to a second term, the Black voting bloc would have ultimately become part of a Kennedy political powerhouse .
 Throughout the 20th century, the Black political apparatus in America was dominated at the highest levels by Jewish influence . Jewish influence was particularly strong in the financial realm .
 The AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith was one of the foremost elements in the powerful Israeli lobby . Organizations aggressively dictated the internal affairs and the public course and discourse of what were ostensibly ""Black" or, in the parlance of the day, ""Negro
 Americans of African slave descent now had an effective and eloquent spokesman in the White House itself .
 This essentially had the effect of moving the ADL, for example, out of the loop . The ADL is now in the process of removing it from the loop. This essentially has the same effect on other parts of the system .
 ADL was no longer the ""middleman" divvying up the civil rights crumbs for Blacks in America . The ADL no longer was the 'middleman' for civil rights in America.
 John F Kennedy emerged as a white ""mainstream" voice for Black America's political empowerment . Kennedy was the voice of a white "mainstream"" voice for the empowerment of Black America . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 As President of the U.S. speaking out on behalf of Black concerns, John F Kennedy short-circuited the long-time domination of the Black community by Jewish financial interests . Kennedy placed himself in the center of the civil rights debate .
 The ADL and other ""civil rights"" organizations funded by the Jewish financial interests were pushed aside and made irrelevant . The ADl and other "civil rights" organizations were made irrelevant to the Jewish community .
 A white man of Irish Catholic descent—the grandson of a saloon keeper—became Black America's unlikely spokesman . He co-opted the Jewish overseers of the civil rights movement .
 The powers-thatbe within America's plutocratic elite determined that John F Kennedy's presidency had to be brought to premature closure . As a consequence, I do believe—as do many other Americans of African slave descent—that this is one of the reasons that this is . The
 Malcolm X and Martin Luther King were themselves rising in popularity and influence, much, it seems, to the dismay of the Jewish community . What's more, all of this came at a time when independent Black voices such as Malcolm X were rising in influence .
 We now know that although we have heard much of the media about J Edgar Hoover's war on Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King was assassinated in the early 1950s . Dr. Luther King was the subject of the FBI's most famous assassination of the 19th century .
 It was the ADL that was providing the foot soldiers for this war . The ADL would much prefer to be kept under wraps .
 A former ADL official has admitted that the ADL was actually doing much of the surveillance of Dr. Michael Collins Piper . Michael Piper documents in Final Judgment in Final Judgement .
 ADL contributors knew how Meyer Lansky was eviscerating Black America . They knew how the drug and gambling and prostitution rackets of Lansky, a major ADL contributor . Lansky is a major contributor to the ADL .
 When all is said and done, there's no question in my mind that we will find that those who slew those dreamers were also behind the murder of John F Kennedy and his brother Bobby .
 This is why I take great pleasure in penning this brief introduction to Michael Collins Piper's remarkable book . Piper's book is published by Harper Collins Piper at £16.99.
 I believe that Final Judgment provides the answer to the mystery of who really killed John F Kennedy—and why . Final Judgment will reveal the truth about who killed JFK Kennedy .
 Final Judgment criticizes "cowardly white liberals" who ignore or suppress the facts put forth in Final Judgment . "I have nothing but contempt for those cowardly white liberals," he says .
 They are profiteers who are trading on the death of President Kennedy but covering up all of the facts that were there before them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They're profiteering on President Kennedy," he says .
 There is no other book ever written that explains the JFK assassination conspiracy so honestly or which makes everything about the JFK murder conspiracy so crystal clear .
 Michael Collins Piper has presented a spell-binding scenario outlining the entirety of the JFK assassination conspiracy more powerful and more convincing than any before . Piper's scenario is more powerful than any other portrayal of JFK assassination .
 Having written a book on such a controversial topic as the JFK assassination has proven quite an adventure . "Coupling that subject with a highly ""sensational"" thesis—has proven quite a adventure," says author .
 "Never having styled myself as an ""expert"" on the JFK assassination, I protest when anyone introduces me as such. Never having styled himself as an "expert"
 Despite what many have assumed, the subject has never been a particular preoccupation of mine. In fact, despite what many assumed, it's never been an issue of my interest in the subject .
 No Arab government or financial interest—or even any Arab-American source—had any hand in preparing, publishing or distributing this book .
 Only in later 2001—a full year after the publication of the fifth Englishlanguage edition—did a privately owned Arabic-language publishing house issue a translation .
 Some critics pointed out that I was an employee of Liberty Lobby, the populist institution that published the national weekly newspaper, The Spotlight . The Spotlight was published by Liberty Lobby .
 Critics note that Liberty Lobby questioned U.S. favoritism toward Israel . Liberty Lobby also questioned the United States' support for Israel .
 "I make no apologies nor, for that matter, are any apologies due," he says . However, for this, he makes no apologies .
 John Avlon says his association with Liberty Lobby enabled him to gain special insights on U.S. policy toward Israel . Avlon: Liberty Lobby helped him gain insights about the Israeli situation .
 E Howard Hunt brought a libel trial against Liberty Lobby for publishing an article alleging the CIA intended to frame Hunt for involvement in the JFK assassination . Hunt sued Liberty Lobby after the article alleged Hunt was framed by the CIA for involvement .
 Mark Lane, the dean of the Warren Commission critics, defended The Spotlight's successful defense . Lane is a former Warren Commission critic . Lane's defense was handled by Lane, who is a leading critic of the Commission .
 Lane put aside presumed ideological differences with Liberty Lobby and skillfully used the Hunt case to explore the JFK assassination in a legal forum . Lane's case is the first such opportunity since Jim Garrison's ill-fated prosecution of Clay Shaw .
 Following the Hunt case from the ""inside" gave me a unique vantage point others haven't had, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I thank Mark Lane and Willis Carto, the founder of Liberty Lobby, for this opportunity .
 Willis Carto's encouragement and enthusiasm were most important in making this book possible . Willis Carte's encouragement was most important to making this project possible .
 Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment proved the Warren Commission Report a fraud . Lane wrote Rush To Judgment, which proved the report was a fraud, and Lane's book proved that . Lane is credited with the discovery of the Warren Report . Lane: "We would still be indebted to Mark for
 Mark's singular crusade convinced the world there was much more to the story to tell . Although many books from others came later, Mark's single crusade convinced many people there was more to be known .
 Mark and his one-of-a-kind wife, Trish, are tremendous human beings and valued friends . Mark and Trish are valued friends and family members .
 The name of Pierre Neuville was unveiled for the first time in the fifth edition of Final Judgment . The Mossad—of course—knew his identity from the beginning .
 Final Judgment was on the mark, author says . The first draft presented a compelling indictment of Mossad complicity in JFK assassination . But a French source pointed me in a direction that convinced me .
 History owes a debt to the well-known and respected former U.S. congressman, Paul Findley . Findley, a liberal, no ""right-wing extremist," vouched for his credibility, he says .
 "Only recently did I formally identify Findley as the conduit, but, again, it was no mystery to those who make it their business to know these things," he says .
 The late U.S. Congressman John Schmitz encouraged me to write this book, saying it was a book he would have liked to have written . Another former Congressman told me of his own long-time suspicion of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination .
 Considering this gentleman's connections, his assessment is very telling indeed . Considering his connections, it's very telling .
 Several authors do confirm the secret war between JFK and Israel, author says . "Behind-the-scenes intrigue in the U.S.-Israeli relationship is relevant to the events of November 22, 1963," he says .
 Stephen Green, Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, and Seymour Hersh, in their own studies of U.S. Middle East policy (Taking Sides, Dangerous Liaison, and The Samson Option) provided the foundation upon which much of my own research was conducted .
 In 1998, four years after the first release of Final Judgment, historian Avner Cohen, author of Israel and the Bomb, came along . Cohen's book has given great credence to his thesis, he says .
 Cohen told a mutual acquaintance he was horrified to learn about the existence of Final Judgment and its thesis . Cohen: "I'm sure he'd be shocked to know we even know each other mutually" Cohen: Cohen told an acquaintance he found out about Final Judgment while doing a search for data
 Cohen rushed to assert his view that rejects the idea of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination . But the genie is out of the bottle and the world now knows that Israel and JFK were not the ""special friends" some would have us believe .
 There's a Fish in the Courthouse, by Gary Wean, enriched my own work considerably . A little-noticed, but important, book, by Wean enriched my work considerably, he says .
 Gary's friend, Wade Frazier, has pointed out that I'm one of the few who has even given any credence or publicity to Gary . Wade Frazier: "Wade Frazier's friend said I was one of those who has given any credibility or publicity"
 A special ""thanks"" to a very real friend, Tom Valentine, host of the popular Radio Free America .
 Tom gave me the opportunity to discuss this book and has continually given me much encouragement . When no others would, Tom gave him the chance to discuss the book .
 Jack Stockwell and Barbara Jean at ""KTALK"" in Salt Lake City, and ""One Eyed Jack"" Jackson in Springfield, Illinois, Bill Boshears in Cincinnati, Ron Muhammed in San Diego . Victor Thorn and Lisa ""Vicki"" Guliani and Rick
 Victor and Donna McGrath kept a watch on the Israeli lobby in Washington, D.C. As publisher of New American View, Victor kept a close eye on the lobby . Victor kept his right hand, Donna, at the heart of the lobby for years .
 Vince Ryan, John Tiffany, Travis McCoy and Jim Yarbrough provided helpful suggestions during the writing of Final Judgment . Travis McCoy, Vince Ryan and Travis McCoy are among the writers of the book .
 Alfred Lilienthal, the pioneer American critic of America's disastrous Middle East policy, was most supportive of the U.S. policy . Alfred Lilientshal was a pioneer of American criticism of the Middle East .
 A warm nod of appreciation to the late H Keith Thompson whose support for my work honored me tremendously . The late Keith Thompson's support for his work was honored by his work .
 From the start, Van Loman has been a valued confidante, providing sharp insights and remarkable leads that brought the book full circle . From the book's inception, he says, "Van Loman is a trusted friend"
 A tremendous, albeit-belated word of thanks to Bill Grimstad for putting me onto Frank Sturgis’ little-noted Mossad connection, a rather relevant point that escaped my own research .
 Tom Kerr, Bill W. W., Reg O., Martin Williams, Tony Blizzard, and others provided editing which improved this book considerably .
 Ace Hayes, a firebrand publisher of the Portland Free Press, and Daniel Brandt of NameBase Newsline proved the point that the JFK assassination is not a matter of "right" or "left" as some naive folks still believe .
 Herbert Calhoun's endorsement of Final Judgment has floored critics who do know that there are a lot of others in high places who agree with Calhoun, but just aren't yet ready to say it publicly .
 Thanks to Gordon Gordon's colleagues at The European for publishing a detailed exposition of my controversial research .
 Idaho attorney Edgar Steele has helped spread the word about the campaign . Steele's endorsement from no-nonsense Idaho attorney has certainly helped spread word .
 I would be remiss in failing to mention Sid and Wwoolf at feralnews.com and Russ at playtowinmoney .com and afrocubaweb.com who have generously promoted Final Judgment.com .
 Alan Jones' excellent synopsis of Final Judgment in How the World Really Works has really been a boost . Alan Jones’ excellent synopsis for Final Judgment has given us a boost.
 Carol Adler, the publisher of many fascinating ""controversial"" titles, also stands out for her interest in my work . Carol . Adler is a courageous maverick publisher, and Carol .
 Professor Ray Goodwin put his career on the line by telling his students Final Judgment is the ""last word"" on the JFK affair . Professor Goodwin said Final Judgment was the "last word" on the affair . The same to Professor Goodwin .
 James the Poet, Trisha Katson, Ann Brown, Helen Nunley, Marie Zittel, Agi, Mike, Nick, Jim, Judy, Ruby Lee, George, Will, Ricky, Ricky and Will .
 My mother—always my worst critic, read the volume and became convinced . Her initial doubts notwithstanding notwithstanding, her mother became convinced of the novel .
 No matter how hard an author researches his subject, he's bound to miss a few significant items the first time around . The problems with writing a book is that no matter how much research an author can do, he'll miss something .
 Final Judgment was first released in 1994, and Final Judgment is released today . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 Former New Orleans Jim Garrison prosecuted trade executive Clay Shaw for conspiracy in JFK assassination . Garrison had no inkling of any Mossad connection to the assassination, he says .
 After the fourth edition of Final Judgment was released, Garrison apparently did indeed realize that the Mossad was connected to the conspiracy . The information had been there for me to find it, if I had looked in the right place, he says .
 Garrison wanted me to find a publisher for a manuscript he had written on the assassination of President John F Kennedy . Garrison wanted to find publisher for the manuscript he'd written on President Kennedy .
 When I read the manuscript I found that it was a fictional work that placed the blame for John Kennedy's death on the Mossad—the Israeli intelligence service . When I found the manuscript, I found it was an Israeli work that put the blame on Mossad .
 Considering all the grief to which I had been subjected over the past several years, I could barely believe what I had read . Even including criticism of the Garrison investigation, some defenders of the investigation were critical .
 There was good reason to believe that the Mossad had been involved in the crime of the century, Garrison says . Garrison himself had indeed figured out—somehow, not surprisingly— that .
 Garrison himself concluded that it was not in his interests to say so . Garrison: "I think it's not in my interests to talk about it" Garrison: Garrison was not interested in the subject matter, but he was interested in it .
 Garrison decided instead to put his thesis in a novel, but it was a novel that obviously was never published . Garrison decided not to publish it, but to put it into a novel . Garrison's thesis was published but never published in the novel .
 Garrison's family will not be attempting to put the unpublished manuscript on the market any time soon . Garrison died at the age of 92 .
 Weberman's revelation is sure to make many defenders of Jim Garrison uncomfortable, but it does provide astounding confirmation that the thesis that has been put forth in Final Judgment does have some genuine support . Garrison has become both a villain and an icon in the lore of the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Garrison's reported theorizing of Mossad involvement does not, of course, prove that the Mossad was involved in the JFK assassination, but it does lend credence to what has been so widely criticized (but without refutation) in the pages of Final Judgment . Garrison: Garrison's
 Final Judgment has now come forth documenting the ""how"" and the ""why"" of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 There are growing numbers of people who believe Final Judgment presents a scenario that does make sense . The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith and other powerful forces in the U.S. may dismay Israel and its powerful lobby in America, represented by the Anti-
 Despite the subtitle of my book, in a sense I actually missed ""the missing link in the JFK assassination conspiracy"—the fact that Jim Garrison had indeed recognized the Mossad connection . So despite the subtitle "I actually missed the missing link"
 On August 21, 1997, a front-page article appeared in the Los Angeles Times describing an uproar in Southern California that erupted over an impending lecture at a community college seminar on the JFK assassination . The author of the book, "JFK," says he is proud to be able to
 The seminar was being held under the auspices of the South Orange County Community College District . The seminar is being held in Orange County .
 Although four speakers were scheduled, it was my expected presence -- my presence alone -- that created the controversy . "I was expected to be a speaker, but my presence, alone, caused the controversy," she said .
 The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith was upset that I contend in this book, Final Judgment, that Israel's intelligence service, the Mossad, played a front-line role in the JFK assassination alongside the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate .
 The ADL failed to cite any evidence of my being a ""proponent of Holocaust denial,"" but evidently the ADL considers that the ultimate kiss of death . Such accusations are fair game when trying to silence anyone who runs afoul of its agenda, says the group .
 The ADL presumes to label my charge of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination as being ""ridiculous"" is downright laughable . That the ADL . presumes that the charge of Israel involvement in JFK assassination is . is laughable, he writes .
 The ADL functions as a major force in the Israeli lobby in the United States, but is also an intelligence and propaganda arm of the Mossad . It seems unlikely the ADL would ever endorse my thesis .
 The JFK seminar was canceled because of the ADL's heavy-handed pressure campaign . College officials said they were concerned about the implications and consequences of the campaign .
 News reports about the affair appeared in newspapers nationwide, even including a Newsweek commentary by George Will, a strident supporter of Israel .
 I'm pleased to say, there was a positive side to all of this. So, as a consequence, I'm not going to give up my job, I said . I'm happy to say that, despite what happened, it was a good thing to happen. I hope that
 Mainstream newspapers have been told that there is a theory floating around out there that Israel's Mossad was involved in the assassination of John F Kennedy . For the first time since Final Judgment was published in 1994, readers of ""mainstream newspapers"" across America are told of the theory .
 "There is now going to be a lot of debate about this book"" —whether the ADL likes it or not," he said . The book will be published in the U.S. Holocaust Museum .
 Los Angeles Times reporter Michael Granberry made some attempt to present my views, but I do feel compelled to comment on various aspects of the article . The whole story behind the article needs to be told, he says, inasmuch as the whole story of the piece needs a story .
 Gerald Posner, author of Case Closed, is an authority on JFK conspiracies . The Times quoted Posner as one of the authors of the Case Closed .
 ADL has said that if people believe there was a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination, they might also end up believing that there was no Holocaust . This happens to be precisely the propaganda line now promoted by the ADL .
 Outspoken Experts Explode the Myths, stated forthrightly: "If segments of the population are really willing to believe that President Kennedy was killed by the military-industrial complex because he was too soft on Communism ... then it is not hard to imagine some of these same people falling
 If you believe in any JFK assassination conspiracy theory, you might actually believe something else about another matter, such as the Holocaust or the slave trade, that the ADL doesn't want you to believe . The ADL says the Holocaust, the Holocaust and slave trade are among the things they
 Posner's book is little more than a rehash of the original Warren Commission Report . Posner attacks on JFK investigators and citizens who came forth with credible evidence pointing toward a conspiracy behind the assassination .
 The author of Crossfire, a popular compendium of JFK conspiracy theories, has been fiercely critical of Posner . He has his own opinions about where Posner is coming from . Jim Marrs, the author of the popular book, has also been critical .
 The Other Side of the Jigsaw Puzzle... book on the JFK assassination . The CIA promised Posner that the CIA would open its own JFK assassination files to Posner so that he could write the book .
 Posner had to have been set up by the CIA for that book, too,"" says Marrs. Marrs . Posner "had to have had the CIA set up" for the book .
 Marrs is upset by the way the mainstream media promoted Posner's book on the 30th anniversary of the JFK assassination . Marrs says she is upset that Posner was promoted on the anniversary of JFK's assassination .
 The biggest media push for Posner's book came in the August 30th 1993 issue of U.S. News & World Report .
 United States News is owned by Mort Zuckerman, one of the most outspoken and powerful figures in the Israeli lobby in America . Mort is a prominent figure in the pro-Israel lobby .
 In an appendix in this edition of Final Judgment, I have analyzed Posner's book and showed precisely what a pathetic fraud it is . In the appendix of this edition, I analyze Posner and showed Posner is a fraud .
 For those interested in a comprehensive critique of Posner, I would heartily recommend Case Open by veteran JFK researcher Harold Weisberg . However, for those . interested in covering Posner's work, you should read Case Open .
 Los Angeles Times took great delight in citing Posner's critique of Final Judgment . Posner, the Times said, considers one of the more ""outlandish" theories presented to date .
 Berlet is employed by the so-called ""think tank"" that employs Berlet has its own axes to grind . Berlet was the first person to be employed by Berlet in the United States .
 Berlet's ""think tank"" has been funded by at least two known CIA front companies . What the Times also failed to mention is that Berlet’s "think tank" is funded by a known CIA-backed company .
 Despite his preppy nickname, Berlet's real name is John Foster Berlet, according to reports .
 Berlet was named after former Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, who was apparently associated with Berlet's father .
 Allen Dulles' brother, Allen, was fired as CIA director by JFK but later went on to serve as a member of the Warren Commission which covered up the truth about the assassination . Dulles was fired by JFK and later served as the CIA director of the CIA . Allen went on
 Final Judgment indicts the CIA for collaborating with the Mossad in JFK assassination . Berlet (and Posner) are eager to keep Final Judgment under wraps .
 ADL directed the Los Angeles Times to both Posner and Berlet, knowing that the two CIA-connected ""authorities"" would come through as they did . The ADL also directed the L.A. Times to Berlet .
 Bauer never read my book, so for him to accuse me of being a 'crackpot' is malicious and baseless name-calling of the worst sort . I am certain Bauer never reads my book. I am not a crackpot, but I am sure Bauer never actually read my
 The professor's 'philosophy' is clearly not a philosophy in line with the American tradition of freedom of speech, he says .
 I made repeated efforts to contact Bauer to speak to him directly but he refused to return his calls . Bauer refused to speak directly to CNN.com .
 When I finally did reach Bauer, he told me that he had been ""advised"" not to speak with me and promptly hung up . Bauer then hung up and said he was "advised" not to talk with me .
 ADL has maintained a policy of "refusing to debate" those it otherwise so feverishly attacks through the press . For years the ADL maintained a . policy of ""refusing . to debate"" those those it . otherwise . attacked through the . press . ADL maintains a
 Bauer, evidently was comfortable throwing brickbats from afar and by calling in the ""thought police" at the ADL, but he didn't have the fortitude to confront me directly . Bauer's anguished response was "thought police," he said . Bauer was comfortable with throwing brick
 College trustee Steve Frogue claimed some time ago that ""the ADL was behind"" the Kennedy assassination . The sponsor of the ill-fated college seminar had claimed that the ADL had been behind the JFK assassination .
 Frogue said there was evidence that it was possible that Lee Harvey Oswald's strange activities in New Orleans were part of one of the ADL's famous ""fact finding’s" operations .
 Frogue's remarks about the ADL's connection to Oswald have taken on a life of its own . The Times reporter misread the remarks, but now that misinterpretation is reported again and again .
 Oswald's ADL connection is examined for the first time in Final Judgement . Oswald's connection to the ADL is examined in Final Judgment . Oswald is a prominent figure in the American Jewish community .
 As a young admirer of JFK, Frogue was preparing to join the Peace Corps, inspired by Kennedy's New Frontier . Frogue says he was inspired by JFK's New frontier .
 Frogue was so frustrated and disillusioned that he instead joined the Marine Corps . Frogue joined the Marines after he became disillusioned with the president .
 "They had no desire to allow college students and other interested participants to even hear what I had to say," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "They considered the thesis of Final Judgment so dangerous that they did all in their immense power to prevent me from being heard," he said . "I'm not going to be able to speak to the world," he added .
 Steve Frogue's project was scuttled through a smear campaign against me and against this decent man that he probably never imagined possible . Frogue was a decent man, but his work was scuffed out by the smear campaign .
 JFK was involved in a fierce battle with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion over Israel's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal . The Los Angeles Times correctly reported JFK's role in Israel's nuclear program . JFK was a fierce opponent of Israeli Prime Minster David Ben Gurion .
 Four prominent authors, Seymour Hersh, Stephen Green and Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, wrote extensively about JFK's policy toward Israel . I relied almost exclusively upon their findings, they said .
 I did not say, as the Times further reported, that I disputed the muchreported figure that ""six million Jews"" died at the hands of the Nazis, nor did I ever once allude to claims that the figure is actually lower .
 My views on what did or did not take place during the Holocaust have nothing to do with my book on the JFK assassination . My views are not related to my views on the Holocaust .
 "You can't turn around without reading something about it in the press all of the time," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm sure it's not the first time I've heard about it."
 Some Jewish historians have claimed that the figure is as high as seven million or even eight million . However, some Jewish historians say it could be seven million to eight million people .
 This was literary license on the part of the reporter who presumed that these were my views based upon what the ADL had already told him my views happened to be on this irrelevant issue .
 JFK book had nothing to do with the Holocaust, the ADL's false and malicious rantings notwithstanding . Despite all this, of course, my JFK book was not to be linked to the Holocaust .
 "I doubt very much that if I happened to be ""pro-choice"" on the issue of abortion that the Catholic Church would have, on that basis, launched a major smear campaign to stop me from speaking on the unrelated subject of the JFK assassination .
 The ADL's hysterical reaction to Final Judgment validates the thesis of this book . When all is said to be said, the ADL is right to be hysterical .
 The Los Angeles Times made reference to another proposed speaker at the scuttled seminar . John Judge was known for his adherence to the conspiracies theories of the late New Orleans Dist. John Judge .
 Judge refused to permit me to speak at a JFK conference that he organized here in Washington in October of 1996 . What is interesting to note is that Judge . refused to grant me a speech at the JFK conference .
 Judge rushed off a letter to the Orange County Register to assure its readers that he and his colleagues would certainly not have anything to do with an extremist like me . Ultimately, when Judge's name was linked with mine in press reports, he rushed off the letter .
 "I find it quite amusing that Judge has now been labeled a ""crackpot"" alongside me. Thus, I find it very amusing that he has now found himself labeled a "crack pot" alongside me."
 Dave Emory was scheduled to speak at the seminar in California . He contends the Nazis were behind JFK's assassination . Emory is scheduled to talk at the event .
 In Chapter 15 of Final Judgment 1 do provide some interesting information about Emory's so-called ""Nazi connection"" which proves it was anything but that . I won't burden the reader with commentary here on that peculiar notion .
 Final Judgment vindicates Jim Garrison's indictment of Clay Shaw for involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy . In fact, the thesis presented in Final Judgment, if anything, vindicates Garrison's case .
 Garrison first pinpointed the role of Clay Shaw in the conspiracy . In Chapter 15, Shaw's Israeli connections are outlined in sharp detail . Shaw's role in the plot is outlined in Chapter 15 .
 The theory presented in Final Judgment does not hinge on Clay Shaw, the author says . However, he says that the theory is not based on Shaw's theory .
 With or without Shaw there is firm evidence in many, many other areas that points in the direction of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination . With or not Shaw, there is evidence that points to Israeli involvement .
 Shaw's complicity in the conspiracy simply brings things full circle, as you'll see . However, Shaw's involvement in the plot is not the end of the story . Shaw's role in Shaw's conspiracy brings things back to the same place .
 To criticize the actions of Israel and its lobby in this country is not ""anti-Semitic"" and common sense people who have no fanatical religious or political axes to grind realize this . To criticize Israel's actions is not anti-Semitic, it is common sense .
 Thomas made the remark in the context of a grudgingly friendly review . However, I have to think that Thomas made that remark simply in hopes of avoiding being called an ""anti-Semite"" himself for suggesting that .
 Israel doesn't deserve any special treatment any more than Ireland or Iceland . Israel, in my view, is just another foreign country . Ireland and Iceland deserve special treatment more than Israel .
 Israel has immense power over U.S. foreign policy making . However, there is a very strong pro-Israel lobby in America . It includes some of its strongest backers such as Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson .
 Israel occupies a unique position that has put Israel right there in the line of fire to be pummeled with criticism . Because of that ""special relationship"" Israel does occupy a unique place that has led to criticism .
 Israel is not above reproach and because it wishes to exert its influence it must expect to be criticized . Israel must expect criticism of its actions in order to exert influence in the Middle East .
 I firmly believe that the Mossad had a hand in the assassination of JFK . Israel must be held accountable for its actions. Israel must hold itself accountable for the assassination .
 If there is evidence that Arabs had a hand in the JFK assassination, they would have to be held accountable . If there was evidence, they, too, would have been held accountable, he says .
 "I do have the right under our good old old-fashioned American Constitution to make my views heard," he says . At any rate, he says. At any . rate .
 If someone construes those views to be anti-Israel or anti-Semitic that's also their right . That's also a right . If someone thinks those views are 'anti-Israel' they are also right to criticize them .
 Being opposed to the misdeeds of Israel is not being ""anti-Semitic,"" no matter what the ADL says . But being opposed to Israel's mis-deeds is not anti-Semitic, it's anti-Semitism .
 Final Judgment stands on its own, no matter what name-callers at the ADL and their shills might say . The evidence presented in Final Judgment is the evidence that the judge was right to question the right to speak .
 Anyone who contends that JFK assassination was a ""Jewish plot is a liar or a fool or both—or illiterate, at the least . Anyone who says he believes JFK was a "Jewish plot" is a "liar" or a "fool"
 The frenzy over the college seminar brought an amazing amount of fully-unexpected publicity to the thesis presented in Final Judgment . Despite all this, as I've said, it's not all the best publicity for the thesis .
 Of some 27 different news accounts of the controversy that came to my attention in the days following the initial Los Angeles Times article, fully 21 of those subsequent accounts said specifically that the Mossad had a hand in the president's murder . The speaker at the seminar was a speaker who contended that
 Most of the references, in fact, actually appeared in the opening paragraphs of the articles in question .
 Not all of the accounts mentioned Final Judgment by name, although many did . The thesis was definitively referenced and no doubt surprised those who had never heard of the theory .
 If the ADL had just ignored the seminar, the role of Israel's Mossad in the JFK assassination might never have received widespread national exposure in the daily press . In the end, what is so ironic is that .
 Michael Granberry, who covered the story for the Los Angeles Times, left his post shortly after his story appeared . Granberry's byline appeared in many of the stories across the country .
 Nat Hentoff, a noted commentator on First Amendment issues, weighed in on the controversy . He said the First Amendment is a violation of freedom of speech .
 Caroline Kennedy, daughter of the late president, is on the center's advisory board . Caroline Kennedy is a member of the board . The center is based in Washington, D.C.
 Caroline has probably heard about Final Judgment, as have several members of her family and possibly her late brother, as we will see . Caroline will appear in a new documentary, "Final Judgment"
 The ADL suffered a historic ""double-whammy"" within eight days time, stemming directly from the controversy . In any case, as a direct consequence of its hysterical effort to prevent me from appearing at the seminar in Orange County, the ADL has a historic "double-w
 The Orange County Register published a lengthy commentary in which I responded to the ADL's attacks and outlined the thesis of the book . First of all, on October 12, 1997, the Orange County .
 This was the first time since Final Judgment was published in January of 1994 that any ""mainstream"" newspaper gave any substantial publicity of any kind to the allegations made in the book .
 An ADL spokesman never once attempted to refute any of my specific allegations . Bruno Medwin was published in conjunction with my commentary on the ADL's response .
 ADL said it believes that "mainstream" theories about a possible JFK assassination conspiracy have a right to be heard . The ADL was misleading readers by suggesting that the ADL believes that ""mainstream"" theories about the assassination conspiracy should be heard, the group said .
 ADL national director Abe Foxman had said elsewhere that any theory of any kind relating to the assassination is potentially dangerous and has no basis in fact . In fact, as noted previously, ADL has said that any theories relating to assassination are potentially dangerous .
 The ADL is ready to shift its position, depending upon the audience, depending on the audience . That says a lot about the dishonesty of the ADL to begin with, it says .
 The ADL suffered an even more critical blow just one week after it was attacked by the White House .
 At a meeting of the South Orange County Community College District Board of Trustees, the board's president, Steven Frogue, was re-elected by a 4-3 vote, much to the ADL's dismay . Frogue had invited me to the JFK seminar in Orange County .
 ADL clamored for Frogue's head and sent its supporters to lobby for his resignation from the board . The ADL's effort failed . Frogue was forced to resign or be forced to leave the board, or his forced removal .
 ADL board member Marcia Milchiker introduced a resolution for Frogue's ouster, but her scheme fell flat . Another board member, Marcia Mchiker, introduced the resolution, but it fell flat.
 The failed attempt to punish Frogue came following a raucous public meeting in which some forty people from the general public were permitted to speak . The ADL operatives were on hand taking photographs of the meeting's participants .
 ADL's Marcia Milchiker could only respond in a rambling, disjointed and rather pathetic fashion that led to other board members asking that she cut her remarks short .
 Milchiker referred to me as ""William Collins Piper,"" showing precisely how adequate her research really is . Describing her ""research"" into the origins of Final Judgment and citing her so-called findings, Milchikiker, at one point, referred to him as "William
 Milchiker had been confident that Frogue was on his way out of the meeting . He had hoped Frogue would be leaving .
 Milchiker claimed the theory in Final Judgment was ""scientifically unprovable" and ""outrageous"" and ""preposterous"" but didn't demonstrate why . Ultimately, he claimed that the theory was "scientifically unprovable"" and "outrageously un
 Using a retired minister, Buckner Coe, as its front man, the ADL orchestrated a recall drive against Frogue . Frogue is a former minister who has been accused of sexually assaulting a woman .
 The ADL attempted to forge a ""united front" against Frogue, roping a variety of special interest groups, including AsianAmerican, Latino, Black and homosexual rights activists into backing the recall . The effort failed to gather the required signatures of 35,000 college district voters by March
 ADL called on a host of Southern California politicians including two GOP members of Congress— Reps. Reps. Ruben Navarrette and Rep. Tom Steyer . The ADL also called on the politicians to come up with the idea .
 One Orange County resident, George Kadar, formed an ad hoc committee to rally support for Frogue .
 ADL's tactics were being mimicked in Orange County by the ADL and its allies . In one instance, a reporter was embarrassed to learn that Kadar was himself an immigrant who had fled the communist ""thought police"" of Eastern Europe .
 In the midst of the anti-Frogue petition drive, one ADL member, Harriet Walther, claimed that she was the victim of an ""anti-Semitic"" attack outside the county registrar's office .
 At the height of the frenzy, I traveled to Orange County to speak at a public meeting of the SOCCCD board of directors in June of 1998 .
 The overflow audience was able to watch the proceedings live via the magic of video . Armed guards were in evidence as hundreds of people crowded into the meeting room and into an adjoining room .
 An idealistic young reporter for a local Jewish community newspaper made energetic efforts to pin me down as a ""Holocaust denier"" and an ""anti-Semite"" and to challenge the thesis of Final Judgment .
 Bob Ourlian, a reporter from the Los Angeles Times, overheard whispering to the young lady, "Don't try to argue with this guy" He was overheard by a young lady in the crowd .
 "He's very articulate and knows what he's talking about,"" and she quickly changed her approach . "He was very articulate,"" she said .
 One week prior to this, I had actually sent Ourlian a copy of Final Judgment, so he knew full well the book was thoroughly documented and that I was fully in command of the information .
 They were involved in Holocaust rescue activities as members of the U.S. military . They were part of the United States military during the Holocaust .
 My father spent time in a veteran's hospital for his efforts on behalf of the Jews . My father was hospitalized for his work in a veterans' hospital . His father was awarded a posthumous award for his services .
 U.S. concentration camps in the United States are euphemistically called ''reservations' But if you want to know about a real Holocaust, that's happening right now, let's take a look .
 Despite all this, the federal government is cutting aid to the reservations, yet billions of American tax dollars are going to Israel . The federal government has cut aid to all reservations, despite all this .
 Reporters didn't seem interested in discussing that subject, and frankly, I'm not surprised . Needless to say, the reporters didn't appear interested in talking about that subject .
 Missing, however, was Marcia Milchiker, my foremost critic on the SOCCCD board . She was also missing from the board's board .
 Irv Rubin, the head of the violent Jewish Defense League, and two equally repugnant associates were shouting from the audience . The police finally expelled one of Rubin's cronies, a bizarre troll named Barry Krugel, after he was kicked out .
 Rubin is the "self-appointed spokesman for the Jewish community right here," board member says . Rubin has been accused of being anti-Semitic, but he says he's not .
 The day afterward, I was invited by Saddleback College journalism professor Lee Williams to address his class on the college campus . The day after, he invited him to speak on campus .
 Students posed thought-provoking questions and exhibited the type of intellectual curiosity that the ADL was so determined to suppress, he says . Williams issued invitation on behalf of staff of college newspaper .
 Students defy the book banners at the ADL by asking me to pose for a picture with them . They later came to the defense of Steve Frogue, a student at the center of the controversy . The students also defied the book banner by posing for photos with Frogue .
 The ADL-instigated clamor for the destruction of Frogue still continued . Frogue is the site of a Holocaust-themed museum .
 The ADL even managed to contrive a short-lived alliance between Democratic Rep. Joe Crowley and Rep. David Levin Levin .
 Sanchez narrowly defeated in 1996 and then dispatched into oblivion in 1998 election . Sanchez was elected to office in 1996, but was defeated in 1998 . Sanchez won't be re-elected to office again .
 Despite all this firepower, the ADL's recall scheme crashed and burned . The ADL recall scheme was a success, but it was a failure .
 ADL hate-mongers suffered an embarrassing defeat on November 12, 1998 . In the end, the ADL lost in a humiliating defeat .
 The ADL's media-backed 16-month-long campaign to oust Frogue came to a crashing halt . Frogue was forced to step down from his post in the wake of the scandal .
 Orange County registrar of voters ruled petition circulators had submitted 13,000 invalid signatures . Petition circulators failed to submit enough signatures, registrar ruled .
 The Orange County Register's Kimberly Kindy failed to mention the ADL's role in the scuttled recall drive . Kindy's brief brief report on the demise of the recall drive was published by Kindy .
 Miss Kindy focused on the role of Democratic and Republican politicians in the effort, never once indicated the ADL was the prime mover behind the bungled effort to eviscerate Frogue .
 Professor Roy Bauer was ordered to seek psychiatric counseling because of the inflammatory writings in his scurrilous campus newsletter in which I had been one of his targets . Professor Bauer is now facing psychiatric counseling for his writings .
 Bauer sued the SOCCCD board, charging that his First Amendment rights were violated . Bauer filed a lawsuit against the board, saying he was violated by the board . Bauer says the board violated his free speech rights .
 Bauer's concern for free speech meant little when he was working to suppress my liberties, but when the tables were turned, he took a second look at the Bill of Rights . Bauer's concerns about free speech had little to do with his efforts to suppress his own liberties .
 Bauer won his suit and I'm glad he did, because, unlike Bauer, I do believe in the First Amendment, even though he and the ADL do not . Bauer won in his suit .
 Steve Frogue declined to seek reelection to the SOCCCD board in the year 2000, but we can be certain the ""Final Judgment Affair"" would have come back to haunt him . Frogue was elected to the board in 2000 .
 The ADL suffered a walloping defeat in Orange County and it happened again in Schaumburg, Illinois, as we will see later . However, the fact is the fact that the ADL suffers a wallop defeat in .
 "The ADL will continue to be defeated over this issue as long as I have anything to say about it," he says . "And the ADL knows it. The ADL know it. It knows it."
 Irv Rubin was arrested in late 2001 on charges of plotting to bomb the office of California GOP Congressman Darrel Issa, an Arab-American . Rubin allegedly committed suicide while in federal custody after having been arrested . Rubin committed suicide in custody after being charged with plotting to attack Issa's office
 Rubin was precisely the type of speaker that the ADL and its allies welcomed at the SOCCCD . Rubin's remarks show that Rubin's agenda really is . Rubin was a key figure in the anti-Muslim movement's efforts to counter the Obama administration .
 Final Judgment really is on the mark. Then, perhaps, you'll understand why Final Judgement really is . Then, maybe, you can understand why it's true .
 Had I not amended Final Judgment after its first edition, I would say— even now — that the book could continue to stand on its merits with no further emendation whatsoever . The book's first edition was published in 1996 .
 "I do believe the book will stand the test of time. Now that the book has been substantially expanded, more so than I would have thought possible, I do believe it will stand for time," says author .
 Israel's Mossad was indeed a primary player alongside the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate in the assassination of John F Kennedy . Mossad played a major role in the JFK assassination . The CIA and Lansky crime syndicate was behind the assassination .
 Final Judgment will prove to be the first-ever comprehensive record of that conspiracy . Final Judgement will be a record of the conspiracy .
 I believe I have taken a new look at a very big jigsaw puzzle that displays a remarkably complex and somewhat murky picture . I believe it is a very complex and very murky picture that displays remarkably complex .
 On the puzzle you see before you all of the various groups and individuals implicated in the JFK assassination conspiracy . The puzzle is a portrait of the people who were involved in the assassination .
 When you turn the puzzle over you find one complete picture of the Israeli flag . The Israeli flag is a great big very clear picture of Israel .
 All the other flags on the front of the puzzle are, in intelligence jargon, ""false flags,"" and Final Judgment proves just that . Final Judgment will be released on Friday at 9 p.m. ET .
 MICHAEL COLLINS PIPER JUDGMENT: "A crime is like any other work of art" Michael PIPer: A crime is "like any other piece of art."
 The Jewish presence on the Warren Commission is "The Best and the Brightest" -- and Jerry Ford, Too . The Warren Commission was created by President Richard Nixon in 1964 .
 The Peking Connection to the JFK Assassination Conspiracy . Israel's Secret Nuclear Alliance With Communist China. Israel's secret nuclear alliance with Communist China .
 All of the information which, taken together, proves this contention has long been in the public domain, says CNN.com.com .
 This book, Final Judgment, brings all the facts together for the first time in a fascinating and frightening scenario that—although controversial—does make sense, does make sense .
 This was the reaction of more than a few people when apprised of the thesis presented in the pages of this book . The author of the book, which is published by Simon Tisdall, is currently on sale for £16.99 .
 Final Judgment is a collection of Final Judgement's Final Judgment . The book is written in the pages of Final Judgment. It was written by Michael Weberman and Michael Canfield .
 JFK assassination was just one lone detail among millions of words written about the JFK assassination . The assassination was one of the most tragic moments in American history .
 Nearly a year went by before I came across the reference again—while re-reading the same book . The reference was found in the book itself .
 I had long ago already concluded that the CIA, in collusion with elements of ""the Mafia"" and the anti-Castro Cuban exiles, was responsible for the president's assassination . I had already concluded .
 David Scheim's book, Contract on America, contends ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" and which also vehemently dismisses any CIA involvement whatsoever . Final Judgment vehemently denies CIA involvement in JFK .
 I had read Scheim's book when it first came out in 1988, but I had not noticed the reference at that time . Scheim had written a book about his life in New York City .
 Scheim's rendition of the quote deleted the reference to the alleged Jewish backers of the Cuban plotters . What intrigued me, however, was that Scheim removed the reference .
 At that moment I finally began to see that this unusual detail might, in fact, point toward something much bigger than I had realized . At that point, I began to realize that this extraordinary detail might point to something more than I'd realized .
 A new biography of organized crime figure Meyer Lansky was released at the time of the book's release . It was at this time that a biography of the crime figure was released .
 Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life was little more than a puff piece for Lansky . The book was prepared in cooperation with Lansky's family . Lansky died in 1994 at age 81 .
 "I realized immediately that the book still somehow seemed to be missing quite a lot," she said . The book "still somehow seems to have been missing a lot"
 It was then that I returned to my library and pulled a book off the shelf that I hadn't re-read in perhaps fifteen years . The book is about a young woman who is in a relationship with her husband .
 Meyer Lansky was not just a Mafia advisor as David Scheim, for example, would have his readers believe . Lansky is not just the Mafia advisor, he says . He says Lansky's book is an example of the Mafia .
 All of the Mafia figures that had been repeatedly implicated in the JFK assassination were Lansky's front men, his subordinates, his underlings . Lansky was the Mafia's front man in the Mafia, the author says .
 If the Mafia had a hand in the killing of JFK, then Lansky had to have been one of the key players . Lansky would have been a key player in the JFK assassination .
 Lansky's preeminent role was being ignored or otherwise under-played, he says . Lansky was an important figure in JFK's assassination . He says Lansky played a key role in the JFK assassination .
 Lansky fled to Israel when the heat was on in the United States. After all, he fled the country to Israel . Lansky is a successful author of several books, including one of Israel's best-selling books .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of your favorite travel destinations .
 At this juncture, however, I had no reason whatsoever to think that Israel would have had any reason to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Several new works have provided never-before revealed information about the covert relationship between the U.S. and Israel .
 Some of JFK's communications with then-Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion were classified for years, until just recently . Some of the JFK's conversations were classified .
 Not even top-level intelligence officials with special security clearance were initially allowed access to those explosive documents .
 Little about JFK's relations with Israel and the Arab world had ever actually been published anywhere . In fact, prior to these more recent revelations, very little had been published .
 The new revelations about Kennedy's relationship with Israel made me realize that there was an unexplored area of research—never before considered—that needed examination .
 The relationship between Israel and JFK's foes at the CIA was now being acknowledged . By this time, then, then the long and close relationship was something that was now acknowledged .
 The depth and breadth of the CIA's relationship with Israel's Mossad, however, was not so commonly known . At the time of the JFK assassination, the relationship between the CIA and Mossad was not well known .
 With a basic thesis now evolving in my mind, I began re-reading much of the published information about the JFK assassination, his policy toward Israel and the history of organized crime . I began to re-read much of that information about JFK assassination .
 CNN.com's John Sutter shares his thoughts on the evolution of the world's first planet . He says he has found new ways to verify what he believes to be the truth .
 By December of 1992 I realized that I had enough material for a book and I began to write it . "I realized that . I began writing it. By December, 1992, I realized . I had . enough material to write a book"
 "I was startled by the vast amount of material that I was continually uncovering," says author . "Vast amount" of material was in the pages of mainstream sources freely available to anyone who cared to do the research, he says .
 I began to realize that I had indeed begun to assemble a remarkable wealth of material that brought my initial thesis full circle . I thus began to . realize that he had indeed . begun to realize . that I . had indeed assembled a . remarkable wealth . of material . that brought his initial
 It is the Permindex connection which is the tie that binds—the final proof that the Mossad was at the center of the assassination conspiracy . Final Judgment: Mossad at center of assassination .
 In Permindex we find all of the critical elements tying the Mossad, the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate together in close-knit intrigue linked directly to the murder of President Kennedy . The CIA, Mossad and the CIA were involved in the assassination of Kennedy .
 Those who have referenced it portray it as some sort of remnant of the Third Reich but nothing could be further from the truth . Permindex is a web-based search engine that has been used in the past for decades .
 Just before I began the book I mentioned my theory to a rather well-known former U.S. congressman . "Just before I started the book, I told him my theory," he said .
 I've believed for years that the Mossad was involved in the Kennedy assassination, but I never really took the time to look into it. I believe for years. I've always thought that Mossad involved in Kennedy's assassination .
 Paul Findley, another former member of Congress, has interest in the book . The book is being published in New York City .
 Ex-Congressman wrote me a surprising letter in which he said, "I will mention that over the past four years I have had lengthy correspondence with a retired diplomat from a western European nation whose family (including himself) has had disastrous experiences with Israel and the Mossad"
 "He has been prodding me all that time to do what you have done," he says . He says, "I will write a book exploring Israel's secret role in the JFK assassination conspiracy"
 Congressman Findley passed the manuscript on to the Frenchman who in turn provided additional fascinating leads and inside information that helped make the thesis presented in Final Judgment complete . The Frenchman provided additional leads to the thesis .
 Israel's Mossad was indeed a primary force behind the JFK assassination conspiracy . Mossad's involvement in JFK's assassination was a major factor in the conspiracy . Israel's intelligence agency was behind the assassination .
 The Israeli connection pulls all of the pieces of the puzzle together into one complete picture, CNN.com reports .
 The role of the Mossad in the JFK assassination is indeed the ""missing link"" in the conspiracy . Mossad's role in JFK assassination was indeed the "missing link" in the assassination . The Mossad role is the 'missing link'
 The following selection of names in this special ""who's who"" is by no means complete . It does provide the reader of Final Judgment with a brief overview of the facts surrounding the circumstances surrounding not only the JFK assassination itself .
 Following each name and description are references to the particular chapters in Final Judgment where details about that individual appear in pertinent part . The names and descriptions of those individuals are included in the book .
 The inclusion of any name in particular is by no means intended to suggest that the individual—unless specifically stated—had foreknowledge that the murder of President Kennedy was being planned . It's not intended to imply that the person had foreknowledge of the murder .
 There were many people who were brought into the JFK assassination conspiracy who had no idea of the actual role they were playing . As we note in these pages, there were many who were involved in the assassination conspiracy .
 The following ""who's who"—if read in this context—provides the reader a quick glance at the key individuals who ultimately prove central to the conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Louis M Bloomfield was a long-time intelligence operative and a front man for the powerful Bronfman family interests . Bloomfield worked for the family of the Bronfman brothers in Montreal .
 Bronfmans were key international backers of Israel but also long-time figures in the Lansky crime syndicate . Bronfman was a key international backer of Israel and a key figure in Lansky syndicate.
 Bloomfield is one of the foremost figures in the Israeli lobby in Canada and one of Israel's leading international operatives . Bloomfield served as the chief shareholder in the Permindex Corporation on whose board of directors Clay Shaw served, as well as had intimate ties to American intelligence .
 Tibor Rosenbaum was a key figure in the JFK assassination conspiracy . He was the first director for finance and supply for Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad . Rosenbaum is a prime financial angel behind the Permindex corporation .
 His Swiss bank, the Banque De Credit International, also served as the chief European money laundry for Meyer Lansky, chief of the crime syndicate .
 John King was a close business associate of Tibor Rosenbaum's protégé and sometime front man Bernard Cornfeld . King sought to persuade Garrison to give up the inquiry .
 David Ben-Gurion resigned his post in disgust with JFK's stance toward Israel in April of 1963 . Said JFK's position threatened Israel's very survival . Said his position threatened Israeli survival .
 Yitzhak Shamir headed the Mossad's assassination squad at the time of JFK assassination . Shamir was a long-time Mossad officer . He headed the assassination squad .
 A former French intelligence officer has charged that Shamir himself arranged the hiring of JFK's actual assassins through a close ally in French intelligence . Shamir is accused of arranging for JFK's assassination through an ally in France .
 Luis Kutner was long and closely associated with Jack Ruby, a sometime client . Kutner also doubled as an international intelligence operative and functioned as an advisor to a pro-Israel lobby group .
 Head of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, an intelligence and propaganda arm for Israel's Mossad . Close associate of CIA operative Guy Banister who created Lee Harvey Oswald's pre-assassination profile .
 Evidence suggests Banister's manipulation of Oswald may have been carried out under the guise of an ADL ""factfinding” operation . Banister may have manipulated Oswald to conceal his involvement in the assassination .
 Arnon Milchan was ""executive producer"" of Oliver Stone's Hollywood fantasy about the JFK assassination . Arnon Milchan was Israel's biggest arms dealer, and may explain Stone's aversion to exploring the Israeli connection to the affair .
 Shaul Eisenberg is Israel's wealthiest industrialist and longtime operative for the Mossad . Eisenberg was a prime mover behind Israel's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal .
 His covert dealings with Red China played a key role in the JFK assassination conspiracy . His dealings with the Chinese government were a key part of the conspiracy .
 Rudolph Hecht was a prominent figure in the New Orleans Jewish community . As chairman of the board of directors of the International Trade Mart was Permindex board member Clay Shaw's primary sponsor .
 James Jesus Angleton Angleton was the CIA's long-time chief of counterintelligence . He was the primary high-level conspirator in the murder of President Kennedy and the subsequent cover-up . Angleton is a former CIA counterintelligence chief .
 Angleton played a major role in the effort to frame Lee Harvey Oswald . Angleton had been co-opted by and was totally loyal to the Israeli Mossad .
 Final Judgment is the first JFK assassination study to delve into Angleton's role in the conspiracy . Angleton was a key figure in the JFK assassination .
 David Atlee Phillips was the CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time a strange effort was underway to implicate Lee Harvey Oswald as a Soviet KGB collaborator . Phillips was a long-time high-level CIA official .
 CIA had long claimed Oswald was Oswald in Mexico City was Oswald's location . CIA director later admitted that Oswald was not Oswald . Oswald had been in Mexico for more than a half a century . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 E Howard Hunt is a former CIA officer and liaison to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles . Hunt worked for the CIA in the 1960s and '70s . Hunt was a liaison to Cuban ex-Cuban ex-CIA officer . Hunt is also a CIA liaison to anti
 Testimony by ex-CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz placed Hunt in Dallas, Texas, the day before the president's assassination . Lorenz says Hunt was in Dallas at the time of the assassination .
 The full truth about Hunt's actual involvement in the affair may never be known, but there is no question that Hunt was deeply involved in the intrigue surrounding the president's murder .
 Evidence does indeed indicate that there was a conscious effort to frame Hunt for involvement in the crime . Hunt was framed for his role in the murder of James Hunt, who was killed in 2008 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald Final Judgment 56 established a public profile for himself as a ""pro-Castro"" agitator in the streets of New Orleans . Under Banister's direction, Oswald became a public figure in the New Orleans area .
 David Ferrie was closely involved with Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans in the summer of 1963 . An enigmatic CIA contract operative, Ferrie worked alongside Oswald out of Guy Banister's office .
 District Attorney Jim Garrison investigated Ferrie, Oswald and Banister . Investigation ultimately led to discovery of Clay Shaw's ties to Ferrie and Oswald . Shaw is a Permindex board member .
 Marita Lorenz testified under oath that one day prior to the JFK assassination she arrived in Dallas with her CIA handler Frank Sturgis and an armed caravan of Cuban exiles . Jack Ruby, who later killed Lee Harvey Oswald, met her in Dallas, she testified .
 Frank Sturgis was a key CIA player in the war against Castro . He worked for the Mossad even prior to his years with the CIA and maintained his Mossad ties well into the 1970s .
 Sturgis was involved in the training of Cuban exiles near New Orleans . He led the armed caravan that arrived in Dallas the day before JFK assassination . Guy Banister and David Ferrie were also involved in training exiles .
 Sturgis later told Miss Lorenz that his team had played a part in the events in Dealey Plaza . The incident took place in the early hours of Tuesday morning .
 Guillermo & Ignacio Novo were part of the armed caravan led by CIA and Mossad asset Frank Sturgis that arrived in Dallas on November 21, 1963 . The brothers were veterans of the CIA-backed Cuban exile wars against Fidel Castro .
 The Novos were convicted of participating in the murder of a Chilean dissident in collaboration with another Mossad-connected adventurer, Michael Townley, in 1963 . Townley had been working for high-level Mossad figures implicated in the JFK conspiracy .
 Marchetti charged that the CIA was about to frame its long-time operative, E Howard Hunt, with involvement in the JFK assassination . In a 1978 article in The Spotlight newspaper, Marchetti charged that Hunt had been framed .
 A libel suit filed by Hunt as a consequence of Marchetti's article resulted in a climactic finding by a jury that the CIA had been involved in the assassination of the president . Hunt filed a libel suit as a result of the article . A jury found the CIA was involved in
 Robin Moore is a journalist with long-standing close ties to the CIA . Moore co-authored former CIA man Hugh McDonald's book, LBJ and the JFK Conspiracy, which promoted James Jesus Angleton's false claim that the KGB was behind the president's murder .
 Meyer Lansky was the de facto "treasurer" of the international crime syndicate . He was active in gun-running on behalf of the Israeli underground . Later settled in Israel .
 Researchers who have claimed that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" have pointedly refused to acknowledge Lansky's preeminent position in the underworld .
 Marcello was the head of the Mafia in New Orleans . He owed his status to Meyer Lansky who was his chief sponsor in the crime syndicate .
 Marcello could not have orchestrated the JFK assassination, as some suggest, without Lansky's explicit approval . Lansky could have been involved in the assassination, but not in the way of Marcella Marcelli .
 Meyer Lansky's New Orleans bagman and liaison with the Louisiana political establishment served as a director of the CIA-linked Standard Fruit company . Lansky served as the bagman for Lansky, who was a liaison to New Orleans politicians .
 He appears to have been a high-ranking CIA asset in New Orleans at the time of the JFK assassination .
 Santo Trafficante, Jr. was Meyer Lansky's chief lieutenant in the crime syndicate and liaison with the CIA in the Castro assassination plots . Trafficante functioned as the head of the Mafia in Tampa, Florida .
 Longtime Chicago Mafia leader Sam Giancana was a player in the CIA-Mafia plots against Castro . He worked under the direction of the real ""poss" of the crime syndicate in Chicago, Hyman Lamer .
 Johnny Rosselli was the primary conduit between the CIA and the mob in the plots against Fidel Castro . He may have arranged the murder of Sam Giancana and was later murdered himself .
 Mickey Cohen was Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman; Jack Ruby's role model and a gun-runner for the Israeli underground . Cohen collaborated closely with Israeli diplomat Menachem Begin prior to the JFK assassination .
 Jack Ruby was a long-time functionary for the Lansky syndicate . Ruby was also engaged in CIA-linked gunrunning to anti-Castro Cuban exiles .
 Evidence suggests there is more to Ruby's sudden ""death"" than meets the eye . Ruby was found dead at the age of six .
 Jim Braden was a personal courier for Meyer Lansky . He was almost assuredly in contact with Jack Ruby prior to the JFK assassination .
 Al Gruber was a henchman of Meyer Lansky's West Coast operative, Mickey Cohen . Ruby and Gruber spoke by telephone shortly before Ruby killed Lee Harvey Oswald . Ruby was a member of the West Coast mobster Mickey Cohen's family .
 It is believed Gruber gave Ruby the contract on Oswald on behalf of his superiors . Gruber is believed to have given Ruby the deal on Oswald . Ruby was assassinated in November 1963 .
 The French Connection Charles DeGaulle . Repeatedly targeted for assassination by Israeli-allied forces in French intelligence and in the Secret Army Organization .
 The Mossad-sponsored Permindex operation laundered money used in the assassination attempts on DeGaulle . The operation also had a hand in the murder of JFK, and laundered the money used for the assassination attempt .
 Georges deLannurien was a high ranking official in the SDECE, the French intelligence agency . He was at the behest of Mossad assassinations chief Yitzhak Shamir . He contracted the hit team who killed JFK .
 Michael Mertz is alleged to have been one of the actual gunmen in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . He is a former French SDECE officer and the Paris connection for the Lansky-Trafficante heroin syndicate . He was alleged to be the actual gunman in Dallas
 Jean Soutre was a liaison for the French OAS with the CIA's E Howard Hunt . He maintained contact with Guy Banister's CIA and mob-linked gunrunning headquarters .
 There is evidence linking Soutre to James Jesus Angleton's intrigue inside the CIA that affected French intelligence in a dramatic way . Angleton was a key CIA operative in the 1960s .
 Thomas Eli Davis III was a world-traveling mercenary linked to Jack Ruby's arms dealing activities . Davis was taken into custody in North Africa for supplying weapons to the French OAS just prior to JFK assassination .
 The CIA's infamous international assassin QJ/WIN has long been said to have secured Davis's release from prison . Davis was released from prison in 2009 .
 Geoffrey Bocca was a former propagandist for the OAS . He later co-authored former CIA contract agent Hugh McDonald's book, Appointment in Dallas . McDonald pointed the blame for JFK assassination away from those who were responsible .
 Christian David is a Corsican criminal associated with reputed JFK assassin Michael Mertz . David has claimed knowledge of a French hit team involved in the JFK assassination .
 David himself was the chief suspect in the murder of a Moroccan dissident, Mehdi Ben-Barka, whose killing was orchestrated by Israeli Mossad through anti-DeGaulle forces in French intelligence .
 Mark Lane was retained by Lee Harvey Oswald's mother to represent her son's interests before the Warren Commission . Lane's book Rush to Judgment was the first major critique of the report . He was also hired by the mother of Lee Harvey Obeidallah .
 Lane proved to the satisfaction of a jury that the CIA had indeed been involved in the JFK assassination . Lane was defending a libel suit filed against The Spotlight newspaper by former CIA operative E Howard Hunt .
 His best-selling book Plausible Denial outlines the circumstances of that libel suit and its conclusion .
 Gary Wean discovered how Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, was conspiring against John F Kennedy on behalf of the Israelis . Wean was a detective on the Hollywood beat of the Los Angeles Police Department .
 In a meeting with the former sheriff of Dallas County, Bill Decker, Wean learned a portion of the truth about what really happened in Dallas . Wean met with Decker to learn more about what happened .
 News Twisters Edgar & Edith Stern close friends of Clay Shaw and financial backers of the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith . WDSU media empire in New Orleans played a major role in giving vast publicity to Lee Harvey Oswald's profile
 WDSU cameraman Johann Rush was on the scene to record Oswald's ""pro-Castro" activities . Rush was a young WDSu cameraman in the 1950s .
 Drew Pearson had close ties to not only the Israeli lobby, but also the CIA and to President Lyndon Johnson and his cronies . Pearson was accused by his own mother-in-law of being a ""mouthpiece"" for the pro-Israel ADL . Pearson had ties to the
 It was Pearson who floated an unlikely story that Fidel Castro was behind the JFK assassination . Pearson also played a major influence in shaping Earl Warren's perceptions of the tragedy .
 Jack Anderson had strange connections that might have biased his own reportage on the JFK affair . As a protéé of Drew Pearson, Jack Anderson was a reporter for Drew Pearson . Jack Anderson also had strange ties to the CIA .
 Since 1963 Anderson has promoted a number of conflicting versions about who killed JFK . The Mafia or Fidel Castro or a combination of both may have been involved in the assassination .
 Jack Newfield is a liberal columnist and some-time JFK assassination buff . Newfield has been a likewise long-standing devotee of Israel .
 Teamster boss Jimmy Hoffa allegedly ordered two Mafia figures to arrange the killing of President Kennedy . Teamster leader Hoffa made a big splash with a highly fantastic story that he had ordered the killing .
 Not surprisingly, Newfield's ridiculous story was given wide play in the Establishment media . Newfield has been accused of being racist and sexist .
 Oliver Stone's JFK gave the public a fullblown, full-color, gory-in-every-detail conspiracy theory on the JFK assassination . Stone's Hollywood extravaganza, JFK, was a Hollywood extra-vaganze .
 Stone's presentation of the conspiracy was far from complete and failed to reach any firm conclusions . Stone: "The conspiracy is not complete and fails to reach a firm conclusion"
 He deliberately suppressed the ""French connection"" which, in turn, was the long-hidden Israeli connection . The French and Israeli connection was suppressed by the French .
 The company distributing Stone's film had its origins in the Lansky crime syndicate . Stone's chief financial backer Israel's leading arms dealer was an arms dealer .
 Frank Mankiewicz is a former publicist for the Israeli Mossad-linked Anti-Defamation League . He had a peculiar part in the events that took place prior to the murder of Robert F Kennedy . He was the publicist behind the assassination of Kennedy .
 Mankiewicz was a key public relations man for Oliver Stone's JFK film . He later became a publicist for Stone's film JFK .
 Anthony Summers is the author of two books on the JFK conspiracy . Summers says the Kennedy family was responsible for the death of Marilyn Monroe . Summers wrote another book on the Kennedy conspiracy .
 In neither book did Summers reveal explosive information that could have helped point in the direction of those same forces which played a part in both crimes . Summers did not reveal explosive new information .
 Robert Morrow is a former CIA contract operative who played a major role in activities on the periphery of the JFK assassination conspiracy . Morrow's book on his experiences is rife with detail, yet suspect in the eyes of many who had looked into his claims .
 Morrow's book absolves the key CIA conspirator, James J Angleton, of involvement in the JFK conspiracy . He portrays him as being ""out of the loop"" when, in fact, the opposite was true .
 G Robert Blakey is director of the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Blakey had served as a character witness for Meyer Lansky, a close associate of Meyer Lanskky . Blakei served as character witness to Lansky's longtime associate .
 When pointing the blame in the JFK assassination, Blakey targeted Lansky's protégé, New Orleans Mafia boss, Carlos Marcello, but looked no further . Blakey pointed no further to the New Orleans mafia boss, but instead pointed to Lansky .
 Blakey, likewise, found no role by the CIA or any other intelligence agency in the assassination . Blakey: "No role by any intelligence agency" was found in the killing .
 Scheim's book was published by the American front for an Israeli publishing company . Scheim’s book is published by an Israeli publisher .
 John Foster ""Chip"" Berlet played a key role in a major propaganda campaign by the AntiDefamation League to prevent the facts about the JFK assassination from being heard . The ADL is a conduit for Israel's Mossad .
 James DiEugenio has tread lightly when inquiring into the ties between Clay Shaw and the Permindex operation with its multiple links to the Israeli Mossad and the crime syndicate . Although a deep admirer of both John F Kennedy and New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison, Di
 Peter Dale Scott's years of in-depth research on the JFK assassination have led him directly to the doorstep of the CIA, the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate . He has never been prepared to name names or point in the direction of those forces, preferring to sidestep
 The blame for the assassination has been placed on numerous power groups, perhaps working independently or together . The blame has not yet been resolved .
 Most often named have been the CIA (or rogue elements) and organized crime . Organized crime and the anti-Castro Cuban network are often named .
 Israel and its spy agency, the Mossad, links all of these forces together . The Mossad is a key to Israel's success in the Middle East . Israel and Mossad are key to its success .
 Israel, however, is the central player whose role has been consistently ignored . Israel's role in the Middle East has been repeatedly ignored by Arab nations .
 Oliver Stone's Hollywood all-star extravaganza JFK drew controversy over the JFK assassination . Terry Catchpole, a journalist, says there is widespread interest in the assassination .
 Each and every one of these theories, additionally, has been intertwined with Final Judgment 63 one or more of the others . The theories are intertwined with each other .
 Stone's film, the subsequent release of several new books on the assassination, has brought new interest in the controversy . The film, Stone's book, and other new books, have also brought interest into the assassination of President Kennedy .
 It was not retired circus clowns who killed John F Kennedy, at least so far as we know . However, it was not a circus clown who killed JFK .
 This book contends that Israel's Mossad was a primary player alongside the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate in the JFK assassination conspiracy . It contends that the Mossad's role was probably the driving force behind the conspiracy .
 The connections are far more sinister and go far deeper than most might imagine . The connections between the two sides of the story go far beyond what you might think .
 Israel had a very distinct motive to orchestrate Kennedy's removal from office and elevate his successor, Lyndon B Johnson, into the White House . Israel's motive was to remove Kennedy from office .
 Kennedy's murder was part of the conspiracy that resulted in Kennedy's death . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy's assassination was the result of a plot to kill him .
 Never once, however, has the suggestion that Israel had a hand in Kennedy's murder ever been uttered . Never once in standard assassination research has suggested Israel was involved .
 Evidence that has lain dormant or has otherwise been ignored or gone unrecognized for its significance is there . Yet, the evidence is there, and it has been ignored, ignored or ignored . The evidence is still there .
 Final Judgment draws from recognized volumes in the field of JFK assassination research and other standard sources . Final Judgment is based on the facts brought together in Final Judgment by John D. Kennedy Jr.
 Paul Findley himself has publicly suggested that Israel indeed may have had a hand in the JFK assassination . Findley says Israel may have been involved in the assassination of JFK .
 President Kennedy's father, Joseph Kennedy, was ambassador to Great Britain . Joseph Kennedy frequently praised Nazi Germany during his time as ambassador .
 The government of Israel, therefore, had every reason to believe that its interests would be better advanced with Johnson as president . Johnson was president of the United States in 1964 .
 In a recent interview another respected JFK assassination researcher, Peter Dale Scott, perhaps lends further credence to the theory we are about to present . In the interview, Scott discusses the assassination of JFK JFK .
 Scott believes that there were a variety of forces at work behind the JFK assassination . Scott believes there were many forces behind the assassination of JFK .
 Lyndon Johnson's backers had a stake in the military-industrial complex, according to the author . The author points out the connection between the military and the Mafia .
 Final Judgment suggests that it was, indeed, Israel's Mossad . It also pinpoints the Mossad connection . Final Judgment not only suggests it was Mossad, but also pins it to Israel .
 Israel's Mossad has been unusually close to the CIA in a variety of international ventures . Mossad is above and beyond any other intelligence network, foreign or domestic, it is Israel's most secretive network .
 CNN goes beyond Scott's conclusions, focusing on the media's role in the story . What's more, we go one step beyond Scott: The media has a role in determining the outcome of the story, CNN.com reports .
 Final Judgment points out the highly significant role of the American media in its role in the cover-up . Final Judgment: The American media played a significant role in covering up the events .
 The cover-up of the JFK assassination conspiracy could never have succeeded without the support of a willing media . The cover up of the assassination conspiracy never succeeded without support from the media, says author .
 Israel and its supporters in the U.S. media have a long and intimate relationship . The fact is that Israel and supporters in American media have long been intimate relations . Israel and Israel supporters have long, intimate relationship with American media .
 Until recent years, criticism of Israel and its misdeeds have been verboten in the Establishment media, as noted previously in the comments by Congressman Findley . Even still today, critics of Israel have been allowed to criticize the country .
 This is a phenomenon never before examined in studying the JFK assassination . It explains, in large part, why the real truth about the assassination conspiracy has remained hidden .
 He also points out that there was, additionally, a change of policy toward Latin America .
 The most profound reversal in the conduct of American foreign policy was in the arena of U.S.-Israeli relations . However, in these pages, we demonstrate beyond question that the most profound and unusual reversal was in Israel .
 Final Judgment is not to prove, once and for all, that there was indeed a conspiracy to assassinate President John F Kennedy and to perpetuate a cover-up of that conspiracy . The purpose of Final Judgment, you see, is to prove that . Final Judgment will not prove that Kennedy was
 The author's work has been published countless times in the past, including in the pages of several novels . He says he hopes to continue to write about the subject subject matter .
 Final Judgment takes the commonly accepted theories one step further and binds them all together . It's a frightening scenario that is surely so very close to the truth .
 Research over the years has ignored the bitter conflict between the State of Israel and John F Kennedy . However, as we note throughout these pages, research has been largely overlooked .
 In Final Judgment, we present a theory that, in the free market of ideas, deserves consideration . The theory is controversial though it will be, but it deserves consideration, even though it's controversial .
 What all of the commonly alleged conspiracies are tied together by is the one strand that has been consistently ignored—and that, of course, is the Israeli connection . The Israeli connection, however, has never been seen to be ignored .
 In Final Judgment we will consider this long-ignored hidden aspect of history . Final Judgment: In Final Judgement, we will look at this hidden history .
 Israel was in a central position to coordinate the assassination scheme and the subsequent coverup, author says . Israel worked closely with its co-conspirators in the CIA and organized crime, he says . Meyer Lansky was intimately linked to syndicate boss Lansky .
 JFK's assassination set the stage for Israel to become a major power . Israel stood to benefit greatly from the death of America's 35th president .
 Research into the Kennedy assassination is most difficult, if only because the literature is so immense, the web so tangled, and the surfeit of theories and potential conspirators are so seemingly unending .
 With all of this in mind, let us proceed on the basis that there are certain areas of agreement . We are happy to clarify that this is not the case for the first time that we have been able to reach an agreement .
 This is the basis upon which the research for this volume was undertaken . The volume contains more than 1,000 pages of text books .
 Final Judgment ties together all of the facts and shows how the State of Israel and its spy agency, the Mossad, collaborated with not only the CIA but also key elements in Organized Crime and in the anti-Castro Cuban community in order to orchestrate the assassination .
 Kennedy's difficult relations with Israel and how U.S.-Israeli relations changed drastically as a result of JFK's murder . Additional information has only recently come into the public forum .
 Final Judgment logically incorporates all of the commonly-accepted theories into one broadly encompassing theory that not only makes sense but which brings the diverse elements in the conspiracy together full circle . The remarkable scenario presented in Final Judgment .
 The theory presented in the pages of Final Judgment has been greeted with the charge of ""anti-Semitism" Final Judgment is a standard attack directed upon any utterance even vaguely critical of Israel and its misdeeds .
 The author leaves it up to the basic honesty and openmindedness of the readers to determine whether or not the theory presented in this volume makes sense . However, the author allows the reader to decide if or not they make sense .
 Final Judgment explores the little-known behind-thescenes war between John F Kennedy and Israel . Documentary documents how U.S. policy toward Israel and the Arab world underwent a drastic reversal upon JFK's assassination .
 Meyer Lansky played a key role in the joint Mossad-CIA-Organized Crime nexus that came together in the JFK assassination . Lansky's role in JFK assassination was key to the CIA, Mossad and Mossad .
 Meyer Lansky was, in fact, the real ""overlord"" of the international crime syndicate . Many of the ""Mafia bosses" who allegedly masterminded the JFK assassination were Lansky henchmen .
 The basic facts have virtually all been published in previous works on the JFK assassination and in other studies on the subject .
 All of the facts have been finally placed together in a neatly-constructed jigsaw puzzle that presents the whole picture in its rather simple entirety . It is only now, however, that all the facts are finally being placed together .
 The conspiracy outlined here was a criminal enterprise involving power politics in its highest-and-lowest forms . A theory of power politics at work at work .
 All of this taken together makes the conspiracy outlined here one that is not only logical, but one that ties all of the most prominently mentioned conspirators together in a package that is all too uncomfortably neat . All of the conspirators are believed to be involved in the plot .
 In order to outline the conspiracy described in the pages of Final Judgment, it is necessary, from the beginning, to consider that conspiracy in its historical context . A READER'S GUIDE .
 A wide array of players were involved and their integral links with one another . The diverse forces behind the Final Judgment 71 conspiracy make it prudent to provide an overview of the material about to be presented .
 e Chapter 2 explores the accusation that Israel's Mossad did indeed consider assassinating an American president perceived hostile to Israel . Chapter 3 reviews the Mossad's historic use of so-called ""false flags"" in its worldwide acts of terrorism and assassination .
 The point driven home is that the Mossad could have done likewise in the JFK assassination . The Mossad has a history of assassinating Americans in the U.S.
 This important chapter also demonstrates how Israel, the CIA and the Lansky Syndicate stood to benefit from U.S. involvement in Vietnam War . Israel, CIA and Lansky syndicate stood to profit from American involvement in the war .
 Chapter 14 is a review of the career of Jack Ruby as an errand boy for the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . This chapter documents Cohen's close relationship with Israeli intelligence and connects the murder of Marilyn Monroe, with Cohen's pro-Israel activities .
 Ten appendices shed new light on a variety of little-known aspects of the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up that have been distorted or misinterpreted or otherwise forgotten .
 The primary ""right wing"" figure linked to the assassination was moving in proIsrael circles all along all along . The primary "right wing" figure was moved in pro-Israel circles .
 Appendix Six takes a look at the strange death of William Colby and another highlevel CIA figure who ran afoul of Israel's Mossad . Separating the facts from the myths, this appendix shows that there's much more to the story than meets the eye .
 Appendix Seven is the first-ever exposition of the real link between the JFK assassination and Watergate . You heard it here first... e Appendix Seven . The real link is between Watergate and JFK assassination .
 Forget anything you've ever heard before about the 'Dallas-Watergate' connection . Forget anything else you've heard before . Forget any of the things you've learned about the connection between the two men .
 This is a detailed selection of questions addressed to the author after the initial release of Final Judgment . The author was asked questions about the film after it was released .
 The answers shed additional light on many matters discussed in Final Judgment as well as upon some things that were not addressed . e Our afterword and what may well be our ""final word" reflect on the nature of the continuing cover-up and of how the truth may never really be told
 A special postscript explains the tragic story of how an honest French diplomat may have died as a result of the release of Final Judgment . Another of the strange deaths that came in the wake of the assassination in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The film was released in November 1963 .
 What appears in these pages, many readers now believe, is a logically constructed recitation of the facts that lead us to the conclusion that Israel's Mossad did play an instrumental role in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Many readers believe that Mossad played a major role in JFK assassination .
 This is the one and only book which ties all of those theories together in a comprehensive summary which makes ultimate sense . It is the only book that ties all the theories together into one comprehensive summary of the theories .
 According to ex-Mossad man Victor Ostrovsky, the Israeli spy agency hatched a plan to kill President George Bush . The plan was hatched by the Mossad, according to an ex-CIA operative .
 If President John F Kennedy was killed by a conspiracy orchestrated by Israel's spy agency, the Mossad . This evidently not be the last time that the MossAD planned the assassination of an American president .
 Ex-Mossad agent Victor Ostrovsky says elements of the Mossad were plotting an attempt on the life of President George Bush . Former Mossad agent says elements were plotting to kill Bush .
 This amazing revelation was published in the February 1992 edition of the Washington Report on Mideast Affairs .
 The author of the report was former Congressman Paul Findley . Findley was himself a prominent critic of Israel .
 Findley reported that Ostrovsky had learned through his sources in the intelligence community that because of President Bush's seeming intransigence toward Israel's demands, the Mossad had begun coordinating plans for the assassination of the American president . Findley said that because . of Bush's
 Ex-Congressman McCloskey flew to Canada to meet with Ostrovsky . Ex-Rep. McCloskeys met with Ostrvsky after learning of potential threat to Bush .
 McCloskey convinced that Ostrovsky was 'real' and telling the truth . McClosky took the next flight to Washington, Washington, to meet with the Russian president .
 Mossad headquarters in Tel Aviv ordered its agents to ignore the threat and to not alert the American servicemen to the danger . Israeli agents learned that the attack was impending, the Mossad HQ in Tel Tel Aviv said . The attack was an attack on the U.S. military,
 During the October 1973 war, Israeli pilots were ordered to shoot down an unarmed U.S. reconnaissance plane that was overflying Israel's secret nuclear bomb development site at Dimona .
 The plane flew too high for Israel's would-be assassins to reach . The plane, however, flew too much for them to reach.
 Each of these threatening incidents took place during President George Bush's January 1992 trip to the Far East . Each incident occurred during President Bush's visit to the East .
 The most notable incident was the President's bizarre public seizure while dining in the company of the Japanese premier .
 More than a few people speculated—privately, that the president might have been poisoned .
 The Washington Post reversed itself and published a seven-part series hailing Vice President Dan Quayle . It was while the president was on his Far Eastern junket, the paper said .
 Victor Ostrovsky said preparations were being made in the U.S. to make a Dan Quayle presidency palatable . This seems to be a confirmation of the claim .
 The Post's unusual flip-flop was made all the more potent when the news arrived that the president had been stricken .
 Quayle, evidently, already had the Establishment's support if he had been unexpectedly thrust into the presidency . He had already been backed by the Establishment .
 The Washington Post had been one of Quayle’s most persistent critics . Oddly, prior to the Post's turn-about, the Washington daily had been a persistent critic .
 CNN.com profiled the events leading up to the end of the week . It was the first time CNN had been given the opportunity to feature in a major newsworthy story .
 Top-secret information regarding the president's personal arrangements was inexplicably made available to the public . For two days, during President George Bush's visit in Seoul, South Korea, top-secret info was made available .
 This was during a period when terrorist alert status was already high . Incredibly enough, this was during the height of the terror threat .
 Security experts believed that if potential presidential assassins had such action in mind, the security breach would have assisted them tremendously . Security experts believe that if possible assassins had . such action was planned, it would have aided them tremendously, they would have helped them .
 Secret Service spokesman: 'It wouldn't be stretching it' to suggest that the security lapse could have put Bush in danger'
 Blame for the lapse in security laid at the hands of the U.S. Information Service . State Department blames the State Department for the incident .
 Officials at the State Department were unable to provide an explanation of the bizarre security breach .
 The names of the 10 Secret Service agents heading security at the various locations that the president visited while in Korea . Also revealed were security control room locations in the hotel where the president was staying .
 The room assignments of top administration officials accompanying the president, as well as those of the thirteen corporate executives along for the trip were also published .
 The tentacles of Israel's Mossad do reach far and wide, even into the depths of the U.S. State Department . Mossad is a major intelligence agency in the Middle East .
 L Fletcher Prouty, himself an acknowledged authority on covert operations, says that 78 Off With His Head one of the primary necessary measures in any assassination plot is the process of removing or otherwise breaching the intended victim's blanket of security .
 Prouty, who worked in presidential security with the military, knows whereof he speaks . He worked for the U.S. military and worked for President Barack Obama .
 According to Prouty, "No one has to direct an assassination -- it happens" According to the author, no one has a direct role in the assassination .
 Mossad had captured three Palestinian ""extremists" and leaked word to Spanish police that the terrorists were on their way to Madrid . The Mossad captured three terrorists and leaked the news to police that they were headed for Madrid .
 The plan was to kill Bush, release the ""assassins"" in the midst of the confusion, and kill the Palestinians on the spot . Bush was killed by the 'assassinins' in the wake of his death .
 The crime would be blamed on the Palestinians—another Mossad ""false flag,"" more than which we will learn in Chapter Three . Chapter Three: Murder would be another Mossad 'false flag' for the Palestinians .
 Historians say FDR may have been a genuine roadblock in the way of the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine . They point out, based on well-documented historical evidence, that FDR . may have tried to prevent establishment of the Jewish state .
 Saudi King Abd al-Aziz Ibn Saud met with FDR on board a U.S. Navy ship on February 14, 1945 . FDR was returning from the famous Yalta Conference when the king met with him .
 President still favored a Jewish state and unrestricted Jewish immigration into Palestine, he said . His new knowledge did not prevent him from authorizing a U.S. Zionist leader to say that .
 As several leading Zionists admitted, if Roosevelt had lived, it is unlikely that Israel would have been born .
 FDR's successor, Harry Truman, was in fact the target for assassination because he was perceived hostile to Zionist interests . However, we do know—based on a very reliable source—that Harry Truman was the target . Truman was perceived to be hostile to Israeli interests .
 Margaret Truman: Jewish underground terrorist movement in Palestine known as Stern Gang tried to murder her father . The Stern Gang once tried to kill her father, she says .
 In a biography of her father Miss Truman discussed the attempt on her father's life by Puerto Rican nationalists .
 Harry Truman rushed to recognize the state of Israel upon its founding in 1948, despite his own reservations and those on the part of his diplomatic advisors . Harry Truman, of course, got the message, though, and rushed to recognition .
 This clumsy attempt to kill Truman is interesting, to say the very least, and points to a proclivity for political violence on the part of the Israeli leaders in the Stern Gang . The Stern Gang were the very individuals who emerged as the leaders of the Mossad following the establishment of
 There is strong evidence—indeed a pattern—to suggest that Israel would indeed consider the assassination of an American president . Israel has a history of assassinating presidents, including presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama .
 With this in mind, let us move forward and examine the evidence which will lead us to a final judgment . With this, let's move forward to the verdict .
 Researchers in the JFK assassination controversy have repeatedly pointed out the false leads that continue to appear . Israel's use of "false flags" in global terrorism has been pointed out in the past .
 Most believe Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin, was indeed what he claimed to be—the patsy . Most believe that false clues had been laid by the real conspirators to make it appear as though Oswald was an agent of Fidel Castro or the Soviets .
 Mossad's use of such 'false flags' by Israel's Mossad to cover up its own role in worldwide assassination conspiracies and other criminal activity has been documented time and again . Mossad has been accused of using such false flags to cover its own involvement in assassinations and other
 The use of ""false flag"" operations by Israel and its Mossad has been documented repeatedly since the Jewish State first came into being . Israel and Mossad have been accused of using false flag operations .
 That Israel has had a long and proven record in planting ""false flags"" is the subject of discussion in this chapter . Israel has a long history of planting false flags, the author says .
 The attack was intended to target an American reconnaissance plane that was overflying Israel's secret nuclear bomb development site . The plane was shot down by Israel in June of 1967 .
 These incidents are particularly intriguing in light of what we will ponder in this volume . This volume is the first volume of this volume to be published in New York .
 The attack on the Liberty was a deliberate attempt to destroy the Liberty and its crew and sink the vessel to the bottom of the Mediterranean . The attack is generally acknowledged by everyone but Israel and its defenders .
 The attack happened in a bizarre and brutal attack on a woman in a car . Police say the woman was attacked by a family member in the early hours of the morning .
 Israel, in fact, hoped to pin the responsibility on a ""false flag" and draw the U.S. into the impending 1967 war on the side of Israel . Egypt hoped to draw the United States into the conflict .
 It is only because the Liberty did not sink and instead was rescued that the history books don't tell us today that ""the Arabs"" sunk an American spy ship and sparked another ""Lusitania incident"" that forced America to go to war . The Liberty was rescued instead of sinking
 Congressman Findley referred to an attack on an American air force plane . The plane was designed to protect Israel's secret development of nuclear weapons .
 Israel's nuclear offensive led President John F Kennedy into the ""secret war" with Israel . Kennedy conducted the war with increasing intensity during the three years of his short-lived .
 Kennedy's intransigent opposition to Israel's nuclear arms development became a central part of his standoff with Israel and its Mossad . As we shall see in Chapter 5, it was the very issue of Kennedy's opposition to the development of nuclear weapons development .
 John Kennedy's life was ended by the assassination conspiracy that ended his life . John Kennedy was assassinated by the Kennedy assassination team .
 Israel has used ‘false flags’ in its international criminal endeavors . Israel has been accused of using false flags in several instances of international crime .
 Israel used a 'false flag' to cover its own trail in the Lavon Affair . Lavon was the best-known instance in which Israel used such a false flag to cover itself up .
 Several Israeli-orchestrated acts of terrorism against British targets in Egypt were carried out in 1954 . In 1954, several Israeli or Israeli-backed attacks against Egyptian targets carried out . Israel was responsible for several of the attacks in Egypt .
 The Muslim Brotherhood opposed the regime of Egyptian President Gamul 82 A Bad Habit Abdul-Nasser . Blame for the attacks was placed on the Muslim Brotherhood .
 The actions should cause arrests, demonstrations, and expressions of revenge, the author says . "The actions [should] cause arrests and demonstrations," he says .
 The Israeli origin should be totally covered, while attention should be shifted to any other possible factor . Attention should be focused on the Israeli origin .
 Competing political elements within Israel used the scandal as a bludgeon against their opponents . Compete political elements in Israel used it as a political weapon against opponents .
 Israel was willing to endanger innocent lives as part of its grand political strategy to expand its influence in the Middle East . The truth about Israel's use of a ""false flag"" had come to international attention and demonstrated how Israel was indeed willing to needlessly endanger lives .
 A shadowy ""right wing"" group known as ""Direct Action" was accused of the attack on Goldenberg's Deli in Paris on August 9, 1982 . A shadowy "right wing" group was accused .
 Rouillan had been operating in the Mediterranean under the cover name of ""Sebas" and had been repeatedly linked to the Mossad . Rouillans was operating under the name "Seba" and was known for his activities in the region .
 All references to Rouillan's Mossad links were deleted from the official reports issued at the time . Rouillans' links to the Mossad have been deleted from official reports .
 Algerian news service blames Mossad for Rouillan's activities . However, the Algerian national news service has ties to French intelligence . The Mossad has been blamed for the deaths of Rouillans .
 Angry French intelligence officers believed to have leaked this information to the Algerians . Angry French officers are thought to have been involved in the leak .
 Several top French security officials quit in protest over this coverup of Mossad complicity in Rouillan's crimes . Mossad has been accused of being complicit in the crimes .
 On October 3, 1980 a synagogue on Copernicus Street was bombed in Paris . The bombing occurred on the same day as the bombing of a synagogue in Paris in 1980 . The synagogue was bombed by a bomb in Paris, France .
 Of all of the "right wing extremists" held for questioning, none was arrested . None of the extremists were arrested, police say .
 In the upper echelons of French intelligence, however, the finger of suspicion was pointed at the Mossad . The Mossad is accused of being behind the murder of two Israelis .
 Paris police received anonymous phone calls accusing Boudia of involvement in narcotics deals and attributing his murder to the Corsican Mafia . Police received anonymous calls accusing him of involvement with narcotics deals .
 Mossad special-action agents were responsible for the terrorist killing, Mossad said . A thorough investigation subsequently established that Mossad agents were behind the killing .
 Mossad unit kidnapped two West German students named Brigette Schulz and Thomas Reuter from their Paris hotel in 1976 . In October, 1976, 1976 the same Mossad team kidnapped two German students .
 Planted ""clues"" and anonymous phone calls made it appear that a Bavarian ""neo-nazi"" formation had executed the abduction .
 French intelligence established that the two German youths had been secretly flown to Israel, drugged, tortured, coerced into a false ""confession of complicity"" in PLO activities . They were then incarcerated in one of Israel's notorious political prisons .
 William Jahnke was a German-born, naturalized United States citizen . He arrived in Paris in 1977 for some secretive business meetings .
 Paris police were anonymously informed that Jahnke had been involved in a high-level South Korean bribery affair and ""eliminated"" when the deal went sour . Paris police say they were informed that the affair had gone sour and were 'eliminating'
 Jahnke was suspected of selling secret information to the Libyans . A special team of investigators from SDECE, the leading French intelligence agency, determined that he had been ""terminated""
 One of Israel's most outrageous ""false flag"" operations involved a wild propaganda story aimed at discrediting Libyan leader Muamar Qaddafi . Israel's favorite enemies are one of the most powerful enemies in the world .
 In the early months of the administration of President Ronald Reagan, the American media began heavily promoting a story to the effect that a ""Libyan hit squad"" was in the United States for the express purpose of assassinating Reagan .
 This inflamed public sentiment against Libya and there were repeated calls for blood . The Libyan government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Manucher Ghorbanifar, a former Iranian SAVAK agent with close ties to the Mossad, was the source of the story . In fact, it was ultimately discovered that the story was one of a former Mossad agent . The story was ultimately found to be
 In fact, he was a Mossad disinformation operative waving a ""false flag" to mislead America . Mossad operatives waved a 'false flag' to mislead the U.S. He was Mossad's disinformation operative .
 Israel's Mossad was almost certainly responsible for the bombing of the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin on April 5, 1986 . The La Belle was a West Berlin nightclub that was bombed by the Israeli government in 1986 .
 Claims were made that there was 'irrefutable' evidence that Libyans were responsible for the attack . However, claims were made by the Libyan government that it was not responsible .
 Intelligence insiders believed Mossad concocted the phony evidence to ""prove"" Libyan responsibility . However, intelligence insiders believed that Mossad had concocted a phony ""evidence"" to prove Libya's responsibility .
 West Berlin police director Manfred Ganschow cleared the Libyans . He said, ""This is a highly political case. This is the most political case in Berlin"
 On April 18, 1986 one Nezar Hindawi, a 32 year old Jordanian was arrested in London after security guards found that one of the passengers boarding an Israeli plane bound for Jerusalem, Ann Murphy, 22, was carrying a square, flat sheet of plastic explosive in her carry-on
 Miss Murphy told security men that the detonator (disguised as a calculator) had been given to her by her finance, Hindawi .
 Word was leaked that Hindawi had confessed and claimed that he had been hired by Gen. Gen. Johnathan Hindawi . Hindawi claimed to have confessed to being hired by the Gen. David Cameron .
 French authorities warned the British Prime Minister that there was more to the case than met the eye . Israeli involvement is suspected in the case, according to the French authorities .
 Thousands of Palestinians living in Jordan were rounded up, some of the leaders were tortured, and in the end, masses of refugees were driven to Lebanon .
 New data suggests the murder of two Mossad operatives in Larnaka, Cyprus was a Mossad covert action . Sylvia Roxburgh, a key Mossad operative, was one of its key operatives . Roxburgh led the operation, leading Mossad to the murder .
 She contrived an affair with King Hussein and served as the linchpin for a major Mossad coup designed to destabilize the Arabs . Mossad said it was a major coup designed for destabilizing Arab nations .
 Even leading Israeli spokesmen, such as former Foreign Minister Abba Eban, admitted that reports of ""PLO terrorism"" had been contrived by the Mossad .
 One of the suspects in the crime was found carrying a ""hit list"" which included the name of the head of the PLO office in London . One suspect was found with a 'hit list' of the names of PLO's London head .
 Oswald's activities were presented as proof that a ""pro-Castro agitator"" had been the ""lone nut" behind the president's assassination . Indeed, Oswald's activity was seen as proof of a 'pro-castro' agitator .
 Lee Harvey Oswald's identity as a "pro-Castro agitator" was tailor-made for the CIA and its allies in the Mossad . If anything—we should note at this juncture— we should note that, we should say, .
 Both Mossad and the CIA would find a ""pro-Castro agitator"" an ideal patsy . The CIA and Mossad would find an 'agitator' to be their patsies .
 In a lengthy essay the Castro government published in the November 4, 1979 edition of Granma, Cuba's official newspaper, the Cuban Marxists critiqued Israel and Zionism . The essay was published in a lengthy article published by the government .
 Zionist counter-revolutionary action against the national liberation movements . And to complete the picture there is the Israeli counter-registration action . The Israeli government has been accused of being anti-Semitic .
 Now their task is to defend oil routes, protect all the interests of U.S. imperialism and block the advance of the Arab revolution . Now they must protect oil routes and block advance of Arab revolution, they say .
 The profile would satisfy both the hard-line anti-communists and the Zionists . The profile of the Israeli prime minister would be similar to that of George W. Bush .
 It was Mossad and its allies in the CIA and in the controlled American media who have been doing all the fingering. It was the Mossad, CIA and the controlled U.S. media, it has been fingering .
 Everybody being blamed by the Mossad and its CIA allies were implicated . Everybody, as a consequence, had a stake in the cover-up . The Mossad is accused of trying to cover up the deaths of its own people .
 JFK was forced to cut secret deals behind the scenes to achieve the presidency in 1960 . JFK's secret deals were with a variety of powerful forces intricately linked to Israel . JFK and Israel are the subject of a series of secret deals .
 In Chapter 4 we shall examine the history of those deals and how they played a part in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Chapter 4 will examine how those deals played a key role in the assassination .
 There was a long history of bitter enmity between John F Kennedy and his powerful father Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy and organized crime boss Meyer Lansky . The elder Kennedy's deals with the underworld stemmed in part from his father's deals .
 This, however, did not stop the Kennedy family from cutting deals with the crime syndicate when it came to winning elections . The Kennedy family is known for their involvement in the drug trade .
 The Kennedy family's alleged anti-Semitism didn't do anything to improve JFK's relations with Israel and its U.S. lobby either .
 Kennedy's intervention in the issue of Algerian independence from France also drew sharp criticism from the Israeli lobby as well . Kennedy also drew criticism from Israeli lobby .
 John F Kennedy was willing to cut deals with the Israeli lobby for a price . Yet, when he was seeking the presidency, he was willing . Kennedy's deal with the lobby was worth a price.
 By the end of his presidency, Kennedy had reneged on his deals, not only with Israel's Godfather, Meyer Lansky, and his henchmen in the Mafia, but also with the Israeli lobby . Kennedy's deal with Lansky included the Mafia and the Israel lobby
 John F Kennedy was very much a product of his father's upbringing— much to the dismay, it might be said, of many of JFK's most devout disciples . JFK's son was born in a very conservative family .
 They would, frankly, prefer to forget much of the recorded history of the Kennedy family and present JFK as something just short of being a saint, they say . They would rather rather rather than forget much .
 President John F Kennedy was the son of Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy . He was perceived to be neutral to the ambitions of Nazi Germany . At the worst, he was an anti-Semite and even an admirer of Adolf Hitler .
 Several accounts suggest that Kennedy himself returned from Britain with the intent of launching a major campaign against President Roosevelt's war plans . Kennedy served as the American ambassador to Britain .
 Kennedy backed off after a meeting at the White House between the ambassador and the president . However, after the meeting, Kennedy backpedaled .
 Ambassador Kennedy was fighting against American involvement in what became the Second World War . His sons Joe, Jr. and John were also promoting the same agenda .
 JFK's father considered involvement in a scheme to cut the war short in opposition to President Roosevelt . Ambassador Kennedy's father, Ambassador Kennedy, actively considered involvement .
 Kennedy's biographer, Richard Whalen, has written of a secret meeting between Kennedy and Lawrence Dennis . Dennis was a prominent critic of the Roosevelt administration, the controversial publicist, Lawrence Dennis. Dennis was Kennedy's publicist .
 Before the war, Dennis had contributed to the Digest, but the author of The Coming American Fascism since had become too controversial for his byline to appear in the nation's largest magazine .
 He said he would meet someone at the St. Regis Hotel who was thinking along similar lines . The hotel is located in New York City .
 Kennedy says he has been seeing Archbishop Spellman almost daily . Kennedy said he had been seeing the archbishop nearly daily .
 Archbishop 89 returned from Rome with word that Hitler's generals might attempt to overthrow him if they were offered terms less hopeless than unconditional surrender . He said the Archbishop had Final Judgement 89 had Final Judgment 89 .
 He declared that the war could be ended within two weeks if German generals were given encouragement . He talked of his two sons in the service, and declared that he could end the war in two weeks .
 The editor asked whether the former Ambassador would write, or at least sign, an article condemning unconditional surrender . Editor asked whether he would write or sign a piece condemning the surrender .
 The impact of such an article, given Kennedy's former standing in the administration, could be enormous . Kennedy is a former White House adviser and has served in the Senate .
 He was very bitter about the war and particularly bitter at Franklin D Roosevelt . He was bitter about Franklin D. Roosevelt .
 The senior Kennedy's views most definitely did not change as time went by . However, the senior Kennedy still believes in the business .
 Hooker may have helped John F Kennedy win narrow victory in 1960 presidential election . Hooker's meeting with Joe Kennedy may have been key to Kennedy's victory .
 Mr Hooker hoped to interest Joe Kennedy in a business venture which Hooker believed might be right up the ambassador's alley . Hooker: "Joe Kennedy is right up his alley. Joe Kennedy is a great businessman."
 Hooker wanted to establish an independent television network . Hooker felt Kennedy, himself a veteran movie mogul, might be interested in backing the venture .
 Hooker's memory of that meeting is quite interesting, particularly in the context of the thesis presented in these pages . Hooker: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to have had the opportunity to learn from the meeting"
 Hooker's remarkable background makes it difficult to understand where he was coming from . Hooker has a remarkable background in a world of contrasts .
 Born to wealth and privilege, Hooker was a descendent of one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence . Hooker had a varied career, including a successful career in Hollywood .
 He modeled in cigarette ads . He also appeared in the Broadway stage and in cigarette commercials .
 Hooker also served for a period as a talent agent with the powerful firm 90 No Love Lost MCA . Hooker was one of the highest-paid talent agents in America during the 1950's .
 Hooker also dabbled in television production and was equally successful . Hooker was also successful in the television industry .
 A powerfully-built man, Hooker is fearless and not afraid to make his position known . Hooker: "I'm not scared to make my position known"
 In his memoirs, Rockwell credits Hooker as being a major influence on his thinking . Rockwell credited Hooker with being influential in his own life .
 In fact, Rockwell dedicated the book to Hooker, along with several others including Sen. John McCain .
 Hooker wanted the new network to be totally divorced from Jewish money and influence . Hooker: "I wanted to be completely removed from Jewish influence"
 The three existing networks were entirely under the control of Jewish interests . In his judgment, he said that they were under Jewish control .
 Hooker had a private meeting in Palm Beach, Florida with Kennedy in 1956 . Hooker and Kennedy met in 1956, Hooker's first meeting was in Florida .
 Hooker was there to solicit Kennedy's financial, political and personal backing for his proposed network . Hooker: "I'm looking forward to working with the president of the United States" Hooker says he wants Kennedy's support for his network .
 Hooker made his presentation to the retired ambassador . Kennedy's response was supportive in spirit, but Old Joe made his final position clear during their four-hour conference .
 According to Hooker, "Joe admitted that when he was ambassador to England that he had been pro-Hitler" Hooker says Joe admitted to being pro-Nazi during his time in charge of the British government .
 I'm teaching my boys the whole score and they're going to work with the Jews. I'm going to teach my boys how to deal with Jews. "I'm teaching them how to do it," he says .
 I'm going to make Final Judgment 91 Jack the first Irish Catholic President of the United States. "If it means working with the Jews, so be it. So be it," he says .
 Ze Hooker was disappointed by Kennedy's response and ultimately his ""fourth ""fourth"" network failed to get off the ground .
 Hooker at least had the satisfaction of knowing that he and the Kennedy family were on the same wavelength . Hooker and the family were willing to compromise those views for political gain .
 Hooker asked Kennedy if there was anything he could do to help the Kennedy family . Hooker said he could help the family of the late president .
 Have them start publishing articles accusing Jack of being controlled by the Jews, of being a Jewish puppet . Jack is a puppet of the Jews. Jack is not a puppet, he is a puppeteer .
 Hooker did influence his right-wing contacts as Kennedy had asked . Hooker was a man of his word, Hooker said .
 Hooker encouraged his friend, Nazi leader Rockwell, and other ""right wingers"" to smear John F Kennedy as JFK's father had suggested . Hooker's friend encouraged him to smear JFK in the wake of JFK's assassination .
 This interesting episode is not likely to be memorialized at the John F Kennedy Library at Harvard or in any friendly biographies of the Kennedy family . This interesting—and revealing, episode is likely to not be memorialed at Harvard .
 Israel and its U.S. lobby had a fairly good idea of what was going on behind the scenes . However, there can be little doubt that Israel and the U.K. had a good idea .
 The giant Arab colossus, long a French colony, was seeking its freedom . In France itself the nation was engaged in a heated debate over the question .
 Israel saw the emergence of another independent Arab republic as a threat to its security . Anyone favoring Algerian independence was thus, thus, advocating a policy deemed threatening to Israel's survival .
 State Department's Office of North African Affairs. William J Porter, an Arabist and the director of the State Dept. of North Africa Affairs. The Arabist. William Porter .
 JFK's initiative on the Algerian question played a major part in shaping the entirety of the conspiracy that ended his life in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963 .
 This gesture by the young senator angered many French nationalists who wanted to retain French colonial control of Algeria . This gesture also angered many .
 93 of these nationalists later banded together in the so-called Secret Army Organization . The Israel-backed OAS fought against French President Charles DeGaulle who ultimately granted Algeria independence .
 In Chapter 12, Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 we will learn more about the socalled ""French connection"" and how it ultimately played a role in the JFK murder, manipulated by Mossad .
 An ancient enmity also stood between Joseph P Kennedy and Meyer Lansky, the foremost Jewish mob boss in America . Kennedy and Lansky were the two most prominent Jewish mob bosses in the U.S.
 The conflict between JFK and Lansky went back to the days of the president's father's own bootlegging activities . JFK's father was involved in bootlegging activities, but Lansky was involved .
 The hijackers were part of the Luciano-Lansky mob, while it was rumored that Joseph P Kennedy was involved in the shipment . It is rumored that Kennedy was also involved .
 Long-time Lansky henchman Michael Milan lends support for Marrs’ allegation . Marrs alleges Lansky was involved in the death of her mother-in-law . Milan has been linked to Lansky for decades .
 Meyer Lansky would "get conniptions" when asked about Joe Kennedy, according to Milan . Lansky was one of the few times he would get 'conniptions' about Kennedy, says Milan .
 "You can't trust Joe Kennedy to keep his word. What they said back during Prohibition was that you can't be trusted to keep your word," Kennedy said .
 The sonovabitch turned around and said that we should all get on Hitler's side, that the Jews could go to Hell. And right before World War II, he turned around . He said that before the war, he said that Hitler should be on his side, and that
 His temples were actually throbbing when Sam Koenig told him what Kennedy had said . His temples actually throbbed when he told Koenig what had happened .
 Meyer swore a blood revenge on the entire family . Meyer was almost like he was a born Sicilian, he swore a revenge . Meyer: "I'm going to get back at him"
 The conflict between Lansky and Joseph P Kennedy was but one facet of Kennedy's relationship with organized crime . Lansky was the leader of organized crime in New York City, New Jersey .
 It was a relationship of many parts, and, in the end, clearly had a significant role in helping shape the conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of Ambassador Kennedy's son . Ambassador Kennedy had finally achieved the presidency .
 Historian Stephen Fox: Gangsters did not normally harm honest lawmen . Kennedy administration had begun cracking down on the national crime syndicate .
 Fox: 'For such an extraordinary murder...to kill a president...they must have been extraordinarily provoked' Fox: For such a murder, the killers must be extraordinarily provoked .
 Lansky himself used to brag that among his clients included, ""judges, senators, respectable businessmen" Lansky bragged of his clients, ""respectable businessmen" Among his clients were judges and senators .
 Jack Kennedy tried to shut out his past relationship with Frank Costello . However, as the senior Kennedy's son Jack moved upward in the political arena, his father tried to .
 Costello's friends say they had the sense that they were close during Prohibition and then something happened . According to one of the friends, ""The way talked about ... you had a sense of . being close during . Prohibition" Costello died at age 81 .
 According to Sam Giancana, JFK and his father had indeed double crossed organized crime . JFK's father was a mobster in Chicago . JFK was JFK's nephew and uncle .
 According to Giancanas, Detroit's ""Jewish Mafia,"" the so-called ""Purple Gang"" had put out a contract on Joe Kennedy's life for bringing illegal liquor through their territory without their permission during the Prohibition days .
 Kennedy Sr. had gone to Chicago to beg for his life and the Chicago Mafia bosses intervened on his behalf, saving his life . However, Kennedy Sr.'s father was killed by the Chicago mobsters .
 You help me now, Sam, and I'll see to it that Chicago—that you—can sit in the godamned Oval office if you want, says President Obama . "You help me, Sam," he says .
 JFK turned to Giancana for critical Mafia support during the 1960 Democratic Presidential primary campaign . JFK, JFK and Meyer Lansky once again turned to the Mafia for support in 1960s Democratic primaries .
 The Giancanas met with Sam Giancana to work out a joint agreement of mutual support . The Kennedys met before and after the election, according to reports . Sam's father and son, Sam, is Sam's son .
 Mafia money poured into critical primary states such as West Virginia . By convention time, JFK was virtually assured the presidential nomination . It'll be business as usual."
 New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello preferred Texas Senator Lyndon Johnson . Agreement was cut, and Kennedy-Johnson ticket was set in place .
 The history books have discreetly ignored JFK's other crime connections, preferring instead to focus on the Italian-American Mafia . JFK himself was busy with other mob figures other than Sam Giancana .
 JFK had "direct contact" with Meyer Lansky during the 1960 presidential campaign, FBI documents and wiretaps reveal . JFK himself had ""direct contact""™ with Lansky himself . The pact was intended to shore up mob support for his presidential campaign .
 There was no love lost between JFK, his father, Ambassador Kennedy, and the American Jewish community . For obvious reasons, as we have seen, there was indeed no love between JFK and his father .
 Unlike Lyndon Johnson, Kennedy did not rush to Israel's defense during the Suez affair . And unlike LBJ, he didn't rush to the defense of Israel during Suez .
 Many Jews associated American Catholics with right-wing, pro-McCarthy, and anti-Semitic causes . Jews associated Catholics with anti-Semitism, McCarthyism . Catholics are Catholics who oppose McCarthyism, anti-Americanism .
 Senator Kennedy had once offered an amendment that would have slashed economic assistance to Africa and the Middle East from $175 to $140 million . This despite the fact that pro-Israel senators said that this was harmful to Israel .
 Feinberg was president of the Israel Bond Organization . He was helping raise private money to finance Israel's secret nuclear development program . Feinberg helped raise money to fund the program .
 Final Judgment 97 came up with $500,000 on Kennedy's behalf . Feinberg and his associates agreed to come up with the money for Kennedy . Kennedy was awarded $100,000 by Feinberg .
 He had driven to Bartlett's home in northwest Washington and dragged his friend on a walk, where he recounted a much different version of the meeting the night before . Bartlett: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to have had a good time,"
 Kennedy, as a presidential candidate, also resented the crudity with which he'd been approached . Kennedy was a candidate for the White House in 1968 .
 In a private letter to Jewish American historian Alfred Lilienthal, Kennedy did, however, reveal his feelings toward the Middle East conflict . In the letter, he called the political process 'dangerous'
 Organized crime and the Israeli lobby had their claims on John F Kennedy . Not only organized crime, they also had claims on Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 In the general election, Kennedy won a narrow victory over the Republican candidate, Vice President Richard M Nixon . In the 1960s, Kennedy defeated Nixon in a narrow general election .
 The role of the Chicago Democratic political machine (under the thumb of Mafia boss Sam Giancana) in stealing Illinois votes on behalf of the Kennedy-Johnson ticket is now well known and accepted part of American political history .
 JFK arranged to meet with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion shortly after his inauguration as president . The first time the two men met in Israel was in the early 1950s .
 At this meeting, Kennedy said, "I know I was elected because of the votes of American Jews" Kennedy said he was elected to be president of the United States .
 Kennedy's organized crime friends began to realize that Kennedy was not proving to be the loyal ally they had expected he would be . Organized crime friends realized that Kennedy had not been loyal to them .
 Soon after JFK assumed the presidency, an unexpected war on organized crime began . The war began with organized crime .
 Robert Kennedy had cut his teeth prosecuting mobsters as a counsel for the Senate's ""racket committee" Robert Kennedy was named attorney general .
 Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, reflected in later years upon the Organized Crime-Kennedy alliance and what it meant, particularly after Bobby Kennedy launched his campaign against underworld .
 There was no thought that they were going to get the best of it with John Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 There may be different guys running for an office, and none of them may be what's best for a combination . See, there may not be different candidates running for office . None of these candidates may be the same .
 "Nobody in my line of work had a idea that he was going to name Bobby Kennedy attorney general," says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "Nobody had an idea that Bobby Kennedy would be attorney general"
 JFK's war against his former allies in the underworld would lead him to the very doorsteps of the real brains behind the national—and international—crime syndicate, Meyer Lansky . Ultimately, as we shall see, the war against Lansky would end up leading him to Lansky
 He had already double-crossed his immediate underworld collaborators . However, he had already done so, he'd already double crossed them .
 JFK was also engaged in some legislative sleight-of-hand that could also prove dangerous to Israel's political leverage in U.S. politics . JFK's actions could also be dangerous for Israel in American election politics .
 In 1962 Kennedy submitted five bills to reform campaign financing to Congress . Kennedy submitted two more such bills to Congress in 1963 .
 Kennedy sought to pass bills but none of those bills survived . Kennedy says special interests opposed his efforts to pass legislation .
 As we shall see in Chapter 5, Kennedy, in fact, was at war with Israel . As we will see, we will learn that Kennedy, as well, was in fact at war .
 Kennedy double-crossed his allies in organized crime and pro-Israel financiers . Kennedy had crossed his pro-Israeli financiering . Kennedy crossed his allies with organized crime, but also crossed his friends in Israel .
 Israel was long close to the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . Israel, as we shall see in Chapter 7, was close to Lansky's organization .
 All of these powerful special interests had very special reasons to want to see JFK removed from the presidency and replaced with Lyndon Johnson . All of the special interests wanted to see the president replaced with Johnson .
 There was clearly no love lost between John F Kennedy and the powerful forces which had helped bring him to the presidency .
 A reform-minded President Kennedy also had other long-range plans in the works . Kennedy had a long-term vision for the country .
 JFK was the scion of an independent and essentially self-made man who ""played the game"" to gain power and influence . JFK was indeed very much his father's son.
 There have been widespread rumors, for nearly a generation, that JFK was planning to issue interest-free money . "Greenbacks" independent of the stranglehold of the private Federal Reserve System .
 In fact, interest-free United States Notes were issued during JFK's presidency . Some remain in private hands today . In Appendix Five we will examine this controversy in detail .
 JFK fully intended to move against the Federal Reserve money monopoly . JFK was once firmly established in the presidency, but wanted to challenge it .
 JFK sought to dismantle the forces whose influence JFK wanted to dismantle . However, there were other conflicts at work between JFK and the hard-driving new Kennedy administration .
 Let us move forward and examine the strange and intimate connections between all of these Kennedy foes and the dynamics at work between them . Let's move forward .
 Israel and Mossad is the central thread of Israel and its Mossad that ties all of these diverse entities together . However, as we shall see, it is as much as a central thread that ties these diverse groups together .
 Long-hidden story of Israel's secret war with John F Kennedy . To begin the process of untangling this hidden web of intrigue, we must first review the long-hidden war .
 Only in recent years have we begun to learn of Kennedy's secret war with Israel . Yet, only recently we have learned of the secret war .
 Much of the conflict stemmed from Israel's determination to build a nuclear bomb . Israel and Israel fought over Israel's desire to use nuclear weapons .
 This is a hidden history that helps explain in part the dynamic forces at work resulting in Kennedy's assassination . This is the hidden history of JFK's assassination. This is also the history of the Kennedy assassination .
 By mid-1963 Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion hated Kennedy with a passion . Ben-gurion hated JFK with a fervor .
 In fact, he considered JFK a threat to the very survival of the Jewish State . The Jewish State was threatened by JFK's assassination, he said .
 Former campaign aide Myer Feldman was JFK's point man for Jewish and Israeli affairs . Feldman was appointed as JFK's Jewish and Israel affairs point man . Kennedy's relationship with Israel and its American lobby has been strained .
 Hersh: The administration was determined to make certain that nobody would be able to circumvent any administration policy in the Middle East . Hersh says the administration wanted to make sure that no one could circumvent any policy .
 Kennedy was looking for ways to solve the problem of finding a home for Palestinian refugees who had been displaced by Israel in 1948 . Kennedy was making it clear that he was very much interested in finding a path to peace .
 American Perceptions of the Arab-Israeli Dispute, elaborated on Kennedy's attitude toward the Middle East controversy . Kennedy's views on the Arab conflict in the U.S. have never been seen as a positive .
 Kennedy was intrigued by possibility of opening up relations with Nasser . Kennedy was especially intrigued with the possibility of an opening up relationship .
 Nasser liked Kennedy's Ambassador, John Badeau, according to Kennedy associate, Theodore Sorensen . Nasser was influenced by Kennedy's practice of personal correspondence, Sorenten says .
 Israel and its American lobby began to understand the import of Kennedy's positioning in regard to the Arab-Israeli conflict . Soon after Kennedy assumed office, Israel began to realize the import .
 Israel began putting heat on the White House through the egis of its supporters in Congress, many of whom relied upon support from the Israeli lobby for campaign contributions and political leverage . Israel was not happy—to say the very least—and began putting pressure on the administration .
 America's most noted longtime Jewish critic of Israel, Dr. David Rothkopf, says Israel is a nation of Jews . He says Israel has a right to Israel's right to be a democracy in Israel .
 Five years and one day after Kennedy's Senate speech calling for Algerian independence, Algeria became a sovereign state on July 3, 1962 . Algeria became an independent state in 1962 .
 Algeria was very much an Islamic state and it created so much concern for Israel . In fact, Algeria was a very much Islamic state, and it was precisely this which created concern . Israel was very concerned about Algeria's Arab influence .
 French Secret Army Organization considered John F Kennedy an enemy only second to Charles DeGaulle . The debate over Algerian independence had sparked a major crisis within France .
 JFK shaping a Middle East policy that put him at loggerheads with Israel . JFK was shaping a Mideast policy at the same time as Israel . At the time, he was shaping the Middle East Policy .
 JFK arranged to meet in Palm Beach, in December of 1962, with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir . JFK was cognizant of Israel's political influence in the U.S.
 The president tempered that pledge with a hope that Israel recognized that America also had interests in the Middle East . However, he said that he hoped that Israel would recognize that U.S. also had Mideast interests .
 America's Secret Relations With a Militant Israel: The United States has a special relationship with Israel in the Middle East . The President said the relationship is comparable only to that which it has with Britain over a range of world affairs .
 Kennedy told Meir that U.S. interests and Israel's interests were not always the same . Kennedy: "United States interests and Israeli interests were never the same" Meir: "Israel's interests and its interests were different"
 America's security problems are, therefore, just as great as Israel's, says Israel's . America needs to know Israel's security needs, writes Israel's ambassador to Israel .
 Kennedy intended to place America's interests, not Israel's, at the center of U.S. Mideast policy . Kennedy informed Israel, in no uncertain terms, that he intended—first and foremost—to place America . Israel's interests should be placed at the heart of U
 Israel had been engaged in nuclear development during the past decade . Israel insisted its nuclear programs were strictly peaceful in nature . Israel had insisted that its nuclear program was peaceful .
 America's Secret Relations With a Militant Israel is a treasure trove of little known information relating to U.S. relations with Israel from the period of 1948 through 1967 . The book is entitled "America's Secret Relationship with Israel"
 JFK's discovery that Israel was engaged in nuclear arms development led to discovery of Israel's nuclear program . Green: JFK discovered Israel was developing nuclear weapons .
 Eisenhower administration informed Kennedy of Israel's secret nuclear weapons development at a site in the desert known as Dimona . Kennedy was coming into office in the transition period of 1960 .
 Israel had advanced several cover stories to explain its activities at Dimona . Israel had advance several cover-up stories to justify its activities there .
 Israel had kept the nuclear weapons program as secret as possible . U.S. intelligence had discovered the project . Israel's nuclear program was 'distressing'
 Kennedy determined that he would make efforts to derail Israel's nuclear weapons development . Kennedy, upon taking office, determined to make efforts .
 Israel's intended entry into the nuclear arena was, as a consequence, a frightening prospect in JFK's mind, particularly in light of ongoing conflict in the Middle East . JFK's father was JFK's secretary of state at the time of the assassination .
 From the very beginning of his presidency, John F Kennedy found himself at severe odds with the government of Israel . Kennedy was at the heart of his troubles with Israel .
 Ben-Gurion had been providing nuclear technology assistance to Israel, but with the assurance that the nuclear development was peaceful in nature . His government had been giving Israel the assistance with the assistance .
 JFK was determined to settle the matter once and for all . JFK was in Washington, D.C. when JFK was assassinated .
 Kennedy had already written to Ben-Gurion expressing his extreme concern about the Dimona project . Kennedy suggested regular inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 Kennedy's friendly overtures to the Arab states were only a public aspect of what ultimately developed into an all-out 'secret war' between Kennedy and Israel .
 If indeed it had been, as we shall see, the mystery behind the JFK assassination might have been unraveled long, long ago . The mystery behind JFK's assassination might be unraveled, but not long ago.
 CIA was monitoring Israel's nuclear weapons development . Israel and the U.S. had established a longtime close relationship with the CIA .
 Kent defined acquisition as either detonation of a nuclear device with or without the possession of actual nuclear weapons, or announcement by Israel that it possessed nuclear weapons even without testing .
 Israel would use its immense political power to force the U.S. to accede to Israel's nuclear intentions . In short, Israel would force the United States to accept Israel's intentions .
 The memorandum was not drafted as a formal national intelligence estimate, which would have involved distribution to several other agencies of the government . According to Green, "It is perhaps significant that the memo was not draft as a . formal intelligence estimate," he said .
 The ties between Israel and the CIA were quite intimate—perhaps too intimate in too many, many ways . As we shall see in Chapter 8, the ties between the CIA and Israel are quite intimate .
 President Kennedy was well aware that Israel's nuclear project at Dimona would enable Israel to produce at least one bomb per year . That was enough to start a world war . President Kennedy knew Israel could produce one bomb a year .
 Israel's nuclear program was ostensibly ""peaceful" in nature . The project was entirely controlled by Israel's Ministry of Defense .
 Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion was critical to neutralize JFK's opposition . JFK was assassinated by the assassination of the president in 1968 .
 There was enough domestic opposition to the program in Israel itself . Kennedy's own steadfast refusal to support Israeli nuclear development could have killed the project .
 In the early months of his administration, Kennedy maintained regular contact with Ben-Gurion in an effort to stop the nuclear development of Israel .
 Ben-Gurion sought to have a private meeting with Kennedy in the course of an official state visit to Washington . The president refused to provide a formal invitation .
 It was Feinberg who had smoothed over Kennedy's relations with the American Jewish community during the 1960 presidential campaign . Feinberg arranged for a massive infusion of Jewish money into JFK's campaign .
 Hersh: "The meeting with Kennedy was a major disappointment for the Israeli prime minister, and not only because of the nuclear issue" Hersh says the meeting was a "major disappointment" for Netanyahu .
 Feinberg: "There's no way of describing the relationship between Jack Kennedy and Ben-Gurion" According to Feinberg, there's "no way B.G. was dealing with JFK as an equal, at least as far as B. G. was concerned .
 Ben-Gurion's contempt for the younger Kennedy was growing by leaps and bounds, almost pathologically . The Israeli prime minister's contempt was growing almost pathological, he said . Ben-gurion was not impressed with Kennedy's popularity .
 The U.S.-Israeli relationship was at an ever-growing and disastrous impasse, although virtually nothing was known about this to the American public at the time . The relationship between Israel and the United States was at a disastrous and growing impasse .
 The Israeli leader refused to agree to a Kennedy proposal that Palestinians either be permitted to return to their homes in Israel or to be compensated by Israel and resettled in the Arab countries or elsewhere .
 Despite all this, the American president remained determined to find a solution to the potential crisis presented by Ben-Gurion’s obstinacy .
 Kennedy offered to sell Israel Hawk missiles for defensive purposes . Kennedy continued to drag his feet on the sale of the missiles .
 Kennedy relented and approved the sale, but only after pressure from Israel and its allies in the U.S. Congress . Kennedy finally relented after pressure was put on by Israel and allies in Congress .
 Even the arms sales to Israel did not assuage Israel and its lobby . Israel and the lobby for Israel is relentless .
 The ""Israel first" bloc in the Senate attacked the administration for failing to conclude a defense pact to protect Israel . The group also called for an embargo on all arms shipments to the Middle East .
 By this time, Kennedy had ordered continuing surveillance of the Israelis and their push for the nuclear bomb . The Israeli government was pushing for the bomb .
 The surveillance was being conducted out of then-CIA Director John McCone's office . To ensure that Israel's access to intelligence regarding the American spy operation against Israel was limited, the surveillance was conducted directly out of the CIA Director's office.
 Kennedy was still willing to attempt to settle the matter and requested that Israel permit American inspectors to come to Israel's nuclear operation at Dimona to verify that—as Israel claimed—the program was peaceful .
 This was the president's last-ditch effort, apparently, to pacify Israel and find out what was going on at Dimona . This was apparently the attempt to find out exactly what is going on there .
 The president's inner circle had begun to realize that Israel deemed Kennedy's refusal to knuckle under to Israel's demands as a dire threat to its survival . Kennedy had been in the middle of a power vacuum when he refused to back down .
 Then-Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara: "I can understand why Israel wanted a nuclear bomb" McNamara says he understands why Israel did it .
 JFK would simply not countenance a nuclear Israel . Israel's leaders believed that a nuke Israel would ensure the continued survival of the Jewish State .
 JFK continued to demand that Israel permit American inspection of Israel's nuclear development facilities . The American president continued to push for Israel to allow American inspection .
 Israel called on its American lobby to apply pressure on Kennedy behind the scenes . Israel has called on the U.S. to pressure Kennedy to make the move . Kennedy has been criticized by Israel for his comments .
 The Israeli Prime Minister hurriedly ordered the construction of what amounted to a phony nuclear plant . The plant didn't give evidence of the building of a nuclear bomb . It was a phony plant .
 False control rooms were set in place and dummy operations were displayed . The operation was simulated using dummy control rooms and dummy rooms .
 Even the Israeli guides who took the Americans through the facility were accompanied by translators who gave the Americans fraudulent translations of the remarks made by the Israeli engineers .
 A standoff between Kennedy and Israel was already in place and it did not bode well for the future . A standoff with Israel in the 1960s would have bode for Kennedy .
 John F Kennedy was the last American president to have tried to stop the advent of the Israeli atomic bomb . John Hadden, the former CIA station chief in Tel Aviv at the time, believes JFK was last president to try to stop Israel's atomic bomb development .
 Kennedy administration policy toward the Middle East left Israel and its U.S. lobby most dissatisfied . The Kennedy administration left Israel most dissatisfied with its Middle East policy .
 1963 was 'the turbulent year' between John F Kennedy and Israel, says pro-Israel American-Israel Public Affairs Committee . Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 "Allies" really meant just one country, Israel, Kenan's foreign principal, Israel . Those ""allies" were meant to be "allies," Kenan wrote .
 Kennedy's ""strong but quiet commitments,"" however, were apparently not enough as relations between Israel and the Arab states were strained . Kennedy's 'quiet commitments' were not enough .
 Algerian premier Ben Bella accused Israel of plotting to topple the new Arab regime . On August 14, 1963 the government of Algerian prime minister Ben Bella said Israel was plotting to overthrow the new regime . Israel has never been accused of plotting against Israel .
 Algerian authorities capture 20 Algerians and 10 foreigners who were engaged in a conspiracy to bring down the government . The Algerian government captured 20 Algerian and 10 foreign members of the conspiracy .
 Israel and its allies in the French Secret Army Organization — now officially disbanded, but effectively still functioning — were determined to reverse the course of history . Israel and allies in France were determined not to reverse history .
 This is not the last time in these pages that we will find the fine hand of Israel and the OAS interfering in the life and work of John F Kennedy . This, however, will not be the first time in this pages .
 Kennedy's efforts to conduct a balanced U.S. Middle East policy were being frustrated at each of every turn . Kennedy's attempts to carry out a balanced Mideast policy were frustrated .
 As a result of Israel's manipulation of Congress, both the House of Representatives and the Senate voted in late 1963 to cut off aid to Egypt . Egypt was a country central to Kennedy's drive for peace .
 His hand of friendship to the Arab world and its leaders, Nasser of Egypt, was being cut off—at the shoulder . Nasser's hand of friendliness to Arab world was cut off, at the shoulder, he says .
 JFK's Middle East policy was angering the Israelis, including his determination to solve the problem of Palestinian refugees . On many fronts, indeed, JFK's Mideast policy was angered by the Israelis .
 On November 20, 1963, Kennedy's delegation at the United Nations called for continuing movement toward the implementation of the 1948 UN resolution . The resolution called for the right of displaced Palestinian Arabs to return to their homes .
 John F Kennedy was plagued with the problem of Israel and its powerful influence in Washington . So it was that even as he was preparing to leave Washington for his final journey as president .
 It was during Kennedy's trip to Dallas that one last memorandum was prepared on his behalf relating to the touchy issue of global nuclear arms development . As it turned out, it was during . Kennedy's visit to Dallas, he prepared a memorandum on the issue .
 JFK had forcefully opposed French production of nuclear weapons . The American president had begun taking a new look at his stance vis-a-vis the French .
 JFK's advisor, McGeorge Bundy, was preparing a 'Top Secret, Eyes Only' memorandum . It was being prepared to outline Kennedy's new policy toward France . France had itself played a major role in Israel's nuclear development and, unwittingly in the drive for atomic weaponry .
 The memorandum regarding the new policy toward France was also dated November 22, 1963 . By this time, however, John F Kennedy's fate was sealed .
 By spring of 1963, Kennedy and Ben-Gurion were at loggerheads, more seriously than ever before . The Israeli-Kennedy relationship was at an all-time high point .
 All of this exacerbated tensions between the U.S. President and Israeli leader . Israeli President Yossi Obeidallah: "All of this exacerbate tensions"
 Relations between U.S. and Israel were unlike they had ever been before . Relations between the United States and Israel was unlike they'd ever been . Israel and the U.N. relations between the two countries were unlike ever before .
 Ben-Gurion: ISRAEL'S 'EXISTENCE IS IN DANGER' Israel's 'existence is in danger' Ben-gurion made his position all too clear at the time of the assassination .
 He was convinced that what he perceived to be Kennedy's intransigence was an all-out threat to the continued survival of the Jewish State . He said he was convinced .
 Ben-Gurion abruptly resigned as prime minister and defense minister in 1963 . On June 16, 1963, he resigned as Prime Minister and Defense Minister . He was the Israeli prime minister of Israel from 1973 to 1994 .
 The ""prophet of fire" ended his fifteen-year career as grand old man of Israel . Thus, he ended his 15-year career as grand old old man .
 Ben-Gurion's departure was the Israeli leader's inability to pressure JFK into accepting Israel's demands . JFK's refusal to accept Israel's request was the primary reason for Ben-gurion's resignation .
 The battle had been lost, but the war between the two men was still to be won . The battle was lost but the battle had not yet been lost .
 Ben-Gurion's explicit comment to John F Kennedy that ""my people have the right to exist . . and this existence is in danger,"" we can certainly make a good presumption . In light of the comments, we should assume that .
 In Ben-Gurion's eyes, John F Kennedy was clearly a modern-day Haman—an enemy of the Jewish people . In Ben Gurion’s eyes, he said Kennedy was a modern day Haman .
 In Jewish folklore, Haman was a descendant of the Amalekites who served as prime minister to King Ahasueros of Persia . Haman served as a prime minister for Ahasuros of Persian Arabia .
 Haman sought to convince the king that all of the Jews of his empire should be exterminated forever . Haman was Haman who sought to kill all the Jews in his empire .
 According to legend, a beautiful Jewish temptress named Esther used her feminine wiles on Ahasueros and, in the end, it was Haman who was instead put to death . Haman was the son of Haman, Haman's son of the Jewish king of the
 The important Jewish holiday of Purim celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from Haman's intended holocaust . Purim is a major Jewish holiday celebrating the birth of the year of the first Purim .
 In the Bible, the ancient Hebrews were urged to ""blot out the memory of the Amalekites" from whom Haman descended . Haman's descendants are from the Amalmekites, the descendants of Haman .
 David Ben-Gurion certainly looked upon John F Kennedy as a modern-day Haman, a son of the Amalekites . In 1963, David Ben Gurion looked upon JFK as a real-life Haman . In Israel, he said: "In 1963, he
 "In his riches, he digged himself a pit, and his own greatness laid him a snare. Insolent in his riches ... he dug himself into a pit," he wrote .
 The Israeli leader could not help but ponder further how he might deliver his people from what he perceived to be certain destruction .
 BenGurion had devoted a lifetime creating a Jewish State and guiding it into the world arena . He dedicated his life to creating the Jewish State of Israel .
 In Ben-Gurion's eyes, John F Kennedy was an enemy of the Jewish people and of his beloved state of Israel . And, in his eyes, he said that Kennedy was a enemy of Israel and the Jews .
 He really steered the state to independence, steered his people to independence . He was prime minister all the way through, with a brief interval, until 1963 . He wrote the Israeli declaration of independence .
 Ben-Gurion ordered the Mossad to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy . It is the thesis of this volume that this volume is . It's the thesis that . in his final days as . Prime Minister, in his . final days . as Prime Minister .
 Final Judgment: Mossad carried out Ben-Gurion's order . Based upon evidence that we will outline in Final Judgment, we believe that . We believe that the Mossad . carried out the order, according to evidence .
 On November 22, 1963, the U.S. president whom Ben-Gurion considered a threat to Israel's very survival came to an inglorious end in Dealey Plaza in Dallas . The Israeli prime minister was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Israel and its leaders believed that drastic measures might be needed to influence the course of history and to ensure the survival of Israel cannot be doubted . Israel's decision to take action was taken in order to ensure Israel's survival .
 Shamir headed the assassination unit from 1955 until 1964— the year after JFK’s assassination . The Israeli newspaper reported that Shamir head the assassination team from 1955 to 1964 . Shamir was assassinated in 1964 .
 Shamir recruited members for his Mossad hit squad from former members of the Stern Gang . Shamir led the underground terrorist group that he led during Israel's fight for independence . The Stern Gang was part of the group that led Israel to independence .
 Stern Gang was responsible for the murder of Lord Moyne and Count Folke Bernadotte . The Stern Gang were responsible for killing the British Mideast minister and UN mediator .
 We know of the existence of the Mossad hit squad that played a major role in the conspiracy that brought about the death of John F Kennedy . And now we know that the hit squad was Mossad's .
 In Chapter 16 we shall learn how this Mossadorchestrated conspiracy came about . Chapter 16 will reveal how the Mossadorchstrategy came about in Chapter 16 . Chapter 17 will reveal exactly how Mossador's plot came about.
 With Israel's intimate ties to the U.S. CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, the Israeli prime minister and his Mossad operatives had in place a network of allies with whom they could easily collaborate in orchestrating the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 A joint conspiracy we shall document in this volume. That they undoubtedly came together in a joint conspiracy. That is what we will find out. The volume will be published in November 2013 .
 With John F Kennedy lying in a grave in Arlington National Cemetery, Israel was safe—for the time being at least . The coming of the MESSIAH was the first time Israel had been in danger .
 Lyndon Johnson is a man with a steadfast history of loyalty to Israel and its American lobby . That he was in line to assume the U.S. presidency was not unnoticed .
 Within weeks of John F Kennedy's assassination, Israel was perhaps the most immediate primary beneficiary of Kennedy's death . This was not something that the controlled media told the American people .
 Lyndon Johnson was a political favorite of Israel and its allies in Meyer Lansky's Organized Crime Syndicate . The most immediate individual beneficiary of JFK's death was, of course, Lyndon Johnson .
 Johnson reversed Kennedy's Middle East policy and established Israel as America's 51"" state . It was Johnson's first major intervention in the Middle East .
 Israel's allies in the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate gained a lock on drug trafficking in Southeast Asia as a result of U.S. involvement in the region . This permitted Israel to advance its own geo-political stance in the Middle East .
 Israel was clearly—and beyond doubt—the primary international beneficiary of Lyndon Johnson's presidency which only became possible through the assassination of John F Kennedy . Israel was the primary beneficiary of the Johnson presidency .
 Israel obviously had a major interest in helping orchestrate the assassination of President Kennedy . If protection of its national security interests and its very survival can be considered a motive, surely it can be . Israel, perhaps above all, obviously, helped orchestrate Kennedy's assassination .
 Survival of Israel has been a cornerstone of Israel's foreign policy from its earliest beginnings . Israel's survival has been the very survival of its foreign policy since its very inception .
 Kennedy had long and often proven a history of personal affinity for Israel and its international interests . This especially, of course, in light of the fact that the man who succeeded Kennedy—Lyndon Johnson—had long . often proven to be a strong supporter of Israel, he says .
 Johnson, too, had a long and sordid record of involvement in criminal activities, including murder, that have finally surfaced .
 The record is far too complex to examine here . Popular literature on the subject is quite complete, including popular literature .
 One major Johnson backer was Meyer Lansky's Louisiana henchman, Carlos Marcello . The Johnson family was a major backer of Lansky, but it's worth noting that one of the Johnson backers was Lansky .
 Lansky's man Marcello funneled at least $50,000 a year in payoffs to then-Texas Senator Lyndon Johnson who, in turn, helped kill in committee all rackets-related legislation that might have been harmful to Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate .
 When Lansky himself was living in Israel, one of his American cronies, Benjamin Sigelbaum, came visiting . When he was living there, he visited a friend of Lansky .
 Mickey Weiner was one of Meyer Lansky's chief couriers between his Miami banking operations and his European money-laundering center at the Banque de Credit International in Geneva, Switzerland . It was this same Mickey Weiner who, as we shall see in Chapter 7, was the chief cou
 Mr Baker served time in federal prison for his criminal activities during his time as Johnson's protégé .
 Even with Kennedy's death, the stench of corruption surrounding the Lansky-linked Baker still threatened Johnson . Kennedy was assassinated in 1964 .
 Washington lobbyist Robert N Winter-Berger recalls a visit by thenPresident Johnson to the office of House Speaker John McCormack . Johnson was in the office at the time .
 Unconscious of Winter-Berger's presence, Johnson began shrieking and shouting and condemning his longtime friend and protéé, Bobby Baker . Johnson was not aware of Winter Berger's presence at the time .
 Speaker McCormack assured the president that Winter-Berger was ""all right"" and that he was close to one of Baker's other associates, Nat Voloshen . Winter-Baker was also close to Baker's former associate Nat Voloshen, who died in 2008 .
 Johnson's Lansky connection is far more complex than we might even be able to determine . The interplay between Johnson and his intimates and those of the Lansky syndicate is indisputable, to say the least .
 The Kennedy war against organized crime came to a sudden halt when Lyndon Johnson became president . Kennedy's war on organized crime ended when he became president in 1964 .
 LBJ's sudden succession to the presidency led to profound changes in U.S. policy toward Israel and the Arab world . LBJ was the president of the United States during the early 1960s .
 The memo was dated November 26, 1963, just one day after John F Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery . Hailing Johnson's ""front-rank pro-Israel position""'*’ during his Senate career, the memo was signed by Johnson in 1963 .
 Kenan's memoirs of his service as one of the Israeli lobby's top men in Washington are particularly interesting . What is additionally interesting are his memoirs .
 Johnson proved to be a loyal friend of Israel, Kenan says . Johnson was the "New Man in the White House"
 Johnson dedicated a synagogue in Austin, Texas, less than six weeks after becoming president . Seymour Hersh points out that one of Johnson's first symbolic acts as president was to dedicate a synagogue there .
 Johnson was the first American president in history to dedicate a synagogue to a synagogue .
 In Israel, Johnson's presidency was greeted with pleasure . Johnson's administration in Israel was greeted by pleasure .
 In other words, Johnson would be willing to set aside American interests in favor of Israel's . Johnson would have been willing to put aside U.S. interests in Israel's interests .
 In Egypt President Nasser realized that the death of John F Kennedy would have a profound impact upon the Arab world . In Egypt he realized that his death of JFK would have had a profound effect upon the world . The death of Kennedy was a profound moment for Nasser to realize .
 In Paris, DeGaulle was stunned by the murder of the U.S. president . He had granted Algerian independence and suffered numerous attempts on his own life in retaliation .
 He was one of the very few leaders of whom it may be said to be said that they are statesmen . He was a statesman, not just a politician .
 There was additional fall-out in the Arab world as a consequence of Kennedy's assassination .
 JFK's alleged assassin Lee Harvey Oswald was promptly murdered by Jack Ruby, an American Jew with gangster connections . Suspicions about Israel's complicity in the crime were widespread .
 There is little question that Kennedy intended to move decisively in his second term . Nonetheless, as Alfred Lilienthal, the veteran critic of U.S. Middle East policy, has written, "Little question"
 The quote, indeed, may have been apocryphal—another legend in the Lyndon Johnson legacy . The quote may have come from a source in the White House .
 Johnson's comment was probably made to Ephraim Evron, the number two man in Israel's embassy in Washington . However, most sources believe that Johnson's comments were made to Evron . Evron is Israel's number two official at the embassy in the U.S.
 It was Evron who ultimately became a very close friend of Lyndon Johnson . Evron later became a friend of LBJ .
 Angleton knew about JFK's assassination, Evron likely knew, and vice versa . Angleton likely knew Evron knew about Kennedy's assassination . Evron probably knew about the assassination .
 McPherson was especially tuned in to Johnson's relationship with Israel and its lobby in Washington, D.C. As a result of his interest in Israel, he became a key adviser to Johnson .
 Israel knew it had a loyal devotee of its interests in the White House now that John F Kennedy was out of the way . Israel knew that it had been loyal to the Kennedy family .
 Israel had been keeping a close watch on Lyndon Johnson for a long time . Israel was a long-time admirer of LBJ .
 President Eisenhower and Secretary of State Dulles wanted to force us to withdraw from Sinai, they threatened us with economic sanctions, says President Eisenhower . "When I was in the Middle East, I was a member of the U.S. delegation," he says .
 Arab States were also watching Johnson closely, particularly after he assumed the presidency . The Arab States also watched Johnson closely .
 JFK bemoaned efforts by Israel and its partisans to sabotage his Middle East peace initiatives, especially in regard to relations with Nasser . In fact, as we have seen, it was during his last White House press conference that JFK was bemoaning .
 Walt Rostow, the president's national security advisor believed that U.S. policy towards Israel would serve as an effective check on Soviet support for Arab countries . Rostow believed that United States policy against Israel would . serve as a check on Arab support for Soviet support .
 As Senate Majority Leader, Johnson worked closely with the CIA on a regular basis . Johnson was considered a ""CIA friend"" in Congress .
 Lyndon Johnson did indeed begin a major shift in U.S. Middle East policy . Johnson's actions were in line with his joint devotion to not only CIA's interests, but those of Israel's as well .
 Israel's initial primary benefit from the death of JFK was, in fact, the removal from the White House of a president who vehemently opposed Israel's nuclear weapons development . Israel's first benefit from JFK's death was the removal of the president's opposition to Israel developing nuclear weapons .
 The new American president, so long a partisan of Israel, allowed the nuclear development to continue . The new U.S. president is so long an opponent of Israel's nuclear program .
 Johnson was cementing ties to Meyer Lansky's Organized Crime Syndicate . Johnson was also cementing his long-standing ties to Lansky syndicate .
 Hubert H Humphrey was President Johnson's vice-presidential running mate in 1964 . Humphrey is a Minnesota senator who served in the Senate from 1964 to 1964 .
 Lansky and his partners in Israel were assured a dream ticket come November . The 1964 presidential election was Johnson's to lose . Lansky's partner in Israel helped secure the election .
 Lansky and Israel made sure there wouldn't be any problems with any independent upstart second-generation multi-millionaire Irishmen like John F Kennedy who was not only the son of a notorious anti-Semite but a bullheaded proponent of America's interests .
 President Lyndon Johnson was in a position to do many favors for Israel, writes David Gergen .
 President Obama's foreign aid giveaways included massive increases in U.S. taxpayer-financed foreign aid programs .
 Johnson made Kennedy look like a piker . Kennedy himself had been generous to Israel in that regard .
 U.S. government assistance to Israel in FY 1964, the last budget year of the Kennedy administration, stood at $40 million . United States government assistance for Israel in 1964 was $40million .
 This was substantially reduced from the levels of assistance in previous years . This was significantly reduced from levels of aid in earlier years .
 In FY 1965, 20 percent of United States aid was military in nature, and in FY 1966, 71 percent of all official assistance to Israel came in the form of credits for purchase of military equipment .
 In FY 1963, the Kennedy administration agreed to sell five batteries of Hawk missiles valued at $21. million . The Kennedy administration sold five of the missiles worth $21 million .
 The death of John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson's assumption of the Oval Office marked a major change in U.S. policy .
 In the years 1948-1963, America was perceived by all of the governments in the Middle East as a major power that acted upon the basis of its own, clearly defined national self-interest .
 U.S. Middle East policy was just that—Middle East policy . It was not an Israeli policy in which Arab countries were subordinate actors . Arab countries should not be subordinate actors to Israeli policy .
 Truman's policies on arms exports to the middle East, Eisenhower's stands on regional water development and on territorial integrity during the Suez Crisis, and Kennedy's candor with Mrs. Kennedy . Truman's policy on arms export to the Middle East included arms exports and water development .
 U.S. diplomatic support for Israel in the UN and elsewhere was no less generous . Israel has a long history of diplomatic support in the United States for Israel .
 America had a public policy on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, but suddenly had a covert policy of abetting Israel's nuclear weapons program . America's policy on nuclear weapons changed dramatically in the past decade .
 We had a public policy on arms balance in the region, but secretly agreed, by the end of 1967, to become Israel's major arms supplier . We secretly agreed to be Israel's main arms supplier in 1967, Israel's first major arms deal .
 Clearly, Israel's allies in the CIA now had a free hand to conduct their own private war in Vietnam . The CIA benefit resulting from Kennedy's removal from the presidency was one of the CIA's biggest gains .
 JFK's reversal of JFK's decision to begin withdrawing U.S. forces from Southeast Asia was, in its own sense, a CIA coup . Johnson's reversal was a "CIA coup" for the CIA, says historian John Avlon .
 Johnson's many friends in the defense industry both at home and elsewhere. Likewise with Johnson's friends in Texas and elsewhere . Likewise with his friends in defense industry .
 The defense contractors reaped untold billions in profits from Johnson's dirty little war in Southeast Asia . The war probably spelled the end of Johnson's popular chances for a second term .
 Israel, too, had much to gain from U.S. involvement in Vietnam, Israel says . Vietnam was a key ally of Israel, but Israel had much more to gain, he says . Israel's role in Vietnam has been ignored, but it's important to remember .
 U.S. military adventurism in Southeast Asia was a direct result of Israel's ability to advance its own military muscle and political influence in the Mideast . Israel was able to advance military muscle in the Middle East, says Stephen Green .
 Israel could now argue, with the United States bogging down in Southeast Asia, Uncle Sam needed its close, reliable, democratic ally in the Middle East looking out for America's interests in the region . After all, Israel could argue that with the U.S. bogged down in
 The United States would have to take the initial steps toward becoming Israel's major arms supplier . Three previous Presidents had said that U.S. never would be a major arms dealer for Israel .
 We would also forfeit our role as primary mediator of the multifaceted Arab-Israeli dispute, says Israel . Israel would also be forced to temporarily forfeit its role as a mediator, says Israeli PM .
 Israel stood to benefit immensely from U.S. involvement in Vietnam, something which would not have occurred had JFK lived . Israel would have benefited immensely from the United States involvement in the Vietnam war .
 There is yet an additional irony in the relationship of the U.S. and Israel vis-a-vis the Vietnam conflict . After the war in Vietnam was underway, dragging Lyndon Johnson deeper and deeper into the muck of public discontent, Israel was beginning to encounter its own difficulties as
 America's entry in Southeast Asia had given Israel a free hand in its own sphere of geographic influence . The tiny Jewish state found that it now needed the United States more so than ever .
 Israel's aggression against its Arab neighbors had rallied the Arab world against Israel . The Arab world had been angered by Israel's actions against its neighbors .
 Israel and its American lobby perceived U.S. energy to be focused in the wrong direction . With the United States in too deep in Southeast Asia, Israel wants to focus on energy in the region .
 Many of the voices urging U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam were those who were most stridently demanding that the United States re-insert itself into the Middle East cauldron .
 It was on the eve of the 1967 War, a war that could have been the end for Israel, that the Washington Star pointed out the strange paradox . The Washington Star noted the paradox in its editorial article .
 The nation, so this line of reasoning goes, cannot afford involvement in both areas . The nation can't afford to be involved in both, it is said .
 "The Middle East is the logical place for the United States to intervene,"" '’according to the Star's assessment of the attitude of the pro-Israel advocates of withdrawal from Vietnam who were urging U.S. intervention in the Middle East,"" .
 It should be noted that Israel's friends in the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate also stood to benefit from the Vietnam conflict . The CIA, CIA & Vietnam were both involved in the conflict .
 In Chapter 12 we shall examine in detail the little-known collaboration between the Lansky syndicate, its Mossad-linked banking money launderers, and the CIA in the drug pipeline out of Southeast Asia . In Chapter 11, we will examine the collaboration between Lansky and Mossad
 The Lansky crime empire began operating major global drug trafficking, largely under CIA cover, throughout Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War . The drug problem began escalating to a major degree in the United States and elsewhere .
 The CIA's role in the global drug market is only now just coming to the surface . Now, many years later, it's only now coming to a conclusion that the CIA has been involved .
 The Iran-contra scandal shed some light on this little known aspect of the underbelly of world affairs, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Joint Israel-Lansky-CIA combine shared a major benefit from U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 Israel and its covert allies did indeed have a messiah in Lyndon Baines Johnson . Israel and covert allies had a passionate attachment to the former president .
 Johnson gave the Israelis the impression that America had no fundamental objection to Israel's nuclear program . Third, by refusing to follow the advice of his aides that America make its delivery of nuclear-capable F-4 Phantoms conditional on Israel's signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
 Meyer Lansky, the CIA, the FBI & the Israeli Mossad . The Man in the Middle . The CIA, FBI & Mossad were behind the creation of Israel in the 1960s .
 Israel was established as a state, in major part, through the political, financial and moral support of Meyer Lansky and his associates and henchmen in Organized Crime . Israel is now a state of Israel .
 Lansky's chief European money laundering bank was an operation run under the auspices of a longtime officer of Israel's Mossad . The bank was run by a longtime Mossad officer, Lansky says .
 Lansky's intimate ties with not only American intelligence made the Jewish mobster the ""untouchable" leader of the global organized crime syndicate . Lansky was known for his close ties to American intelligence .
 During John F Kennedy's short-lived presidency, he was not only at odds with Israel and its powerful lobby in America . He was not alone at odds but with the powerful lobby of Israel .
 Kennedy had also double-crossed his secret allies in the criminal underworld who had helped him achieve the presidency . Kennedy's secret allies were also involved in his downfall .
 The president's brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, was waging a relentless war against organized crime . Kennedy was the Attorney General of the United States .
 Meyer Lansky had schemed and shot his way to the top of the crime syndicate . Lansky was a littleknown, but immensely powerful underworld figure by the name of Lansky . Kennedy's rise to the presidency was the culmination of a series of scandals .
 Meyer Lansky was the so-called ""chairman of the board"" of that criminal empire which spanned the globe . That syndicate was not just national—it was international—and the uncrowned king of crime .
 Meyer Lansky was one of the leading sponsors of the state of Israel early in his criminal career . Lansky's associates were among the chief financial patrons of the influential Israeli lobby in America .
 Lansky forged close ties with Israel's allies in the U.S. CIA . Lansky had also forged ties with the CIA, which had entered into a bitter war with John F Kennedy .
 JFK unwittingly forged a deadly alliance among his fiercest foes . JFK came to blows with not only Israel and its allies in the Lansky Organized Crime empire but also with the CIA .
 Israel's Mossad, Organized Crime and the CIA came together in the Kennedy murder, it is most appropriate to begin with Lansky . Lansky was the CIA's top operative in the assassination of the late president .
 It is Lansky and his crime syndicate which tie all of these diverse strands together, pointing the finger toward the until-now undisclosed role of Israel in the JFK assassination . Israel has never been publicly identified .
 Meyer Lansky, in fact, is a pivotal player in the international conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of John F Kennedy . Lansky was a pivotal member of the conspiracy that led to the assassination .
 The most concise summary of the origins and rise of Meyer Lansky appeared in a lengthy profile of Lansky that appeared on the front page of The Wall Street Journal in 1969 .
 By the time he was 27, young Maier had five arrests on his record, on charges ranging from disorderly conduct to suspicion of murder . Maier was never convicted of murder, but he was never found guilty .
 "Their specialty was protecting liquor in transit from hijackers to East Coast gangs," says board member .
 Lansky and Siegel were named to the board of the Eastern Syndicate when it was formed to coordinate rum-running . They were good at it, and Lansky was a big name in the business .
 Final decisions rested with individual gang leaders, with one acting as federation chairman . Final decisions were made by gang leaders with the help of gang leaders .
 The Navy decided East Coast piers could be protected from sabotage only with the aid of the Mafia . The Mafia was responsible for the Navy's decision to protect the East Coast .
 Luciano's attorney and Meyer Lansky were recruited to persuade Luciano to give the arrangement his blessing . Luciano gave his blessing to the arrangement . Lansky's lawyer and Lansky recruited Luciano for the deal .
 After the war, Lucky was paroled and sent home to Italy on promise he would never again enter the United States . He was sent home on promise never again entering the U.S. after the war .
 By the late 1950's, Costello had been ousted from power by his colleagues and Adonis had been deported . Adonis was deported from the country .
 Roosevelt sent Lansky as a personal emissary to Cuba to meet with Cuban strongman Fulgencio Batista . Lansky was sent to Cuba by Roosevelt as an emissor .
 FDR believed that Batista's authoritarian rule was stirring popular discontent which could be exploited by a growing communist movement in Cuba . FDR believed the authoritarian rule could be used to help the communist movement .
 Through Lansky FDR hoped to influence Batista to institute reforms that would quell the communist threat . FDR's efforts to quell communist threat were thwarted by Lansky's efforts .
 Lansky had a long and profitable personal and business relationship with Batista and other Cuban leaders . Lansky made millions in kickbacks from Lansky's casino operations .
 Batista was in and out of office several times during the next two decades . The Cuban strongman remained the de facto leader of the island through successive puppet regimes until the advent of Fidel Castro on New Years Day, 1960 .
 Lansky also had extensive contacts much farther away from American shores . Lansky had contacts in the U.S. but also had contacts far away from the shores of America .
 Lansky was a key force in establishing the State of Israel . Lansky helped establish the Israel in the early 1950s .
 To understand Lansky's preeminent leadership position in organized crime, we must first look at the strange and complex alliance—and rivalry—between the Italian and Jewish elements in the organized crime world . Lansky was the leader of organized crime in New York City, New York .
 The Wall Street Journal's account of Lansky's rise to power hints at these contradictions, but doesn't explore them in the fashion needed . Lansky was a controversial figure in Washington, D.C. for decades .
 Two interesting things left out of the Journal summary of Lansky's career should be mentioned . Lansky was a member of the New England Patriots team in the 1960s .
 Lansky launched his criminal career working in conjunction with the famed Mafia figure Charles ""Lucky"" Luciano . It is generally known that Lansky worked with Luciano in the early 1950s .
 A recent Hollywood extravaganza entitled Mobsters highlighted the youthful exploits of Lansky, Luciano, Benjamin Siegel and Frank Costello . Their alliance is noted in the Journal account and a recent Hollywood special has been released .
 Lansky may have arranged the criminal indictment and subsequent imprisonment of Luciano . However, it may have been Lansky, through his political contacts, who arranged the indictment .
 Luciano's imprisonment and deportation smoothed Lansky's further advancement in organized crime . Luciano was imprisoned and deported from New York . Lansky was the leader of organized crime in New York City .
 In his own memoirs Luciano provides a detailed account of how he was framed on the white slavery and prostitution charges that resulted in his imprisonment . Luciano says he was, in fact, framed on white slavery charges .
 Luciano does not blame Lansky, by any means, although, as we shall see, he may have had suspicions . Luciano says Lansky is not the only reason he blames Lansky .
 Luciano doesn't ask the reader to believe that he wasn't engaged in extensive criminal activity . Luciano didn't want to believe the public to believe he was involved in extensive crime .
 "He does present a very cogent case, however, that he was not guilty of the crimes for which he was convicted," he says .
 Luciano was never brought to trial for any of the crimes in which he was engaged with Lansky . He was never charged with any crimes he committed in the role of Lansky in the 1980s .
 In any case, it is quite possible that Lansky, in fact, did have some role in framing Luciano on prostitution charges . Lansky may have had a role in frame Luciano for the prostitution charges against him .
 Tom Dewey's war against Lucky Luciano, the Mafia chieftain's imprisonment, and his subsequent deportation smoothed the way for Lansky's rise to the top .
 Luciano: "I worked it all out with Lansky, and that's the point where Meyer became the real treasurer of the outfit" According to Luciano, Meyer became "the real treasurer" of the organization .
 Both Dewey and Lansky stood to benefit from Luciano's imprisonment . Dewey & Lansky did, of course, stand to benefit by Luciano .
 Lansky reportedly donated $250,000 (in 1938 dollars) to Dewey's campaign . In fact, at that time, Lansky donated fully . In 1938 dollars, Dewey was a Democrat .
 Lansky provided additional financial support and political muscle to Dewey in 1942 . Lansky helped Dewey successfully seek the governorship of New York City . He also supported Dewey again in 1942 when he ran for governor .
 In return for his freedom, Luciano agreed to go into exile to his homeland of Italy . Luciano was freed in exchange for his release from prison .
 Dewey Dewey later became a major stockholder in the Mary Carter Paint Company in the late 1950's . Dewey became a stockholder of Mary Carter paint company in the 1950s .
 Carter Paint was originally an active corporation set up by Thomas Dewey and CIA director Allen Dulles to use as a CIA front . According to former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow, "Carter Paint" was originally a corporation .
 In 1958, Dewey and some friends had bought controlling interest in the Crosby Miller Corporation, with two million dollars in CIA money . Allen Dulles authorized the purchase of the company with funds from the CIA .
 Crosby Miller Corporation merged with the CIA-owned paint company in 1959 . Crosby Miller and the CIA owned paint company was merged into one of the world's largest companies .
 As an example of one of its early activities, it provided laundered CIA money for the Bay of Pigs army . The CIA provided money to the army in the 1960s .
 Dewey's admiring biographer, Richard Norton Smith, never mentions Lansky's support for Dewey in his biography .
 All of this illustrates the depth of Lansky's political influence and his wide range of connections . Lansky: "All of this shows the depth and breadth of his political influence"
 The attempt on Costello forced the ""prime minister"" into early retirement and gave Lansky further influence in organized crime . Whatever the truth, it is believed the attempt forced Costello to retire .
 In 1961, well after his influence in the international crime syndicate had begun to dwindle, Luciano reflected upon his relationship with Lansky . In 1961 he reflected on his friendship with the late crime boss .
 According to Luciano, his Mafia associate Vito Genovese was his own Cassius . Luciano: "I'm not sure what happened to Cassius. I'm sure he was Cassius"
 "Come to think of it, I even had two Cassiuses in my life, the other one bein' a guy by the name of Meyer Lansky," he said . However, upon further thought, he added, he said he had 'two Cassiuses'
 Luciano, in exile in Italy, got word from home that there were ""orders"" that he not participate in any such venture . However, Luciano was in exile and said he would not participate . Luciano: "There were orders" to stop him participating in the venture .
 Luciano saw the whole truth about what ""the Mafia"" had really become . Luciano says he saw the full picture of what the Mafia had become .
 "Everybody was dancin’t to his tune on the other end, like a bunch of puppets," he says . "Because he was pullin' the wires and everybody was pulling the wires"
 He was so hungry for power behind the scenes he'd kiss anybody's ass and do anythin’ he had to do so that in the end, he would wind up the real boss of bosses of all the Italians and the Jews—and without a single fuckin’ vote on
 "The Mafia Killed JFK" couldn't have done without the foreknowledge—and guiding hand—of Meyer Lansky . Lansky was the forerunner of JFK's assassination, and his role in the assassination .
 Meyer Lansky is an Israeli loyalist who bound together the diverse elements which came together in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Lansky's connections with Israel and its Mossad (as well as Israel's allies in the CIA), demonstrates that he is an integral player in the conspiracy . And as
 Lansky's name seldom appears in any significant fashion in most accounts which contend that organized crime played a role in the assassination . Yet, contrary to what Lacey contends, Lansky is rarely mentioned in most of the accounts .
 The fact is that Lansky's name has been continuously and conveniently buried behind a host of Italian Organized Crime figures . Lansky has been a major figure in Italian organized crime for decades, but his name has never been found .
 In Chapter 10 and Chapter 11 we review, extensively, Lansky's connections with the more famous—perhaps infamous—lItalian-surnamed underworld figures linked to the Kennedy assassination . In Chapter 11, we discuss the connections between Lansky and some of the most famous underworld figures .
 Those individuals were, practically to a man, Lansky's underlings . As we shall see, the individuals in question were Lansky underlings. Lansky was a real-life figure in the world .
 Lansky's name is hardly mentioned at all in standard accounts which suggest that organized crime— particularly ""the Mafia" — played a part in the president's murder . Lansky was a prominent figure in organized crime .
 According to Luciano, Lansky suggested that the newly-assembled national crime syndicate dub itself ""the Union Siciliano" According to Lansky, it was Lansky himself who suggested that he called himself the "Union Sicilian" It was a sobriquet which
 Many have been afraid to point out the important role of Jewish criminals in the world of crime . Because of political constraints and fear of being accused of anti-Semitism, many have not commented .
 One Jewish gangster, Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, discussed the Italian-Jewish conflict in organized crime in his memoirs . Cohen's memoirs were published in New York City .
 Americans had long been aware of legendary mobsters such as Al Capone and Lucky Luciano . But general awareness that a national crime syndicate did indeed exist was not commonplace . Americans had not been aware that the syndicate existed .
 Following a police raid of the Appalachian conference, public attention began focusing on ""the Mafia" The conference was attended exclusively by top Italian-surnamed Mafia figures .
 The official story has always been that a local policeman just happened to stumble upon the Mafia conclave at the home of Mafia figure Joseph Barbara . Police say the conclave took place at a home of a local Mafia figure .
 Police had been tipped off by a Lansky associate that the meeting was about to take place . Hank Messick says the police had been warned by Lansky associates about the meeting .
 The session focused not only on the men who attended the session but on the entire Mafia . It focused on the members of the Mafia, including the men involved in the session .
 State and federal officials tried to find some charge to stick against delegates they had captured or identified . What's more, it continued for well over a year as state and federal .
 Finger later went on to become chief of the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith, the primary intelligence and propaganda arm of Israel's Mossad in the U.S. Finger was the head of the "civil rights division" of the anti-Semitic AntiDef
 Michael Milan was a low-level Jewish organized crime figure who grew up in Lansky's sphere of influence . He claims to have been inducted into the Mafia by Lansky himself . Lansky is a known figure in the New York mafia .
 Lansky's role in the Office of Strategic Services -Naval Intelligence operations during World War II and his work on behalf of Franklin Delano Roosevelt in handling Batista may account for the fact that Lansky seldom faced harassment from federal authorities .
 No final answer is possible, but he has been strangely immune to prosecution on the Federal level . He has a strange reason for not being prosecuted on the federal level .
 Twice the IRS Intelligence Division has recommended prosecution, and twice the Justice Department has declined . The IRS has been criticized by both the IRS and Justice Department .
 Lansky remains the only top man in the national crime syndicate to escape untouched untouched . Lansky is the only man to escape unscathed from his crimes .
 Mr. L was never rousted, was rarely served with federal subpoenas, and was generally left alone to conduct his business .
 Mr L. L. didn't go around shooting anybody like people in some of the other Families, and making life embarrassing for the cops and the feds, he says . "Mr L. on the other hand, didn't shoot anybody like ... people in the other families," he says
 It was the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith . It was largely responsible for the establishment of the J Edgar Hoover Foundation in 1947 .
 Upon retirement from the bureau he signed on as Executive Vice President of Schenley Industries, a major liquor firm run by ex-bootlegger and Lansky associate Lewis Rosenstie .
 Lansky was involved in bootlegging and rum-running rackets for decades . Lansky had longtime contacts with liquor interests, including liquor interests .
 The organization's initial impetus came not so much out of a desire to defend members of the Jewish faith, but, more so, Jewish mobsters . The organization was formed in response to a desire for Jews to be protected from mobsters, the group says .
 Bingham was accused of being 'anti-Semitic' for pointing out the role of certain Jewish gangsters in organized crime . Bingham faced accusations of being anti-Semitic in 1908 .
 One of the immediate beneficiaries of Bingham's departure was mobster Arnold Rothstein, Lansky's mentor . Rothstein was the undisputed Jewish underworld leader prior to Lansky his rise to power .
 The source of the attacks on Bingham was a public relations committee formed by a corporate attorney by the name of Sigmund Livingston . The committee was formed by an attorney by a corporation attorney .
 J Edgar Hoover biographer Curt Gentry notes that Hoover's FBI was never strongly concerned with Lansky's activities . Gentry: FBI was not strongly concerned about Lansky activities .
 The Dallas and Miami field offices had blind spots, says Gentry . According to Gentry, "The Dallas and . Miami field office had blind blind spots"
 William Sullivan had his own suspect, someone close to both the director and [Hoover's] close friend and second in command, Clyde] Tolson . Tolson was reputedly living far above his means, according to Sullivan .
 Sullivan happened to be the number three man at the FBI behind Hoover and Tolson . Sullivan was the FBI's number 3 man behind Hoover, Tolson and Hoover . Sullivan also was the number 3 FBI director at the time .
 As head of the Bureau's highly secretive Division Five, Sullivan was in charge of domestic counterintelligence . Sullivan was head of Division Five at the time of the CIA .
 Also in charge of the FBI's participation in the Warren Commission investigation, Sullivan was a close friend of James Angleton, head of the Mossad desk at the CIA, and CIA conduit within the FBI itself . Sullivan was also a friend of Angleton and a CIA conduit .
 Sullivan was head of the FBI's Domestic Intelligence . Sullivan was in charge of the infamous COINTELPRO operations against Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Sullivan was a top FBI official .
 Sullivan was shot to death in a strange hunting accident on November 9, 1977 just prior to being called to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Sullivan was a man with much inside knowledge .
 Winchell would pass information on fixed races to Hoover . Hoover would pass the information to Winchell, who would then pass it on to Hoover. Hoover would also pass on the information . Hoover was Hoover's driver .
 Hoover would arrange his real bets through his associates while making minimal bets on his own ticket at the horse races . Hoover would make his bets through associates while arranging his own bets on the ticket . Hoover was known as the richest man in the world .
 He knew where the money went and how it made its way to the top bosses . The money went to top bosses, he knew where it was going .
 In a typical month in 1963, the skim from one casino amounted to $123,500 . Lansky kept $71,000, then transmitted the rest to the New Jersey mobster Gerald Catena .
 Each recipient would have had a small percentage of his share deducted for casino employees who kept mum about the operation .
 In 1993 author Anthony Summers provided what may be a critical missing piece of the puzzle . Author Anthony Summers provides what may have been the missing piece .
 No well-known author had affixed his own name to the charge . Hoover had been rumored to have been the subject of rumors about him for years .
 Summers reports that former OSS man James Jesus Angleton also had control of the Hoover photos . Angleton was CIA counterintelligence chief and OSS chief William Donovan .
 The question is whether Angleton, Donovan and Donovan gave the photos to Lansky—or vice-versa . Either option being possible in light of Lansky's own longtime association with American intelligence .
 Angleton had been directly involved with the Lansky crime syndicate through the CIA's dealings with Lansky's drug-smuggling allies in the Corsican and Sicilian Mafias . Angleton, as we shall see in Chapter 8 and Chapter 12, had been involved with
 Meyer Lansky was very much a ""godfather"" in organized crime, far more influential than even the most powerful Mafia boss in any city in America . Lansky's influence was far more powerful than even even even the biggest Mafia boss .
 Lansky's pre-eminent role in the underworld accounts for his pre-eminence in underworld . Lansky is known for his involvement in organized crime in New York .
 When we refer to the ""Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate" we are referring to the powerful Jewish interests that are inter-connected here . It is for this reason, then, that when we . refer to not only the . ""Mafia"" but also to the
 Lansky Syndicate played a pivotal role in the establishment of Israel . It was the Lansky syndicate that played a key role in founding Israel .
 Jewish gangsters have long and openly supported Jewish causes and the State of Israel . According to Hank Messick, "Jewish gangsters" have long been involved in Jewish causes .
 Lansky permitted the Haganah fund-raiser, Joseph Baum, to hold a $10,000 benefit at (Lansky's gambling house), the Colonial Inn .
 On other occasions, arms intended for the Arabs were, instead, hijacked by Lansky's henchman and shipped to Israel .
 Lansky also wasn't above putting the squeeze on rackets buddies, Jewish and non-Jewish alike, to buy Israel bonds . Lansky: "Racket buddies" should be able to buy bonds .
 Kahane actually served, at one point, in the Israeli parliament . Kahane, who was ultimately assassinated, actually served in parliament in Israel .
 Lansky's connection with the OSS-Naval Intelligence enterprise known as ""Operation Underworld" paved the way for the establishment of the state of Israel . Lansky was involved in a strange global network that led him to the creation of Israel.
 In Chapter 17, we will examine the ADL's role more fully, particularly in regard to its manipulation of the media . Chapter 17: In Chapter 18, we'll examine ADL more fully .
 Stephenson's top aide was Louis Bloomfield, later an attorney for the Lansky-linked Bronfman bootlegging family . Bloomfield was himself a key player in the conspiracy to assassinate John F Kennedy .
 There is little question but that Stephenson and Bloomfield were in close contact with Lansky and his henchmen during this period . There is no doubt that they were involved in the Lansky affair .
 Institute provided arms and money to Haganah and Irgun in Palestine with arms . It was this institute that provided the Jewish Hagenah, and later the Irgun, with arms and cash .
 The Institute's coordinator for arms smuggling to the Jewish underground was Louis Bloomfield .
 Bloomfield worked with liquor baron Samuel Bronfman, one Hank Greenspun and Lansky himself . Working with Bloomfield were liquor barons Samuel Bronfran and Hank Greenpun .
 Angleton worked closely with Jewish underground activities both in London and Italy . Angleton was instrumental in orchestrating U.S. intelligence collaboration with the Corsican Mafia and Sicilian Mafia in intelligence operations .
 Meyer Lansky was directly and intimately involved with all of the major players in the establishment of Israel . Lansky helped establish Israel in the 1950s and '60s .
 The Russian-born Jewish immigrant had come a long way from the slums of Brooklyn to a singular and pre-eminent role in power politics .
 The real key to the Lansky connection with Israel is money, the real key is money . Lansky is known for his connections with Israel . The Lansky operation is based in Tel Aviv .
 The newly-established State of Israel not only needed money to exist, but the organization of a new government was an ideal opportunity for Lansky . Lansky and his confederates established their own worldwide financial—and criminal— network .
 The emotional memories of the experiences of the Jewish people during World War HI— indeed throughout history — were the foundations upon which Israel had been established . Israel was established in 1948 .
 Lansky's status as organized crime's chief financier and grand wizard of money laundering put Lansky in a particularly central position . Lansky was one of the leaders of organized crime in New York's organized crime .
 Lansky's primary link with Israeli intelligence and financial operations came through the entity of the Banque de Credit International in Geneva Switzerland . Lansky was linked to Israel's intelligence operations through the Swiss bank's Geneva branch .
 Lansky emerged as Lansky's primary European moneylaundering operation . Lansky was behind the bank that he used to use to launder money in Europe . The bank was Lansky’s primary European operation .
 Rosenbaum was a co-founder of the World Zionist Congress . He also was a director of the Jewish Agency in Geneva, Switzerland . Rosenbaum also co-founded the World Zionism Congress .
 Rosenbaum was, very clearly, a key figure in Israel's international intrigue and a critical player in the world of organized crime syndicate boss Meyer Lansky . Rosenbaum: "Rosenbaum was very clearly ... key figure" in Israel .
 Rosenbaum also served on the board of the SwissIsrael Trade Bank . The bank was established by Pinchas Sapir, Israel's Finance Minister and Mossad officer, Sapir .
 The BANQUE DE CREDIT INTERNATIONAL BCI was an Israeli government/Mossad operation, critical to the survival of the Jewish State .
 One of the board members of BCI was Zwi Recheter, director of the Bank Hapoalim, one of Israel's largest banks . Zwi was also director of Bank Hapalim .
 BCI was to become Meyer Lansky's primary overseas money laundering bank . The bank provided money laundering services that the bank provided to Israel's Mossad . BCI also provided services to the Mossad.
 During its heyday, BCI included among its board of directors two longtime Lansky associates . Edward Levinson and John Pullman were among those on the BCI board .
 As we noted in Chapter 6, Levinson was one of the operators of the Fremont Casino in Las Vegas, a front man for Lansky's close friend, Joseph ""Doc"" Stacher . He was a frequent business partner of Bobby Baker, reputed ""pagman""
 John Pullman was Lansky's key international money handler . Pullman, about whom we shall learn more later in this chapter, was Pullman's key money handler.
 The extent of Lansky's Israeli connection first became part of the public record in 1970 during the criminal trial of Alvin Malnik, one of his lieutenants . Rosenbaum's BCI helped expose the extent of the Israeli connection .
 Rosenbaum's bank received its Lansky Crime Syndicate cash flow mainly through the Lansky-dominated Bank of World Commerce in Nassau, Bahamas . Rosenbaum received his bank's cash flow mostly through the bank's bank of world Commerce .
 The middleman was a Swiss national, Sylvain Ferdmann, a courier for Lansky . He was the middleman of the deal .
 Ferdmann was an official of Rosenbaum's bank, an associate of the Bank of World Commerce and a legman for Investors Overseas Services . He was an associate with the Bank, controlled by Lansky's longtime crony, John Pullman .
 Cornfeld was sponsored by Rosenbaum, who had emerged as a major money launderer for Lansky's global drug trafficking . Cornfeld, in fact, was sponsored in by Lansky, Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum was also involved in the drug trade .
 A superb clandestine operator, Rosenbaum is said to have provided weapons to the Haganah and Stern Gang . Rosenbaum was said to be instrumental in providing weapons to both sides .
 Banque de Credit International or BCI], “Rosenbaum's Baby,"" became gambling czar Meyer Lansky's Number One conduit abroad .
 Rosenbaum's bank facilitated the flight-capital schemes worked by IOS . It also served as a source of secret funds for Mossad, Israel's intelligence service, and as one of the country's primary weapons brokers .
 The raison d'etre of the Israel Corporation was to raise money among the world's Jews . Money to be invested in a variety of public and semi-public Israeli enterprises .
 By finding money abroad to fund development projects in ""the homeland,"" Rosenbaum and Rothschild freed Israeli tax monies to spend on the country's critical military needs .
 Mr. Fixit became the 'Mr Fixit' of Israeli finance . He cemented friendships with the country's most important military and political leaders .
 It was Rosenbaum's BCI that held the bulk of funds for the Israel Corporation, a $200 million investment trust . The trust is now worth $1 billion .
 The founders of the Israel Corporation included a host of longtime figures who moved in Lansky's sphere of influence . Israel Corporation was founded by Lansky .
 Rothberg was one of the initial investors in Lansky's first Las Vegas casino, the Flamingo Hotel . Lansky invested in the first casino, established by Benjamin Siegel, in Las Vegas . Rothberg: Lansky was an early investor in the original casino .
 Rothberg was one of the leading lights in the American Jewish community . He was the U.S. director of the Israeli Bonds drive .
 Klutznick had been associated with the Lansky-linked Sonneborn Institute gunrunning operations . He had become chairman of the board of the American Bank and Trust Company .
 American Bank and Trust was a subsidiary of the Swiss-Israel Trade Bank, a Mossad financial operation . Rosenbaum and his long-time associate, Shaul Eisenberg, had been directors of the bank .
 Feinberg was instrumental in arranging highly critical American Jewish financial support for the 1960 presidential campaign of then-Senator John F Kennedy . Feinberg arranged to arrange highly critical financial support .
 The company was looted in 1975-76 by financier David Gravier who subsequently was supposed to have died in an airplane crash in Mexico . Gravier subsequently died in a plane crash in 1976 .
 Tibor Rosenbaum's BCI also, incidentally, had a similarly unhappy ending . Tibor also had an unhappy ending in his novel .
 The bank collapsed in 1974 resulting in a scandal that shook Israel to its core . Bank collapsed in the 1970s resulting in the collapse of Israel's largest bank .
 Aathor Gerald Krefetz details the collapse of the Lansky-Mossad banking operation . The Myths and the Reality is published by Gerald KRefetz . He says Lansky's banking operation collapsed .
 Two of Lansky's top money laundering banks in the U.S. included several Lansky associates, most notably Max Orovitz, as directors . The Bank of Miami Beach and the City National Bank of . Miami Beach were Lansky’s chief money laundering lenders .
 In 1963, Lansky began planning the installation of his gambling casinos in the Bahamas in Orovitz' office . Lansky planned the casinos in 1963 in the office of the late owner Orovitzer .
 Lansky initially took up residence in the Dan Hotel in Tel Aviv, owned by Lansky's Miami banker friend, Orovitz . Finally, when Lansky himself ultimately settled in Israel, he moved to a hotel owned by his friend .
 Lansky's Miami banks were central to his gambling operations in the Caribbean . Lansky was a major player in the gambling industry .
 The Bank of Miami Beach was originally set up to service Cuban casinos operated by organized crime . It continued to perform laundering services through the 1960s—and was considered mob-connected .
 Leonard Abess was chairman and founder of City National Bank of Miami . He was chairman of the bank's first bank . He founded the bank in Miami, Florida .
 Abess served as ADL national vice chairman . His bank managed ADL Foundation funds and Abess himself served as vice chairman of ADL .
 In Chapter 15, however, we shall see the Lansky-Rosenbaum connection once again, and in further detail, in Chapter 15 .
 Israel's role in JFK assassination conspiracy is critical to recognizing the important role it played in the assassination conspiracy . Israel played a key role in the JFK assassination, says historian John Avlon .
 Meyer Lansky pulled up stakes and settled in Israel in 1970, finally . Lansky left Israel in 1971 . He moved to Israel in 1973 .
 Under Israel's unique ""Law of Return"" any Jew from anywhere in the world could claim Israeli citizenship . Under the law of return, Israel can claim citizenship from anywhere around the world .
 Lansky set up the Jewish State as the new formal headquarters for his global crime syndicate . Israel was an ideal location for Lansky to relocate his operations and he set about plans for setting up his new headquarters .
 Lansky's good friend Phil ""The Stick"" Kovolick had a wide-ranging assortment of other American Jewish mobsters, including Lansky . The mobster's friend, "The Stick," was a former mobster who organized organized crime .
 Mossad-dominated government of Israel seemed to welcome these criminals as new countryman . Mossad dominated by Mossad, Israel seems to welcome the criminals as countrymen .
 Israel appeared to be motivated by self-interest, Newsweek said . Newsweek said Israel's actions appeared to have been motivated by 'self-interest' Newsweek said that Israel was motivated by "self-interested"
 Each year, Lansky and his underworld associates pour vast sums into Israeli bonds and philanthropies . Lansky is known for his involvement in the anti-Semitism .
 Word leaked out that a wealthy ""Miami philanthropist” had taken up residence in the Jewish State .
 Lansky was forced to step down as the underworld's most famous criminal . Lansky's career took a difficult turn after a series of events in the underworld .
 During his stay in Israel, two grand juries handed down indictments against Lansky and several of his associates . Lansky was indicted in March of 1971 and June of 1972 .
 The first indictment charged that Lansky had been skimming millions from the Flamingo Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas . Lansky was convicted of embezzling millions of dollars from the casino .
 Hank Messick's biography of Lansky appeared during that same period and portions of it appeared in the Israeli press . It didn't help matters that it was also published in Israel .
 Lansky: "I don't care what they wrote and write about me in America" Lansky says he doesn't care about what they write about him in America .
 The 'boss of all bosses' appealed his expulsion all the way to the Israeli Supreme Court . However, the ""boss" appealed the expulsion to the highest court in Israel .
 The emotional issue of a Jew who had made ""aliyah"" and settled in Israel under the Law of Return played heavily in Lansky's favor . Lansky was then expelled from Israel to face possible punishment in a criminal court in another country .
 Lansky offered $10,000,000 if he was permitted to remain in the United States . Lansky was forced to return to the U.S. despite his best efforts to stay .
 By this time, Lansky was in ill health and even underwent open-heart surgery . Lansky underwent open heart surgery in his final years .
 A jury in his home base of Miami acquitted him on the income tax evasion charges . The jury also acquitted him of tax evasion in his native Miami .
 The criminal charges against Lansky were thrown out of court on the basis that Lansky was in ill health . Then, in mobcontrolled Nevada, the criminal charges were thrown . The charges were later thrown out .
 U.S. Solicitor General Robert Bork decided against going after Lansky . Lansky was the ruling boss of international organized crime .
 Bork decided that the Justice Department just didn't have a case against Lansky . Lansky was convicted of murder in 1998 . Bork: Lansky should have been charged with murder in prison .
 Lansky's remaining years were quiet ones spent with his wife and dog and an assortment of other aging racketeers . Lansky spent his remaining years with wife, dog and wife and other friends .
 He still maintained some oversight over his business operations but increasing health problems continued to plague him . He still maintains some oversight of his business .
 The mastermind behind the global crime syndicate finally died on January 15, 1983 . He is believed to be one of the most powerful men in the world .
 Gangsterism was being made fashionable—even as the glory days of John F Kennedy and Camelot were being trashed by that same media . Gangstersism was making it fashionable even as Camelot was being destroyed by media .
 Lansky's days with Benjamin Siegel were glamorized in films such as The Gangster Chronicles, The Neon Empire, and Mobsters . A host of teen idols played Lansky, Siegel, Costello and Luciano in their early years .
 Lansky would have us believe that Lansky was, more than anything, a devoted family man, and not the ruthless thug that he truly was . Lansky is a dedicated family man and not a ruthless thug, he would say .
 Even as Lacey's Lansky biography was hitting the bookstores, yet another Hollywood production brought Lansky to the screen . Lansky is a best-selling author and author of several novels .
 The film Bugsy stars Warren Beatty as Benjamin Siegel, who played Mahatma Gandhi . Ben Kingsley played the wise and all-knowing Meyer Lansky in the film .
 The Hollywood versions of Meyer Lansky's life and times were far from the truth, no matter how colorful a story they told about the evil genius they portrayed . However, the Hollywood . versions of the life . and times of Meyer . Lansky were far more colorful than the ones portrayed
 Lansky was a virtual middleman between the high-level forces that conspired in the assassination of John F Kennedy has been cleverly buried by a willing media . Lansky's central role has been effectively buried by the media .
 Lansky was a cynical, cold-blooded killer who had ordered the death of his closest friend, Benjamin Siegel . Lansky had no qualms about helping orchestrate the murder of an American president who threatened his own survival .
 The CIA and Israel had forged a close-working strategic alliance in the previous decade . The CIA had a close working strategic alliance with Israel in the past decade .
 Joint enterprises around the globe tied the CIA and Israel together inextricably . CIA, Israel and CIA worked together in the 1970s and '80s .
 Israel's interests and the CIA's interests were often one and the same, perhaps too often . Israel's interest and CIA's interest was often one or the same often .
 Israel's chief contact at the CIA in Washington, James Jesus Angleton, ultimately played a pivotal role in the JFK assassination conspiracy cover-up . Angleton played a key role in Israel's efforts to cover up the assassination of JFK .
 Angleton had close links with the same forces in the Lansky Syndicate . Angleton, too, had close ties to the same syndicate .
 At the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters at Langley, Virginia, there was one man who knew perhaps better than any other American, Israel's intentions and attitudes toward President John F Kennedy . At the CIA's Langley HQ, Israel was one of America's top secret agents .
 Angleton was so close to the Israelis during his tenure at the CIA that a monument was unveiled in Israel by its government in his honor . Angleton died in 1987 at the age of 92 .
 This is one of the few known public monuments to any American CIA official anywhere in the entire world . Angleton is actually one of several memorials to Angleton in Israel .
 Angleton assumed the highly sensitive post of chief of CIA counterintelligence in 1954 . Angleton was the CIA's chief of counterintelligence . He was also the CIA director of the CIA during the 1950s .
 Angleton's influence within the CIA itself was of a greater magnitude than what otherwise might be expected . Angleton had a greater influence in the CIA than might otherwise have been expected .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles and his deputy, Richard Helms, were Angleton's mentors . Helms later went on to become CIA director under Lyndon Johnson . Angleton was the CIA Director under the CIA under the late President Richard Nixon .
 Helms, along with Angleton, would later be implicated in a strange series of events that would ultimately blow the lid off the CIA's involvement in the JFK assassination . Helms and Angleton would be implicated .
 Angleton's longstanding friendships with Dulles and Helms were to become the most important factor in giving him freedom of movement within the CIA . Angleton was extended such trust by his superiors that there was often a significant failure of executive control over his activities .
 The result was that his subsequent actions were performed without bureaucratic interference . The result of his actions was that he did not have to wait for approval .
 The simple fact was that if Angleton wanted something done, it was done . Angleton was the man who wanted something to be done, he said .
 Angleton argued that he would have to be trusted, without outside accountability, because it would have been difficult to allow mere clerks to go through his accounts . Angleton argues that it would be difficult to let mere clerks go through accounts .
 Angleton managed a "second CIA" within the CIA, a CIA that was collaborating with Israel's Mossad . In short, according to Peter Dale Scott, Angleton ""managed a ‘second CIA’ in the CIA""”” and one, as we shall
 Angleton's influence went even further . Angleton was the CIA's top international intelligence official .
 Angleton, in fact, was the CIA liaison for all Allied foreign intelligence agencies"”°*—in particular, and most especially, the Mossad . Angleton was a CIA liaison with all Allied intelligence agencies""”*** .
 While he was liaising with everyone, he was getting them to do favors for either the C[A—things the CIA didn't want to carry out directly; like they've never killed anyone, right?—or for his own agenda .
 "My Israeli sources tell me such and such,’ and no one was going to contradict him, since no one else was allowed to talk to Israeli intelligence. You know, 'My . Israeli sources told me such . such a thing, he said . No one else would contradict
 "For him nothing else really mattered, but he would use anyone and anything to combat it," he said . "He would use anything and anything, but it would never be anything else," he added . For him, nothing else mattered, and he would fight it .
 CIA's longtime, self-appointed man at the agency's Israel desk . In fact, he was the CIA's long-serving, self appointed man at Israel desk.
 Angleton knew of Ben-Gurion's distaste for JFK, it was Angleton . Angleton was the only person in the CIA who knew of the Israeli leader's disdain for JFK . The Israeli leader was known for his dislike of JFK .
 As a devoted friend of Israel, Angleton had to be fully aware of the raging conflict between the Israeli prime minister and the American president who refused to bow to Israel's demands . Angleton was the chief liaison with the Mossad, and had to know of the conflict .
 Chapter 9: Kennedy's own conflicts with the CIA will be reviewed in Chapter 9 . All of this not to mention Kennedy's conflicts with CIA which we will review .
 John F Kennedy was not only a threat to Israel and the CIA and their allies in the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, but also to James Jesus Angleton himself . Angleton was a major CIA operative in the late 1960s and '60s .
 Kennedy's war with the CIA could spell an end to Angleton's career and the world-wide intelligence empire that the strange and calculating counterintelligence boss had assembled . Angleton was the leader of the CIA in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The ties between Angleton's CIA and the Mossad were such, according to historian Steven Stewart, that they had the effect of ensuring that virtually every CIA man in the Middle East was also working at second hand for the Israelis .
 Angleton was the prime mover behind the CJA-Israeli Mossad's close working relationship . Angleton, who was, as we have seen, was behind the relationship from its very beginnings .
 Wilbur Crane Eveland, a former advisor to the CIA and former member of the policy-planning staffs of the White House and Pentagon, had written extensively on the U.S.-Israeli relationship . Eveland was a member of a policy-making staffs at the White
 Eveland reviewed the beginnings of what Andrew and Leslie Cockburn call the ""dangerous liaison" In his book, Ropes of Sand, Eveland reviews the beginning of America's covert relationship with Israel . Eveland: The relationship began in the 1950s .
 According to Wolf Blitzer, the CIA-Mossad relationship began on a basis of mutual distrust . Blitzer: The CIA and Mossad relationship is based on mutual distrust and distrust .
 Blitzer notes that after Iranian militants seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, they seized CIA documents . The documents were later released by the militants .
 The CIA and the Mossad had many joint ventures over the years, all conducted under Angleton's watchful eye . Angleton oversaw the CIA and Mossad's joint ventures .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles and Angleton launched a plan to kill Nasser . President Eisenhower said he hoped that "the Nasser problem could be eliminated"
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles intervened and called off the CIA dogs . The dogs were the first dogs to be sent to the CIA, but the dogs were never found .
 The CIA was also engaging in covert actions against Israel's enemies in Syria . The CIA also engaged in covert operations in Syria, Israel says .
 One CIA plot to overthrow the nationalist government of Syria fell apart when the CIA's paid henchmen, Syrian nationals, turned themselves in and exposed the plot to the Syrian government . Angleton considered the government in Syria to be "leftist" Angleton: The Syrian government is a
 As part of the plot against Castro the CIA established its nowinfamous ZR/Rifle Team, incorporating a wide array of foreign assassins and mercenaries . It is interesting to note, however, at this juncture, that as part of this plot the CIA set up its ZR
 This, in the long run, gave Angleton and his Israeli allies access to the ""talent"" necessary to achieve a successful operation in Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963 . This, as we shall see in Chapter 16, provided Angleton with access to
 Eisenhower appeasement policy towards the Arab world would ultimately be disastrous for every American interest, military or economic . The CIA had been realistic enough to realize that the policy was disastrous for the American interests .
 The CIA had no office or station chief in Tel Aviv, but that certain officers in the U.S. Embassy there co-operated with the Mossad . The CIA has no office in Tel Tel Aviv but certain officers co-operate with Mossad.
 In theory this entailed an exchange of intelligence between the two sides . But in practice this worked rather better than one could have expected normally .
 It was he who first saw the need for a new policy in the Middle East and safeguards against increasing Russian influence in the region . He was also the first to see the need to introduce a new Mideast policy .
 CIA helped Israel with technical assistance in the nuclear field . CIA: "He and Evron worked well together and, as a result, helped Israel"
 There is, in fact, evidence that Angleton was covertly assisting Israel's nuclear bomb program . The program was the primary source of conflict between JFK and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion .
 Angleton's 'closest colleagues' from his days in the OSS in Italy were Meir Deshalit, a former leader of the Jewish underground . Meir is the brother of a physicist who was one of the leaders in the drive to build a nuclear bomb .
 John Hadden, who was the CIA station chief in Tel Aviv before his retirement in 1960, is evidently the CIA officer who first reported (perhaps incorrectly) that an Apollo, Pennsylvania company was illegally providing bomb-grade uranium for Israel's nuclear weapons development . Hadden: The Nuclear Materials
 Hadden was constantly attacked by the assistant to the deputy director for covert operations, Hadden says . Hadden's claims were belittled by an individual who was constantly attacking Hadden .
 Shackley was a key CIA player in CIA-Lansky Syndicate plots against Fidel Castro . Shackley, as we'll see in Chapter 11, was a CIA operative in the plots against Castro . He was also a key figure in the CIA's efforts to oust Castro .
 Shackley was a key CIA player in Southeast Asia during the joint CIA-Lansky drug-trafficking operations in the region . And it was also Shackley, as we shall see in Chapter 12, who was a CIA player .
 Shackley entered into lucrative international arms dealing ventures with Shaul Eisenberg, a key Mossad operative and a major figure in Israel's nuclear development program . Later, following his retirement from the CIA, Shackley became involved in lucrative arms deals .
 Later in these pages we will learn much more about the connections of both Shackley and his future business partner Eisenberg .
 Shackley engaged in covering up Israeli operations in the nuclear development arena . Angleton, Shackley and Angleton were both involved in the cover-up of Israeli operations .
 According to Hadden, Angleton ""had no interest in stopping” the NUMEC operation, and did not . Hadden says Angleton did not. Angleton had no interest stopping the operation .
 As we will see in Appendix Nine there is much more to the NUMEC story than meets the eye . However, as we will . see in . Appendix Nine, there are much more . to be revealed in Appendix 9 .
 The memorandum was not drafted as a formal national intelligence estimate, which would have involved distribution to several other agencies of the government . However, historian Stephen Green says it is perhaps significant that the memorandum wasn't drafted as an intelligence estimate .
 CIA-Mossad joint operations relating to Israel's nuclear development continued for a generation . CIA and Mossad worked together for decades to develop Israeli nuclear weapons .
 CIA and Israel arranged the kidnapping of Mordechai Vanunu, a nuclear technician who blew the whistle on Israel's nuclear weapons development . Many years later, the CIA and the Israeli government arranged a kidnapping of the technician . The kidnapping took place in Israel in the 1980s .
 A woman used to lure Vanunu in the kidnapping conspiracy was a CIA covert action operative . She also did occasional work for the Mossad . The woman used in the plot was a woman who worked for the CIA .
 Angleton's influence in Middle East policy-making became even greater with the advent of the Johnson administration . The close relationship between Angleton and his Mossad liaison, Evron, and Lyndon Johnson, led Angleton to greater influence .
 New additional information has come to light which ties Angleton even further into the international web of conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of John F Kennedy . Angleton was involved in the conspiracy which led to the assassination .
 Angleton had intimate ties to Meyer Lansky-linked organized crime operations in Europe stemming back from his service in the OSS in England and in Italy . Angleton, in fact, was a member of an organized crime syndicate .
 Meyer Lansky himself was engaged in joint covert operations with the OSS, as noted in Chapter 7 . Lansky was involved in joint operations with OSS .
 Angleton came in contact with a young American officer detailed to the OSS—one Clay Shaw . It is also very likely that during this time Angleton had contact with Shaw, one of the young officers .
 Angleton was the youngest counterintelligence branch chief in the entire OSS . He was the only non-Briton in Italy cleared to share intelligence secrets of the top-secret Ultra program which was cracking Nazi codes . Angleton died at the age of 27 in 1945 .
 Italy was a central point of contact for Angleton and his international intelligence connections . Angleton worked for the state of Israel, particularly for his work on behalf of the country .
 In Chapter 7 we met Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum of the Banque De Credit International . Rabbi Rosenbaum spoke to us about his experience with the bank .
 Angleton worked so closely with the Mossad that he was one of the prime movers in the refugeeturned-intelligence network . Rosenbaum went on to serve as Director General for Finance and Supply for Mossad . The Mossad was the prime mover of the intelligence network with
 It was also during this same period that Menachem Begin was coordinating Israel's Irgun operations in Europe . It was during this time that Begin coordinated Israeli Irgun attacks on Europe .
 Begin was also operating in the United States in conjunction with a key figure in the Lansky Crime Syndicate in joint efforts on behalf of Israel—and against John F Kennedy . In Chapter 13, we shall find, Begin was working in the U.S. in conjunction .
 Angleton's connections with the Lansky operations go even deeper . Angleton was involved in the Corsican Mafia in the early 1960s .
 Angleton and his Lansky-linked organized crime associates were involved in organized crime . Angleton was involved in an organized crime ring that was linked to organized crime in the 1960s .
 In the 1960s Churba and Kahane functioned as CIA assets in churning up Jewish support for the war in Vietnam . The venture proved fruitful for the CIA, but its allies in Israel and their allies in the Lansky Syndicate .
 It was under the CIA's direction that Lovestone and Brown set up right-wing death squads in Marseilles and other European cities after the Second World War to break the burgeoning leftwing labor movement .
 By 1953 his key contact in the Marseilles underworld, Pierre Ferri-Pisain had control of the city's port, where he built an international heroin trafficking empire . By 1953, he had control over the port in Marseilles .
 Lucky Luciano allowed to smuggle weapons from Hoboken to the Irgun in Palestine . The OSS established contacts with the Sicilian Mafia through the same Luciano who allowed the weapons to be smuggled into Palestine . Luciano was the leader of the OSS .
 Corsicans smuggled raw opium from Turkey and refined it into no. heroin for export . Corsicans worked with Italy's Mafia syndicates in partnership with them to smuggle heroin from Turkey .
 In Chapter 12 , Chapter 15 and Chapter 16, we will also examine the role of French Corsican gangsters and French intelligence operatives in the JFK assassination . In Chapter 13 and Chapter 15, we'll also examine how Angleton was connected to the events in Dallas .
 James J Angleton was the prime mover behind the CIA operations utilizing the Corsican and Sicilian organized crime elements in Angleton's ""anticommunist"" ventures .
 Angleton's Israeli desk at the CIA is quite interesting, to say the least . That all of this was run through the CIA's Israel desk is interesting, says the author .
 This ties Angleton and the CIA and their collaborators in the Mossad even further into the Lansky network . This is a nexus revolving around the conspiracy that led to the murder of John F Kennedy . Angleton's CIA and Mossad collaborators in Mossad are also involved in the Lans
 Angleton's French intrigue went beyond his connections with the Corsican crime syndicate . Angleton, the CIA and the CIA were at the center of the French intrigue . The CIA was involved in the CIA's covert operation in France .
 He and the CIA were also dabbling in internal French politics, interfering with the political aims of French leader Charles DeGaulle and his political alliance . The CIA was also involved in France's internal politics .
 There were only three major political parties in France --Socialist, Communist and Gaullist . By a simple process of elimination the CIA wound up allying itself with the Socialists .
 Angleton and the CIA would be actively working against DeGaulle is intriguing, particularly in light of further evidence we shall examine in Chapter 12, Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 which ties the CIA and its allies in Israel to joint operations against Degaulle .
 It was from this same sphere of intrigue, as we shall see, that JFK assassination evolved . The JFK assassination was from the same sphere as the assassination .
 Angleton emerged as CIA's ""overseer"" of the Warren Commission investigation into the assassination of Kennedy . Angleton was the CIA's top official in charge of the investigation into Kennedy's assassination .
 Angleton maneuvered himself into this position, as we shall see, in fact . Angleton is a former CIA operative and CIA operative . He is now a CIA operative in charge of the CIA .
 The testimony by Scelso also brought forth some interesting revelations about Angleton's organized crime connections . Angleton was convicted of murder in the 1990s .
 Justice Department once asked the CIA to determine the true names of people holding numbered bank accounts in Panama because the mob was hiding Las Vegas ""skim"" money there . Scelso said the Justice Department had once asked for the names of those who had bank accounts there .
 The real reason is that Angleton himself has ties to the Mafia and he would not want to double-cross them . Angleton has ties with the Mafia, and he wouldn't want to 'double-cross' them .
 Angleton, Israel's point man at the CIA, was well-placed to help cover up the real truth about Israel's role . Angleton was the CIA and the Lansky syndicate, and ultimately he did .
 Angleton emerged in the period of the Warren Commission investigation as the leading CIA critic of Russian Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko . Angleton was Angleton who emerged in . period of Warren . Commission investigation .
 Nosenko claimed to have been the KGB's case officer who handled Lee Harvey Oswald during his sojourn in Russia . He defected to the U.S. in 1964 . He claimed that the KGB had nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination .
 Angleton wanted to hang the blame on the KGB for the president's murder . Angleton had what appeared to be a bona fide Soviet defector on their hands .
 Angleton was Nosenko's loudest and most vociferous accuser, determined to prove him a liar . Angleton is the daughter of former President George W. Bush. Angleton says he was a "loner"
 Angleton subjected Nosenko to 1,277 days of torture, questioning and deprivation, but he stuck to his story . Angleton tortured, tortured and tortured him for more than 1,000 days .
 Angleton was clearly determined to disprove the one man who was clearly well-informed enough about the Soviet KGB to dispute the claim that the Soviets were behind the assassination .
 Eliminating the Soviets as a suspect would, course, shift suspicion elsewhere . Elimination of the Soviets would, of course, shifted suspicion elsewhere, would shift suspicion away .
 In Chapter 16 we shall see how Angleton did indeed play a key role in the JFK assassination cover-up . Angleton was a key figure in the CIA's JFK assassination attempt .
 Revelation of either a CIA role or an Israeli role in the murder of JFK would have inevitably destroyed not only America's relationship with Israel, but it would have brought the international house of joint CIA-MossadLansky Crime syndicate conspiracies tumbling down .
 James Jesus Angleton, as the CIA's intimate liaison with Israel, would have been destroyed in the process . Angleton would have destroyed his relationship with Israel in the wake of the 9/11 .
 Angleton was fired by the new CIA director, William Colby, on December 20, 1974 . Angleton worked for the CIA for more than 40 years .
 Angleton's firing not only had precisely to do with his unusually close affiliation with Israel, but ultimately may have played a part in the strange demise of William Colby . And, as we shall see in Appendix Six, as well as the firing of Angleton, the firing may have
 In his remaining years, Angleton habitually met with Washington reporters, feeding them tidbits, stroking them with information, convincing them all that they were getting ""the inside story" Angleton .
 Angleton was "Epstein's chief source for the narrative unfolded""’””* in Legend . Angleton is the author of the book, "Legend"
 Epstein's book presented the thesis that Oswald had been recruited by the Soviet KGB during his Marine service . Epstein wrote that Oswald was recruited during his service in the Soviet Union .
 Later KGB asset Oswald killed JFK, but not necessarily on the Kremlin's orders . Oswald was a KGB asset . JFK was JFK's assassin, but he wasn't on Kremlin orders .
 The controlled media which had scoffed at JFK conspiracy allegations responded so favorably to this ""new"" conspiracy story .
 The normally chaste Wilfred Sheed swallowed the whole Angleton kaboodle and chimed in on his own . “Cuba itself seems the most likely conspirator’ with Oswald.”
 Many Americans fell for the Angleton-sponsored fantasy that the KGB was behind the JFK assassination . Conservatives fell for Angleton's fantasy .
 Since the publication of the second edition of Final Judgment, a former publicist for the American Security Council has published the book Final Judgment . Final Judgment is published by the American National Security Council .
 William J Gill, acknowledged to this author his own sincere belief that there had been a communist role in the JFK assassination . Gill said he believed in the assassination of JFK JFK . Gill: 'I believe there was a communist involvement in this assassination'
 He acknowledged that, for political reasons, he had indeed been part of the effort to pin the assassination on the Soviets . He acknowledged he had been involved in the effort .
 In other words, that he now believes that the Israeli Mossad was indeed the prime mover behind the JFK assassination .
 Revilo P Oliver, a key figure in the John Birch Society, was called before the Warren Commission to elaborate on his theory that the Soviets had JFK executed because he was not doing enough to advance international communism . Oliver was a prominent right-wing journalist of the time .
 Oliver told associates he would have relished the opportunity to write a favorable review of Final Judgment which had just been released earlier in the year . However, shortly before his death in 1994 Oliver said he would like to review Final Judgment .
 Oliver himself realized that he, too, had been taken in by the Angleton-inspired myth . Oliver: "I'm not a believer in the myth, but I'm a fan of the myth"
 The myth the Soviets were somehow involved in the JFK assassination was an ideal cover story . James J Angleton was very much the prime mover behind the cover-up .
 Angleton insisted that the reference had nothing to do with the JFK assassination . Angleton, however, insisted that it was not a reference to the Kennedy assassination .
 Angleton died a broken man on May 11, 1987 . Angleton was driven out of the CIA to which he had devoted his lifetime . He left the CIA in 1987 .
 Final Judgment was the first JFK assassination book to seriously focus on James Angleton . Lisa Pease has written two excellent articles examining Angleton's role in the JFK affair .
 The Assassinations are edited by Miss Pease and James DiEugenio . They appear in the book The Assassination edited by James D. Pease .
 Miss Pease referenced Final Judgment, in passing in earlier renditions of her essays . She has since deleted those references, perhaps out of fear of being associated with yours truly .
 Miss Pease also rushes to assure her readers that she has found no evidence to support the theory that Angleton was ""controlled"" by the Mossad, despite her suggestion that other un-named writers have asserted as much .
 Final Judgment is no longer available in this book . Final Judgment will be released in September 2015 .
 JFK's battle with the CIA over the Bay of Pigs debacle was just the beginning . JFK's war with Israel's Allies at the CIA was just one of the first .
 JFK was fighting the CIA's Israeli allies over the nuclear bomb . He was also resisting efforts by the CIA to involve the U.S. more deeply in Southeast Asia . JFK was not only fighting over the bomb, but he was also fighting efforts to involve more deeply .
 JFK planned to dismantle the CIA entirely, a move that would threaten Israel's power base in official D.C. Washington . JFK also planned to remove Israel's influence in official Washington .
 At the same time, the CIA and the Mossad were also engaged in efforts to undermine French President Charles DeGaulle . The CIA and Mossad also were also trying to undermine the French president .
 In the end, the intrigue against DeGaulle would prove to play a little-known but critical part in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 In 1972 the Washington Observer newsletter published perhaps what was one of the first hints—in print—that the Kennedy family itself suspected that the CIA had a hand in the assassination of John F. Kennedy .
 Robert F Kennedy conducted his own private investigation parallel with the official inquiry conducted by the Warren Commission . According to the Observer, shortly after President Kennedy's assassination, he was still Attorney General, when he was Attorney General .
 Kennedy's investigation featured trips to this country by Inspector Hamilton, former Chief Inspector of Scotland Yard . Kennedy's probe included trips to the UK by the Inspector Hamilton .
 JFK's failed attempt to invade Castro's Cuba was a serious point of conflict between the president and the intelligence agency . JFK and the CIA had a bittnerness that developed between them over the failed attempt .
 The Bay of Pigs and its aftermath was a sore spot between Kennedy and the CIA, but not the last . Kennedy and CIA were at odds with the CIA over the invasion of Cuba .
 The family biographers of Chicago Mafia boss, Sam Giancana, who participated in the infamous CIA-Organized Crime plots against Fidel Castro say he was aware that the CIA was unhappy with the Kennedys . The biographers say Giancanas was aware of the CIA's displeasure
 Most relevant, therefore, is not what Kennedy was or was not about to do vis-a-vis the CIA, but what leaders of the Agency believed he might do . Most relevant is what they thought Kennedy might do, not what they believed he would do .
 These documents, in theory, eliminated the ability of the CIA to wage war . These documents were released by the U.S. government in 2009 .
 L Fletcher Prouty, who served as liaison between the Defense Department and the CIA during the relevant period, was the CIA's liaison with the U.S. Defense Department .
 Prouty: "Nothing I had ever had ever been involved in my entire career had created such an uproar. Nothing had ever created such a huge uproar"
 NSAM 55 stripped the CIA of its cherished covert operations role, except for small actions . The CIA has been stripped of the role of covert operations in the U.S.
 The burgeoning issue of U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia had positioned the president at odds with the CIA even further . The president's position is said to be that of the CIA .
 JFK's conflict with the CIA was in full force in late 1963 . Word was leaking out through official and un-official channels that there was something afoot at the highest levels .
 Krock quoted a high-level administration source as having suggested that if there were ever a coup d'etat in the United States, one might expect that it would be the CIA which was responsible . This just weeks before JFK was murdered, Krock said .
 Krock was a longtime friend and confidant of the Kennedy family . He ghost-wrote several published works on behalf of the president's father, Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy .
 The columnist was a key Kennedy link in press circles and would have been the first and foremost choice of President Kennedy if JFK had wished to utilize the press to bring his conflict with the CIA into the public arena .
 President Kennedy sent Henry Cabot Lodge, his Ambassador to Vietnam, with orders to the CIA on two separate occasions . In both cases the CIA ignored those orders, saying that it was different from what the agency thought should be done .
 Details of the agency's operations in Vietnam can come only from the same critical official sources . And published simultaneously are details of the operation in Vietnam that can only be published .
 The longer the longer the President tolerates it, the greater the real war against the Vietcong and the impression of a very indecisive Administration in Washington. The longer it is tolerated, the longer it will be, the more difficult it is for the President .
 The department sought and failed to get even the outlines of the agency's case in rebuttal . Nor to this department, the department sought to get a rebuttal, it said .
 "Hopefully he also will make it public, as well as the appraisal of fault on which it is based," he says . "When he makes this judgment, hopefully he also makes it public," he adds .
 Fletcher Prouty points out that upon their return they reported to the President that it looked to them, after their visit to Saigon, as though things could be put under control and that we would withdraw all personnel by the end of 1965 .
 War in Vietnam proved a boon to the CIA's allies in Israel, allowing the Middle East state to flex its muscles in the region . However, as we have seen in Chapter 6, the war in Vietnam was a boon for the CIA .
 A joint C[A-Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate venture in the international drug racket out of Southeast Asia proved so profitable, conducted under military cover in the midst of U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 Lane's book proved once and for all that the CIA was involved in the CIA's involvement in the Vietnam War . Lane: "The CIA's complicity was commonplace over the years, but it proved to all. Suspicion of CIA complicity is commonplace"
 His book was a written summation of a libel trial in Miami some years ago in which the jury had concluded that the CIA had indeed been involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up . And, significantly, his book was also a written .
 Former CIA official Victor Marchetti alleged the CIA intended to frame longtime CIA operative E Howard Hunt for involvement in the Kennedy assassination . Hunt was a CIA operative who worked for the CIA in the late 1960s .
 Hunt was CIA's chief political liaison with the anti-Castro Cuban community during the period leading up to the JFK assassination . Hunt had been mentioned as a suspect in the assassination conspiracy . Hunt was the CIA's political liaison to the antiCastro community .
 Marchetti's article suggested that there was growing suspicion that the CIA had been involved in the JFK assassination . The CIA had decided that it would sacrifice Hunt and say that Hunt was a ""renegade" operative involved in JFK's assassination .
 The CIA intended to say Hunt and his co-conspirators had been operating independently, Marchetti says . However, the CIA as an institution had not been part of the conspiracy, he says .
 Marchetti's article served as an advance warning to Hunt about what his former employers had in mind, the ex-CIA man decided to sue . Hunt ultimately admitted under oath that he believed The Spotlight's story seemed plausible .
 When the case finally went to trial in federal court in Miami, the newspaper suffered a devastating loss . The case was finally going to trial .
 The jury found in favor of Hunt and ordered The Spotlight to pay $650,000 in damages . The jury also ordered the newspaper to pay The Spotlight a total of $1.5 million .
 An error in the trial judge's instructions to the jury gave the populist weekly grounds for an appeal . Fortunately, The Spotlight was able to appeal the decision .
 Mark Lane, an attorney, stepped in for the defense in the case . The case was successfully appealed and ordered for retrial . Mark Lane is an attorney for the prosecution .
 Accompanying Miss Lorenz on what she described as a secret mission were several CIA operatives, led by CIA ""handler,"" Frank Sturgis .
 According to Miss Lorenz she had not been apprised of the purpose of the mission . She said she was not informed of the reason for the trip .
 Miss Lorenz met with E Howard Hunt, who was functioning as the CIA operatives’ paymaster, and Jack Ruby, who later executed the president's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald . Hunt was the CIA's paymaster .
 When Hunt himself took the stand, attorney Lane pointed out numerous inconsistencies in Hunt's testimony . Lane's attorney Lane, while questioning Hunt, pointed out many inconsistencies .
 Hunt himself had told several stories, over the years, about where he had been on the day the president was assassinated . Hunt himself has told several times about the day of the assassination .
 Miss Lorenz’ testimony convinced the jury that the CIA had been involved in the Kennedy assassination . The jury convicted the CIA of involvement in the assassination .
 He was asking us to believe John Kennedy had been killed by our own government . John Kennedy was killed by his own government, he said .
 "There are other interesting connections, in the meantime, that should be explored," the author says .
 Lane has described how Miss Lorenz had gone even further in her testimony, naming other CIA operatives who had been in the two-car caravan organized by Frank Sturgis in which Lorenz traveled from Miami to Dallas . Lane has also described how Lorenz went even further naming other operatives
 Lane says Hunt's lawyer asked her that question and she answered it, to my surprise . Lane says she was surprised by Hunt's answer .
 Lane: "Guillermo and Ignacio Novo brothers are very interesting characters" Lane says the brothers are a "very interesting character"
 Lane: "The first time I heard their name connected with the Kennedy assassination was when Miss Lorenz gave their names to Hunt's lawyer. I can assure you,"" said Lane, ""that the first I heard . of their name . was the first time he heard their names connected
 She said: "If they are so dumb as to ask me that question, then it is not my fault if I give them the answer" She said Hunt, the CIA and his lawyers are "so dumb"
 The Novo brothers were involved in a series of intelligence related crimes, according to the report . The Novos brothers were also involved in several other intelligence crimes .
 They were involved in the murder of Orlando Letelier and Ronnie Moffit in 1976 . They were killed in Washington, D.C. in 1976 of former Chilean government official . They are accused of killing a woman and a man who was with him .
 A man named Michael Townley who was connected with the Chilean secret police was involved in planning the Letelier murder with the Novo brothers . Townley was connected to the murder plot with the brothers .
 Buckley is the brother of former CIA operative and conservative fortnightly National Review founder William F Buckley, Jr. Buckley is a federal judge on the United States District Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia .
 Townley made reference to William Sampol who worked in James Buckley's office, Lane said . According to Lane, Sampol worked in the office of James Buckley . Lane said Townley's testimony by Townley referenced Sampol .
 William Buckley Jr. took that story from Bush and ran with it, Lane says . Lane: "It was William F Buckley, Jr. who took it from Bush to Buckley and took it with it"
 Evidence now available from former Mossad operative Victor Ostrovsky suggests that Israel's Mossad, in fact, was indirectly connected with the Letelier assassination for which the Novo brothers (implicated in the JFK assassination) were later convicted . Marita Lorenz testified that Mar
 Mossad had no direct involvement in the hit ordered by Chilean DINA Chief Manuel Contreras Sepulveda . It had played a significant indirect role in the execution through a secret deal with Contreas to buy a French-made Exocet surface-to-surface naval
 Michael Townley had very interesting further connections with Israel . It is interesting to note, nonetheless, that Townley himself had interesting connections with the country .
 One of the key money laundering channels for the illegal proceeds of Lansky's narcotics, vice and gambling rackets was BCI, the brainchild of the Israeli Mossad's former Director-General for Finance and Supply, Tibor Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum's BCI received its Lans
 The middleman was a young Swiss, Sylvain Ferdmann, a courier for Lansky . Lansky was a Swiss courier for the company . He was arrested in Switzerland on suspicion of drug abuse .
 Townley's employer, Cornfeld, was initially sponsored by Rosenbaum, who had emerged as a major money launderer for Lansky's global drug trafficking . Rosenbaum emerged as the major money laundering mastermind for drug trafficking, Townley says . Townley: Rosenbaum was a
 Michael Townley should be associated with the Novo brothers who have been implicated in both crimes themselves . Townley has Israeli Mossad connections during the period of the JFK assassination and during his participation in the Letelier murder .
 E Howard Hunt and William F Buckley Jr. were longtime friends stemming from their CIA days . Hunt and Buckley's brother, William F. Buckley, Jr. was longtime friends of Hunt and his brother .
 Hunt's own longtime intrigue with the Cuban American community in anti-Castro activities has long been noted . Hunt was the CIA's chief liaison with the Cubans, a longtime ally of the Cuban Americans .
 The Buckley family had substantive links to Israel through their family oil enterprises . James and William Buckley had substantive ties to the country .
 Buckley family oil concessions in Israel were established by Buckley's father . Buckley's family oil concession was established by his father in 1971 .
 Israel-Mediterranean Petroleum, Inc. was incorporated under the laws of Panama under the law of Panama . Simultaneously, the company was incorporated in Panama . The company was founded in 1973 .
 The principal offices of the firm were located in Jerusalem at the same address where Pan-Israel Oil Co. was located .
 All of the voting stock for the two companies was held in the voting trust . The voting trust was set up to protect the voting rights of both companies . The two companies are now owned by a trust .
 Pan-Israel and Israel-Mediterranean jointly owned eight petroleum licenses . The licenses were all located in Israel . The two companies owned eight of the licenses .
 President of PIP, Ltd. was John W Buckley who, with his brother James L Buckley, served on the board of directors .
 These companies, together conducted global operations with oil properties in Australia, South America, Canada, Libya, Spanish Sahara, the Philippines and Israel .
 Novo brothers’ associate in the Letelier assassination—at least—was himself tied to the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and an Israeli Mossad-sponsored money laundering operation .
 Buckley family links to a key player in the strange world of Lee Harvey Oswald . Buckley family is linked to the alleged assassin of JFK's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Lee Oswald .
 George DeMohrenschildt befriended Oswald upon his return from exile in the Soviet Union . Oswald was the son of a Russian nobleman who befriended the young American . Oswald had a close relationship with the nobleman .
 DeMohrenschildt is reputed to have worked for various international intelligence agencies . He had a long-standing relationship with the CIA, dating back to the days of the CIA's predecessor, the Office of Strategic Services . E Howard Hunt himself had served for the CIA .
 It was in this guise that he came into contact with the Buckley family . He was in contact with them in the guise of being a member of the Buckley clan .
 As early as 1945 DeMohrenschildt worked directly under Warren Smith, then the president of the Pantepec Oil Co., the Buckley family's Mexican oil company, established in 1914 . As early in 1945 Smith worked directly with Warren Smith .
 DeMohrenschildt and Smith eventually formed the Cuban-Venezuelan Oil Trust Co. The trust company eventually formed a joint venture with Venezuela's government .
 The Buckley Family's Pantepec had, by that time, already shifted its focus to Venezuela . The Buckley family had already shifted their focus to the country .
 Hunt and DeMohrenschildt both popped up in Cuba in 1956 in the stormy period before Fidel Castro pushed the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate off the island . Hunt and deMohrenschschildt also popped up there in 1956 .
 Hunt was attending a meeting of CIA station chiefs from the Caribbean and Central American regions . DeMohrenschildt said later that he was there on oil business .
 Hunt and DeMohrenschildt also appeared in Guatemala when troops were being trained there for what was ultimately to be the Bay of Pigs debacle . In 1960, they were training troops in Guatemala for the purpose of toppling Castro Castro .
 DeMohrenschildt said that he and his wife were on a walking tour of Central America . He said they were in Central America on a walk tour .
 Hunt, however, was serving as the CIA's liaison with anti-Castro Cuban groups . Hunt served as a CIA liaison with Cuban groups, but was also serving as CIA liaison .
 The role of DeMohrenschildt in the JFK assassination conspiracy will probably never be known . The role will probably not be known.
 In the end, the globe-hopping nobleman died on the morning of March 29, 1977 . He was scheduled to meet with an investigator of the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 DeMohrenschildt's wife believed her husband’s suicide had somehow been induced . The couple was married for two decades .
 DeMohrenschildt had just met author Edward Jay Epstein before his death . Whatever the case, there is yet another bizarre coincidence .
 Epstein was the primary literary promoter of the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was under Soviet influence when he assassinated John F Kennedy . In Chapter 8, as we saw, as well, it was Epstein who was the author of the book .
 Epstein's theory was the work of CIA ally James Jesus Angleton . Angleton was the primary source for Epstein's theories . The primary source was Israel's CIA ally, Israel's former CIA chief .
 The Church Senate Committee hearings on clandestine CIA activities concluded that there had been no CIA involvement with the OAS,*’ There is very strong evidence to the contrary,’s the author says .
 Challe insisted that he had no contact personally with any foreign countries . He deliberately avoided all such contacts so as not to incur any possible charge of having been brought in on foreign bayonets .
 Salan was assassinated in December 1961 in France . Salan's assassination was the first assassination attempt by the CIA .
 E Howard Hunt was the agency's political handler for the anti-Castro Cuban exiles . Hunt was a key figure in the Cuban exile community . Hunt worked for the CIA during the 1960s and '70s .
 In Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 we will examine Hunt's OAS connections further, particularly as they relate to the key players involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy . In Chapter 16, we will look at Hunt's connections to the OAS .
 Challe was released from prison in 1967, having been convicted of his involvement in attempting to topple DeGaulle . He was hired by Zim, the Israeli shipping concern, **’ part of the international corporate empire of one of Mossad's most valued assets .
 We first met Eisenberg in Chapter 7 where we learned of his partnership, along with Mossad officer Tibor Rosenbaum, in the SwissIsrael Trade Bank . Rosenbaum was Mossad's partner in the bank .
 We will learn more about Eisenberg and his ventures on behalf of Israel's drive for a nuclear arsenal later in these pages . But we will learn much more about his ventures later in this pages .
 Eisenberg's activities tie directly into the JFK assassination . More importantly, however, we will see how Eisenberg involved in the assassination . This is a story that has never been told before .
 Israel and its allies in the CIA would be conspiring against Charles DeGaulle during the same period when they were likewise conspiring against John F Kennedy, as we shall see, is quite significant indeed indeed .
 Three powerful forces all of which desired the removal of John F Kennedy from the White House . The CIA and the Israeli Mossad were all of the powerful forces behind the assassination of Kennedy .
 Marcello's most formidable chief accuser, G Robert Blakey, had been on the payroll of a key figure in the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . Blakey was the staff director of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, staff director .
 His key placement in New Orleans, scene of much of the preassassination planning, makes him the perfect fall guy . He was a key figure in the planning of the assassination .
 Oswald's pathetic cry, ""I'm just a patsy,"" has become immortalized . Lee Harvard Oswald's cry, "I am just a patsy" was immortalized by the cry .
 New Orleans' supposed "crime boss" might himself be able to make that same claim . Ironically, though, one of the most widely alleged JFK assassination masterminds might be New Orleans’s supposed crime boss .
 Carlos Marcello, aka "Little Man," shared a sobriquet with Meyer Lansky . He was known for his colorful reputation for his role in the crime scene .
 Carlos Marcello and the Assassination of John F Kennedy, named Marcella as the likely mastermind of the JFK murder . Marcelli is the son of a former FBI agent who worked for the CIA in the late 1960s .
 But, as we've said, his conclusions are not based on the totality of all the evidence available to those interested in the big picture .
 The Mafia Murder of President John F Kennedy, likewise blames ""the Mafia"" for the JFK assassination . The book also points the finger at Carlos Marcello in particular .
 Scheim is devoted to underplaying (even ignoring) the critical role of Meyer Lansky in the underworld . For whatever reason, however, Scheim has ignored the role of Lansky .
 In Scheim's view, Lansky was little more than a bit player—this in direct contradiction to even standard histories of organized crime . By virtue of reality, by virtue of . reality, are forced to recognize Lansky's particular influence .
 That Scheim even suggests this indicates that he is determined to ignore the entire picture . Scheim suggests that Scheim is determined that he will ignore the whole picture .
 He was not, contrary to Scheim's bizarre concoction, he was not a Mafia handler of Meyer Lansky . Scheim: "He was not ...a Mafia handler" of Lansky. Scheim was not Lansky's handler of the Mafia .
 Scheim's own determination to ignore the role of the intelligence community in the JFK assassination conspiracy is also interesting . Scheim: The CIA's role in the assassination conspiracy should be questioned .
 Scheim goes to great lengths to portray New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison as a tool of the Mafia . Garrison was an associate of Carlos Marcello, author Scheim says . Garrison is accused of being a tool for the Mafia in the 1980s .
 Garrison comes down hard on Garrison's investigation of international businessman Clay Shaw . Garrison also criticizes Garrison's probe of Clay Shaw and Garrison's handling of the investigation . Garrison says Shaw's investigation was "a complete failure"
 Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw, who became his prime culprit, was also bizarre, Scheim says . Garrison was accused of the murder of Shaw, but Shaw was never convicted .
 There is simply no rational excuse for Scheim’'’s deliberate deletion of this critical fact . Scheim has been accused of lying to the public .
 In Chapter 15 we shall examine Shaw's central positioning in the conspiracy that involved not only the CIA and the Mafia, but also Israel's Mossad . Be that as it may .
 Scheim is forced to avoid the facts that damage his thesis . Obviously, in order to perpetuate the myth that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" Scheim says .
 Organized Crime Assassinated JFK by G Robert Blakey and Richard N Billings . Organized crime assassinated JFK JFK by organized crime . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Scheim's book, all in all, fails miserably in its attempt to lay the blame anywhere for that matter . Scheim failed miserably to blame anyone for the loss of his career .
 Scheim and Davis relied upon the Blakey/Billings work . This book comes from what can only be charitably described as suspect sources . It is unfortunate that this book relies on Blakey's work .
 Blakey was director of the House Assassinations Committee which concluded that there had probably been a conspiracy behind the president's assassination . Blakey said elements of the ""Mafia"" may have been involved in the assassination .
 Richard Billings, who served alongside Blakey in the House Committee investigation, was no stranger to the JFK assassination conspiracy . Billings was a member of the House of Representatives who worked with Blakey .
 Billings had been Life magazine editor who led a team from his magazine to New Orleans ostensibly to collaborate with then District Attorney Jim Garrison in his investigation into JFK murder . Billings was the Life editor who had been the editor of Life magazine magazine .
 Life ran several major articles which linked Garrison to organized crime, to Carlos Marcello, specifically, thereby discrediting Garrison to many who believed the tales . Garrison was accused of being involved in organized crime by the Mafia .
 Blakey and Billings teamed up to write the book based on their experiences with the House Assassinations Committee . They reserved harsh criticism for Garrison and suggested that he was pointing the finger, wrongly, at the intelligence community .
 Blakey and Billings' work put much emphasis on Marcello as having been one of the prime movers in the conspiracy . So it was that Blakey . Billings . Blakey. Billings's work put emphasis on the prime mover .
 Blakey's allegations about the role of ""the Mafia"" can only be described as suspect, to say the very least . Blakey has been accused of being a member of the Mafia in the past .
 Blakey's conclusions about the role of ""the Mafia"" in the JFK assassination conspiracy have received widespread recognition and credibility .
 Penthouse magazine had published an article alleging that La Costa Country Club in Carlsbad, California was linked to the underworld . La Costa's founders filed a lawsuit against Penthouse after the article .
 One of the plaintiffs in the La Costa case was Morris ""Moe"" Dalitz, a former Detroit and Cleveland bootlegger-turned-Las Vegas casino boss, who had longstanding and close personal and business ties with Meyer Lansky .
 This was certainly an unusual position for a self-promoted ""crime fighter"" such as Blakey . Blakey was a self proclaimed "crime fighter"
 The longtime crime fighter, in fact, provided an affidavit on Dalitz's behalf against Penthouse . Dalitz provided the affidavit on behalf of Penthouse owner .
 One of the key leaders of the Purple Gang was Moe Dalitz, an up-and-coming mob figure . At that time, Dalitz was a key member of the gang . The Purple Gang is one of the most notorious mobsters in New Jersey .
 Moe Dalitz started his criminal career way back in the Prohibition Era . According to FBI organized crime expert William Roemer, "Moe Dalitz" started his crime career in Prohibition era . FBI: "Dalitz, SIEGEL AND LANSKY"
 In fact, it was Dalitz who was the prime mover behind the Syndicate's move against Benjamin ""Bugsy"" Siegel, Lansky's friend and fellow racketeer .
 Dalitz was the main contributor to the growing opinion that everything was not on the up and up, says Roemer . Dalitz, reports Roemer, reports that he was the "main contributor"
 Robert Blakey, the chief proponent of the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" would end up on Morris Dalitz's team, proclaiming Dalitz innocent of any mob connections and directing attention away from any direct Lansky connections to the JFK assassination .
 Penthouse prevailed and beat back their libel suit and, in effect, repudiated Blakey's character reference on behalf of Dalitz and his associates . Unfortunately for Blakey, Dalitz, La Costa and La Costa, Penthouse won .
 Moe Dalitz was one of Meyer Lansky's closest associates . He was the chief proponent of the theory that ""the Mafia Killed JFK"" .
 Some seven months after Blakey and the House Assassinations Committee issued their report that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" The Wall Street Journal reported in September of 1979 that Dalitz had long been identified as an ongoing senior advisor to organized crime .
 Dalitz' public image did not suffer as a consequence of the Penthouse victory in the libel suit or as a result of the Wall Street Journal .
 The ADL gave its highest honor to one of the top leaders of organized crime . Evidently the ADL did not see any problem with giving the honor to an organized crime leader .
 Dalitz's service to the cause of Israel was apparently deemed more significant than his activities in the underworld . Dalitz was considered more significant to his service to Israel .
 In fact, Dalitz himself was the key mid-West contact for the Sonneborn Institute, the Israeli arms smuggling entity . In Chapter 7, we examined the long-standing ties of the Lansky Syndicate to Israel .
 The ADL is giving Dalitz a $10,000 award for his services . Dalitz was awarded for his work at the center of the anti-war movement .
 Dalitz's defender, Robert Blakey, clearly prefers to look at the Italian elements of the underworld, but no further .
 As we saw in Chapter 7 the differences between ""the Mafia"" and organized crime as a whole are far more profound than Blakey would allow us to imagine . The differences between organized crime and the Mafia are far too profound to be imagined .
 Blakey has refused to acknowledge the role of U.S. intelligence, specifically the CIA, in the JFK assassination . Blakey, likewise, has refused, to acknowledge, the CIA's role .
 Marcello was nothing more than a front-man for the ""boss of all bosses" -- Meyer Lansky himself . The fact remains that the JFK assassination or the cover-up was a front man for Lansky, author says .
 Lansky was, in fact, much, much bigger than Carlos Marcello would ever be . Lansky's fame and reputation notwithstanding, he was a powerful figure in the world . He was much more influential than Marcelli .
 Davis himself makes clear that Marcello was, in fact, a protéé of Lansky . Davis: "Marcello" was, indeed, a pro-Lansky. Davis himself made clear that .
 For the full story of the Lansky-Marcello relationship, we are indebted to Hank Messick, the fearless investigative reporter who specialized in Organized Crime coverage .
 Meyer Lansky picked Marcello out of relative obscurity and set up Louisiana's supposed "Mafia boss" in business . In his biography of Lansky, Messick described how Lansky set up the alleged "Mafamist boss"
 Lansky-Costello associate ""Dandy Phil"" Kastel was sent in to take charge of the project .
 Lansky himself went to New Orleans to cut the deal with Long . Lansky was Lansky's agent when he signed the deal .
 The two met at the Roosevelt Hotel which was owned by a mutual crony, Seymour Weiss . The two were married at the time .
 It was during that brokered convention that Lansky bribes, along with Long's support, enabled FDR to win his party's nomination . Lansky, Long, and Lansky bribed FDR to secure the nomination .
 Out of the first $800,000 made by Lansky and his cronies in New Orleans, widows and orphans got exactly $600 . Widow and orphans only got $600 out of the $800K Lansky made . Widows and orphaned children got only about $600
 Tunisian born in 1910, he had come to New Orleans in 1910 and made a living in a variety of ways, none of them successful . Born in Tunis, he was born in 1911 .
 In years to come he was touted as the Mafia boss of Louisiana . Despite his birth in Tunis, he resisted efforts to deport or jail him . He resisted all efforts to jail him.
 Even Marcello's famous Beverly Club was not, in reality, his personal fiefdom . The Beverly Club is not a private residence, but a club .
 All of this, taken together, sheds a more accurate light on the truth about the Lansky connection and Carlos Marcello .
 Marcello was a co-conspirator with the CIA in gunrunning operations . He was a fervent supporter of the anti-Castro exiles . Sam Giancana's biography says he was a 'fervent supporter' of the Castro .
 Senate report pinpointed New Orleans as key distribution point for drugs coming into U.S. Report to 88th Congress on organized crime and illicit traffic in Narcotics: New Orleans . New Orleans was a key point for drug distribution in the United States, report says .
 Most observers believe that one of Marcello's ""legitimate" businesses, a shrimp-boat operation, was, in fact, part of the drug-smuggling—and gunrunning—network . The shrimp boat operation was part of a drug smuggling network .
 Marcello's central positioning in New Orleans made it such that it was inevitable that the Mafia chieftain would have an inside track to gaining first-hand knowledge about developments in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Ferrie's still-undetermined part in the JFK assassination conspiracy is still unknown . His apparent association with alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, is but another piece of the whole puzzle .
 Ferrie's associate Guy Banister's New Orleans private detective agency employed several other Marcello cronies . Banister was the boss of a private detective firm that ferrie's associates ran .
 Banister had been with the Office of Naval Intelligence, and was later special-agent-in-charge of the Chicago office of the FBI . Banister, who had re-located to New Orleans, re-joined the FBI in New Orleans .
 Banister, clearly, was the intermediary between the CIA and the LanskyMarcello operation in New Orleans, New Orleans . Banister was the CIA's intermediary .
 New Orleans and the Marcello fiefdom were an integral part of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . Without question, New Orleans was part of a syndicate of organized crime .
 To suggest Marcello was the driving force behind the JFK assassination conspiracy is to ignore the whole picture . But to suggest he was the driver behind the assassination conspiracy would be a mistake, he says .
 As a passing historical note, it is probably appropriate to refer to the demise of Huey Long and the role that Lansky and his associates played in that important political event .
 By 1935, Long had been elected to the Senate and had risen to national prominence . Long was elected to Senate in 1935 .
 Long was generally considered a major threat to FDR's 1936 re-election chances . Long was considered a threat to Roosevelt's 1936 election chances .
 Long had made it clear that if he didn't run as a Democrat in 1936, he intended to play a major part in that election, and not on FDR's side . Long had said he planned to run for a third party candidate in 1936 .
 A Justice Department investigation of Long and his finances was unleashed . The investigation was launched by the Justice Department .
 An inquiry was dredging up Long's tangled financial arrangements and threatened to break the back of the very profitable machine that Long had assembled . Such an inquiry would have led to an inquiry into Long's finances .
 There were more than a few Louisiana political figures and Long associates who were frightened of their impending demise alongside Long at the hands of federal prosecutors . Long was charged with federal crimes in Louisiana .
 It was in a Dallas, Texas hotel room that the federal authorities made the decision to indict Long .
 The colorful Louisiana Senator was shot that same day by a ""lone assassin"" who was himself promptly shot to pieces by Long's bodyguards . Long was shot in the head by a single assassin who was killed by his guards .
 To this day there are myriad conspiracy theories relating to Long's murder . Long was found dead at Long's home in 2011 .
 Some say that the alleged assassin never fired a shot—instead, that he swung a punch at Long and that the ""murder weapon"" was planted on the scene afterward by the bodyguards . Bodyguards wanted to cover up the fact that it was one of them who accidentally shot Long
 There are those who say Long was, however, deliberately shot by one of his bodyguards . Long was shot by a bodyguard, according to a report .
 Long died in the hospital some hours after the shooting . Whatever the case, Long died some hours later .
 Long's death removed from the scene a major threat not only to the Roosevelt administration, but to the Long machine . Long machine relied heavily on the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate .
 The evidence now indicates that Long's death could have been prevented . Long's body was found in a shallow grave at the scene of his death . Long was found to have been killed by a single gunshot wound .
 Lansky's lieutenant, Carlos Marcello, had his own reasons for wanting John F Kennedy out of the way . The Kennedy assassination was a major scandal for Lansky .
 The Justice Department under Robert F Kennedy had targeted Marcello repeatedly . Marcella was convicted of racketeering in 1986 .
 John Davis's interesting biography of Marcello provides a detailed analysis of the Kennedy campaign against Marcella . John Davis' biography provides a fascinating analysis of Kennedy's efforts to win the election .
 In fact, there is no evidence anywhere whatsoever that Marcello took any further affirmative action to have his order—if indeed one can call it an order—fulfilled--fulfilled . There is also no evidence whatsoever that there was any more affirmative action in place .
 Robert Kennedy's systematic prosecution and harassment of Marcello would have only been a logical first step in the Justice Department's ultimate prosecution of Meyer Lansky . Robert Kennedy stalked Lansky through the years of harassment .
 Meyer Lansky would have been the so-called ""chairman of the board,"" Lansky . Lansky is a former New York City mayor and author of the book, "Mansky"
 The end of the Kennedy war on organized crime was a major consequence . Meyer Lansky was a fiefdom of the organized crime fiefom of Meyer Lanski .
 Meyer Lansky was Carlos Marcello's immediate superior in the world of organized crime, not vice versa . Lansky's role in the mafia was to protect Marcella from the mobster's .
 There is simply no way of getting around Lansky's critical positioning in the center of the vast conspiracy . Lansky is a key figure in the CIA, CIA, FBI and others .
 Any major operation such as the assassination of a president would have first had to have been cleared by Marcello through his boss, Meyer Lansky . Any such major operation would have had to be cleared by Lansky's boss .
 It would have been Lansky himself who most certainly had to have given the go-ahead, even if the Kennedy assassination plot originated with Marcello alone . The assassination plot would have originated with Lansky alone .
 The evidence suggests that Marcello and his associates in New Orleans were simply pawns in a more far-reaching conspiracy that originated elsewhere . The evidence, of course, suggests, however, suggests that this is not true .
 Their proximity to Oswald and the New Orleans end of the conspiracy, however, makes them an easy target for those who seek to find a ""Mafia"" conspiracy behind the murder .
 Sources who point to Marcello as the mastermind of the JFK murder choose to ignore his secondary positioning to Meyer Lansky in the syndicate chain of command . Those very sources choose not to mention his secondary position to Lansky .
 Robert Blakey's House Assassinations Committee gingerly skirted around the issue, however . Lansky linked Robert Lansky to Robert Kennedy's assassination .
 The committee concluded that Organized Crime did play a significant role in the assassination conspiracy . However, one could also conclude from the committee's presumption that if indeed organized crime did play some significant role, it was not a conspiracy that originated with the Mafia .
 The House Committee has provided us even further basis for the conclusions drawn here. Unwittingly, then, the House Committee provided us with an additional basis for our conclusions, the committee said .
 The House Committee report had nothing to say about the LanskyMarcello connection . LANSKY NOT MENTIONED in the House report .
 Robert Lacey's Lansky biography, Little Man, never once mentions Lansky's sponsorship of Marcello . Lacey never mentioned Lansky in the book, nor does Marcelli's name appear once in it .
 The New Orleans connection is barely mentioned at all, and only in passing . It's barely mentioned in the film .
 Mossad has a long-standing policy of using ""false flags" in its criminal endeavors . Mossad is known for its use of false flags in criminal endeavors, says Peter Bergen . This would fit firmly into Mossad policy, he says .
 There's a lot more to the relationship between Meyer Lansky and key "suspects" in the JFK assassination than meets the eye . Clearly, there is a lot of more to be known about Lansky's relationship with JFK .
 All of which, again, points toward Lansky's central role in the international conspiracy which we document . Lansky was a key figure in the conspiracy which he was involved in, says the author .
 Meyer Lansky, the Mafia, the CIA and the Mossad and the Castro Assassination Plots . Three top ""Mafia"" figures were key figures in the CIA-Mob plots against Fidel Castro and often linked to the JFK assassination .
 The three Italian-American gangsters were major mob players, evidence shows . Evidence shows they also were subordinates of Meyer Lansky .
 Giancana (and Rosselli) were actively collaborating with the Mossad, essentially mere ‘front men"" for Meyer Lansky's little-known Chicago partner-in-crime, Hyman Larner, the real 'boss'" of the mob in the Windy City
 Carlos Marcello is not the only major ""Mafia"" figure whose connections with Organized Crime syndicate boss Meyer Lansky have been ignored by Lansky's friendly biographer Robert Lacey . Lacey's friendly biography of Lansky has been published by Lacey. Marcell
 Both Marcello and Rosselli have particular prominence in the annals of criminal folklore, especially in relation to the Kennedy assassination . Both men were involved in the JFK assassination .
 e Rosselli was a major figure in Organized Crime in Havana, representing the interests of the Chicago Mafia . He was Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana's primary representative in Havana .
 By all standard accounts, Rosselli was very much a key figure in the modern ""Mafia"" as we know it . He was one of the key figures in the 'Mafia' as it became known as the Mafia .
 Rosselli operated as almost a roving ambassador for the Italian wing of Organized Crime (popularly called ""the Mafia.""), primarily the Chicago branch . Marcello's activities were based entirely in his Gulf Coast fiefdom .
 Lacey's biography would suggest that Lansky had no connections with Marcello and Rosselli . But it's not entirely clear that any connections he had were so insignificant that they weren't even worth mentioning .
 Rosselli's name has also been prominently linked to the Kennedy murder . Marcello's name, like that of Marcella, has been linked to Kennedy's murder .
 Lansky's biographer failed to bring in these clearly important connections to Lansky . Lansky died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 Even Tiger (described in the index as """") is mentioned—not once, but twice, as well as Tiger . Tiger is mentioned not once but twice .
 Rosselli was also close to Lansky's Florida and Havana lieutenant, Santo Trafficante, Jr, who is also practically a ""non-person"" in Lacey's account of Lansky . Rosselly was also particularly close to Trafficante Jr .
 Trafficante was also a major figure in the annals of crime and much more so than even Rosselli, was an intimate working partner of Lansky . Trafficante also worked with Lansky, an intimate partner of the crime king .
 Trafficante was Lansky's immediate underling in the gambling and narcotics rackets . Trafficante, although a ""Mafia"" leader, was Trafficante's "underling" Trafficante .
 In Lacey's biography of Lansky, Trafficante is also given short shrift . Trafficante was also a major figure in Lansky's life .
 In fact, he is hardly mentioned at all, except in minor passing—just eight times . He's hardly mentioned in the film, but his name is rarely mentioned .
 Trafficante rates 13 references, including a detailed review of the dog's sad final days . There are fewer references to Trafficante than there are to yet another Lansky dog Bruzzer, who rates 13 .
 Trafficante once told one Jose Aleman, Jr., Jr., a wealthy Cuban exile, that JFK was scheduled to be hit . Trafficante is said to have told one of Aleman's sons that JFK would be hit by a bullet .
 Rosselli and Trafficante were involved in CIA-Organized Crime plots aimed at Fidel Castro . Lansky had seized control of Lansky's gambling operations in Havana . Trafficante was involved in plots to kill Castro .
 Lansky's CIA linkage goes far beyond Cuba and the Caribbean . Indeed, as we shall see in Chapter 12, he is linked to the CIA . Lansky was a CIA operative in Cuba and Cuba .
 Prior to the advent of Castro, Cuba had been a primary gambling money-making base of operations for the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate .
 Lansky reportedly persuaded Batista to step down for a while . In 1944, when the U.S. feared trouble from the Cuban left, the United States feared trouble . Batista reportedly stepped down as a precaution .
 The current President, Carlos Prio Socarras, was reportedly eased by a quarter of a million dollars and a major stake in the casino business . When he came back in 1952, it was after the current President was persuaded to resign, a departure reportedly eased .
 When the Batista regime began to crumble before a revolution, the mob hedged its political bets by courting Fidel Castro . The mob courted Fidel Castro when it was overthrown before the revolution .
 Some of its members had been active in the revolution, ferrying guns to Castro's guerrillas . On the one hand, some of the members of the group were active in Cuba's revolution .
 It was at this point, then, that the mob did a turn-around and began working against Castro . The mob began to work against Castro, but then began to focus on him again .
 Many syndicate figures still hoped that they could resume operations in Cuba after Castro was removed from office . Lansky was more realistic and practical. Lansky said he was realistic .
 He began looking to the Bahamas as his next Caribbean gambling base of operations . The Bahamas is his next destination for gambling operations .
 It was during this period the CIA was preparing to move against Castro . The CIA was planning to attack Castro .
 Anti-Castro Cubans who had settled in Miami and elsewhere following Castro's rise to power were Cuban Jews . The fact is that many of the anti- Castro Cuban Jews settled in the U.S. and elsewhere .
 American CIA-financed anti-Castro propagandist Paul D Bethel gives us some interesting facts about the status of Jews in Cuba before and after the advent of Castro . Bethel was writing in the December 15, 1965 issue of the Latin America Report .
 Bethel noted that of a total of 11,000 Jews in Cuba at the time of Castro's takeover, only 1,900 remained at that time . Bethel said that of the total of 9,500 Jews in the island nation, just 1,800 remained .
 The rest had already joined the anti-Castro Cuban colonies which had largely migrated to the Miami and New Orleans areas .
 Anthony Summers’ previously-cited book on the JFK conspiracy devotes very little attention to Meyer Lansky's pivotal role in Organized Crime . Summers' previous book, Conspiracy Conspiracy, makes reference to a CIA anti-Castro operation funded by Lansky .
 CIA operative E Howard Hunt put together the Revolutionary Democratic Front, a coalition of anti-Castro Cubans . Hunt is a former CIA operative and former Cuban Senate President Manuel Antonio de Varona .
 de Varona met with Lansky for financial support and also received funds through the Washington, D.C. firm of Edward K Moss and Associates . The firm represented the interests of Lansky operatives Dino and Eddie Cellini .
 CIA-Mafia assassination plots against Castro have been reported time and again . Key organized crime players in the tale are Santo Trafficante, Jr., Johnny Rosselli and Sam Giancana of Chicago .
 Biographers note that it was CIA contract agent Robert Maheu, a longtime acquaintance of Rosselli, who initiated the CIA's dealings with organized crime in the anti-Castro plots .
 Rosselli's Chicago boss, Sam Giancana, and the other was Santo Trafficante, Meyer Lansky's colleague in the Havana casinos . Trafficante was one of the two men who worked for Lansky .
 In fact, Trafficante was Lansky's subordinate . As we shall see in Chapter 12, we will examine the LanskyTrafficante relationship further .
 Trafficante's anti-Castro operations in league with the CIA were being conducted with Lansky's approval . Trafficante was under the watchful eye of Lansky, who oversaw the CIA's efforts .
 Skilled assassins recruited from around the globe (and often from the ranks of professional mercenaries and from within organized crime) were on retainer for use in the CIA's own private ""hit team""
 One of the prime in-house supervisors of the ZR/Rifle Team project was the CIA's counterintelligence chief, James J Angleton . Angleton was Israel's loyal ally, Israel's ally .
 That Rosselli was entwined in some aspect of the JFK assassination conspiracy seems certain . He was involved in the assassination of John Kennedy III .
 Evidence suggests that Rosselli was definitely engaged in activities during the summer and fall of 1963 that tied him directly to several of the key figures in the assassination conspiracy . Evidence suggests he was definitely involved in activities .
 Biographers have suggested that Rosselli was involved in the assassination itself . Biographers themselves have suggested he was indeed involved in it .
 The Cuban Revolutionary Council had an office in the controversial building . It was in the same controversial building that the Cuban Revolutionary council had a office .
 The full story of Sam Giancana's role in much of these matters never became known until his own nephew and brother went public in 1992 with their book Double Cross . The JFK assassination was the JFK assassination .
 There was indeed a major Mossad influence at work in the affairs of Sam Giancana . However, we now know that there was indeed an influence there at work .
 An eye-opening new book, Double Deal, bares new facts about the secret history of the famed Chicago ""Mafia,"" Reveals certain significant never-before-told details that further confirm the likelihood of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination .
 Despite his famous ""Mafia"" name, Corbitt's co-author, Giancana, was never involved in the family business . He wrote the account of the life and crimes of his late uncle, who had been murdered in 1975 .
 Despite the media-bally-hooed ""revolving door" of Italian-American Mafia bosses such as Giancana and others who were alternately jailed or ""whacked" Lamer was in charge of the Mafia .
 Much of Lamer's criminal activity was conducted not only in concert with the CIA, but also, in particular, with the Mossad . The authors reveal that Lamer was involved in much of his criminal activity with the U.S. government .
 Lamer was not just a major figure in Chicago crime, but on the international scene as well . He was also a prominent figure in international crime and international crime . Lamer died at the age of 92 in October .
 He was also a longtime associate of Jewish crime chief Meyer Lansky . Lansky was effectively the successor when Lansky died in 1983 .
 Corbitt learned early on, during his mob days, of Larner's existence . Larner was so high up in the mob that it was something neither government investigators nor the media wanted to focus on . Corbett says he learned early that Larner had been involved in the
 When Hy Larner's name was mentioned in the papers, he was described only as an associate or ‘protégé’ or some gangster and nothing more than that . He was described as an ‘associate’ of the gangster .
 It was the partnership with the Mossad—running guns to Israel—that gave the Chicago mob its 'get out of jail free' card . Justice Department sympathizers high up in the Justice Department were concerned about the deal .
 Everything was coming in and out of Panama, which meant that everything was being handled by Hy Lamer . Everything was going into Panama, including everything coming out of the country .
 Lamer was without a doubt Sam Giancana's most trusted financial advisor . Lamer has been Sam's financial advisor for years .
 He had everybody who was anybody in Panama—from bankers to generals—eating out of his hand . "Everybody in Panama was eating out his hand," he says. "He had everybody ... eating out of him hand"
 Lamer was also deeply enmeshed with two of Lansky's chief high-level lieutenants, Carlos Marcello in New Orleans and Santo Trafficante in Tampa . Corbitt and Giancana reveal, Lamer also revealed, that Lamer and Marcell
 The two southern Mafia leaders were engaged with Lamer in lucrative guns and drugs smuggling operations in the Caribbean . Lamer and Lamer were engaged in lucrative drugs and guns smuggling operations, not just gambling .
 Hy Lamer and Meyer Lansky weren't just Zionists, they were also mobsters . They believed the end justifies the means, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Corbitt also reveals the amazing story of how Giancana (with Larner's help) finally got the United States Justice Department off his back . Corbett also reveals how he got the U.S. Justice Department to get him back .
 U.S. entanglement in Vietnam made it impossible for President Johnson to act . President Johnson and his Zionist advisors wanted to wage war against Egypt and other Arab states on behalf of Israel .
 Lamer and Giancana arranged shipments of stolen weapons to Israel from one of their outposts in Panama . The operation was conducted in league with the Mossad's Panamanian-based operative, Michael Harari . Lamer put up a substantial amount of money to help arm Israel
 President Johnson ordered the Justice Department to drop its campaign against Giancana . In return for this service on behalf of Israel, Justice Department was ordered to drop the campaign .
 Giancana and Lamer's relationship with Lamer ended in the end of the relationship . Lamer is a former president of the U.S. State Department of Education . Giancrano is a member of the Italian government .
 Giancana was murdered execution style in his own home in Chicago on June 19, 1975 . Giancana and Rosselli were executed execution style .
 Giancana was killed the day that congressional investigators were on their way to Chicago to interview the Mafia leader about reported CIA-organized crime plots against Castro . As it just so happens, the day was the day investigators were going to interview him .
 Sam and Chuck Giancana assert in their own book that it may have been Johnny Rosselli who helped arrange the murder of Sam Giancrano .
 According to the Giancanas they believe that the CIA contracted out the Giancana murder . They believe the CIA had arranged the murder through Trafficante Trafficante .
 The Giancanas believe Trafficante arranged the Chicago hit on Sam Giancana . Trafficante also arranged the hit on Trafficante, according to the Giancananas .
 On August 7, the flamboyant mobster's butchered corpse bobbed up in a drum from the bottom of the ocean . The body of the mobster was found in the ocean on August 7 .
 There have been suspicions that Trafficante may have arranged the hit on Rosselli . Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker note that there have suspicions that it was indeed Trafficante .
 There are many in the Mafia who do not believe this necessarily to be the case . However, they point out that there are many people who believe this is not necessarily true .
 In the judgment of Rosselli's biographers, "The CIA certainly had the contacts in Cuban Miami to pull off the execution," says the author .
 Even the evidence pointing to Trafficante did not rule out collaboration by the spy agency . Trafficante was found dead in a car crash in 2010 .
 Trafficante was Lansky's primary lieutenant in the Southeast Asian drug smuggling racket . Trafficante developed even closer and more intimate ties to the CIA following the JFK assassination . In Chapter 12 we shall see, indeed, that Trafficante became Trafficante's primary drug smuggler .
 Trafficante himself died of kidney failure in 1987, four years after Lansky . Trafficante died just four years before Lansky, Trafficante was assassinated by the Mafia .
 Once again, the Mossad connection is very much there, although there are few ""JFK assassination experts"" who are willing to admit it . So, once again, there is little doubt that Mossad is behind JFK's assassination .
 Tampa, Florida Mafia boss Santo Trafficante Jr. has frequently been mentioned as a possible mastermind behind the assassination of John F Kennedy . The Lansky-CIA-Southeast Asian Drug Pipeline and the Mossad Connection are linked to the Kennedy assassination .
 The media has portrayed Trafficante as the prime mover behind the international heroin racket operating out of Southeast Asia . Trafficante has also been accused of being behind the heroin racket .
 Meyer Lansky was the primary architect of the global drug operations . Lansky has been accused of masterminding the drug operations in the United States .
 The Lansky heroin pipeline was conducted through the CIA-backed French Corsican Mafia in Marseille . The CIA's covert activities in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War were used as a cover for its operations .
 All the evidence suggests that the drug smuggling was a joint CIA-Organized Crime venture . In fact, all the evidence points to the CIA-organized crime venture .
 Lansky's chief drug money laundering bank in Switzerland was a Mossad operation . Lansky bank was Mossad bank that laundered drug money from Switzerland .
 The Lansky Crime Syndicate/Mafia connections with Israel's allies in the CIA are even deeper and more intimate than we have been led to believe . Thus, the Lansky crime syndicate connections with the CIA is even more intimate .
 Scott is correct, for any careful, in-depth examination of the global drug racket shows conclusively that Israel's allies in the Lansky crime syndicate and the CIA are very much a part of the international drug racket . Scott says, "For any careful ... ... it shows con
 First published in 1972, The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia has withstood the test of time . Despite efforts of the CIA to block its publication, the work has stood strong against the CIA .
 The new edition is an equally remarkable work which includes additional findings uncovered in the subsequent 20 years since its initial publication . McCoy outlines the CIA operations against his research and the publication of the book .
 In 1933 Lansky moved into the Miami Beach area and took over most of the illegal off-track betting and a variety of hotels and casinos . Lansky took over the illegal gambling in the area .
 One of Lansky's earliest associates in Florida was Santo Trafficante, Sr., a Sicilian-born Tampa gangster . He was a member of the notorious Tampa-area gangster Gangster Gang Gang .
 Trafficante had earned his reputation as an effective organizer in the Tampa gambling rackets . Trafficante was already a figure of some stature when Lansky first arrived in Florida . He had earned a reputation for his role in organizing Tampa gambling .
 Trafficante delegated his Havana concessions to Santo Trafficante, Jr., the most talented of his six sons . Trafficante had himself become such an important figure that he delegated his concessions to his son .
 The younger Santo was manager of the Sans Souci Casino in Havana . His official position in Havana was that of managing of the casino . He was more important than his title indicates .
 Trafficante Jr. played a key role in ensuring Lansky's dominance over syndicate gambling in Cuba . Trafficante was a key figure in Lansky syndicate's dominance in Cuba gambling .
 Anastasia's removal from the scene was vital to Lansky's ultimate dominance . Lansky: "Anastasia was a vital part of the Lansky-era era"
 Trafficante got caught in the middle between Anastasia and Lansky over Havana gambling . Messick notes that Trafficante was caught between the two sides in Havana .
 Trafficante also swore a blood oath to Lansky, assuring Lansky of his support . Trafficante opted to abandon his fellow Italian Mafia figure, instead of joining him in the Mafia .
 Trafficante attended a conference attended exclusively by top Mafia figures from around the country . Trafficante included in the police raid of the Appalachian conference .
 The official story has always been that a local policeman just happened to stumble upon the conclave at the home of Mafia figure Joseph Barbara . Joseph Barbara is a former Mafia figure .
 The officer called in reinforcements and a major ""bust"" took place, following a heated chase of the Mafia figures through the briars and brambles of the rural countryside .
 Mafia leaders immobilized by continuing publicity, demoralized . Mafia leaders demoralized by publicity, they were demoralized, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Trafficante himself stood to benefit from Trafficante's actions, Messick says . Trafficante says he's "a good guy" and "a bad guy" Trafficante has a history of corruption .
 A close working relationship between Lansky and Trafficante had been cemented . Clearly, a close relationship between Trafficante and Lansky had been established . Trafficante was a major figure in the history of the Italian Mafia .
 It continued for many years, up to and including the critical year of 1963 . It continued until 1963 .
 Lansky, preparing to take refuge in Israel, turned over most of his responsibilities to his subordinate, Santo Trafficante, Jr. In 1970, Trafficante Jr. took over most responsibilities .
 In 1968, Trafficante had journeyed to Saigon, Hong Kong and Singapore . In 1968—just two years earlier, he had traveled to Hong Kong .
 It was there in the exotic East that he was solidifying the longtime relationship between Lansky and the CIA in the international drug racket . Lansky was a key figure in Lansky's long-running drug empire .
 Professor Alfred McCoy discusses Lansky's ties with the CIA in the Southeast Asian drug racket . McCoy also discusses the covert part Lansky played in the CIA's involvement in the Vietnam conflict . McCoy: Lansky and the CIA played a covert part in the drug racket in Southeast Asia .
 Lansky visited Luciano in Rome, where they discussed the narcotics trade . After crossing the Atlantic in a luxury liner, Lansky crossed the Atlantic with Luciano .
 He then traveled to Zurich and contacted prominent Swiss bankers through John Pullman, an old friend from the rum running days . Pullman is a former rum runner and former rum dealer .
 This bank was the brainchild of longtime Israeli Mossad officer Tibor Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum is a longtime Mossad agent .
 In Chapter 15, we shall examine the Lansky-Rosenbaum-BCI link to the JFK assassination in detail . In chapter 15, the link will be examined in detail.
 After lengthy discussions, Lansky and the Corsicans are reported to have arrived at some sort of agreement concerning the international heroin traffic . Lansky is believed to have agreed to a deal with the Corsican .
 James Angleton was engaged in the region, assisting the emigration of European Jews to Palestine . All of this took place at the same time as Israel's friend in the American OSS . Angleton worked for the OSS in the Middle East .
 The CIA utilized the Corsican Mafia to shatter the communists’ strength in the region . The communists had amassed much political clout in the area . The Corsican mafia helped shatter the communist's political clout .
 The Guerinis gained enough power to take control of the Marseille waterfront in 1950 . The Guerini took control of Marseille's waterfront after a dock strike .
 The Hmong commander, General Vang Po, used the CIA's Air America to collect opium from his scattered highland villages . Since the Hmong's main cash crop was opium, the CIA adopted a complicitous posture .
 In their first years of operation, these laboratories exported high-grade no. heroin to U.S. troops in Vietnam . The laboratories exported heroin to United States troops fighting in Vietnam in the 1960s .
 Operation Mongoose, it turns out, was under the direction of General Edward Lansdale . General Lansdale cultivated a close relationship with the Corsican Mafia during his controversial service in Vietnam .
 The role of Lansky in all of these activities, however, has been carefully ignored, even by writers . Lansky's role in the global drug racket is carefully ignored by writers, including Alfred McCoy .
 Jonathan Kwitny outlines the ClIA-backed drug trafficking networks operating out of Southeast Asia and using the CIAallied Corsican crime families as a central distribution source .
 Kwitny points out the role of Charles ""Lucky"" Luciano in establishing the initial networks which also utilized the Sicilian crime families in the Mediterranean .
 Kwitny makes no reference to Santo Trafficante, Jr., Lansky's chief lieutenant and primary heir in the global drug racket . Nor does he make reference to Trafficante Jr., who is the son of one of the most prominent drug dealers .
 According to Kwitny, the principal architect of the crime was, by his estimation, more than likely New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello . Marcella was one of Lansky's local front men, as we have seen .
 Lansky's friendly biographer, Robert Lacey, writes in his 1991 biography of Lansky, suggests that Lansky had no part in the international drug racket .
 This, as we have seen, is par for the course as far as Lacey's attitude toward Lansky is concerned . This is not the first time that Lacey has been criticized for his treatment of Lansky .
 Rachel Ehrenfeld is one of the world's leading experts on the drug combine and its connections with global terrorism . She writes in her book Evil Money that there exists reliable evidence to the contrary .
 There are some who believe that the Corsican Mafia or other French elements may have played a role in the assassination of John F Kennedy . Considering the CIA's alliance with Lansky's allies in the Mafia, it is interesting to consider .
 There is evidence, indeed, that at least one French mercenary did show up in Dallas the day JFK was slain .
 Henry Hurt explores one aspect of the so-called ""French connection" in some detail . Henry Hurt writes in Reasonable Doubt .
 He describes the possible role of a French OAS terrorist in the assassination . He also describes the possibility of the death of a terrorist in France .
 As we saw in Chapter 6 and Chapter 9, the OAS was comprised of CIA-backed French forces who opposed granting independence to the French colony in Arab Algeria . The OAS is comprised of . CIA- backed French forces opposed granting . independence .
 This led them into direct confrontation with French President Charles DeGaulle who granted Algerian independence . This led to a direct confrontation between the French and Algeria .
 John F Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, at 12:30 a.m. A few hours later he was in Dallas where he was assassinated .
 French intelligence wanted to ascertain whether he was expelled to Canada or Mexico . He was wanted to know if he had been expelled to Mexico or Canada .
 Roux happened to be in Fort Worth on November 22, having entered the country on November 19 and leaving at Laredo, Texas, on December 6 . Roux entered the U.S. on Nov. 19 and left on Dec. 6, having been in the country since
 Souetre said Mertz was an old enemy who often used his name and may have been trying to implicate him in misdeeds . Soumetre said he may have implicated him in a misdeed . Souete said that he was a former enemy of
 CIA man E Howard Hunt was one of the CIA's point men in dealings with Souetre and OAS intelligence . Hunt and Hunt may have been in Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination . Hunt was Hunt's CIA point man in the dealings with OAS and SSA intelligence
 In Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 we shall see that Israeli Mossad/ Lansky-linked elements in New Orleans funneled money to the OAS for a 1962 assassination attempt against Charles DeGaulle . These same elements are tied directly to the JFK assassination .
 Both are practitioners of what one retired CIA operative has called the ‘clandestine arts' Retired CIA operative: 'The basic skill of operating outside of normal channels'
 Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana's family biographers have written of his own elaboration on this relationship with the mob boss . Biographers have also written of the relationship between Giancanas and Giancans .
 All the evidence suggests that the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate were indeed partners in many areas of mutual concern . This includes in Cuba and in the Southeast Asian drug racket, but also in the assassination of Kennedy .
 Lansky’s allies in Israel stood much to benefit from U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia . And as we saw in Chapter 6, Lansky's allies in the region benefited from American involvement .
 Lansky narcotics network was using its partnership with the CIA during the Vietnam War as a cover for its drug-smuggling . Israel was using America's engagement in and preoccupation with the Vietnam conflict as a means whereby Israel could flex its muscle in the Middle East .
 The CIA and Israel itself had long and close ties equally as incestuous of those of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and Israel . And as we have seen in Chapter 8, the CIA itself had close ties to Israel .
 That Israel had its own difficulties with John F Kennedy we have already seen . That Israel has its own problems with JFK, it has already been seen . Israel has a history of difficulties with JFK .
 There was no way John F Kennedy could have completed his first term in the White House . Clearly, this alliance of forces against JFK was such that there was really no way .
 The role of Meyer Lansky's West Coast Henchman — longtime Israeli loyalist Mickey Cohen — in the JFK assassination conspiracy is one of history's little-known stories . Cohen's role as a West Coast henchman in the assassination conspiracy remains a mystery .
 Cohen apparently had a direct hand in the initial stages of Israeli machinations against John F Kennedy . Cohen was one of Jack Ruby's idols .
 Evidence suggests that Marilyn Monroe's death was linked to the Israeli connection in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Evidence suggests also that the death of film actress Marilyn Monroe was linked, in fact, to the Israel connection .
 Mickey Cohen's name has appeared in numerous books and monographs relating to the JFK murder, but it has only been in passing . Cohen has only appeared in passing in the past, but his name has never been mentioned in the books .
 Cohen, it would appear on the surface, deserves mention if only because of his involvement in Organized Crime which figures so prominently in JFK conspiracy theories . Cohen's involvement in organized crime is so prominently linked to the JFK conspiracy .
 Cohen's intimate involvement with Israel and its international intrigue, needs to be examined further . Cohen's dedication to advancing Israel's interests, even at the expense of his own criminal money-making activities, is needed further, he says .
 The evidence we shall examine here suggests that even the death of film actress Marilyn Monroe is indeed linked to the John F Kennedy assassination in a way never imagined . Marilyn Monroe's death in the 1960s is believed to have been linked to JFK's assassination .
 Cohen used Miss Monroe as a conduit to learn Kennedy's intentions toward Israel . Cohen was using Miss Monroe, one of John F Kennedy's illicit liaisons, to learn his intentions .
 There is a lot more to the story of Marilyn Monroe's affair with JFK than the tabloids have told us . Marilyn Monroe and JFK had an affair in the early 1950s .
 The primary source on Mickey Cohen's memoirs is the Los Angeles mobster's own memoirs . Cohen's autobiography is published by New York-based publisher Simon Simon .
 In My Own Words—is one of the more fascinating first-hand accounts of life in Organized Crime . In My own Words is a first hand account of the life in organized crime .
 Virtually all of the popular accounts of life in the mob come from former ""Mafia"" members or associates . Virtually every account is from former associates of the mob .
 Cohen is perhaps the only other non-Italian, non-Mafia Organized Crime leader to put his experiences in writing . Cohen, with the exception of Michael Milan, whom we first met in Chapter 7, wrote about his experiences with the mafia .
 Cohen, as Hollywood's rackets boss, was a central player in that underworld that links the entertainment industry to Organized Crime . Cohen was a key figure in that unique underworld . Cohen: "Hollywood is a big part of the world"
 Cohen's ""ghost-writer" was John Peer Nugent . Nugent edited Cohen's sometimes inelegant ramblings for publication .
 Former Newsweek correspondent was taken into custody while in Africa on suspicion of being a CIA agent . Nugent was a former correspondent for Newsweek .
 He was released through the personal intervention of then-Secretary of State Dean Rusk . He was freed through the intervention of Rusk, who was in prison .
 Nugent did have CIA connections, according to organized crime authority Art Kunkin . Nugent was known for his connections with organized crime .
 Co-author of Coup d'Etat in America, who sought to refute CIA complicity in JFK assassination, co-wrote the book .
 In this context, one can't help but wonder if Cohen's memoirs weren't a laundered version, CIA-style . Cohen was the subject of an FBI investigation into his memoirs . Cohen is a former CIA operative .
 Cohen's reminiscences are equally intriguing . Both what does appear and what doesn't appear in his reminics appear . Cohen: "I'm not sure what's going to happen"
 Cohen's memoirs are a gold-mine of often fascinating information, particularly in regard to the Hollywood mobster's early links to Israel and its birth struggle . Cohen's autobiography is published by Simon Cowell, London, New York, London .
 Cohen was the West Coast successor to Meyer Lansky'’s ill-fated boyhood crony, Benjamin Siegel . Siegel was Organized Crime's top man on West Coast until his bloody assassination on June 20, 1947 . Cohen was a successor to Siegel,
 Siegel was shot dead in Beverly Hills home of his second wife, mob playgirl Virginia Hill . Siegel best known as "the man who invented Las Vegas,"" the handsome Siegel .
 Lansky and Siegel were longtime friends and early partners in Brooklyn at the beginning of their initial reach into the upper echelons of Organized Crime . Lansky was a longtime friend and early partner with Siegel in Brooklyn .
 Siegel was killed in retribution for his betrayal to Organized Crime's ruling commission . He was believed to have looted funds earmarked for casino network he was establishing .
 Lansky agreed to the decision that Siegel had to be executed . Lansky himself agreed to Siegel's execution . Siegel was a hit for Lansky .
 In Chapter 7, we explored the FBI Director J Edgar Hoover's seeming inability to acknowledge the existence of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . Hoover's connections to Israel's American-based intelligence and propaganda agency, the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith .
 Michael Milan (whom we first met in Chapter 7 as a mutual associate of both Hoover and Lansky) says that when the hit was ordered on Ben Siegel, "Even himself had to concur and told everybody to stand away"
 According to Lansky's biographer, Hank Messick, it was Cohen who was Lansky’'s real ""eyes and ears"" in Southern California . Not Siegel, but Cohen . Cohen was Lanski's real "eye and ears" not Siegel .
 Cohen's job was to keep an eye on the free-wheeling and reckless Siegel on Lansky's behalf . One of Cohen's primary responsibilities was keeping a watchful eye on Siegel .
 When Siegel was removed from the scene it was Cohen who stepped in and took charge of Lansky's West Coast affairs . Cohen could —by no means, ever have competed with Siegel in a beauty contest .
 Mickey Cohen was in the State of Israel's camp from the very beginning of its existence, even before . Cohen has ties to Lansky, and his own intra-mob machinations, but also to the Jewish community .
 By his own admission, Cohen was engaged in arms smuggling and fund-raising for Israel even before Israel had become a state . Cohen was also engaged in fund-raisers for Israel .
 Cohen recounted the day that Mike Howard introduced him to an Israeli operative . Howard introduced Cohen to an operative, Cohen said . Howard is a longtime crony for Cohen .
 The Haganah was organized by the David Ben-Gurion guy, says Israel's former president . "And the guy tells me this story," he says . "It's a great story about the Hagenah, which was organized ... by the guy who organized it"
 "He tells me especially about the Irgun and the type of war they're fighting against the British," he says . The Irgun is fighting in a war against the UK, he adds .
 Hecht appeared at Cohen's headquarters accompanied by a representative of the bloody terrorist Irgun gang . Hecht was joined by a rep from the murderous terrorist group Irgun .
 Jimmy Fratianno, a top West Coast Mafia figure-turned-government informant, gives us a hint as to who Cohen's Irgun friend may have been . In his own memoirs he gives us an insight into who Cohen was friends with .
 This guy's wearing a black armband and he tells us he's wanted back there for bombing a hotel that killed almost a hundred people . The man says he is wanted back in the U.S. for bombing the hotel where almost 100 people were killed . He says he's
 Begin and the Haganah, another underground outfit, start arguing about who's going to handle the money . Afterwards these other guys from the Hagenah, other underground outfits, started arguing with Begin about who'd be handling the money.
 He was so devoted to Israel that he allowed his criminal activities to go by the wayside . He was devoted to the country, even though he was involved in a crime .
 And plenty of armament and equipment was collected that you couldn't possibly get . Plenty of armaments and equipment collected that couldn't be bought .
 "He couldn't openly allow it to be known that he was okaying stuff to be shipped back there or that stuff was being stolen from the ships that were coming back from the Second World War," he said .
 To me, he was the greatest man in the world, Harry Truman, because of what he done for Israel and because he made it available for us to do . Israel's prime minister says Truman was the 'greatest man' of the world .
 Some of the stuff and equipment like machine guns that we got back to Israel had never got a chance to be used in the Second World War . The equipment was never used in World War II, but some of the equipment was returned to Israel .
 There's a Fish in the Courthouse . Gary Wean kept an eye on Cohen's activities . He later wrote a memoir .
 Wean's contributions to Kennedy assassination research have not received the widespread recognition they deserve . Wean is credited with helping to uncover the truth behind the Kennedy assassination .
 Wean was a Criminal Intelligence Investigator for the Los Angeles District Attorney's Bureau of Investigation . He was privy to much ""inside"" information about Cohen and his activities in Hollywood .
 Wean was chief investigator for Ventura County Public Defenders Office until 1970 . Later, Wean worked for the Ventura County Department of Public Defender's Office . Wean later worked for Public Defenders of Ventura County .
 In his memoirs, Wean says he saw Ruby twice in Hollywood in 1946 and 1947 . Wean: Wean saw Ruby in Hollywood twice in 1947 .
 The first time Ruby was riding with Cohen in Cohen's big black limousine, although, the first time they were introduced, they were not introduced .
 According to Wean, he and his partner went to a club known as Harry's Place . Wean and Wean went to the club where Wean was photographed with his partner . The couple were in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Ruby was there, and Wean introduced himself and informed Ruby he was a police officer . Ruby was at Wean's house, and he introduced himself to Ruby, who was there .
 Since the war's over the West Coast is dead, so is Chicago, we're moving 'everything' to New Orleans and Miami . We're moving ‘everything’ to the New Orleans, Miami and New Orleans . Since the death of the war’s over, so
 "We feel that it's flowing in from other Cosa Nostra organizations in other parts of the country for investment by the local mobs," says one of the mobsters .
 It wasn't until 1963, however, that the relationship came full circle, as we shall see in Chapter 14 . Chapter 14 follows the relationship between the author and the author .
 By 1960, Cohen was an established power in the West Coast syndicate operations of Meyer Lansky . Cohen was a key figure in Lansky's West Coast operations of 1960s .
 Cohen was also a key figure in Hollywood, nurturing his relationships with the film colony there . Cohen's relationship with the colony was forged for his own purposes, he says .
 Cohen was manipulating beautiful screen star Marilyn Monroe for yet another purpose . Cohen was also manipulating beautiful actress Marilyn Monroe . Cohen manipulated her to appear in the public for the purposes of manipulating her .
 Frank Sinatra connection led to the introduction of Marilyn Monroe to John F Kennedy . Marilyn Monroe was introduced to Kennedy by Sinatra .
 Wean reveals that Cohen's close friend, Joey Bishop, was the one who set up the circumstances that led to JFK's first liaison with Monroe . Bishop was a member of Sinatra's famous clique known as ""the rat pack"
 Begin was spending more time hanging around Cohen in Hollywood than in Israel . Begin spent most of his time in Hollywood . Cohen was known for his work in the film industry .
 Begin desperately wanted to know what Kennedy's plan was for Israel if he became president . Begin's plan for Israel was to ask Kennedy what he wanted to do if he was president .
 Wean learned this from a young lady named Mary Mercandante who was jealous of Piscitelli's relationship with Miss Monroe . Wean was told this by a young girl who had a crush on Wean .
 Piscitelli told Miss Mercandante that Marilyn would get upset when he began pressing her, saying she didn't know anything about politics . However, according to Wean, Wean said that Marilyn wouldn't get upset if he pressed her . Wean says Marilyn would say she
 She appears to be yet another of the many victims of the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up .
 There has long been widespread suspicion that Marilyn Monroe was perhaps murdered . The tabloids would have us believe that she was murdered by the Kennedy family to keep silent about her affair with the President .
 The evidence suggests that if Miss Monroe was murdered it was to keep her silent, but for an entirely different reason . The evidence we have seen here suggests that she was murdered to keep quiet .
 Cohen's memoirs are filled with name-dropping and accounts of his friendships with a bevy of Hollywood figures . He never once mentions Marilyn Monroe .
 There were evidently certain things that Cohen and his co-author did not see fit to mention . Cohen: "There were evidently things that were not mentioned here"
 Meyer Lansky had "inside knowledge" of Robert Kennedy's affairs, says Lansky . Lansky knew about the affairs of Attorney General Robert Kennedy at the very least .
 According to J Edgar Hoover biographer Curt Gentry, Lansky was overheard on a federal wiretap on August 1, 1962 telling his wife, Teddy, that Robert Kennedy was carrying on an affair with a woman in Texas .
 Mickey Cohen's strange activities were of continuing particular interest to Gary Wean . In any event, Wean was impressed by the strange behavior of the late comedian .
 He spent a lot of time with a weird-looking little guy at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel lunch counter and drug store area .
 According to Wean, Cohen and Begin departed after the coffee shop conference . Wean says they left after the conference . Cohen, Begin and Wean attended the conference together .
 Cohen and Begin met with high-priced lawyer Melvin Belli, Wean says . Belli is Cohen's longtime friend and attorney . Wean: Belli was a longtime friend of Cohen and his longtime friend .
 Cohen was sharing his girlfriend, stripper Candy Barr, with not only Ruby , but also with Begin, Israel's man in Hollywood . Cohen was with Ruby, Candy Barr and Begin .
 Mickey Cohen had a lot more on his mind than his criminal activities and his sexual pursuits . Cohen had more to say than his sexual exploits .
 Cohen was interested in the survival of Israel, the nation he had helped establish, Cohen said . Cohen was also interested in Israel's survival, he said .
 Cohen's interest in JFK's Middle East policy, coupled with his unfortunate manipulation of Marilyn Monroe, places him squarely in the midst of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate's central part in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Cohen's long-held devotion to the Zionist cause also places him in the
 The simian-like Los Angeles thug was privy to the circumstances of what really took place in the JFK assassination . He was very much privy .
 Cohen died suddenly of a heart attack . Lansky henchman died suddenly . Cohen may have known, but was lost forever .
 In Chapter 14 we shall examine Cohen's connection with Jack Ruby in more detail . We shall examine the connection between Cohen and Ruby in Chapter 14 .
 Begin's alleged association with U.S. gangsters was investigated by a writer who said he was looking into his alleged association . Begin was accused of being involved in gangsters in the early 1950s .
 Tivnan was not interested in Wean's account of Begin's very real association with the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . Wean: Begin's association with Lansky organized crime syndicate .
 Author Anthony Summers was preparing his book Goddess, a life of Marilyn Monroe, when he contacted Wean for information . Wean provided Summers with all of the details .
 Summers’ biography of Miss Monroe finally hit the bookstores this week . Summers had nothing to say about Cohen and the Israeli connection . The author of the biography of the late Miss Monroe has nothing to do with Cohen .
 Book suggested that Miss Monroe's death was a proximate result of her affair with the Kennedy brothers . Instead, the book suggested that her death was the result of an affair .
 The book led the reader to believe that it was the Kennedys who were responsible—directly or indirectly—for the young woman's tragic death .
 This same Anthony Summers is the Anthony Summers who wrote an exhaustive study of the JFK assassination entitled Conspiracy . Summers is also the author of Conspiracy, which he says is a study of JFK assassination .
 Summers released an up-dated edition of his book in 1992, he never reported Wean's information . Summers never reported the information that Wean provided him about the connection .
 It is likely Summers did not understand the significance of what he had learned, Summers says . Summers: "It's likely, in all fairness, that he probably didn't understand what he'd learned"
 Wean's discovery was a key to understanding what really happened on November 22, 1963 . However, it is very clear, considering everything that we have already examined in these pages, that we are about to examine .
 Ruby's first phone call was to Al Gruber, a Mickey Cohen associate in Hollywood, shortly after the JFK assassination . Ruby made the call to Gruber shortly after Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested .
 Gruber, it also turns out, was associated with Lansky's Mexico City syndicate drug-smuggling connection, ""Happy"" Meltzer . Ruby had his own connections with Meltzer, with whom, as we shall see, Ruby had own connections . Gruber was associated
 As it stands, ironically enough, Mickey Cohen was already incarcerated in federal prison by the time of the JFK assassination .
 Lansky's West Coast lieutenant was one of many ""big names"" snared in the Kennedy war against the Lansky crime syndicate . Lansky was a member of the West Coast gangster ring ring .
 There was clearly no love lost between Mickey Cohen and the Kennedy brothers . Cohen and Kennedy brothers were married at the time of their wedding in 1963 .
 Gary Wean believes Cohen's henchman Gruber was the intermediary for the Lansky syndicate in the delicate matter of how to silence the patsy . Wean: It seems likely—and as he told this author—that Gruber may have been the intermediary .
 Mickey Cohen and Menachem Begin very clearly were involved in the initial stages of what ultimately became the JFK assassination conspiracy . It was because of Kennedy's difficult foreign policy struggle with Israel which led to his assassination .
 In the next chapter we will examine Jack Ruby's role further and consider his connections with the Lansky syndicate . The next chapter will examine Ruby's connections to the syndicate and Israel .
 Jack Ruby's connections to the criminal underworld are well-documented . Jack Ruby was more "Mossad" than "Mafia" than the mafia .
 Ruby was an integral link to the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate, not "the Mafia" Ruby's role in the syndicate is almost always ignored, but he's integral to Lansky .
 Ruby's ties to Israeli intelligence are strictly ignored in the new book . Ruby's CIA connections are often mentioned but his equally profound ties to Israel are also ignored .
 A complete examination of the real Jack Ruby, not the Ruby of legend, points further to the likelihood of Mossad involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy . The real Ruby was not the Jack Ruby of the legend .
 Ruby silenced Oswald and helped perpetuate the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up, but also added fuel to the fire of speculation as a result . Ironically, not only did Ruby silence Oswald and help perpetuate the conspiracy, but he also fueled speculation .
 Lee Harvey Oswald died of a heart attack in the Dallas jail, rather than at the hands of a mob-linked thug named Jack Ruby . Suspicion of a conspiracy might not have evolved so quickly .
 Jack Ruby stepped into the public limelight and eliminated Oswald . Attention was focused on the strange background of the Chicagoborn underworld figure who had killed Oswald .
 McWillie's bosses at that time were Meyer and Jake Lansky . Interestingly enough, McWilliams' bosses were Meyer, Lansky.
 Ruby mysteriously spoke of meeting two brothers who'd owned the Tropicana Casino which McWillie managed . Ruby mysteriously said he'd met the brothers who had owned the casino . The casino was owned by two brothers .
 Ruby said he was unsure of their last name but thought it had been Fox . Ruby said the Foxes were Foxes .
 Meyer and Jake Lansky were the two key Tropicana owners . Meyer and Lansky have long been known that they were key owners of the club . Lansky was a key figure in the ownership of the Tropics .
 Meyer and Jake Lansky were known as the most prominent Syndicate men expelled by the Castro government and were in fact then living in Miami . Meyer and Lansky lived in Miami when they were expelled by Castro government .
 Ruby said he thought one of the 'Fox brothers’ first names may have been Martin . Ruby said it may be possible the Fox brothers' first names were Martin .
 Ruby testified that Fox and McWillie had also subsequently dropped by his nightclub, where they posed for photographs with him . Ruby further testified that the two men had also dropped by the nightclub where they had posed for photos .
 Ruby biographer Seth Kantor notes that there were brothers named Martin and Pedro Fox who were Cuban nationals and involved in the Tropicana .
 He was telling them the truth, and begged to be taken out of Texas so he could tell them more . He begged for them to take him to Texas to give them more, police say .
 Peter Dale Scott has scored G Robert Blakey and his House Assassinations Committee for its failure to explore and to expose Ruby's Lansky connections which are very strong indeed .
 Scott Scott has studied Jack Ruby's criminal antecedents . Scott has outlined Ruby's critical positioning in the Lansky syndicate . Ruby was a key figure in Lansky's criminal organization .
 The House Committee investigation of Ruby and his underworld associates chose to focus on what Scott describes as an ""ethnic model of organized crime as 'La Cosa Nostra'**°—that is, focusing on the so-called ""Mafia,"" the popularized media sobriquet
 For this active misrepresentation has deformed the two official investigations into the Kennedy assassination itself, not in marginal ways, but so as to conceal central truths about the assassination, truths that were embarrassing to those conducting the investigation . For this misrepresentation, it has been deformed to conceal the
 Processes mutually affect the truth, but concealed, seats of political power in this country . Processes, one must add, which mutually affect truth, are mutually affecting the truth and the truth .
 The deeper political processes of which Peter Dale Scott has noted ""have not yet been discerned"" are now, however, in the pages of Final Judgment, being bared for the first time .
 Jack Ruby was long known to be proud of his Jewish heritage . Ruby had an intimate connection with an individual with deep ties to the world of intelligence and to the pro-Israel lobby in the U.S.
 Ruby was called before the Kefauver Senate Racket Committee in 1950 to discuss underworld activities in his former home base of Chicago . Luis Kutner of Chicago represented Ruby when Ruby was questioned by the committee .
 Kutner: Ruby's offer was contingent upon the condition that the Kefauver Committee stay away from investigating organized crime in Dallas . Ruby was by then ensconced in Dallas, Dallas, where he was accused of being involved in organized crime . Kutner says Ruby made the offer
 Kutner used Ruby to 'run errands' in his unsuccessful 1936 congressional campaign . According to Scott, "Kutner, by his own account, had known Ruby since 1936"
 General Julius Klein played a major role in supplying weapons to the Israeli Haganah underground prior to the establishment of Israel . He also assisted in the founding and training of the Israeli Mossad . He served as honorary chairman of the pro-Israel lobbying group .
 Jack Ruby's friend and lawyer, Kutner, was a man with important ties to Israel and its global power networks . Kutner was a prominent lawyer and lawyer for Jack Ruby . He was also a friend of Jack Ruby and his lawyer .
 Weberman raised the question as to whether this suggested Ruby might have been involved in an arms deal between Israel and South Africa, but noted that the FBI had then decided the number was JE-8-7475 . He said the FBI then decided that the number had been JE
 There is, in fact, evidence of other Ruby connections to Israel at the time of the JFK assassination itself .
 Ruby claimed to be translating for Israeli ""reporters"" who were on the scene of the assassination . Ruby was milling about the Dallas Police Department after the assassination that night .
 It seems unlikely that Israeli correspondents in the U.S. would have English capabilities so lacking they required the services of a Dallas strip club operator . This seems unlikely .
 The answer that the master of ceremonies, Walt Brown, gave was revealing in its own fashion . The answer to the question was revealed by researcher Walt Brown .
 Pepper's circumspect reference to the Mossad was a lightning bolt of recall to anyone who had already read Final Judgment . Pepper made the reference in Final Judgment, but it was not the first time Pepper had made such reference .
 Pepper's assertion is based on statements made to one of Pepper's investigators by former Colonel John Downie of the 902nd Military Intelligence Group, a unit based inside the Department of Defense . Pepper says the Mossad link to the arms smuggling operation involving Ruby is a Mossad connection .
 Downie: King's accused assassin, James Earl Ray, claimed to have helped frame him for King's murder . Downie says the figure was part of a U.S.-based international arms smuggling operation . Pepper had already determined—through other sources— involved Jack Ruby .
 The proceeds from the arms deals were reportedly split equally with the United States 902nd Military Intelligence Group using its cut for financing covert, off-budget, operations .
 Pepper's source had already pinpointed the identity of the individual described by Pepper's sources . Final Judgment had almost certainly pinpointed an individual described as Pepper's . Pepper had already published Final Judgment in the previous week .
 The famous "umbrella man" who was photographed in Dealey Plaza in Dallas on Nov. 1963 bore a remarkable resemblance to no less than longtime Mossad figure, Michael Harari .
 In 1963, Harari was in the field as a top Mossad's assassinations specialist . He would have assuredly been in Dallas if the Mossad was a prime player in the JFK conspiracy .
 Jack Ruby's covert activities were clearly well-established . Jack Ruby and the Bronfman family were well-known for their covert activities .
 Independent researcher Brian Downing Quig came up with a Ruby connection that had never been revealed . The Ruby connection was never before revealed .
 Quig learned from Marley's longtime publicist Al Lizanetz that Jack Ruby was also on the Bronfman family's payroll . Marley is linked to the infamous 1976 murder of investigative reporter Don Bolles .
 Former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow reports that Ruby's pro-Castro gun-running was done in conjunction with former Cuban president Carlos Prio Socarras .
 Jack Ruby of Dallas, Texas, then known as Jack Rubinstein, would partner with Jack Ruby . Ruby would be Jack Ruby's partner in the business . Ruby was known for his exploits in the 1960s and '70s .
 Ruby was in the gunrunning business in Florida during the late 1950's . Ruby is believed to have been involved in a gunrunning operation in Florida .
 Kohly offered to return casino rights if he, Kohly, were able to assume power in Cuba after Castro was removed . Kohly himself turned to Meyer Lansky for support . Lansky offered to give Kohly casino rights back to him if he assumed power .
 There is clearly more to the story of Jack Ruby that needs to be explored . Nonetheless, there is more to Jack Ruby's story to come out .
 The late John Henshaw, a crack investigative reporter operating out of Washington, D.C., did some of his own digging into Ruby's background . Ruby was a key figure in the CIA .
 Dallas police officials were actually in the process of investigating Ruby and Oswald in the assassination attempt on retired General Edwin Walker several months before the JFK murder . Henshaw: Dallas police were investigating Ruby, Oswald in an assassination attempt .
 A bullet was fired through Walker's window, although the general was unharmed . Walker was a dedicated anti-communist and Castro critic . Walker is an anti-Castro critic .
 This is yet another of the many unanswered questions surrounding the JFK mystery . The JFK mystery continues to be unsolved .
 Secret police investigation linked Oswald and Ruby to the shooting, Henshaw's account says . Ruby and Oswald were both involved in the shooting . Oswald was shot by Ruby, Ruby was killed in the attack .
 A high-ranking FBI official was asked by a top official in the Justice Department to stop the arrest of the two Dallas operatives, Henshaw says . Then, a top Justice Department official asked him to intervene and stop the arrests, he says .
 Henshaw said that it was the CIA itself that had asked the FBI to intervene . The CIA itself had asked that the FBI intervene .
 According to Henshaw, the CIA was using Ruby to recruit Dallas men into the anti-Castro movement . Ruby was reportedly recruited by the CIA to recruit men in the movement against Castro Castro .
 FBI official refuses to intervene, saying it would be obstructing justice . FBI official refused to intervene in the case .
 FBI official says he would make request only if he were formally directed to do so in written communication . FBI official: I would make the request if he was formally directed by Justice Department official .
 Henshaw: FBI official then received a signed directive from the White House . Shortly thereafter, he says, the FBI official was given a signed order .
 He contacted Dallas police and urged them not to arrest Oswald and Ruby . Ruby was arrested in Dallas, Texas, in the early days of Oswald's shooting rampage .
 Justice Department asked Dallas Police Chief Curry to leave Oswald and Ruby alone . Thereupon the Justice Department sent the communication to Dallas Chief Curry asking that Oswald be left alone .
 The film covers Ruby's progress through the FBI and police screens guarding the entrance of the Dallas Police headquarters . The film also covers the progress of Ruby's .
 There is evidence of other possible contact between Ruby and Oswald— even in New Orleans . Ruby was involved in the shooting of Oswald in Dallas, Texas .
 This author received access to a private letter written on February 20, 1967 during the controversy over New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison's inquiry into the assassination . The letter was written in response to Garrison's investigation .
 The author of the letter described the fears of his aunt, a New Orleans woman, who was a neighbor of Lee Harvey Oswald's during his sojourn in the Crescent City . Oswald's neighbors were a neighbor in New Orleans during his time there .
 She observed Oswald having visitors three times three times . Two ""Cuban looking" men visited him twice and a man and woman came and picked up Oswald one weekend . Oswald was picked up by a couple of women .
 Jack Ruby did indeed have ties to both the Lansky Syndicate and to the CIA involving Cuba is, today, not in doubt . Ruby's ties to Lansky syndicate and the CIA involve Cuba is not doubt today .
 During the period of the Warren Commission investigation, the official government ""investigation"" preferred to look the other way . However, during the time of the investigation the official "investigation" preferred to looked other way.
 After they were arrested and jailed, both men said they had been manipulated . Both men later said they were manipulated by police .
 Ruby and Oswald knew that the assassination of Kennedy was in planning, but it's not clear if they knew . Ruby, Oswald and Oswald were involved in the Kennedy assassination, but the evidence is still unclear .
 Michael Milan has written of his role in working as part of a secret U.S. government team collaborating with the Lansky Syndicate . Milan says at least several people operating in Dallas believed that they were not involved in a conspiracy to kill John F Kennedy, but, instead, in a
 According to Milan, he played a part in the JFK assassination cover-up . Milan: "He played a role in the assassination cover up. He played a key role in JFK's assassination"
 Milan claims that following the assassination he was dispatched to Dallas by J Edgar Hoover himself . Milan claims to have been dispatched by Hoover himself after the assassination of JFK .
 Milan asked who set up the shooting, Brinkman said, "I never met the guy before I was introduced to him by this broad at Carousel Club" The shooting was set up by a broad at the club, according to Milan .
 Shooting victim: "I don't know who they are or where they was when the shooting started. But I'm not sure if they were at the scene of the shooting"
 "We was just supposed to shoot at the governor when they passed and get out of there," says crew member . "It was supposed to be a simple thing. We was just trying to get away from the governor," she says .
 Hoover told Hoover: "You already know too much. When he returned to Washington he was met at the airport, he says, by Hoover . Hoover said, "I'm not going to tell you what I'm going to do, but you're going to find out."
 Meyer Lansky's longtime personal courier, Jim Braden, was visiting in Dallas a day prior to JFK assassination . Braden was a longtime personal courier for Lansky, one of his most prominent associates .
 He was actually taken into custody by the Dallas police, and then released . He was also on the scene in Dealey Plaza when JFK was assassinated, actually being taken in custody .
 Standard accounts of the role of organized crime in the JFK assassination conspiracy have frequently pointed out Braden's strange doings in Dallas .
 What has been ignored, however, is the close relationship between Meyer Lansky and his close relationship with Lansky . What has also been ignored is the relationship between the two men .
 David Scheim, writing in Contract on America, never once mentions Braden's connection with Lansky . Scheim writes a lengthy discussion of Braden, but never mentions his connection to Lansky.
 Scheim prefers to leave the reader with the impression that Braden was a ""Mafia"" courier—not a Lansky courier . Braden worked for the Mafia, not Lansky .
 Braden was so much a key figure in the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate that he was a charter member of the La Costa Country Club .
 Blakey was on the payroll of Lansky associate, Morris Dalitzone of the founders of La Costa, after Dalitz and his partners sued Penthouse magazine for publicizing the mob links of the Carlsbad, California resort .
 Blakey served, in effect, as a character reference for the Lansky Syndicate defending the resort against the accusations . Blakey, for obvious reasons, would not be inclined to brag about when proclaiming himself a crime-buster .
 Jack Ruby visited Hunt Oil Company on November 21, 1963, the afternoon before the assassination . Hunt visited the same oil company the day before the shooting . Hunt was visited by Ruby at approximately the same time .
 Ruby visited the Cabana Motel around midnight on the night before the assassination . Jim Braden was a guest at the Motel .
 During this same period in late 1963, David Ferrie was working for Mafia leader Carlos Marcello on the same floor . Ferrie worked in the same building just down the hall from Braden—in Room 1707 . During this time, Ferrie had been working for Marcell
 In Chapter 11 we examined the role of CIA contract agent David Ferrie and his connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy in some detail . Chapter 11 examines the role he played in the assassination of JFK .
 One of Meyer Lansky's chief couriers would be in Dallas and moving in Ruby's sphere of operations . This is evidence that the fine hand of Lansky himself was in motion in Dallas . More likely, this is a direct link between Lansky and Ruby .
 Anything to do with a hit, gambling operation, or to go somewhere or to see somebody, was by courier . Anything to be done by courier was done by a courier, police say .
 Another Lansky associate, Michael Milan, has also written of the importance of mob couriers and the need for secrecy . Michael Milan has also spoken of the need to secrecy .
 There is evidence, however, that Ruby and Braden did indeed have a very close connection . Ruby kept it all in his head, too.""
 Lansky's courier Jim Braden was also a ""friend""*® of ""Happy"" Meltzer,"" whom we met earlier in this chapter as the head of a drug-smuggling operation in which Ruby was evidently involved . Meltzer's Mexico City representative, ""Happy
 Obviously, Lansky's courier, Jim Braden, may have been bringing a message from Lansky to Ruby .
 There's no question but that he was there for a purpose in Dallas . But whatever his role in Dallas, there's no doubt that there was a purpose for him .
 Lansky-Ruby connection is much deeper than might be perceived and far more than some ""crime solvers"" would have us realize . All of this, taken together, suggests, as we have said, that the Lansky and Ruby connection is much deeper than perhaps perceived .
 An additional Lansky connection to Ruby surfaced after the assassination of JFK and after the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald . What is especially interesting, further, is a connection to Lansky that surfaced after JFK .
 Mickey Cohen was Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Mickey Cohen's role in the assassination conspiracy was a little known, little known role .
 Cohen was a longtime Ruby associate and the Dallas mobster's role model . He was obviously a key figure in the network of conspiracy . Cohen was the leader of the conspiracy .
 Cohen's longtime friend—and attorney—Melvin Belli stepped forward as Jack Ruby's defense attorney . Belli is a longtime friend of Cohen's and attorney .
 Belli was a regular at the Los Angeles nightspot, Rondelli's, of which Cohen was the secret owner . Cohen was a secret owner of the club, which Belli attended regularly .
 Belli even once had Cohen introduced as "Professor O'Brien from Harvard who's going to give you a talk on tax laws,"" “*°° to a meeting of the American Bar Association in Miami," Belli said .
 The mobster assumed the platform and then began rattling on for some time, essentially saying nothing . Cohen, writing in his memoirs, wrote that Cohen said he didn't say anything at the start of the interview .
 Seymour Ellison, a lawyer associated with Belli, got a phone call from “a Las Vegas attorney’ who said, 'One of our guys just bumped off the son of a bitch that gunned down the President.’
 Ruby says he watched Belli sum up a murder defense in a Los Angeles courtroom and asked Belli to take the case . Earl Ruby says Earl Ruby came to California three days after his brother was arrested . Belli: Earl Ruby asked him to take his case .
 He had learned that his fee would be paid by the sale of Ruby's story to newspapers, and he did not care to be involved in that sort of exploitation . He did not want to get involved in the exploitation of Ruby, the author says .
 As a result, any final determination of just what role Ruby played in the JFK assassination scenario became another mystery in an endless series of mysteries . Ruby's role in JFK assassination has never been determined .
 Melvin Belli's role in the JFK controversy was not the end of the controversy, however . Belli was not involved in the scandal, however, in the wake of the JFK scandal .
 Belli emerged as one of the leading defenders of the official Warren Commission version of the JFK assassination . Belli was a leading defender of the Warren Commission's version of events .
 According to Lane, ABC-TV's Les Crane show wanted to stage a debate between Lane and Belli . Lane says the show wanted a debate .
 Belli came on stage wearing a cape over his tuxedo during the first debate, in San Francisco . Belli made his final judgment on the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 He declared: "If we cannot trust the FBI, the CIA and Earl Warren, then God pity us" He declared that if we can't trust the CIA, the FBI and the CIA then God would pity us .
 Perhaps those assembled that evening constituted the largest paying audience to witness a debate in many years . The debate was held in San Francisco, San Francisco .
 That which which which is not found within its many pages ostensibly did not happen . That which was not found in the many pages of this book, it's not found out what happened .
 Jack Ruby's actual role in the planning stages of the JFK assassination conspiracy will probably never be fully known . Ruby became a critical factor in the cover-up of the assassination . Ruby was a key figure in the assassination plot .
 His murder of Lee Harvey Oswald silenced the one man who could no doubt fill in at least some of the missing pieces of the puzzle .
 Jack Ruby was a wellplaced errand boy, not only for Meyer Lansky and his global crime syndicate, but also, it appears, for the covert arm of the CIA as well . Ruby was one of the most prominent figures in the world of organized crime and the CIA .
 Ruby sought to speak freely, but the Warren Commission refused his entreaties to be allowed to come to Washington to tell his story . Ruby was denied access to the White House by the commission .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren refused to give Ruby the opportunity to leave Dallas to tell his story . Chief Justice Warren refused Ruby's request to leave the city to tell the story of the JFK assassination . The story is a famous part of JFK assassination folklore .
 Ruby never did have the chance to give his version of what really happened to him . As a consequence, he was never given the opportunity to speak to the public .
 Ruby played a starring role in a drama orchestrated far beyond his seamy Carousel Club in Dallas . Ruby was just one player, albeit, in the end, in an important one .
 Ruby was an errand boy in a high-stakes operation that was being undertaken by the CIA, Mossad and Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate . The operation was part of a joint alliance of the CIA and Israel's Mossad . Ruby was a member of the joint alliance between the CIA
 A strange story about Jack Ruby bears repeating, if only for the reason that it should be part of the permanent record . Israel did indeed have a hand in the assassination of John F Kennedy, author says .
 The original source was a now deceased Idaho woman named Grace Pratt who related the story to a friend whose name must remain anonymous . The now deceased Pratt told a friend about the story .
 This author has spoken with an elderly retiree in Oregon, Oregon . He believes very strongly in the reliability of Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The elderly man says he believes in her reliability .
 George had worked in the Navy yard and Grace had cooked for many years in many of the big restaurants in San Francisco . George and Grace worked at the Navy Yard .
 Tiny's had a side-by-side restaurant and bar with a door between, opening into the anteroom between the dining room and the kitchen . Tiny's was one of the first restaurants in the country to open in the 1930s .
 After the dinner rush, Grace would fix her plate and one for Jack Ruby, and they would eat in the anteroom . Jack Ruby would eat with Grace and Jack Ruby .
 A big husky man came back, gripped her by the arm until she thought he would crush it and said, 'You didn't see anything, did you?' She said he came back and grabbed her arm and told her to look back .
 Anyone who knew Jack Ruby that well would always be able to recognize him going or coming, says Ruby . Ruby was a well-liked man who would always recognize his coming or coming . Ruby died at the age of 92 in August .
 She said she thought he was giving the message to someone that he had made it and was on his way . She said he was trying to tell someone he was going to the airport .
 She said there had already been a number of JFK assassination witnesses who had mysteriously died . She added that there had been already been several witnesses who died mysteriously .
 Two years after seeing him board for Israel, she heard through the underground that Ruby had gone to Brazil . Two years later, she saw him leave Israel for Brazil .
 The source who provided the author with this unusual memorandum firmly believes that Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline is innocent . The source strongly believes Mrs. Kennedy Kennedy-Kennedy is innocent and innocent .
 Pratt herself was convinced that she had seen Ruby boarding the plane for Israel . Pratt herself herself said she saw her daughter take off from the plane .
 Jonathan Jay Pollard was sentenced to life in prison for passing U.S. defense secrets to Israel . Pollard is serving a life sentence for espionage in the United States . Israeli leaders are working tirelessly for a pardon of Pollard .
 On October 6, 1966, at the time Ruby was granted a new trial, the Washington Daily News carried a story proclaiming that ""It's Possible for Ruby to Go Free,"" as a result of a second trial .
 Crime reporter Dorothy Kilgallen had an abiding interest in the JFK case . What's interesting to note is that she wrote a little-noticed column about the case .
 The extent to which the federal government is cooperating with the defense is being kept a secret, says Kilgallen .
 It appears that Washington knows or suspects something about Oswald that it does not want Dallas and the rest of the world to know or suspect . Washington may know or suspects Oswald, but it's not clear what it does .
 She reportedly told friends shortly before her ""accidental"" death from a combined drug overdose and alcohol, that she was about to crack the Kennedy case wide open .
 Ruby's path to possible freedom was being assisted by the FBI . Ruby was arrested in 2007 in connection with a murder case in which he was found guilty of assaulting a federal judge .
 The late Grace Pratt's reported ""death"" prior to a second trial is a mystery . The mystery deepens .
 The answer to that question has no direct bearing on the thesis of Final Judgment, but it may be a mystery that deserves further scrutiny . Final Judgment may be the first film to be released in theaters .
 Following the release of the first edition of Final Judgment, the author came across an obscure volume entitled The Ruby-Oswald Affair, published in 1988 . The book was published in 1987 .
 The author was the late Alan Adelson who had served as the attorney for Jack Ruby's family in the probate of Ruby's will . The late Adelson was the lawyer for the Ruby family .
 I had heard rumors that Kennedy was not really dead, but was hidden away in South America . I had been told that he was actually dead .
 In this case, the reference came from someone who had not actually known Jack Ruby in person . The reference was made in reference to Jack Ruby, who died in 2008 .
 Photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald and John F Kennedy have been widely circulated . No known photographs of Ruby have been taken of him .
 Frankly, I do not find Adelson's posthumously-published proclamation of having seen ""Jack"" as any refutation of the story by Grace Pratt . Grace Pratt's story was not refuted by Adelson .
 Adelson: "For the record, however, it seems appropriate to record the comments attributed to Adelson . For the record of the comments, Adelson said, "I don't think it's appropriate to ... record them"
 Kaufman very much wanted to keep the ADL from being associated with Jack Ruby . The ADL is an arm of Israel's Mossad, and is an affiliate of the CIA .
 The author received an unusual manuscript from Dallas in the opening days of 2005 . Final Judgment was published by the author in the early days of that year .
 "I have to confess that my efforts to ""be moderate"" and not focusing on someone who happened to be Jewish caused me to miss or ignore distinct Israeli connections in Dallas to the JFK conspiracy. Now, thanks to the Dallas manuscript, I have a confession .
 "Evil critics who charged that my book and my motivations were ""antiSemitic to the core"" have been proven wrong, very wrong, and as far as I am concerned this alone clears me of the charge," he said .
 Because I was not writing from an ""anti-Semitic"" viewpoint, as the liars charged, I missed some very serious points that, thankfully, have now been covered in this book . Because I wasn't writing from a 'anti-Semitism' viewpoint, I was wrong to say
 Grace Pratt story of Jack Ruby's phony ""death" is controversial, but it's not controversial, says author . Alexander Cockburn and James Ridgeway wrote a piece from the Village Voice .
 We have examined the interplay between the relatively small group of individuals whom we have linked to the JFK assassination conspiracy . We have also examined the  interplay of the individuals who were involved .
 Let us move forward and determine a critical point of contact that ties together the diverse—yet closely connected—elements behind the conspiracy that took the life of John F Kennedy . Let's move forward. Let's find a way to find out what happened .
 This is vital to recognizing and understanding the central role of Israel's Mossad in the crime of the century . Mossad's role in Israel's murder of 9/11 is crucial to understanding its role in the killing of the year's most prominent victims .
 Central to understanding the joint Mossad-CIA-Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate nexus in the plot to assassinate John F Kennedy is to recognize the importance of a littleexplored corporate entity based in Rome and known as Permindex . Israel, the CIA, the Lansky Crime Syndicate
 New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw served on the Permindex board of directors . Shaw was indicted by Jim Garrison for conspiracy in the JFK assassination . Shaw is accused of conspiracy to cover up the assassination .
 All of the firm evidence indicates Permindex was an Israeli operation, with close CIA connections . It was tied inextricably with the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . The CIA has close ties to the organization .
 Unraveling the mystery of Permindex explains the web of intrigue that ties all of the key players in the conspiracy together . Unravels the mystery behind PermIndex explains all the mystery surrounding the conspiracy .
 The Permindex connection is also the famous ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination . The connection to JFK assassination is also known as the "French connection"
 The French connection is, actually, the Israeli connection . And as we shall see, it is actually the French connection .
 In Oliver Stone's film, JFK, actor Kevin Costner confronts Tommy Lee Jones in Italy . He displays Italian newspaper articles exposing the activities of a Rome-based operation known as Permindex .
 Shaw, an international trade executive, served on the board of Permindex. Shaw, a former international trade exec, is a member of the board . Shaw: "I'm not sure what I really want to do with my business"
 The film audience is left with the impression that Permindex was a covert CIA operation . The purpose of the operation is never defined in the film .
 Permindex was a Mossad arms trading and money laundering venture operating in conjunction with the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . However, as the evidence now shows, it was Mossad's arms trading .
 Clay Shaw, a longtime CIA asset, served on the Permindex board . Shaw was a prime player in the New Orleans phase of the JFK assassination conspiracy . Shaw is a member of the CIA's New Orleans-based board, serving on the board .
 Therein, quite simply, lies the key to the mystery behind the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination is still shrouded in mystery .
 Jim Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw, a director of Permindex, had to be scuttled . Therein lies the explanation as to why Garrison's probe of Shaw had to go, he says .
 Garrison stumbled upon a definitive CIA link, and also discovered the Israeli connection . Garrison: "Not only had discovered the connection, but also had also found the connection with Israel" Garrison: 'I'm not surprised'
 Israel's Mossad was the key force behind Permindex . Mossad is behind the creation of the site . PermIndex.com.com .
 One of the chief shareholders in the Permindex holding company was the Banque De Credit International of Geneva . Tibor Rosenbaum, the Director for Finance and Supply of Israel's Mossad .
 BCI served as Meyer Lansky 's chief money laundering bank in Europe . It was BCI, as we saw in Chapter 7 and Chapter 12, which served as Lansky's chief money launderer in Europe.
 That Tibor Rosenbaum's BCI was a controlling force behind the enigmatic Permindex entity places Israel and its Mossad in the very center of the conspiracy behind the assassination of John F. Kennedy .
 Clay Shaw's positioning in New Orleans, site of one operational rung of the conspiracy, resulted in Shaw's implication in the investigation conducted by Jim Garrison . Shaw's involvement in Garrison's investigation led to Shaw being implicated in investigation .
 Garrison came to recognize that Israel's Mossad was intimately involved in the events in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Garrison: "Mossad was directly involved" in the shooting .
 Garrison surely never even suspected it and certainly had no reason to do so . Garrison had no idea he was in fact in the beginning of the affair . Garrison is believed to have been in a coma for a year .
 JFK's secret war with Israel was an unknown factor in the geo-political events of the period . JFK was assassinated in 1968 in the wake of 9/11 .
 It is clear, based upon the evidence that we shall review in these pages, that Permindex, which played so central a role in the JFK assassination conspiracy, was indeed one of these transnational ""overt, structured arrangements or forums"" of which Scott speaks .
 Paris Flammonde's 1969 account of the Garrison investigation, The Kennedy Conspiracy, contains valuable information on Permindex . Unfortunately, unfortunately, he didn't pursue the matter as far as he could have .
 Had he done so he would have unearthed the IsraeliLansky Organized Crime Syndicate connection, it would have uncovered a connection with the organization .
 Flammonde cites several articles that appeared in the foreign press, specifically Italy's Paesa Sera and the Canadian publication, Le Devoir as his source .
 These articles provide the unusual background of Permindex and point toward its real origins . The articles provide an unusual background and point to the real origins of the site .
 At the time CMC was established, it was asserted that CMC would function as an international commercial organization . It would aid in the establishing of a permanent worldwide network of trade expositions .
 Clay Shaw was the founder and director of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans . Shaw was born in the city's key port city of New Orleans, Louisiana . Shaw died in 2003 .
 Shaw's connection with an international trade entity seems logical . Shaw's connections with the international trade organization seem logical .
 We refer to Seymour Weiss who ran New Orleans, alongside Carlos Marcello, for the Lansky syndicate . Seymour Weiss was Lansky's contact man with Louisiana's famed ""Kingfish,"" Huey P Long .
 Weiss emerged as the Lansky syndicate bagman and political operative working in conjunction with Marcello . Weiss, however, was not involved in the syndicate, but was a political operative and bagman .
 Meyer Lansky would point in the direction of Lansky, the author says . Lansky is the author of the book, "Mansky"
 One New Orleans-based CIA contract agent investigated by Jim Garrison is known to have written a letter to a ""Mr Weiss"" in which Novel discussed the dangers of the Garrison investigation .
 Novel's letter surfaced at the time that Garrison's inquiry was in full swing and Novel was seeking to avoid giving testimony . Novel sought to avoid testifying in a bid to avoid testimony .
 Many have opined that the Mr Weiss in question was probably Novel's CIA superior . Others have suggested the ""Mr Weiss"" may have been another Weiss—and not Seymour .
 Seymour Weiss was a prime figure in the Lansky syndicate . He was tied closely to the intelligence community . He undoubtedly worked on its behalf in the context of his role with Standard Fruit .
 The major fruit companies, as numerous works can attest, had extensive interplay with the CIA inasmuch as their vested interests in the so-called ""Banana Republics" of Latin America were directly affected .
 The CIA played a major role in the affairs of Latin America from almost its inception . The CIA has been involved in Latin America's affairs since the 1950s .
 Weiss served as a director of the CIA-linked Standard Fruit during the time he was in charge of the powerful fruit company . Hecht was a leading figure in the small and tightly knit but highly influential Jewish community .
 Shaw maintained a high public profile with the Trade Mart that won him his place in New Orleans society . Shaw and Hecht were the real powers behind the scenes, while Hecht was the real power behind scenes . Shaw maintained the high profile with his Trade Mart .
 Edgar Stern, Jr., Jr. was a powerful figure in the Jewish community . His father Edgar and his mother Edith were among the most prominent financial angels for the Israeli lobby in America .
 WDSU played a key role in portraying Lee Harvey Oswald as a "pro-Castro agitator" prior to the JFK assassination, setting him up as the patsy . As we shall see in Chapter 17 and Appendix Three, the Sterns were the forces behind the
 There is indeed much more to Clay Shaw than what we have been told . Clay Shaw's life is inextricably fascinating .
 As we do, the reality of what Permindex was and how it was intimately tied to the JFK assassination will become more apparent .
 Major Louis M Bloomfield of Montreal, Canada, is a devoted and influential supporter of the Israeli cause . Bloomfield is a dedicated supporter of Israel .
 Permindex had its headquarters in Bloomfield's base of operations in Montreal until 1961 at which time it was relocated to Rome . In fact, the company was headquartered in Rome until 1961 .
 Bloomfield played a critical role in helping establish the state of Israel and its Mossad . There we learned how Bloomfield helped establish the country .
 Bloomfield's wide-ranging financial interests were, in fact, those of the Bronfman family . This rather intriguing detail suggests that Bloomfield had financial ties to the Bronman family . Bloomfield was a well-known philanthropist and philanthropist in the 1930s .
 The Bronfman family built its fortune working with the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate in the illegal liquor trade . The family has been key backers of Israel and leaders in the Zionist cause .
 Edgar Bronfman most recently served as president of the World Jewish Congress . Bronfman is a philanthropist and philanthropist who founded the World Jewry .
 Bronfman family links to the JFK assassination conspiracy . Bronfman's family was involved in the assassination .
 Texas oilman Jack Crichton arranged for translator for Oswald's Russian wife Marina . Former military intelligence officer made arrangements to translate Oswald's wife .
 Bloomfield maintained close ties to Israel in his own Canadian business and social affairs . Bloomfield also maintained close links with Israel in Canada .
 Bloomfield is the director of the Israeli-Canadian Maritime League . Bloomfield also served as Chairman of the Histadrut Campaign in Canada .
 This bank, as we shall see, was implicated in Permindex intrigue in Europe that comes full circle back to New Orleans and the Clay Shaw connection . The bank, which is implicated in Europe, was linked to the Perm index .
 Bloomfield transferred $7.7 million into BCI coffers in 1963 . BCI was founded by the Bloomfield family of Chicago-area residents .
 This was ostensibly for the purpose of rescuing the Mossadcontrolled bank after the government of Liberia defaulted on a substantial loan from BCI, supposedly putting the bank in peril . The bank was supposedly put in danger by defaulting on a large loan from the government .
 It helped channel money from rich investors around the world into Israel . It also performed any number of services for the country . Israel was founded in the 1930s .
 Defense Minister Shimon Peres called Rosenbaum when he told him that Israel needed $7 million within 24 hours for national security . Rosenbaum found the money overnight .
 Other accounts were held by the Histadrut, the Israeli labor federation, Solel Bonhen, the Zim Navigation Co. and Israel Corporation, an investment company . The accounts were also held by Solel .
 Permindex chief Bloomfield's intelligence connections with U.S. intelligence connections were impeccable . And, as we have already seen, the intelligence connections of Bloomfield are impeccable.
 Although a Canadian by birth, Bloomfield was hired by J Edgar Hoover to serve as a recruiting agent for the FBI's counterespionage division, Division Five . Bloomfield is a former FBI agent who recruited agents for the bureau .
 Bloomfield was also given an officer's rank in the United States Army during World War II and assigned to the Office of Strategic Services . Bloomfield's fellow Permindex director, Clay Shaw, was also a U.S. Army officer during the war .
 Angleton may have had contact with Shaw at the time, but there is no firm evidence to prove it . Angleton himself may have been involved in Shaw's murder .
 Shaw and Angelton were both married at the time of the 1960s . Shaw was married to Angelton in the early 1950s . Angelton was a member of the Shaw family . Shaw is the son of Shaw, who is now a successful businessman in London .
 Shaw served with U.S. intelligence during World War II . Shaw was stationed for a time in France where he had contact with the French intelligence .
 At that time, one of the highest-ranking French intelligence officers was one Gustave Bertrand who was, in fact, a close friend for another OSS officer, James J Angleton . Bertrand was a friend for Angleton, who was a close ally for another .
 Angleton and Shaw were certainly moving in the same circles during World War I—and much later . This is speculation, of course, but there is no question, as the evidence now shows, that they were indeed moving in circles .
 French intelligence connections to Permindex and to JFK assassination conspiracy are very strong indeed . And as we shall see in this chapter and in Chapter 16, the French connections to the JFK conspiracy are strong indeed. And as well as this chapter, Chapter 16 will reveal .
 There is one definitive Angleton-Shaw connection that has been documented and it is interesting indeed . Yet, there is still no definitive connection between the two .
 Shaw's address book contained the private telephone number of the Principessa Marcelle Borghese . When Shaw was later arrested by Jim Garrison, it was discovered his address book had the private number of Borghesse .
 Meyer Lansky was the middle man between the OSS and organized crime . He arranged for Sicilian Mafia support for the invading Allied troops in Italy . Lansky helped arrange for the support of the Italian Mafia .
 Clay Shaw's contacts in the Mossad-linked Permindex entity had a wide-ranging array of international interests in the world of intrigue . Some of the other personalities involved in the case are also Mossad associates .
 Among those who were either investors in Permindex or shared seats on the board were several interesting characters with equally interesting connections . Among them were those who shared seats in the board of the company .
 The former premier of Hungary was a fierce anticommunist who maintained close connections to Israel's allies in the U.S. The anti-Castro Cuban colony in Miami was itself practically a joint operating subsidiary of both the CIA and the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate .
 Seligman was intimately involved with the Israel-oriented Zionist agency known as the Jewish Colonization Association . He was involved in the organization's efforts to establish Israel in Israel .
 Dalitz was a longtime Lansky intimate who was Benjamin Siegel's successor as Lansky's point man in Las Vegas . Dalitz worked for Lansky for decades . He was the successor to Siegel, who died in 1995 .
 Blakey was placed in charge of the House Assassinations Committee investigation of the JFK murder . Blakey is now the director of the investigation into the JFK assassination .
 Dalitz was also a longtime fund-raiser for the Israeli lobby in the United States . He was honored by the Anti-Defamation League for his services .
 Prio Socarras had been a front-man for Meyer Lansky's partner-in-crime, Fulgencio Batista . Socaras was the President of Cuba from 1948-1952 . He was the Cuban President of the Cuban government from 1952 .
 Lansky persuaded Batista with a hefty bribe to ""step down"" in favor of Prio Socarras . In fact, it was Lansky who convinced Batista to "step down"
 The Tibor Rosenbaum-BCI connection with Permindex points most definitely toward the Israeli Mossad interest in Permice . As we have noted, however, it is .
 BCI, as we have seen, was very much a creature of Israel and its Mossad . BCI was a member of the Mossad, Israel's intelligence network .
 Among the directors of Rosenbaum's BCI was Ernest Israel Japhet, also chairman and president of Bank Leumi, the largest bank in Israel .
 BCI and Bank Leumi were involved in the diamond trade and tied into Far East drug trafficking . The bank and bank were tied into drug trafficking and involved in diamond trade .
 Two other directors of BCI were Ed Levinson, front man at the Fremont Casino in Las Vegas for Joseph ""Doc"" Stacher, who died in exile in Israel . John Pullman, Lansky's international money courier, was also a director of the company .
 In Chapter 8 we learned that Eisenberg later became a business associate of Theodore Shackley . The CIA figure later became an associate of the CIA figure . The book ends in a cliffhanger .
 Shackley was CIA's chief of station in Miami during the CIA-Lansky Crime Syndicate plots against Fidel Castro . Shackley, as we discovered in Chapter 11, was the CIA's Chief of Station in Miami in the 1960s .
 Shackley was CIA chief of station in Laos during the period of the close working relationship between the CIA and the Lansky syndicate in the global drug racket . Shackley worked for the CIA in Laos .
 It was Feinberg, as we saw in Chapter 4, who was the American Jewish fund-raising contact of the 1960 Kennedy for President campaign . Feinberg was a fund-raiser for the 1960 campaign .
 Feinberg's heavy-handed tactics infuriated Kennedy . Kennedy told a close friend that he intended to enforce changes in campaign fund-raising regulations .
 Feinberg helped arrange the bitter meeting between Kennedy and Ben-Gurion recounted in Chapter 5 . Feinberg, additionally, was close to Israeli Prime Minister David Ben Gurion and helped arrange that meeting .
 The manager of Rosenbaum and Feinberg's Swiss-Israel Trade Bank was Gen. Gen. David Rosenbaum . The bank was the Swiss-Israeli Trade Bank's manager .
 Julius Klein engaged in illegally re-routing shiploads of supplies and equipment to post-war Germany . Klein was a U.S. Army officer who had engaged in re-route of supplies to the Haganah, the military forces of the Jews in Palestine .
 Klein's services on behalf of the state of Israel were even more significant, he says . Klein was a well-respected member of the Israeli community .
 It was Klein who had been involved in setting up Israel's Mossad and in training its officers . Klein was also involved in training Mossad's officers .
 Stephenson cemented his ties with the Jewish anti-Nazi underground during his days working with the American OSS and Naval Intelligence .
 Operation helped Israeli Intelligence in the early days of the state of Israel . Operation was far removed from the story of Palestine, but helped Israel in the long run .
 Stephenson had contact, during those early days, with a young American who became a friend of Churchill . Shaw, that American Army officer detailed to the Office of Strategic Services, was likely to be Stephenson's friend .
 Obviously, the connections between Tibor Rosenbaum’''i Mossad banking operation and the Banque de Credit International are linked . Rosenbaum's connections with a wide-ranging array of figures tied closely to the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate .
 That BCI was one of the primary shareholders of the Permindex entity clearly points toward a Mossad role in the plot that ended John F Kennedy's life .
 Research by former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow sheds light on the connections between Lansky's Miami banks and Mossad officer Tibor Rosenbaum's BCI . Morrow also provides evidence of a role by Meyer Lansky in the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 Morrow was contacted by a young man with an incredible story he wanted to tell . Morrow had published his first book, Befraya/ in which he described his own connections through the CIA with a number of the figures involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 According to Morrow's source, Albert Moakler, "The tapes were indicative that there was a conversation going on which was more than idle gossip" According to a Morrow source, the tapes were "indication" of a conversation . According to the source, "There was a discussion
 "It definitely concerned Jersey and Miami . . . The areas, people in the areas," said the mayor of Miami .
 Weiner made regular runs between Switzerland and Miami where he would visit the Bank of Miami Beach . Morrow also determined that Weiner would also visit the bank .
 Lansky's courier definitely had ""inside"" information about JFK assassination . Thus, it's clear that Lansky’s courier had inside information about the JFK assassination.
 We may even go so far as to speculate that it was Lansky's courier who was providing funds from Permindex to the assassination conspirators .
 A ""high level financial backer"" of the Permindex operation, according to Paesa Sera, was one Dr. Dr. David Cohen . Dr. Cohen was one of the financial backers of the operation .
 This committee was the American affiliate of the Israeli Histadrut for which Permindex board chairman Louis M Bloomfield was a chief fundraiser . Bloomfield is a former chairman of the board of PermIndex . He was also the chairman of a committee that was formed by the board .
 Ex-CIA man Philip Agee has said that the Committee for Labor Israel is often used as a CIA cover .
 Biegun oversaw the liquidation of CMC/Permindex after the company was expelled from Switzerland and Italy in 1962 . Biegun was responsible for relocating the operation to Johannesburg, South Africa, in 1962.
 Permindex has been linked to the JFK assassination . It is here that we find even more intriguing connections between the two organizations .
 Earlier in these pages, as we have seen, the rebel Secret Army Organization was bitterly opposed to DeGaulle's decision to grant independence to Arab Algeria . The OAS, known by its acronym, was bitterly opposing the decision .
 The OAS launched numerous assassination attempts against DeGaulle, none of which were successful . Frederick Forsythe's famous novel, The Day of the Jackal, inspired by the assassination attempt . None of the attempts were successful, but they inspired the novel .
 In 1962, French intelligence charged that Permindex laundered money into the OAS coffers to finance an attempt on DeGaulle's life .
 Jewish-born convert to Christianity, Jacques Soustelle was former governor-general of Algeria . He was one of the harshest French critics of Algerian independence in the 1950s .
 Soustelle, as French Atomic Energy Minister from 1958 to 1959, cooperated closely with Yuval Ne'eman, the father of Israel's atomic bomb project, in helping Israel develop the groundwork for a nuclear arsenal . Described by Israeli historian Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi as
 Bitterly condemning Degaulle's reversal on Algeria, Soustelle went into self-imposed exile . Soustell went into exile in Algeria . Bitteringly condemning the move, he was forced to go into exile .
 Israeli intelligence came to Soustelle's aid when he went into exile . Israeli intelligence helped him go into exile when he was in exile . Israel helped him get back into Israel .
 According to Henissart, "" attracted hotheads including some Jews who belonged to Irgun Zvai Leumi, the Israeli underground military organization . Some Jews belonged to the organization .
 Only Israel voted against Algeria seeking admission to the UN . Then, when Algeria was finally independent, only Israel voted to support it .
 At the same time, these elements were using their Permindex connection in yet another plot, this one aimed at the life of John F Kennedy .
 There is, interestingly, a New Orleans connection here . The OAS, PERMINDEX and New Orleans have a history of the U.S.
 Banister's agent, Maurice Brooks Gatlin, carried the money to the OAS in Paris . The money was sent to Banister by Gatlin's agent .
 Antonio Valladares was the chairman of a Latin American regional conference of a global anti-communist confederation . The conference was organized by CIA operative and Banister contact, E Howard Hunt . Hunt was a CIA operative .
 This same same attorney also served as attorney for New Orleans Mafia chief Carlos Marcello . Valladares, based in Guatemala, was assisting in financing Banister's anti-communist activities . Banister was a member of the New Orleans mafia .
 In attendance at the conference, which ultimately merged into the World Anti-Communist League, was Maurice Brooks Gatlin,”’' suggesting that the New Orleans connection to the CIA was very strong indeed .
 Bank Hapoalim was the bank established by Israel's labor bund, the Histadrut, for which Permindex chairman Louis Bloomfield served as chief fundraiser in Canada .
 Guy Banister's activities were explored earlier in Chapter 10, Chapter 11 and Chapter 14 . Guy's activities are explored in Chapter 11, Chapter 14 and Chapter 15 .
 According to an associate of the late Bernard Fensterwald, Banister's office also served as a New Orleans headquarters for OAS-connected mercenaries .
 Jean Souetre was reported to have been picked up in Dallas on November 22, 1963 and expelled from the U.S. He was among those OAS mercenaries picked up by the United States in Dallas, Texas .
 Former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow asserts in his book, Betrayal, that Permindex board member Clay Shaw was, in fact, Banister's immediate superior in coordinating CIA operations out of New Orleans . Shaw was Shaw's direct superior to Banister, Morrow says .
 CIA asset Clay Shaw serves on the board of Permindex, which is in turn operating in conjunction with Banister's office in plots against Charles DeGaulle . Thus, we have a CIA asset serving as a member of the board .
 Banister was involved in manipulating the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans just prior to the assassination of John F Kennedy . Banister manipulated Oswald's activities in the same time as the assassination .
 Ferrie also had a long-standing connection with Lee Harvey Oswald . Ferrie was associating regularly with Oswald in New Orleans in the summer of 1963 .
 Ferrie and Shaw were intimately acquainted with each other in the 1930s and '60s . Shaw and Ferrie were married at the end of the day . Shaw died in prison in 1966 . Ferrie was a member of the Shaw family .
 Ferrie, Shaw, Banister and Oswald do come full circle . The connections between Ferrie and Shaw, Shaw and Banister . Oswald was the first person to write a book about Ferrie .
 Former CIA man Morrow worked with David Ferrie in conjunction with the CIA . Morrow visited a warehouse in Europe where vast amounts of arms were stored .
 There is yet another Israeli connection to the New Orleans scenario that set up Lee Harvey Oswald as the fall guy .
 Botnick was obsessed with communism and believed communism to be a major force behind the civil rights movement . Botnick reportedly considered himself ""a super communist hunter"
 At the national level, and under Botnick in New Orleans, the ADL had a history of deploying agents into left-wing groups to spy on their activities .
 Many of the ADL's factfinders were "retired local or federal government investigators"”’s Forster says . The ADL says Oswald is likely a likely former American intelligence agent .
 Oswald was being ""sheep-dipped"" as a ""pro-Castro"" agitator by the ADL (under the guise of ADL ""fact finding"") which was functioning as a conduit for Mossad and its CIA allies .
 JFK assassination researcher Peter Dale Scott has lent credence to the possibility that there was much more to Banister's operations than would seem to meet the eye . Scott does not pinpoint the ADL as a force behind the activities .
 Those stressing the intelligence angle point to Banister's FBI and CIA connections . Others stressing the ""Mafia"" point to his connections to New Orleans Mafia chief Carlos Marcello . Banister and Ferrie have connections to the mafia .
 The FBI files of another prominent Black civil rights leader, Dick Gregory, show conclusively that the ADL which was monitoring his public lectures and then turning the information over to the FBI as part of its COINTELPRO operations .
 COINTELPRO, carried out by the FBI's Division Five, was under the direct control of William Sullivan, who was effectively a CIA ""mole" inside the FBI for his close friend, James J Angleton . Sullivan was a close friend of Mossad's CIA ally,
 Clay Shaw, Guy Banister, David Ferrie and Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans during the summer of 1963 . Whatever the case, it is very clear that the Mossad and the CIA had a direct hand in the strange activities of Clay Shaw .
 Both Mossad and CIA were intimately tied with the Permindex plot against French President Charles DeGaulle and with John F Kennedy . The CIA and Mossad were involved in the plot against John F. Kennedy and the French President .
 New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison was indeed on the right track . Garrison got a strange visit from a stranger during his investigation . Garrison says he was on right track in the early days of the investigation .
 A Denver oilman offered to arrange the district attorney's appointment to a federal judgeship in return for Garrison's abandonment of his investigation . The oilman, later identified by investigators as John King, appeared in Garrison's office .
 King very clearly had inside information about the nature of Garrison's inquiry . King was obviously interested in shutting it down before it went any further . Garrison's inquiries into the inquiry into the Iraq War should be closed .
 Garrison would not be bribed, however, and promptly showed the gentleman to the door . Garrison refused to bribe the man, but he refused to give up .
 Garrison's inquiry into the origins of the Permindex plot that led to the murder of John F Kennedy led to his assassination . Garrison was the target of the assassination, but the CIA wanted to silence him before he went further .
 Permindex and its backers were determined to stop the investigation in its tracks . The investigation was launched in 2007, but the investigation was never closed . PermIndex and its backer were determined not to let the investigation go .
 John King's visit to New Orleans is very clear evidence, indeed, that the role of Clay Shaw and Permindex is the key to the JFK assassination mystery . John King: "Clay Shaw's role in JFK assassination case is clear evidence"
 By 1967, Myer Feldman was a key player in the Permindex network of Tibor Rosenbaum and John King . Feldman represented IOS interests in Washington . Feldman was also a super-lawyer representing IOS in Washington DC .
 Feldman apparently serves as an attorney for the Kennedy family itself . He oversaw the most private legal matters of the family of the slain American president . Feldman is now a private lawyer for the family .
 Clay Shaw was rehabilitating carriage houses in New Orleans . Shaw was an innocent figure who was only rehabilitating French Quarter carriage houses . Shaw has been accused of being a drug dealer in the past .
 Those who say that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" say nothing about Shaw's firm ties to the Lansky Syndicate money laundering Banque De Credit International . Yet, despite the link between Permindex and Lansky syndicate, Shaw's very firm ties— through Perm index— to
 To disregard the Israeli linkage to Permindex is to avoid the truth altogether . To disregard Israel's link to the Israeli link is to be avoided the truth .
 Clay Shaw has been charged with murder in the death of his wife . Clay Shaw is accused of being wronged by "the Mafia" Clay Shaw was acquitted of any wrongdoing .
 To look Shaw's direction is to look in the direction of Israel—and that's why it was so vital that Garrison's investigation had to be scuttled at all costs .
 Obviously, there's much more to the Permindex controversy than many people would like to admit . There's a lot more to it than you think .
 There is something about Miss Brussell's background that is significant in light of the Israeli role in the JFK assassination as dissected here . Yet, there is something significant in .
 Brussell would not be inclined to follow Permindex to its Israeli antecedents . Brussell: "Permindex is not an easy way to get around the world"
 Brussell and her acolyte, Dave Emory, contended that high-ranking former Nazis such as General Reinhard Gehlen who were brought under the wing of American intelligence following World War II were responsible for the Kennedy assassination .
 Israeli intelligence was working closely with the Gehlen organization in the post-World War II period . However, the fact is that Israeli intelligence worked closely with Gehlen in post-war period .
 Gehlen worked with reputed former Nazi war criminals in Gehlen's operation . John Loftus and Mark Aarons have written of how Israeli operatives worked with the Nazis .
 Israelis had infiltrated Gehlen organization, Gehlen says . What's more, the Israelis had completely infiltrated the Gehlen group, he says .
 As we know now, it was not a Nazi plot . But, as well as now, the fantasies of Dave Emory and Mae Brussell notwithstanding .
 It is probably worth noting, for the record, that the first nationwide publicity that Mrs. Michelle Obama received was the first national publicity that she received .
 Brussell's theory appeared in the pages of the short-lived magazine, The Rebel, published by controversial pornographer Larry Flynt . The Rebel was published by Flynt's controversial pornography magazine .
 The Nazis believed that the Max network was their secret intelligence source inside the Kremlin . It did in fact give 'good intelligence to the Germans but it was strictly controlled by the Communists .
 That the Israelis were blackmailing Angleton, according to Loftus and Aarons, who are undoubtedly pro-Israeli partisans, explains much about Angleton's behavior throughout his CIA career and in the events which involved Angleton in the circumstances of the JFK assassination .
 In light of all this, we now understand why Zionist operatives collaborated with so-called ""Nazi"" forces in the strange transnational entity known as Permindex .
 There were common modes of interaction between a variety of interests involved in complex, multi-centered intrigues where these diverse elements, each with distinctive motives, worked together on common projects .
 Through the so-called ""false flag"" technique in which the Mossad is so skilled , ""Mafia"" figures, anti-Castro Cubans, lowlevel CIA operatives and other strange figures were drawn into the Permindex web behind the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Permindex board member Clay Shaw was charged with having participated in the conspiracy . Shaw was the one person to be charged with participating in the alleged conspiracy .
 Whether Shaw knew of the impending assassination will probably never be known . Shaw knew nothing about the impending murder .
 Shaw was trafficking with the likes of David Ferrie and Guy Banister, who were his handlers . Shaw was known to be involved in the trafficking of Swindell .
 Shaw knew Oswald, ultimately, would be the patsy is another mystery . Whether Shaw knew that Oswald would be a cover-up, it's not clear whether he knew he would be .
 Clay Shaw link to the assassination—and to Permindex— points directly toward the Mossad role in the conspiracy . Nonetheless, the link to Clay Shaw points directly to Mossad’s involvement .
 Permindex is the key to understanding the full nature o f the JFK assassination conspiracy . The JFK assassination is the subject of a new book, "Permindex"
 To ignore the Permindex connection is to ignore the reality about the origins of the plot that led to the assassination of John F Kennedy, John F. Kennedy .
 The tentacles of Permindex reached far and wide, inextricably intertwining the Mossad, the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate . The Mossad and CIA were involved in the creation of the network .
 Warren Commission enthusiast Max Holland penned an essay in the spring 2001 issue of The Wilson Quarterly purporting to ""prove"" that the Soviet KGB was responsible for effectively sponsoring ""disinformation" The opus does no more than to prove that Permindex was the subject of controversy in the
 Final Judgment answers the question beyond any shadow of a doubt, but it's not likely Holland will respond to that . Holland will not likely respond to the question . Final Judgment will be released on Friday .
 James Jesus Angleton played a key role in the assassination conspiracy and cover-up . Angleton was Israel's ally at the CIA headquarters at the time of the CIA's assassination .
 New information suggests that there was much more happening in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963 than otherwise might meet the eye . We will examine important new information which suggests there was more happening on that day .
 We will discover that the so-called ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination is, in fact, the Israeli connection . We will also discover that . The 'French connection' to the assassination is also a connection to the death of JFK .
 Mark Lane proved to the satisfaction of a jury that the CIA played a part in the assassination of John F Kennedy in a trial in Miami in 1985 . Lane was a veteran Kennedy assassination investigator .
 Lane's groundbreaking best seller, Plausible Denial, published in 1991, told the whole incredible story . Lane's book, published by 1991, was a groundbreaking bestseller .
 Evidence from that trial also points toward Israel's connection to the assassination through the offices of CIA ally, James Jesus Angleton .
 There is also strange new evidence that there was much more happening in Dealey Plaza in Dallas than even many of the people involved in the events surrounding the JFK assassination really knew .
 Mark Lane's Plausible Denial proved conclusively that the CIA had a hand in the assassination of President John F Kennedy . Mark Lane says the CIA was involved in the JFK assassination .
 The Washington-based Spotlight newspaper's libel trial with ex-CIA man E Howard Hunt brought into a Florida courtroom the first hard evidence linking the CIA to the Kennedy assassination . Lane's book tells how the Washington newspaper brought the evidence into a courtroom .
 Lane agreed to serve as The Spotlight's defense attorney after Hunt won a $650,000 libel judgment against the populist weekly . Hunt won the judgment against The Spotlight .
 Lane successfully handled The Spotlight's defense after the case again went to trial after the initial libel verdict was overturned . Lane successfully defended The Spotlight after it went back to the defense .
 The libel action stemmed from an article published in the pages of The Spotlight in 1978 . The Spotlight was published in 1978.
 After leaving the CIA, Marchetti became a journalist specializing in matters relating to the CIA and the intelligence community in general . He is now a freelance journalist .
 He had done a number of intelligence-related articles for The Spotlight, among numerous other publications, both here in the United States and abroad .
 Marchetti's article suggested that upper echelon executives of the CIA had decided to frame E Howard Hunt for involvement in the Kennedy assassination . Hunt had been framed by the CIA for his role in Kennedy's assassination .
 Hunt was framed for the crime . Hunt was not involved in the crime, but the CIA had decided to frame Hunt for the deed . Hunt had been framed by the CIA .
 Hunt was one of three so-called "tramps" being led away from the scene by police officers in Dealey Plaza . Hunt was a member of the 'tramps' who were captured in the famous photo of the three men . Hunt had been involved in the assassination .
 There are some who believe Hunt as a tramp was deliberately trumped up as part of the CIA's scheme to frame Hunt for involvement in the assassination . Hunt was accused of being a 'tramp' by the CIA .
 Victor Marchetti exposed the CIA's plan to implicate Hunt in The Spotlight . It was the CIA plan to use Hunt as a criminal suspect in the case of Hunt .
 Weberman has also been closely associated with Mordechai Levi, a known agent provocateur of the Israeli Mossad's propaganda and intelligence arm, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith . We examine this in further detail in Chapter 17 .
 In Chapter 8 we saw that Kahane was a CIA asset and protéé of Jay Lovestone who handled CIA liaison with the Meyer Lansky-linked French Corsican and Sicilian Mafias .
 It may very well be that the ""Hunt as a tramp"" story being touted by Weberman was indeed a CIA-Mossad concoction to further muddy the waters . Weberman may have been trying to play a role in the hunt for the CIA .
 In 1975, Weberman was publishing and promoting a book that named Hunt as one of the tramps . A strange letter appeared anonymously in the mailbox of another assassination researcher, Penn Jones, Jr.
 The letter was written in Spanish and its envelope earned a Mexico City postmark . The letter is written in English and has an envelope with a postmark in Mexico City .
 E Howard Hunt's alleged role in the JFK affair was well-known . Hunt had known connections to the CIA and Mexico City, where he had been active during his CIA career . Hunt was active in Mexico City during his time in the CIA .
 Hunt's letter was sent from Mexico City, Hunt's former base of operations . Hunt sent the letter from his former base in Mexico City . The letter is interesting, though, that the letter is sent from that location .
 Someone wanted to throw further suspicion on E Howard Hunt—and succeeded . Whether the letter was real or not, it was obvious that someone wanted to . Hunt . Hunt is accused of trying to frame him up for murder .
 The Weberman story of ""Hunt as a tramp"" and the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter appeared at the same time are particularly intriguing in light of another matter we are about to consider . The story of Hunt as a 'tramp' and the letter as a "Dear Mr
 Both the ""Hunt as a tramp"" story and the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter appear to be part and parcel of a CIA black propaganda operation run by the Mossad .
 E Howard Hunt was indeed in Dallas, Texas, on November 21, 1963 . Hunt was involved in strange activities in league with key players in the JFK assassination scenario . Hunt's involvement in the Dallas assassination scenario is a key piece of evidence .
 According to Marchetti, widespread public suspicion of CIA involvement in the president's murder was forcing the CIA to play its hand . Hunt, one of its more notorious longtime operatives, had indeed been in Dallas on the day that Kennedy was killed .
 Hunt's well-known ties to anti-Castro Cubans are considered prime suspects in the JFK assassination . Hunt would have a difficult time explaining why he had been in D.C. on that fateful day .
 Marchetti's article never said Hunt had, in fact, been involved in the assassination conspiracy . Interesting, it never said that Hunt had been involved .
 Marchetti's article said only that top-ranking CIA officials had decided to frame Hunt for the crime . Hunt is the son of a former CIA operative .
 A strange in-house CIA memo somehow ended up in the hands of investigators for the House Assassinations Committee . Hunt would ultimately be forced to explain his reported presence in Dallas on November 22, 1963 .
 The Spotlight's editors didn't, in fact, feel that the article implicated Hunt in the president's murder . They didn't feel that Hunt was implicated in the murder .
 Inexplicably, however, the ex-CIA man decided to sue, even though he ultimately admitted under oath that when he first read The Spotlight's story that Marchetti's contentions seemed plausible indeed . He ultimately admitted to the story that under oath he thought the claims seemed plausible
 Hunt did believe that his former colleagues would throw him to the wolves, for their own nefarious reasons, he says . Hunt did not believe that he would be thrown to the wolf for his own reasons .
 The Spotlight's management did not take the lawsuit seriously . However, The Spotlight did take the suit seriously .
 Hunt's attorneys did not believe either that the article damaged Hunt's reputation or that his attorneys could prove that the newspaper had published the article maliciously . They did not think that Hunt's lawyers could prove the article had been maliciously published .
 During that trial, The Spotlight's attorney unexpectedly stipulated that The Spotlight did not believe Hunt had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . During the trial, the newspaper's attorney said that Hunt was not in Dallas that day .
 The trial, however, resulted in a massive $650,000 libel judgment against the newspaper . The trial ended with a massive libel judgment .
 Mark Lane, an attorney, entered into the case almost purely by chance . Lane was introduced to the publisher of The Spotlight by a mutual acquaintance shortly before the case was heard on appeal . Lane is a famed JFK assassination investigator .
 Lane had long been convinced that the CIA had been instrumental in orchestrating the JFK assassination, but he had never had a legal forum in which to conduct an investigation of this sort . Lane had been convinced for decades of intensive research .
 The trial took place in 1985 (some seven years after the controversial article had first been published) The new trial gave him that opportunity . The trial was held in 1985 .
 He contended Hunt had indeed been in Dallas just prior to the president's murder . He said he would be able to prove Hunt was in Dallas at the time of murder .
 This took Hunt's lawyers by surprise, but despite their efforts to derail Lane's new approach, they were unsuccessful . Despite their efforts, Lane's lawyers were able to get their hands on the deal .
 The key witness in the second libel trial was Marita Lorenz, a former CIA operative . Lorenz testified before the House Assassinations Committee in 1978, relating to the president's assassination .
 Miss Lorenz, a German-born beauty, had, actually been the one-time mistress of Cuban dictator Fidel Castro . But she had ultimately turned on the Cuban leader and had become involved in anti-Castro activities under the CIA's tutelage .
 Among her key contacts in the CIA during this period was the CIA's chief liaison with the anti-Castro Cuban operatives, E Howard Hunt, and veteran CIA contract agent Frank Sturgis .
 Mark Lane asked Miss Lorenz to testify in the Hunt trial in The Spotlght's defense, restating—again under oath—what she had told the House Assassinations Committee and what he had told Lane himself .
 Miss Lorenz testified in a deposition that just one day prior to Kennedy's assassination, she, along with Sturgis and several anti-Castro Cuban exiles, met in Dallas with E Howard Hunt, Jack Ruby . Ruby was the nightclub operator who later killed Lee Harvey Oswald,
 According to Miss Lorenz, Hunt was the CIA paymaster for a top-secret operation . The purpose of the operation, she did not know, she said, was to be a top secret operation .
 Miss Lorenz left Dallas on November 22 and never participated in the operation . However, feeling uneasy, she left the Dallas airport feeling uneasy . She never participated .
 Jack Ruby had killed Lee Harvey Oswald, the president's alleged assassin . Ruby was killed by Jack Ruby, the alleged assassin of President Kennedy . Jack Ruby killed Oswald in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 Lane took excellent advantage of Hunt's sworn statements in deposition and trial testimony . Lane took advantage of those statements to show those contradictions .
 Witnesses called in Hunt's defense by the ex-CIA man's attorneys only ended up suggesting Hunt had more to hide than he had to admit . What's more, the witnesses called in the defense by Hunt's attorneys ended up saying Hunt had a lot to hide . Hunt was convicted of
 Many of Hunt's former CIA colleagues testified in deposition by CIA-dispatched lawyers . Many of these witnesses, including Hunt's ex-CIA colleagues, were represented by CIA lawyers . Hunt is accused of trying to cover up his actions in the death of Hunt .
 Marita Lorenz's testimony convinced the jury, once and for all, that The Spos/ight had a much more plausible story than Hunt . However, it was the testimony of Lorenz that convinced them that Hunt had a very plausible story .
 The Spotlight vanquishes Hunt's libel action against The Spotlight . The Spotlight won the case against Hunt in a stunning courtroom victory .
 Very little about Hunt's courtroom defeat appeared in the media, particularly the sum and substance of Miss Lorenz's allegations .
 This, of course, was real news in every sense but the media chose to ignore what had taken place in that Miami courtroom . This was a real news story, but media chose not to report it .
 There was yet another newspaper report which—like Marchetti's, suggests that there was a lot more to the story than meets the eye . Interestingly, however, as we shall see, there was another report which suggests there was more to be done with the story .
 In-house CIA memorandum linking Hunt to JFK assassination was the work of Israel's ally at the CIA, James Jesus Angleton, whose own history we examined in Chapter 8 . Angleton was the CIA's own history and whom we have met repeatedly throughout these pages .
 Hunt was not in Dallas on either November 21 or November 22, 1963 . This is not to suggest, though, that Hunt was in Dallas either that day or November 21 . Hunt was the prime suspect in the Dallas shootings .
 Hunt's presence in Dallas was linked in some fashion to the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination conspiracy . Hunt was in Dallas for whatever purpose, and Hunt was there for whatever it was . Hunt is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA in the 1960s .
 Angleton was also responsible for leaking the memo he drafted that linked Hunt to the JFK assassination . This evidence suggests, as we shall see, that it was Angleton . Angleton also leaked the memo linking Hunt to JFK to the assassination .
 A few months ago, in March, there was a meeting at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., the plush home of America's super spooks overlooking the Potomac River . The meeting took place in March .
 The clandestine operation was attended by several high-level clandestine officers and some former top officials of the agency . It was held in a secret meeting with members of the CIA .
 The House Special Committee on Assassinations holds its open hearings, beginning later this month . They were calculated to both fascinate and confuse the public .
 Spy jargon is spy jargon for a favorite and frequently used gimmick of the clandestine professionals . A ""limited hangout" is a popular and often used gimmick by clandestine professionals.
 When their veil of secrecy is shredded, they can no longer rely on a phony cover story to misinform the public . They resort to admitting—sometimes even volunteering—some o f the truth while still managing to withhold the key and damaging facts in the case .
 The public, however, is usually so intrigued by the new information that it never thinks t o pursue the matter further .
 We will probably never find out who masterminded the assassination of JF K—or why . It's unlikely we'll ever find out what happened to JFK .
 There are too many powerful special interests connected with the conspiracy for the truth to come out even now, 15 years after the murder . The truth will not come out until now, even if the truth is still out, the author says .
 CIA and HSCA are going to learn much more about the crime, sources say . The next two months will reveal much more, sources in the CIA say .
 Once again, the good folks of middle America will be hoodwinked by the government and its allies in the establishment news media . But once again, it's not surprising that middle America won't be fooled by government .
 In fact, we are being set up to witness yet another cover-up, albeit a sophisticated one, designed by the CIA . CIA with the assistance of the FBI and the blessing of the Carter administration, the author says .
 CIA manipulated the Church Committee's investigation two years ago . CIA has manipulated and manipulated the investigation into the CIA's involvement in the CIA .
 The committee learned nothing more about the assassinations of foreign leaders, illicit drug programs, or the penetration of the news media than the CIA allowed it to discover, the committee says .
 CIA is out to accomplish through HSCA with regard to JFK's murder . And this is precisely what the CIA is trying to accomplish, he says .
 E Howard Hunt, of Watergate fame, will be exposed by the new investigation . Chief among those to be exposed will be Hunt, the Watergate legend . Hunt is known for his role in Watergate .
 His luck has run out, and the CIA has decided to sacrifice him to protect its clandestine services . The CIA has chosen to protect the lives of its clandestine agents .
 Hunt dragged it publicly into the Nixon mess and for having blackmailed it after he was arrested . The agency is furious with Hunt for having dragged it into Nixon mess . Hunt is accused of blackmailing the agency after his arrest .
 Hunt is an easy target as they say in the spy business . Besides, Hunt is vulnerable—an easy target . Hunt is a vulnerable man .
 The death of his wife, Dorothy, in a mysterious plane crash in Chicago still disturbs many people . There were rumors from informed sources that she was about to leave him and perhaps even turn on him .
 Hunt hated JFK and blamed him for the Bay of Pigs disaster . Hunt also hated JFK for his role in the Bay Of Pigs disaster, and blamed JFK for the disaster .
 The CIA will 'admit' that Hunt was involved in the conspiracy to kill Kennedy . Hunt will testify in the public hearings in the wake of the Kennedy assassination .
 CIA may go so far as to 'admit' that there were three gunmen shooting at Kennedy . CIA may even admit that three gunmen were involved in the Kennedy shooting .
 The FBI, while publicly embracing the Warren Commission's 'one man acting alone' conclusion, has always known that there were three gunmen . The FBI has always privately known that three gunmen were involved in the shooting .
 CIA moved to finger Hunt and tie him to the JFK assassination . Hunt was the prime suspect in the CIA's most recent case . Hunt has been linked to the assassination of JFK JFK .
 HSCA unexpectedly received an internal CIA memorandum a few weeks ago that was found in its old files . The memo was a CIA memorandum that the agency just happened to stumble across in its files .
 Hunt was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, the day President Kennedy was killed . Hunt's presence in Dallas will have to be explained in the future . Hunt is a former FBI agent who worked for the Dallas police department .
 Hunt is going to be hard put to explain this memo, and other things, before the TV cameras at the HSCA hearings . Hunt is likely to face a tough task to explain the memo .
 Hunt's reputation as a strident fanatical anti-communist will count against him . Hunt will be judged to be a 'strident' fanatical opponent of communism .
 Richard Nixon's relationship with the anti-Castro Cubans and his penchant for clandestine dirty tricks will be remembered . Nixon was one of Nixon's plumbers, and he has a long and close relationship with Castro .
 E Howard Hunt will be implicated in the conspiracy and he will not dare to speak out— the CIA will see to that. Hunt will not speak out . Hunt will never speak out again . Hunt is a CIA operative and will be involved in the operation .
 Who else will be identified as having been part of the conspiracy and/or cover-up remains to be seen .
 The fact that some may have had connections with organized crime will prove to be only incidental in the long run, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The fact that . some . may have connections to organized crime is only incidental"
 Those with provable ties to the CIA or FBI will be presented as renegades who acted on their own without approval or knowledge of their superiors . Those with proven ties to FBI or CIA or CIA will be portrayed as renegade .
 Past Presidents will be blamed on past Presidents, either dead or disgraced . As for covering up the deed, that will be attributed to past Presidents . The White House has a history of scandalous behavior .
 Carter will emerge as a truth seeker, and the CIA and FBI will have neatly covered their institutional behinds . Thus, Carter will be revealed as the truth seeker .
 Hunt himself initially admitted that he believed that the story had a basis in truth . Hunt himself admitted that his former colleagues in the CIA did consider framing him for involvement in the JFK assassination .
 The origin of the memorandum linking Hunt to the JFK assassination is interesting as it was presented by Marchetti . Hunt is the prime suspect in the assassination of John Kennedy .
 In other words, one might presume from Marchetti's flippant reference, the CIA had, instead, perhaps concocted the memo . The CIA may have concocted a memo .
 The CIA "just happened to stumble across"" the memo at a time when public suspicion of CIA involvement in JFK assassination was growing . The memo was published at the time of JFK's assassination . The agency "just stumbled across" the memo .
 If Hunt were indeed in Dallas either on the day JFK was killed, or even the day prior, it would look suspicious . Hunt was not in Dallas at the time of JFK's assassination .
 Hunt's long-standing involvement with anti-Castro Cubans through the aegis of his CIA activities—would make him a likely suspect . Hunt's involvement would make him likely suspect were he, in fact, proved to have been in Dallas at the critical time of the assassination
 Linking Hunt to the JFK assassination would be a cover story that the public would easily accept, Marchetti says . Hunt is the prime suspect in the CIA's most recent case of JFK .
 The CIA, as an institution, would absolve itself of any responsibility, having thrown Hunt to the wolves . Hunt was an independent operator out of the CIA's control . Hunt is not a CIA operative, but a CIA insider .
 CIA could then lay claim to having ""solved"" the JFK assassination at last . Indeed, the CIA could now lay claim . claim to have solved the assassination of JFK .
 Hunt's alleged involvement would also draw in a number of other false flags, including anti-Castro Cubans, and ""right wingers"" in general .
 Richard Nixon may have taken some of the heat with many of the public suspecting that perhaps Nixon might have had a hand in arranging the JFK assassination . What's more, considering Hunt's involvement in Watergate (and with Richard Nixon having left the presidency in shame), perhaps Nixon himself may have
 Nixon had been involved in the earliest high-level anti-Castro planning, alongside Hunt and the CIA . Nixon himself had been vanquished in the 1960 presidential campaign by Kennedy .
 That one of Nixon's Watergate burglars was implicated in the JFK assassination would do no service to Nixon's already tarnished image .
 This ""limited hangout"" by the CIA would have, as a consequence, covered up the role of the Israeli-linked Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . The CIA would not have, however, have covered up .
 To delve too deeply into the real origins and linkage of the crime network would have dragged the Israeli connection into the open—if pursued to its logical conclusion .
 Marchetti: The framing of Hunt by the C[A never, in fact, took place . Now, obviously, the scenario presented in Marchett's article never took place, he says .
 Hunt was being pondered as a "fall guy" for the White House, it seems seems . Hunt was reportedly being considered as a 'fall guy' for the CIA .
 The claims made in the second article are somewhat different than those which appeared in Marchetti's article . However, the similarities, in general, are what are most significant . The similarities are what is most significant in the article .
 The article appeared in the Wilmington, Delaware Sunday News Journal on August 20, 1978 .
 CIA memorandum says E Howard Hunt was in Dallas the day President John F Kennedy was murdered . Agency officials plotted to cover up Hunt's presence there, memo says . Hunt was killed in Dallas on the day of Kennedy's assassination .
 Hunt thought he thought he was assigned by higher-ups to arrange the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald . Some CIA sources speculate that Hunt was assigned to arrange Oswald's murder . Hunt was killed by Oswald in November 1945 .
 Sources say Hunt was acting chief of CIA station in Mexico City in weeks prior to Kennedy assassination . Hunt was convicted in the Watergate conspiracy in 1974 .
 Oswald was in Mexico City, and met with two Soviet KGB agents at the Russian Embassy there . Oswald left for Dallas, Texas, after meeting with two KGB agents, the Warren Commission report says .
 The 1966 secret memo, now in the hands of the House assassination committee, places Hunt in Dallas Nov. 1963 . Hunt was killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 4, 1963, in Dallas .
 Richard M Helms, former CIA director, and James J Angleton, former counterintelligence chief, initialed memo . Helms and Angleton initialed the memo according to investigators .
 CIA source: 'The memo is very odd' CIA memo is 'very odd' to put out on paper .
 Memo shows CIA involvement in the Kennedy case could run into the CIA hierarchy, committee source says . Committee source says memo shows CIA involved in Kennedy case may run into CIA hierarchy . Committee member: Memo "Shows CIA involvement"
 Hunt's aipentenee on the scene in Dallas and Mexico City at the time of the murder adds strength to a theory shared by some internal CIA investigators . Hunt was a CIA agent in Dallas, Mexico City and Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald believed to have been working for U.S. intelligence, that he was ordered to infiltrate the KGB . This explains his life in Russia, according to Russian officials .
 Oswald proved to be so unstable that he was ""handled"" by the KGB into becoming a triple agent, and assigned for the Dallas job . The KGB believe he was so unstable he was assigned to the Dallas assassination job .
 Investigators theorize Hunt was in Dallas that day on the orders of a high-level CIA official who in reality was a KGB mole . The same investigators theorize that Hunt was visiting the city that day was on orders from a CIA official .
 Hunt allegedly thought he was t o arrange that Oswald be murdered because he had turned traitor . Hunt allegedly wanted to arrange for Oswald to be murdered . Hunt thought Oswald was a traitor and wanted to kill him .
 CIA sources speculate he was to kill Oswald to prevent him from ever testifying and revealing the Russians had ordered him to kill Kennedy . He was to be killed to prevent Oswald ever testifying against the Russians, they say .
 CIA investigators are most concerned that either Helms or Angleton might be that mole . CIA investigators fear that either Angleton or Helms might be the mole . Helms and Angleton may have been involved in the operation .
 Boris Pash, was ordered to eliminate suspected double agents and lowranking officials . Pash was ordered by the government to eliminate alleged double agents . He was also ordered to be eliminated from Afghanistan .
 Angleton met regularly with a member of the late Allen Dulles, then head of the CIA and Angleton's boss . It was also learned from CIA and committee sources that during the time that the Warren Commission was investigating the Kennedy assassination, Angleton regularly met with the late Dulles
 Dulles, on a weekly basis, briefed Angleton about the direction of the investigation . Dulles was briefed by Angleton on the direction the investigation took .
 Angleton briefed Raymond Rocca, his closest aide and the CIA’s official liaison with the commission . Angleton, according to sources, briefed Rocca in turn . Rocca is the CIA's official liaison to the commission.
 One of the coauthors, Joseph Trento, admitted under oath during the E Howard HuntSpotlight libel trial that he had actually seen the memo in question . Trento admitted to seeing the memo under oath .
 Trento also noted that he knew James Jesus Angleton of the CIA and had utilized him as a source on occasion . Trento said he knew Angleton and that he had used him as an informant .
 Intelligence writer, William R Corson, was actually the source of both the Marchetti and Trento stories . In fact, we know, as a consequence of the Hunt libel case against The Spotlight, that intelligence writer was actually a source of the stories .
 Corson was obviously working as Angleton's ""cutout"" passing on the information that appeared in the two stories . Corson worked as a "cutout" for Angleton, passing on information to Angleton . The two stories appeared in both of the stories .
 The CIA memo was ostensibly drafted in 1966, but the actual date it first appeared is subject to question . The memo itself is subject, of course, to question the actual intent of the memo itself .
 A memo recorded the alleged presence in Dallas of longtime CIA operative, Hunt, at the time of JFK's murder . Hunt is a longtime CIA agent who worked for the CIA in Dallas, Texas . Hunt was an operative at the CIA's Dallas headquarters .
 The evidence suggests that Angleton wanted the story to be leaked to the press . Angleton's memo was put on paper and then subsequently released . It was part of a continuing cover-up of the real origins of the JFK assassination .
 Hunt—a lower level CIA operative —-was being hung out to dry and the real conspirators at the top were washing their hands of the matter . Hunt was being hung to dry . Hunt, a lower-level CIA operative, was hanging to dry. Hunt was hanging out to
 Angleton leaked the memo to the House Assassinations Committee . Joe Trento has subsequently revealed that Angleton did in fact leak the memo . Angleton's memo was leaked by the House of Representatives .
 The Trento article suggests Hunt was in Dallas and that he was there on an assignment involving Lee Harvey Oswald is significant as well as the fact that Hunt was there in Dallas . Hunt was reportedly in Dallas on a assignment involving Oswald .
 There is much more to the story of the role played by the CIA's Mossad ally James J Angleton in the JFK assassination and cover-up . Yet, as we shall see, there is more to be done by Angleton .
 The Trento article accepts, as its basis, the story that Lee Harvey Oswald had been in Mexico City meeting with the Soviets and the Castro Cubans . The article accepts the story as a basis for the story . The CIA and the CIA are at odds with each other .
 Mark Lane demonstrated in Plausible Denial that Oswald had been in Mexico City meeting with the communists was an outright fraud . Lane demonstrated that the story was a concoction of the CIA itself .
 One of the central tenets of the lone assassin theory is Lee Harvey Oswald's presence in Mexico City . Oswald was killed in the September 4, 1918, assassination .
 Senora Silvia Duran, a Mexican employed at the Cuban Embassy, told the CIA that Oswald had been in the embassy . The CIA reported that the proof came from a Mexican employee at the Embassy .
 The CIA told the Warren Commission that Oswald had met with a KGB officer named Valeriy Kostikov . The KGB officer was a specialist in assassination and sabotage, the CIA said . He was in charge of assassinations in the U.S.
 CIA implication was that Oswald had been meeting with the KGB officer to plan JFK's murder . Clearly, the CIA's implication is that Oswald planned the murder of JFK .
 Even the Warren Commission was suspicious and asked for evidence of Oswald's activities in Mexico City . Oswald was a major figure in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Some four months went by before the CIA could provide anything other than the testimony of Miss Duran . The CIA had to wait four months to get the testimony .
 The CIA cabled the Mexican police to re-arrest the young lady, but cautioned the police to make sure that Miss Duran knew nothing about the CIA's involvement . After she was released from custody, she spoke out about her experience .
 In 1977 David Atlee Phillips, former head of the Western Hemisphere for the CIA, admitted publicly that Oswald had not been to the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City .
 Phillips was CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time of Oswald's alleged visit . Phillips, if anybody, should have known inasmuch as he had been CIA chief .
 The magnitude of this CIA misconduct can't be fully understood only when its conspiracy to cover up is traced to its origin . CIA's cover-up can only be traced to the origin of its cover-ups, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For the CIA charade, which evidently included employing an imposter for Oswald, began no later than October 1, 1963 . The CIA used the imposter as a cover-up for Oswald .
 The fate of the world was in the hands of Chief Justice Earl Warren and his fellow commission members . Chief Justice Warren was the only member of the commission to vote on the issue .
 If the public learned that Oswald was a pawn of the Soviets, a nuclear war could break out . The public could learn that Oswald's secret was a secret to the Soviets .
 Mark Lane: Warren was “held hostage""*”” by the CIA's provocative lie . As Mark Lane commented, Warren was "held hostage"
 Mark Lane exposed all of this before the audience . Mark Lane's debate with David Atlee Phillips exposed all this to the audience.
 Angleton himself may have been the mastermind behind the leak of that document as well . And in light of the mysterious appearance of the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter mailed from Mexico City, we can only speculate as to whether Angleton was the mastermind behind that leak .
 Angleton most vociferously accused Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko of being a KGB plant . Angleton was most vocal about the defector's defection from the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The story told by Nosenko disproved Angleton's thesis entirely, which perhaps explains why Angleton dealt so harshly with him . Angleton was angry with the story he had been told about . The story disproved his thesis .
 Trento's story would incorporate a major portion of Angleton's JFK cover story . Angleton memo on Hunt on Hunt is interesting to say the least .
 Sources within the CIA had suggested that Angleton was suspected by some of being a KGB mole, Trento writes . Angleton's ouster from the CIA was due to internal turmoil .
 Angleton was the prime mover behind long-term internal CIA inquiries into possible infiltration of the CIA at the highest levels . This, of course, is part of the great irony of Angleton's complex life in that it was Angleton himself .
 Angleton's fiercest critics have suggested that Angleton was indeed a mole . They say he was a full-fledged co-opted agent for Israel, not for the Soviets .
 Angleton's role in the CIA, working for—Israel and its Mossad, appears to be the real driving force behind his dealings . Angleton worked for Israel and Mossad in the 1960s and '70s, says the author .
 Angleton's interest in Warren Commission investigation only displays part of the picture, Trento Trento says . Angleton has been involved in the Warren Commission probe, but it's not the only reason .
 JFK assassination investigator Bernard Fensterwald detailed how very much interested Angleton was in the JFK assassination . Angleton's interest in JFK assassination was revealed in a book written by the CIA .
 James Angleton was the key CIA official in dealing with matters related to the Kennedy assassination, author says . CIA files on Warren Commission critic Bernard Fensterwald, Jr., contained copies of several high-level internal CIA memos .
 Angleton requested that Hoover run some kind of vaguely defined identification check on Fensterwald and three other Warren Commission critics associated with him . Angleton asked Hoover to run a vaguely defined ID check on those associated .
 In June, 1976, new information became available regarding Angleton's key role in dealing with the Warren Commission investigation . Angleton was a key figure in the investigation into the death of James Angleton .
 Israel's chief advocate at the CIA became that agency's number one in-house handler for JFK assassination investigation . Some would call it a ""cover-up" during the Warren Commission's controversial inquiry into the president's murder .
 Angleton's close friend William Sullivan was detailed as FBI's liaison with the Warren Commission . Sullivan was the FBI's number three man at the FBI . Angleton was a close friend with Sullivan .
 Angleton's interest in the affairs of John F Kennedy was evidently broad-ranging . Angleton was a keen admirer of the assassinated president . Anglemans' interest in Kennedy's affairs was apparently broad-reaching .
 Angleton obtained socialite Mary Pinchot Meyer's identity after she was shot to death in 1964 . Angleton was responsible for the murder of socialite Pinchenot Meyer . She was also responsible for obtaining the socialite's identity .
 Meyer had been a longtime lover of President Kennedy's . Meyer's diary contained much information about her relationship with the president .
 Angleton Mrs. Bradlee's sister, Toni Bradlee, is the wife of Post editor Ben Bradlee . Angleton was Angleton's sister .
 JFK's diary may have contained secrets about CIA-Organized Crime plots to assassinate Castro . JFK may have told Mrs. Castro that JFK told her about plots to kill Castro .
 It is just as easy to speculate that perhaps the diary also contained Mrs. Dorothy's diary . However, of course, it is also possible that perhaps Mrs. Diana's diary was also contained .
 Meyer's written memories of President Kennedy's musings about his most unpleasant relationship with the state of Israel . Meyer's memories of JFK's relationship with Israel .
 Angleton's own relationship with Hunt is also mysterious to say the least . Angleton and Hunt's relationship is also quite mysterious . Hunt is the subject of a new series of mysteries, starring Angleton .
 Angleton signed off on a 1966 memo pinpointing Hunt as having been in Dallas . Angleton seemed to have forgotten by 1972 at the time of the Watergate break-in .
 Angleton denied ever having seen Hunt, following revelations that Hunt had been involved in the Watergate burglary . Angleton had denied he had seen Hunt in June 1972 . Hunt was involved in Watergate burglaries .
 Or, logically, we could also suggest that the memorandum itself was not, in fact, drafted in 1966 as we have been told . The memorandum itself, however, was not drafted as it was supposed to have been .
 It could, instead, have been drafted at a much later time and then given an earlier date . It could have been given the earlier date, and the draft could have gone further further .
 Angleton was knee-deep in the Bay of Pigs invasion planning . Hunt was the chief political liaison to anti-Castro Cuban exiles involved in that operation . Angleton knew Hunt, the political liaison for the Cuban exile .
 Angleton-Hunt relationship suggests there was a lot more to the Angleton and Hunt relationship than meets the eye . Whichever the case, it strongly suggests that there was more to be done with Hunt .
 Israel's friend at the CIA, the enigmatic James Jesus Angleton, was the prime mover behind the memorandum that would have been used to frame Hunt for involvement in the assassination . Hunt was the CIA's friend and CIA colleague, Israel's former colleague .
 Angleton's link to Israel and its Mossad is the key to understanding his unusual behavior that we have outlined . Angleton has a history of unusual behavior, including his links to Mossad . He says the Mossad's links to Israel are key to his unusual actions .
 The Mossad loyalist was the central player in the intrigue between the CIA and the Mossad in the JFK assassination . James J Angleton was the CIA's most senior operative .
 Never-before-published information confirms our contention that Angleton was indeed the primary high-level CIA collaborator in the JFK assassination conspiracy . We will review new information later in this chapter .
 Angleton was the CIA figure involved with the Mossad in the planning of the JFK assassination itself . Angleton may have been involved in key aspects of the subsequent cover-up .
 E Howard Hunt, indeed, may have been Angleton's fall guy—another patsy—from the beginning . Hunt may be the fall guy from the beginning, Angleton may have used Hunt as a cover-up . Hunt was a CIA operative in the early days of the
 He has, instead, chosen to deny any responsibility or involvement . He bitterly contests any suggestions of his connection to the events in Dallas .
 Hunt was bitter toward Kennedy for the president's moves against the CIA . Hunt himself probably felt then (as perhaps he does today) that Kennedy was getting a taste of his own medicine .
 Hunt: Many of the key JFK assassination witnesses have met early—and violent—deaths . Hunt notes that many of JFK's key witnesses have also met early, and violent, deaths . Hunt: "I'm not surprised by the deaths of JFK witnesses," Hunt says .
 Whatever Hunt does know, we will probably never find out—and Hunt intends to keep it that way . Hunt plans to keep out what he really knows, and it's not known .
 Marchetti recently commented on the renewed furor over the JFK assassination . In the February 1, 1992 edition of his newsletter, New American View, he wrote about the Israeli lobby and its power in America .
 Marchetti's earlier controversial article in The Spotlight never suggested Hunt had actually been in Dallas or that he played a part in the assassination . Only that the CIA was considering the option of framing Hunt for the president's murder, he says .
 Hunt was Israel's contact at the CIA, James J Angleton . Angleton was behind the impending operation against Hunt . Hunt was the CIA's contact, and Angleton wanted Hunt killed .
 Marchetti's final comment about Hunt's possible appearance in Dallas is interesting, particularly in light of what we are about to consider . Hunt is expected to appear in Dallas in the NFL's first game on Sunday .
 There is evidence Hunt, in fact, may have been inadvertently caught up in intrigue involving the JFK assassination conspiracy . Hunt may be caught up with the conspiracy beyond his own control . Hunt is a former CIA operative .
 There have been suggestions that perhaps Hunt was not actively involved in a genuine assassination plot against Kennedy . Hunt was in Dallas for another purpose entirely, suggesting that he was in there for a different purpose .
 Gary Wean, formerly of the L.A. Police Department's criminal intelligence squad, worked for the LAPD . Wean is a former member of the Los Angeles police department's criminal intel squad . He worked for LAPD for more than 20 years .
 Wean detailed his own dealings and surveillance of Meyer Lansky's Hollywood henchman, Mickey Cohen . Wean was in Chapter 13 of Wean's book, "Mickey Cohen"
 E Howard Hunt may have come to be implicated in the crime of the century . Wean stumbled upon information shortly after the JFK assassination that sheds new light on Hunt .
 Wean became acquainted with Dallas Sheriff Bill Decker through their mutual friend, Audie Murphy, the ex-war herotumed-film star . Wean was just several weeks after the president's murder that he met Decker .
 It was Decker who ordered his men to investigate the railroad yard behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll from where shots at the president's motorcade appeared to have originated .
 Decker told Wean that he was certain Oswald was innocent of the president's murder . Decker said he is certain that Lee Harvey Oswald was not guilty of the murder .
 Oswald is accused of carrying out the crime with the weapon he was alleged to have used . The three men, all of whom were familiar with firearms, didn't believe Oswald could have used the weapon . Oswald's alleged use of the weapon was a mystery to the men .
 There has been a terrible double cross somewhere somewhere and everybody is scared shitless of everybody else . There is no doubt that there is a double cross in the world, and there is no sign of it .
 CIA man E Howard Hunt was indeed involved with Lee Harvey Oswald, Wean's source says . Hunt was involved with Oswald, but not in planning the president's assassination, the source claims . Hunt is believed to have been involved in the CIA's involvement with Oswald's assassination .
 Wean reports that John told him that Hunt had something else in mind altogether . Wean says Hunt told Wean that Hunt was not interested in the project .
 Hunt was frustrated with Kennedy' administration's moves to achieve an informal detente with Castro . Hunt became frustrated with the Kennedy administration's attempts to achieve a detente . Wean's source says Hunt was becoming frustrated with those efforts .
 Hunt devoted much energy to the drive to undermine Castro and now all of his work was undone . Hunt, of course, had devoted much . Hunt's work was being undone .
 His scheme was to inflame American people against Castro and stirring patriotism to a boiling point not felt since Pearl Harbor . The scheme was intended to stir patriotism to an even higher level since the war of terror .
 President Kennedy's assassination attempt was to be so 'realistic that it's failure would be looked upon as nothing less than a miracle'
 Footprints would lead right to Castro's doorstep . Castro's trail would be a trail that the rankest amateur could not lose . Footprints could lead to Castro .
 Hunt gave Oswald Oswald the rifle two months before the 'fake assassination' Hunt gave the rifle to Oswald two months earlier . Hunt was only two months old when he gave Oswald the gun .
 Hunt told Oswald that President Kennedy himself was not aware of the plan, but high-ranking cabinet officers were in on the deal . He'd remain in hiding until after Cuba was invaded by the U.S. A fake trail to Mexico City ending at the Cuban Embassy .
 Oswald would be free to come back and live as a free man after Castro was dealt with . Oswald would have been able to return to the U.S. after his arrest .
 "By my God, this was no break-down or neglect of performance, or even bad luck," she said . "It was no bad luck. It was no broken-down," she added . "This was no failure, it was a mistake, it's not a mistake
 Shots were actually fired at JFK's motorcade and the president was indeed killed . JFK was actually killed by shots fired at his motorcade .
 John did not believe that the blame lay at the hands of either the Mafia or the anti-Castro Cubans . However, John believes that the Mafia and anti-Cuba Cubans are to blame for the tragedy .
 Whoever shot Kennedy had to know all these minute details to pull it off the way they did . Still, it's clear that whoever shot Kennedy would know all the details .
 John asked that they forget what they had been told . However, it was just several days later that John asked for them to forget what had been said .
 Murphy informed Wean that Hunt and his agents have regrouped from their horrified panic and sprung back into action . According to Wean, Murphy informed him that he had been advised from Dallas that Hunt had "recovery and recovering"
 Murphy says military intelligence, FBI and CIA were all in a panic . Murphy: Military intelligence, the FBI and the CIA were in panic. Murphy says the CIA and military intelligence were in a 'panic'
 In fact they have solemnly determined that national security is at stake . In fact, they've solemnly declared national security at stake, says CNN.com .
 Murphy himself may well be one other on the long list of additional victims of the JFK assassination conspiracy . Murphy may have been one of the victims of JFK assassination . Murphy himself is believed to have been a victim of the conspiracy .
 Wean himself has described how Hunt and Oswald both must have reacted if the story is true . Wean has described Hunt's reaction to the story if it was true . He has also described how Oswald and Hunt would have reacted .
 There is additional documentation about the activities of an individual named ""John"" who was active in the Dallas area and in Miami . Hunt's base of operations with the anti-Castro Cuban exiles was Miami .
 In his book Conspiracy, Anthony Summers describes one John Martino who was known to have connections to the Mafia, Meyer Lansky's lieutenant, Santo Trafficante, Jr., in particular, and the Central Intelligence Agency .
 Martino admitted in 1975 that he had been a CIA contract agent . Martino said he had inside knowledge about the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination . In 1975, he admitted that he was a contract agent for the CIA .
 Martino said the anti-Castro people put Oswald together . Summers quotes Martino as having said, ""The anti- Castro people" Martino is quoted as saying .
 After Martino died in 1978, his widow claimed that ""the Company"" picked up his body to determine the cause of death, which was established to have been a heart attack . Martino and Murphy unquestionably had at least one connection, indirect, that can be documented .
 Murphy was employed for a period during the mid-1960s by New Orleans businessman, D'Alton Smith . Murphy worked for Smith during the 1960s .
 The story told by John Martino, at the very least, has a ring similar to that of Gary Wean . Martino's story is similar to the story of the ""John"" whom Gary Weans met in Dallas .
 Wean revealed to this author the identity of the gentleman named John who told him what had really happened in Dallas .
 Wean deliberately did not reveal John's last name when he wrote his book describing his meeting with John . Wean knew exactly who John was when he met him, although he knew who he was .
 Wean slightly altered his physical description of John in order to protect his identity .
 John died on April 5, 1991, in a bizarre airplane explosion that made national headlines . Audie Murphy died in the same plane explosion as John .
 John Tower was the first Republican in this century to win a Senate seat from Texas . Tower was John Tower who, in 1961, had been the first GOP to win this century's first Senate seat . Tower won the Texas Senate seat in 1961 . Tower died at the hands of Texas Governor
 Tower took many of the secrets of the Iran-Contra scandal to his grave, having headed the commission which critics contend was a CIA whitewash of the events . Tower was a stalwart ally of the CIA throughout his career .
 Many people in the CIA had reasons to cover up their own relationship to Oswald, Russell says . As Russell notes, "Many people had reasons for cover up"
 Gerry Patrick Hemming maintains that some of the exiles who thought they knew the score in 1963 have today become convinced that they were being used . According to Russell, some exiles believe they knew that they had been used in Cuba .
 They were told that their dream of retaking their homeland was dead . Unless something drastic was done, they would not be able to reclaim their homeland . They had been told their dream was dead—unless something drastic is done .
 Cuban refugees in the assassination was not desirable, but it would not come at a high cost, especially if they had worked diligently to build a cover as Castro agents . Implicating a few Cuban refugees is not desirable but not desirable .
 Hemming spoke of at least one faction of anti-Castro Cuban exiles who seemed to be out of the conventional loop . Hemming himself has spoken of a faction of ex-Cuban ex-cuba exiles .
 There was a third force, outside CIA channels, outside our own private operation down in the Keys, that was doing all kinds of shit, and had been all through 1963 . "The third force" was doing "all kinds of shrapnel," he says .
 Most exiles being approached were being set up as patsies themselves . Not until later did we figure out that most of the exiles were set up themselves . "Most of them were actually setting up themselves," says Peter Bergen .
 Israel, its Mossad and Israel's powerful domestic American lobby and its contacts at all levels . Israel's Mossad, its powerful domestic U.S. lobby and Israeli-American lobby and contacts all levels. Israel has a strong presence in the United States.
 There have been several widely-read works relating to the JFK assassination which have indeed suggested that Oswald, at least, was roped into some sort of 'dummy assassination' type of operation . Oswald was led to believe the operation described by Gary Wean's source in Dallas .
 Executive Action, a book loosely based on the film of the same name, presents Oswald as being manipulated in this fashion . Executive Action is a book based on a film about the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 Don DeLillo's novel, Libra, presents Oswald at the center of a 'dummy assassination' attempt which was manipulated by others and went awry . More recently, DeLillo presented Oswald as the person behind a fake assassination attempt .
 A known longtime Mossad asset has direct involvement in the events in Dealey Plaza . However, there is yet one quite extraordinary piece of the puzzle which actually implicates a known Mossad agent with direct involvement .
 Frank Sturgis is a longtime CIA contract operative . He is thought to have played a key role in the assassination of JFK's widow .
 Sturgis had ties to Israel's Mossad, going back fifteen years prior to JFK assassination . What few people know is that he was involved in the assassination of JFK JFK .
 F Peter Model reported that Sturgis was a ""Hagannah mercenary during the first Israeli-Arab war,"" °” and that he also had a girlfriend in Europe in the 1950s who worked for Israeli intelligence .
 Weberman as having said that he assisted his girlfriend as a courier in Europe in a number of her endeavors on behalf of the Mossad . Weberman said to have said he helped his girlfriend in Europe as a . number of European endeavors .
 Sturgis was well known among anti-Castro Cuban exiles that he also worked for the Mossad . George, who knew Sturgi, says he spent time with Castro alongside Castro in the hills of Cuba during the Cuban revolution .
 During the heyday of the CIA's anti-Castro operations in Miami, some 12 to 16 Mossad agents worked out of Miami under the command of Mossad Deputy Director Yehuda S Sipper . Their influence reached throughout Latin America and the Caribbean .
 JFK writers Warren Hinckle and William Turner have said that most of funding came from dispossessed casino owners and was funneled through Norman Roughouse' Rothman . Rothman was the original "mobster middleman" between the CIA and the Lansky syndicate in the Castro
 Russo, however, says Rothman's support for Sturgis came ""from unknown sources"" yet cites Hinckle and Turner as his source . Russo says that Rothman came from unknown sources . Russo cites Hincksle, Turner and Turner for his source of support .
 As we shall see, this speculation may not be far off the mark. Sturgis, BANISTER, FERRIE AND OSWALD are among the stars of the night .
 Newman: Hemming ran anti-Castro Cuban training grounds around Lake Ponchartrain outside New Orleans . Newman: Sturgis was connected with those Interpen operations .
 Clay Shaw of New Orleans tied to the Mossad through his association with the Permindex operation . Banister and Ferrie were also involved in the anti-Castro operations . Shaw, Banister, Ferrie and Shaw were CIA assets .
 Sturgis, Marita Lorenz and the anti-Castro Cubans who traveled to Dallas on November 21, 1963 to meet with E Howard Hunt was actually a Mossad ""false flag"" operation .
 According to Miss Lorenz, Sturgis later admitted that his team in Dallas did actually participate in the assassination . It is conceivable that Hunt himself did not know that the team was going to be involved in an actual assassination attempt or thought they were only involved in a ""dummy""
 Hunt's knowledge—or lack thereof --remains a mystery . Hunt's actual culpability in any assassination conspiracy per se cannot be pinned down . Hunt has been accused of being involved in the assassination of President Obama .
 Hunt does know a lot more about what happened in Dallas than he has admitted . But the circumstances do suggest that Hunt does have a lot of knowledge about the case . Hunt has been charged with murder in the wake of the incident .
 Frank Sturgis did have multiple longtime links to the Mossad for many years prior to the time of the JFK assassination .
 This, in itself, is a major revelation and one that is quite relevant when considering the thesis put forth in Final Judgment . This is one of many things that is relevant to the thesis being put forth by the film .
 A character named Chauncey Holt claims to have been in Dallas and involved in the circumstances surrounding the assassination . Holt is a character who claims to be involved in Dallas's assassination .
 It's always been my theory that whoever was the architect of this thing—and no one will ever know who was behind it, will never know who is behind it . No one knows who was manipulating all these people, he says .
 Michael Milan, whose book The Squad outlines his role in working as part of a secret U.S. government team collaborating with the Lansky Syndicate . Milan says that there were at least several people operating in Dallas who believed that they were not involved in a conspiracy to kill John F Kennedy
 In his biography of Connally, James Reston, Jr. suggests that Oswald had been recruited by Jack Ruby as part of an organized crime plan to kill Connally rather than Kennedy . Reston: Oswald recruited by Ruby was part of organized crime plot .
 The unusual contention that Connally was the target and Kennedy was the unintended victim has some very interesting support . Connally and Kennedy were not the target of the assassination, but they were the unintended victims .
 Former Mossad operative Victor Ostrovsky writes in his book By Way of Deception that part of his Mossad training included an in-depth review of the JFK assassination .
 A simulation exercise of the presidential cavalcade was carried out to test their theory . They did a simulation exercise to see if expert marksmen could hit a moving target from a distance of 88 yards .
 Ostrovsky: Mossad had every film taken of the Dallas assassination . The Mossad also had aerial photographs of the area, the topography, aerial photographs .
 That Mossad would go to the length of calculating an extensive cover story is interesting in itself, perhaps further evidence that the Mossad had a very particular interest in JFK assassination .
 There were clearly many forces at work in Dealey Plaza, perhaps beyond the comprehension of any one conspirator . Oswald, Ruby or even Hunt or Sturgis or any of the others involved .
 Some of the conspirators may have been led to believe this was a Mafia hit on Connally and that it, in fact, turned out to be a hit on Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Dallas .
 The Mossad story that it was a botched operation aimed at Connally and resulting in the accidental killing of Kennedy sounds like nothing less than -- to borrow a phrase from Ostrovsky—""pure, unadulterated hokum"" from the Mossad itself .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was being made to appear as though he were a pro-Castro/pro-Soviet agitator through the Mexico City Scenario and of his manipulation in New Orleans by the Clay Shaw-Guy Banister apparatus . Oswald was also manipulated by the CIA and Mossad
 One can only imagine the surprise of a hidden gunman firing at John Connally when he realized that another gunman was firing at him . John F Kennedy was killed by a sniper in 1963 .
 Evidence suggests that the JFK assassination conspiracy was multi-leveled and ranging out in a variety of directions . However, all of the evidence we have seen suggests that this was not the only case of the assassination .
 If so, we cannot help but be reminded of Mossad's famous use of false flags in its criminal endeavors . The Mossad is known for its use of fake flags in criminal endeavors.
 Scott Thompson has gone so far as to charge that the provocation against Castro was being carried out with the full knowledge of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy . Scott Thompson, who believes in the ""dummy assassination"" theory, has gone even further .
 Thompson alleges that E Howard Hunt was, in fact, in charge of coordinating the fraudulent assassination attempt . Thompson alleges Hunt was in fact in fact to have organized the fraudulent attempt .
 Former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow has lent credence to the 'dummy assassination attempt’ scenario . Morrow has been a contract agent for the CIA for more than 20 years .
 CIA operatives, working with Cuban exiles, were working on a fake assassination attempt against Kennedy, according to Morrow . Morrow has reported that he had been told that CIA operatives were working with ex-Cuban exiles on the assassination attempt .
 While the book contains much intriguing information, there is a very good possibility that the book is classic CIA-Mossad disinformation . The book contains a lot of intriguing information .
 Russo claims that shortly after the JFK assassination, Robert Kennedy launched a private inquiry into his brother's murder . The inquiry was conducted by a British intelligence asset who was a long-time Kennedy family friend . Russo claims the British investigator hired two former French operatives to conduct the investigation .
 Russo says that one was Andre Ducret, former head of the French intelligence agency, and the other was known only as ""Philippe,"" but believed to be Philippe deVosjoli . Russo says one of the two was known as "Philippe" and that the other
 The French investigators then spent several years conducting the investigation . RFK's report alleged that Texas oil barons in league with Lyndon Johnson had been behind the assassination .
 RFK was killed shortly after receiving the report . The British agent who sponsored the investigation asked the surviving brother, Sen. RFK, to ask him to investigate .
 Report was turned over to Herve LaMarre who fashioned the book into Farewell America . Kennedy said his family was not interested, according to Russo .
 While the book may have contained grains of truth, there is good reason to believe that it was largely CIA-Mossad disinformation .
 Philippe deVosjoli had a 'long friendship special relationship' with CIA loyalist James J Angleton ©° to the point that he refused French orders to spy on the United States, but instead apparently helped Angleton conduct espionage against France .
 Farewell America steered finger of blame away from both the CIA and the Mossad, and suppressed the little-known ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination that has been long discussed . If dissected as we shall now do here, points directly to not only Angleton at the CIA
 It's an amazing story that has never been told before, but which we will outline here for the first time ever . We will outline it here for first time in an effort to tell the world's first story .
 Even the CIA contract the services of other members of the intelligence community to wash dirty linens . The CIA contracts with other intelligence officials to wash clothes for them .
 The executioners are not interested in the aftermath of their mission, they say . And the executioners don't want to see what happens after their mission .
 Neuville: "There are no coincidences in the suspicion business—just cover-ups" According to the French minister, there are "no coincidences" in the case .
 Angleton had a history of fingering alleged Soviet infiltrators in other nations' intelligence services . Angleton was often prodded by his Mossad allies, often prodding by Mossad .
 Following World War II Angleton served as American intelligence liaison with the SDECE . Angleton maintained close friendships with a number of French intelligence officials .
 Frenchmen shared Angleton's devotion to Israel . Angleton was a Frenchman who shared his devotion to the state of Israel .
 One SDECE officer, Leonard Houneau, who was cleared of the slander that he was a Soviet mole, later said, ""The whole story was invented," he said .
 In Chapter 12 we noted that it was Souetre who was picked up in Dallas on November 22, 1963 and expelled from the United States . He was also CIA man E Howard Hunt's OAS liaison . In Chapter 13, he was also the CIA man who was also Hunt's
 Souetre maintained ties with Meyer Lansky's allies in the Corsican Mafia . He maintained ties to Lansky allies in Corsican mafia .
 All of this, certainly, suggests a very clear pattern which spells more than coincidence . All of the latest developments in the world's most famous unsolved mystery mystery .
 As we saw in Chapter 12, there is some question as to whether the individual picked up in Dallas was Souetre or someone using his name . The question is whether the person picked up is Souete or someone who used his name is Souete .
 Souetre has suggested that it was another Frenchman, one Michael Mertz, who may have been the guilty party who may be actually in Dallas .
 Mertz was a former French SDECE officer who had infiltrated the anti-DeGaulle OAS and foiled a plot against DeGaule's life . The allegation is most provocative is that he was an ex-SDECE agent who infiltrated anti-G
 Mertz was said to be Paris connection man for the Lansky-Trafficante-Corsican Mafia network . He was also engaged in the illegal drug racket, said to have been involved in the drug racket .
 Former CIA insider Robert Morrow contends it was Mertz who was on one of the assassination teams that struck down John F Kennedy in Dallas in Dallas . Morrow was enmeshed in much of the intrigue surrounding the activities of the Clay Shaw-Guy Banister operation .
 The SDECE was as much apparently out of DeGaulle's actual hands-on control as the CIA was out of JFK's control . The CIA was also out of control as was the SDECe .
 At least one assassination attempt against DeGaulle by the Permindex-and Israeli-backed OAS came as a direct result of ""inside"" information .
 Intelligence historian Richard Deacon has noted that in France, during this difficult period, there was a good deal of unofficial support for Israel, notably in the ""™ pointing further toward the role of SDECE officers in arranging the assassination of John F Kennedy on behalf of its allies in the
 The SDECE had the reputation internationally of being the rogue elephant of the world's intelligence circus . According to Stewart Steven, an authority on the history of the Mossad, it was "brilliant in many respects"
 Few services had so many departmental heads constantly at loggerheads with one another . The CIA regarded it as being ‘leaky as a sieve,’ and probably with some justification .
 The SDECE proved itself extremely useful in the tricky world in which the Mossad was obliged to operate . The Mossad had proved itself useful because its officers did not feel obliged to necessarily receive political authority for its operations .
 This gave the service a freebooting quality very much like the Israelis themselves but without Israeli discipline and order . The service was like Israel's own but without any Israeli discipline or order .
 DeGaulle had reached a truce with the OAS in early 1963 and had helped arrange for its members to set up operations elsewhere . The OAS had also agreed to move its operations elsewhere in 1963 .
 The likelihood that an Israeli-linked faction of DeGaulle's intelligence service, the SDECE, might have recruited an assassin—particularly a Corsican— for the hit against JFK is very strong . The likelihood is that an Israel-linked group recruited the assassin, particularly a
 Corsicans had been professional thugs from the underworld before being enlisted by DeGaulle . Corsicans enlisted the aid of their former underworld friends to do a dirty job for the government .
 Frederick Forsyth knew whereof he spoke when he described a fictional OAS-sponsored ""Jackal"" seeking to destroy DeGaulle . So it seems Forsyth was right when he spoke .
 There is even more evidence suggesting that the so-called ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination is indeed, instead, the Israeli connection reaching all the way to Dallas . However, there is also more evidence that the French connection to the assassination is not French .
 In 1965 a bizarre crime exposed the close ties between certain elements in DeGaulle's intelligence agency, the Israeli Mossad and the French Corsican Mafia underworld . The crime took place in France in 1965 and exposed the ties between the two sides .
 The same crime implicated individuals whose names have been linked with the JFK assassination as a consequence of subsequent revelations . And, incredibly enough, this same crime also implicated individuals .
 Mehdi BenBarka was a Moroccan political figure who was a critic of the ruling regime in his native country . The crime in question was the murder of one of the Moroccan political figures .
 According to historian Stewart Steven, "As always ... one arm of the SDECE didn't know what the other was doing"
 He immediately ordered that the secret service's house be put in order . President Obama ordered that it be 'put in order'
 David has claimed knowledge of a French team of assassins being involved in the JFK murder . David claims to have knowledge of the French assassins involved in JFK's murder .
 Jack Ruby (who killed Lee Harvey Oswald) mentioned to his lawyers his connection with Davis . Ruby was Jack Ruby, who killed Oswald, who mentioned to lawyers that Davis had a connection with him .
 Charles DeGaulle would have had an interest in getting to the bottom of the JFK assassination . There were multiple French connections to key players in the conspiracy, inasmuch as there were multiple connections to the conspiracy .
 DeGaulle clearly discovered that elements of French intelligence and/or agents of his sworn enemies in the OAS had been brought into the JFK assassination conspiracy by the Mossad . The Mossad had been involved in the assassination of JFK JFK .
 One or more of the French assassins who played a role in the events in Dallas were recruited by the Mossad through its allies within DeGaulle's intelligence service . Mossad's allies within the intelligence service are believed to have recruited the assassins .
 Those in the ClA-connected New Orleans faction of the assassination conspiracy framed Lee Harvey Oswald as a pro-Castro agitator . The OAS network and the Mossad's Permindex operation conspired against DeGaulle, he says .
 James J Angleton engaged in intrigue that clearly points to his own involvement in the conspiracy and the subsequent cover-up . Mossad's devoted friend and longtime associate of top SDECE officials, James J. Angleton, engaged in . The Mossad is a devoted friend of top
 Hunt's apparent visit to Dallas just prior to the assassination put him squarely in the middle of the intrigue . Hunt met with longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis just before the assassination . Hunt was apparently at Angleton's orders at the time of the murder .
 The later attempt to publicly link Hunt to the assassination reaches directly back to Angleton . Angleton was responsible for the assassination of George Kennedy III . Hunt was a CIA operative in the late 1960s .
 The origin of the conspiracy to kill the American president was not, in fact, French . These details explain the socalled ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination .
 There were, very clearly, many, many people involved in the periphery of the assassination conspiracy . Whether as active conspirators or not, there were people involved, says CNN's John Sutter .
 French President DeGaulle had a direct interest in finding out how his own intelligence service and/or individuals connected thereto had been manipulated by the Mossad . The Mossad had an interest in covering up the Israeli intelligence agency .
 CIA man James J Angleton's own machinations created havoc in French intelligence forcing the French president to take action . The Mossad's own purported discovery of KGB ""moles" in the SDECE's ranks had created havoc . The CIA man Angleton was a CIA man .
 This, of course, recalls DeGaulle's decision during the same time frame— as noted previously— to expel the Mossad from France .
 A large part of DeGaulle's move against Angleton'’s CIA and Mossad allies arose from his discovery that his own intelligence service had been compromised by the involvement of SDECE officer Georges deLannurien in helping facilitate the JFK assassination .
 The Permindex connection (through Clay Shaw in New Orleans) did indeed tie together not only the CIA and the Lansky Syndicate and the Mossad . The French connection to the assassination conspiracy also ties together the CIA, Lansky syndicate and Mossad.
 Garrison perceived Permindex as only an indication of Shaw's intelligence connections and nothing more . Garrison perceived Shaw's connections to the U.S. intelligence community as a matter of concern .
 "French connection" seems to have gone right by Garrison and perhaps led in part to his failure to convict Shaw in the JFK conspiracy . Unfortunately, at least at first, the ""French connection"" (which is actually the Israeli connection) seems to be gone right .
 There is an Israeli connection to evidence linking OAS elements to a plot against President Kennedy . In fact, there is also a connection to Israel .
 Russell says Dinkin discovered OAS foreknowledge of an assassination plot against President Kennedy supposed to take place in Texas . Russell says that (as known by the CIA and the Warren Commission in 1964) Russell says he discovered foreknowledge .
 By taking his story to the Israelis, Dinkin was alerting the OAS that he had stumbled upon their connections to the impending assassination of the president . Thus, by taking his case to Israel, the Israelis were alerting them of their connections .
 There clearly is much more to the so-called ""French"" connection to the assassination of President Kennedy than meets the eye . The 'French' connection to President Kennedy's assassination is a mystery .
 Final Judgment: We have outlined the parameters of the French connection as it has never been done . Here in Final Judgement, however, we have outlined a French connection .
 Final Judgment: We have come closer to the truth than ever before . Pinning down the truth of what happened in Dealey Plaza will never be possible .
 The former French intelligence officer's information meshes with other facts assembled in this chapter and through the pages of this volume . James J Angleton's CIA, and with pro-Israel forces in the SDECE, are the subject of this chapter .
 The role of Israel was the unsuspected but ever-present ""missing link"" in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Israel was an "unsung" but ever present "missing link" in the assassination plot .
 Let us now move forward to examine the manner in which the media maneuvered and/or was manipulated by the CIA and the Mossad in covering up the truth about the murder .
 His death was indeed a critical part of the cover-up of his brother's assassination in Dallas, Texas . His brother was assassinated in Dallas . He was killed in the Dallas assassination .
 The influence of Israel and its lobby over the American media would have made it difficult for anyone who even suspected that Israel had a hand in the JFK assassination to get the word out . Israel's influence over the U.S. media made it hard for anyone suspected Israel of involvement .
 The media promoted the conclusions of the Warren Commission and savaged its critics . The media has been savaged by critics of its conclusions .
 The reporting of Drew Pearson and the sensational Oliver Stone film JFK are classic case studies of how Israeli-linked media sources have manipulated public perception of the murder of President Kennedy .
 In Chapter 5, in particular, very little was in fact known about JFK's secret war with Israel and the major Middle East foreign policy turn-about that came after JFK's assassination .
 Even the harshest critics of the Warren Commission had no reason to suspect that there might be an Israeli connection to JFK's murder . The Warren Commission was not "investigated" and "covered up"
 The final conclusions of the Warren Commission hardly satisfied anybody, except for the friends of Israel and the CIA in the Establishment media . The Establishment media gave the Report's conclusions wholehearted support .
 The media almost unanimously sided with the Warren Report, despite all of the evidence which proved the report a fraud . Without question, this is significant .
 New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison's 1967-1969 inquiry into the JFK murder led to his prosecution of Crescent City businessman Clay Shaw . Garrison and Shaw were involved in the investigation into the murder of JFK in New Orleans . The media went into a frenzy with coverage of Garrison's investigation into Shaw
 At the time Garrison began pursuing Shaw, the facts that we now know today about Shaw's connections with the Lansky-Mossad-CIA-linked Permindex operation based in Rome, were not so obvious .
 It wasn't until 1975 that former CIA official Victor Marchetti acknowledged publicly that Shaw had ties to the CIA . The CIA was very interested in assisting Shaw during the period of his prosecution in New Orleans .
 If Garrison had had proof at the time of Shaw's trial, the verdict may have been different . Garrison: "If Jim Garrison had . had had that proof, it may have . been different"
 There is yet additional evidence of attempts by the CIA to undermine Garrison's investigation . The CIA has been involved in the investigation into the CIA .
 This evidence directly implicates the CIA's director of counterintelligence, James J Angleton . Angleton's own unique ties to the Mossad and his central role in the JFK conspiracy cover-up we examined in Chapter 8, Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 .
 Author Anthony Summers, in his recently-released biography of former FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, described how the alleged compromising photos of Hoover engaged in homosexual activities managed to surface in relation to the Garrison investigation . Hoover was the FBI Director of the Department of Investigation .
 Summers was told by former CIA contract operative Gordon Novel that he was shown such photos by James J Angleton . Summers says Angleton was shown the photos by Gordon Novel .
 Novel, who operated out of New Orleans, had popped up in Jim Garrison's investigation as a possible suspect . Novel had filed a lawsuit against Garrison after he was found to be a suspect .
 Novel said he was being urged to pursue his lawsuit against the New Orleans district attorney by his associates in the CIA . Novel said Hoover was opposed to the lawsuit, but that Hoover was opposing it .
 Angleton contacted Novel, displayed the compromising photos, and suggested that Novel discreetly advise Hoover that he had seen the photos . Novel says he did, much to the FBI director's dismay .
 Garrison thought he was doing his patriotic duty when he launched his investigation of Shaw . Garrison: "I thought I was doing my patriotic duty. When I launched my investigation, I thought I would be doing my duty"
 He was trying to prosecute a man he believed was connected to the JFK assassination conspiracy . He believed the man was involved in the conspiracy .
 The New Orleans district attorney was greeted with a hurricane onslaught by the media . A media outlet with close ties to elements in the pro-Israel lobby is one of the media outlets .
 The evidence indicates that pro-Israel propagandists were at work, orchestrating the attack on Garrison Garrison . The 'Stern Gang' was behind the attack, and the evidence indicates, in fact, that the fine hand was at work . The group is known for its anti-
 WDSU was owned by Edgar Stern, of the powerful New Orleans Stern family . Stern family was major contributors to American Jewish Committee, American Jewish Appeal and Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith .
 Clay Shaw was a close friend of Edgar Stern's wife, Edith Stern, whose support for Shaw in the face of his prosecution was prominently noted in James Kirkwood's account of the Shaw trial . i As we shall see, the ADL functions as a foreign intelligence operation for Israel
 ADL uses its influence to play a major role in shaping American media news coverage . More importantly, the ADL has influence to influence the American media .
 This was critical to covering up the truth about the JFK assassination, says John Avlon . Avlon: JFK's assassination was a cover-up for the truth .
 WDSU's malicious attack on Garrison, however, was a much bigger project than it might have appeared . Garrison was a victim of the station's "malicious" attack .
 NBC's coordinator for the project was a former Justice Department official, Walter Sheridan, who had also previously worked for the National Security Agency . NBC's director of the project is also a former NSA official .
 Sheridan: Edgar Stern was a courageous, liberal man who shared our views concerning Garrison and his probe . Sheridan: Stern was "courageous, liberal" and "shared our views" of Garrison . Stern died at the age of 92 .
 WDSU was the only voice in the Louisiana wilderness speaking out against what Garrison was doing . However, how courageous and liberal the Stern family may have been is subject to question, in light of their attack on Garrison .
 ADL provided $36,500 of its own funds toward an FBI operation to entrap Ku Klux Klansman Tommy Tarrants and a young woman named Kathy Ainsworth . In 1968, the ADL's New Orleans office provided the funds for the operation .
 Walter Sheridan's involvement in the Garrison case went far beyond being a reporter who was simply out to do a hatchet job . The Garrison case was one of the most notorious unsolved mysteries in American history .
 Sheridan was actually trying to sabotage Garrison's investigation by interfering in the actual course of the inquiry . Sheridan was not trying to derail Garrison's inquiry, but to sabotage it, he says .
 Sheridan and his associates were "going far beyond word games," Garrison said . Sheridan's associates were going "to go far beyond words games" Garrison: Sheridan's actions were not just words .
 They were engaged in an organized effort to derail an official investigation of a major city's district attorney's office . Prosecutors say they were trying to derail the investigation of the office .
 Oswald appeared outside Clay Shaw's International Trade Mart distributing pro-Castro leaflets . Oswald and a colleague appeared on August 16, 1963 . Oswald was a member of the Cuban Revolution Party .
 WDSU promoted Oswald's public image as a pro-communist agitator prior to the assassination of President Kennedy . This, however, was not the end of their involvement in promoting Oswald's image .
 Oswald was interviewed by WDSU Radio's William Stuckey on August 17 . Oswald proclaimed his leftist views in a radio interview . Oswald is a member of the Democratic Party of New York City . Oswald was arrested in the wake of the incident .
 WDSU's Stuckey again contacted Oswald and arranged for Oswald to appear in a debate with an anti-Castro activist over his radio station . Oswald appeared on August 19 for a debate over radio station in New Orleans .
 WDSU turned a copy of the debate transcript over to the FBI office in New Orleans . The next day, the FBI turned the transcript over . The transcript was released to the New Orleans FBI .
 ADL-connected WDSU TV and radio had provided "one lone nut" with more free publicity than any other leftist in the city of New Orleans could have dreamed about . Lee Harvey Oswald's "free publicity" was "more free publicity" than any single leftist in New Orleans
 WDSU played a part in portraying Oswald, now to a national television audience, as a proCastro agitator . Immediately after Oswald was arrested in Dallas on November 22, it was—once again—WDSU .
 WDSU cameraman who filmed Oswald's demonstration, Johann Rush, emerged some thirty years later as an ""expert"" whose ""enhancement"" of the Zapruder film of the JFK assassination was hailed as proof that Oswald acted alone . Rush was hailed in 1993 as an
 Rush collaborated with author Gerald Posner in the publication of a volume entitled Case Closed . Case Closed was widely hailed in the Establishment media as the ultimate refutation of JFK assassination conspiracy theorists .
 Posner-Rush book is rife with errors, contradictions, misstatements and distortions of fact . United States News & World Report devoted an extended special issue promoting the book in its cover story .
 The book is quite disingenuous in its thesis that while the Warren Commission was wrong on some points, its basic thesis was correct . "The Warren Commission" was wrong, but it was correct, the author says .
 The authors ignore critical evidence of CIA and other intelligence connections to Oswald and Ruby . They suggest virtually all of the many witnesses who provided information pointing toward a conspiracy were either mentally unstable or outright liars or both .
 Johann Rush is a veteran of WDSU's conspiracy to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as a pro-Castro agitator . Rush has once again returned to the center of the media's cover-up of what really happened in Dallas, 1963 .
 Nathan Lewin was one of the Israeli lobby's most prominent legmen in Washington . This was the firm of a former Justice Department colleague of Sheridan's . Sheridan's former colleague, a former colleague of the Justice Dept. of Justice, was involved in the firm . Lewin's firm
 Sheridan laid the groundwork for the establishment of a security firm that provided exclusive services to the Caribbean resort empire . Resorts International is generally perceived as a joint intelligence operation linking the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate .
 Sheridan has been involved in the effort to destroy Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw and the JFK assassination conspiracy . This is not surprising, of course, in light of all that we have seen regarding Sheridan and the forces behind the effort .
 In any case, forces with close ties to the Israeli lobby were among those leading the assault on Garrison. Garrison.
 His integrity was questioned and his methods of inquiry were called into judgment . His integrity has been questioned and he has been accused of corruption .
 Anyone who questioned the "official" word on the JFK assassination has been questioned . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 The CIA even went to the trouble of preparing a review of Mark Lane's best-selling Rush to Judgment that was distributed to CIA friends and assets in the media . This was all part and parcel of the campaign to discredit those who were on the brink of uncovering the real truth about
 In his memoirs, Garrison notes how he and his fellow investigators in the New Orleans District Attorneys office discovered evidence that their work was being sabotaged from within . Garrison notes that time and again, he and fellow investigators discovered evidence .
 Government infiltrators and others were not only spying on Garrison's activities, but they were attempting to undermine the whole investigation . Garrison says the government was trying to undermine his efforts . Garrison: "Government infiltrators" were trying to sabotage the investigation .
 Garrison's dismay, even some seemingly dedicated volunteers who had offered to help investigators turned out to be saboteurs . Garrison: "Even some of the people who had volunteered to help us find out what was wrong"
 Tom Bethell, a young Englishman who later ""broke"" with Garrison, was one of Garrison's critics . Bethell later became a source for Garrison critics, and became one of his critics .
 Perhaps we now know what Bethell's reward was, now that time has passed . Bethell was the last man to be found alive in the early 1900s .
 William F Buckley Jr. later hired on young Bethell as an editor for his National Review magazine . Former CIA man William F. Buckley, Jr. touted Bethell's talents as one of the great young conservative writers of the era .
 Thanks to Buckley's patronage, Bethell's career as a journalist moved along quite nicely . Bethell: "I'm glad to have had the opportunity to do so much for me"
 There is other evidence of apparent CIA meddling in the Garrison investigation . There is also evidence that the CIA was involved in the investigation .
 Garrison critic, James Kirkwood, inadvertently let the cat out of the bag regarding an intelligence community-linked effort to sandbag Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw . Kirkwood's book American Grotesque, published in 1968, revealed the effort .
 Kirkwood published a transcript of a taped interview he conducted with James Phelan . Kirkwood said he had been trying to disprove Garrison's case against Shaw . He published the transcript of the interview .
 Phelan told Kirkwood Garrison provided him key documents, in confidence, which he was supposed to return the next morning . Garrison provided the key documents in confidence which he returned the next day . Garrison said he would return the documents the following day .
 "I got up early and made a call to Bob Mayhew at the Desert Inn and told him I needed a Xerox and needed it fast," he says . "So I got up . early, I made a phone call and called Bob to ask him to get the Xerox
 I had to have two documents Xeroxed and I did not want anyone else reading them or knowing they were being copied . "I had to be careful not to have anyone else read them"
 "I returned the originals to Garrison and made no comment about the thing. They Xeroxed the copies for me and I returned them to Garrison," he said . Garrison was happy to have the copies of the originals returned .
 When Kirkwood first revealed the Phelan-Maheu machinations, Maheu's behind-the-scenes activities were still a deep, dark secret . Kirkwood: Maheue's behind the scenes were still still a dark secret.
 In Chapter 11 we examined Maheu's involvement with the CIA and such organized crime figures as Johnny Rosselli, Sam Giancana and Meyer Lansky lieutenant Santo Trafficante .
 Desert Inn was established by Meyer Lansky's trusted associate, Morris Dalitz, whose activities and strange connections we examined in Chapter 10 and Chapter 15 . Desert Inn (by this time the property of billionaire Howard Hughes) was initially established by Howard Hughes . It will also be recalled that Desert
 CIA did have its collaborators in key positions to undermine the Garrison investigation, says CNN's John Sutter . Garrison says the CIA was behind the effort to undermine Garrison's investigation . Garrison: "It was that the CIA did ... have collaborators" Garrison says Garrison was a CIA operative .
 Some of Garrison's more creative foes in the media cleverly came up with a new way to discredit the New Orleans prosecutor . Garrison's critics say he's not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Garrison was, in fact, trying to cover up the JFK murder, Garrison's critics say . Garrison is accused of covering up the murder of JFK . Garrison's defense says he was trying to find the truth .
 Garrison—so they said—was a willing tool of Mafia chieftain Carlos Marcello . Garrison was a willing member of the Mafia, according to reports . Garrison is believed to have worked for the Mafia for decades . Garrison says he was willing to work for the mafia .
 Garrison critics say the D.A. was trying to take the heat of suspicion off Carlos Marcello . They say he pointed his finger at the CIA . Critics say he was pointing his finger in the direction of the CIA, the Garrison critics claimed .
 Garrison was trying to cover up any Marcello connections to the assassination conspiracy, he was going about it in the wrong way . Garrison was wrong to try to hide any connection to Marcella, he says, in the way .
 Billings, who later served as a top advisor to the House Assassinations Committee, pointed the finger of blame for the JFK assassination on ""The Mafia,"—and Marcello in particular . Billings was Billings' advisor .
 Ferrie himself was standing alongside Marcello in a federal courtroom in New Orleans at the very moment JFK was shot . Ferrie was in the courtroom at the time of JFK's assassination .
 Garrison was practically walking right into Marcello's office itself . By first inquiring into Ferrie's activities, Garrison walked right into his office .
 This fact alone nullifies the creative ""Mafia cover-up"" critique of Garrison that continues to hang over Garrison's memory to this day . Garrison's murder conviction for his role in the Mafia remains a mystery .
 Those who push the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" ignore this fact . Yet, those pushing the theory ignore the fact that JFK was assassinated .
 Evidently the people of New Orleans didn't buy the Establishment's heavy-handed assault on Garrison Garrison . Garrison was a member of the New Orleans City Council .
 Garrison's fiercest at-home critics were the newspapers of New Orleans . This is all the more remarkable in that it was the very newspapers of the New Orleans area .
 Clay Shaw sat on the board of Permindex, the shadowy Israeli Mossad-linked entity that played so central a role in the murder of the American president . Garrison was Garrison who linked Clay Shaw to the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 How much Shaw knew about the impending murder of the president will never be known . Shaw was tied to the core of the conspiracy, but there is no question that Shaw knew more .
 No wonder then that the full force of the federal government came down on Garrison's head . Garrison was a hero of the U.S. government .
 He was hit with a wholly-concocted indictment on bribery charges but subsequently—and rightly, was acquitted . He was acquitted of bribery charges .
 The key witness against Garrison admitted in a press interview that the charges against Garrison were a Justice Department concoction . Garrison's former friend, Pershing Gervais, said he was a friend of Garrison's .
 Garrison beat that charge, but his Establishment critics continue to allege that the jurors in that case may have been bribed to bring in a not guilty verdict . Garrison won't be charged, but critics say jurors in the previous case were bribed . Garrison beat the charge .
 The image of John F Kennedy has been repeatedly savaged in the years following the assassination . What's more, thanks to the media, the image of the JFK image has also been savaged .
 Kennedy's reputed sex life became the subject matter not just the tabloids, but of the Establishment press itself .
 His affair with Marilyn Monroe became the subject of conversation at every dinner table . He was married to Marilyn Monroe . He had an affair with her that led to his death .
 The media eagerly pounced on the Massachusetts senator's every mistake and hyped several malicious books attacking him . Ted Kennedy was assassinated 30 years ago on the 30th anniversary of the JFK assassination .
 E Howard Hunt-Spotlight newspaper libel trial in Miami in 1985 . Media silent about the revelations that came forth in the trial . Media was strangely silent on the revelations .
 It was then, as we saw in Chapter 16, that the jury concluded that the CIA had indeed played a part in John F Kennedy's assassination . The jury concluded the CIA played a role in the assassination .
 The CIA's friends at The Washington Post had barely a word to say about Hunt's stunning loss during the trial . Hunt's loss was a stunning loss for the CIA .
 The CIA has had a major role in subverting the First Amendment and influencing the American media . That is now a widely accepted truth . The CIA and the media have been involved in subverted First Amendment subverting First Amendment .
 Through the U.S. Information Agency as a “cut-out,’ the CIA subsidized major publishers to produce books . Some of the books were then sold in the United States bearing no government imprint to warn the unsuspecting .
 By the mid-sixties, more than $1 million had been spent by the government on its 'book development' program .
 It is a subject that deserves far more consideration than we can provide in these pages . The subject is a matter of concern for the future of the world .
 Four volumes give the reader an in-depth look at the way Israel and its lobby in this country have had such a powerful impact on the way news relating to Israel is reported .
 Documents from ADL files prove the role of the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in seeking to silence critics of Israel . They include threats, economic boycott and other unsavory and illegal measures contrary to American tradition .
 It is the activity of the ADL, in particular, which seems to have had a recurring role in the JFK assassination conspiracy cover-up by the media . The ADL's activity is a recurring theme in the coverage of the assassination .
 ADL has consistently had a major impact on the America media over the years . The ADL have consistently had an impact on America's media .
 The ADL's fine hand is visible in the media's coverage of the JFK assassination, the Warren Commission investigation, and the subsequent critiques of the commission .
 ADL, as a voice for Israel, would have an interest in stifling any suggestion that Israel and its allies at the CIA had a hand in the JFK assassination . That the ADL would have a interest is disputed, but it's not disputed .
 ADL has adopted as its mission the defense of Israel and the defamation of its critics—both real and perceived . After all, the ADL is committed to defending Israel and defaming its critics .
 The ADL has very close ties to the remnants of the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . The group has throughout its history, including ties to Lansky .
 $5,500,000 of the ADL's total budget of $6,183,000 came from contributions from the liquor industry, a 1968 study says .
 The liquor industry was a virtual fiefdom of powerful Jewish families known for their devotion to Israel . Most notably the family of ex-bootlegger Samuel Bronfman, who was known for his love of Israel .
 ADL's activities in the context of the media's assault on those who ponder the possibility of a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination .
 The ADL has connections above and beyond the organized crime interests that stood to benefit from the JFK assassination . However, as we shall see, the ADL also has connections to organized crime .
 Israel's ADL and its clandestine efforts to control public discussion of U.S. Middle East policy on all fronts, particularly in the American media . This, of course, is but one example which demonstrates the pervasive influence of the ADL . This is one example .
 ADL's history of covert spying finally became the topic of widespread public controversy in 1993 . The ADL was accused of spying on Americans in the United States .
 The ADL spied on organizations that had cooperated with the ADL in joint ventures, including the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the American Civil Liberties Union .
 Contrary to popular perception, the ADL was not spying only on socalled ""right wing"" or ""anti-Semitic"" groups . The ADL did not only spy on right-wing groups, but on anti-Semitic groups .
 ADL appears to have maintained constant surveillance of a wide variety of groups and individuals . Instead, the ADL appeared to be maintaining constant surveillance .
 The longtime chief of the ADL's spy network (euphemistically called its ""fact finding division"") was one Irwin Suall who operated out of ADL headquarters in Manhattan . Suall was one of the longest-serving ADL spies .
 Formerly active in the labor movement, Suall was a protééé of Jay Lovestone, whom we first met in Chapter 8 . Suall is a former member of the Labor Party and a former friend of Lovestone .
 Angleton was Mossad-allied CIA spymaster James J Angleton's point man in the CIA's dealings with the Lansky Syndicate-linked Corsican and Sicilian crime organizations . Angleton will be recalled as Mossad spymasters .
 Foreign crime elements were used by the CIA in its campaign against left-wing labor movements in the Mediterranean during the post-war period . These foreign crime elements handled the Lansky-run drug racket in Europe .
 James J Angleton was dismissed from his CIA post after revelations of his involvement in illegal domestic spying by the CIA . We cannot help but speculate that, in light of revelations about ADL spying, Angleton almost certainly relied upon the good offices of his friends .
 The ADL had a hand in shaping JFK assassination news coverage was inevitable, particularly in light of the revelations we have put forth in the pages of this volume . That the ADL would have a hand was inevitable .
 Establishment media put forth a theory that perhaps Lee Harvey Oswald was indeed part of a much bigger conspiracy, it was in a news story leaked by two major columnists who were very close to not only the ADL but to key figures in the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate .
 Case study we are about to examine is highly significant and illustrates the point all too well . The case study is highly important and shows the importance of the study .
 On March 3, 1967, syndicated columnist Drew Pearson and his understudy, Jack Anderson, floated a story which suggested that Fidel Castro had been behind the JFK murder . Pearson and Anderson floated the story on March 3 .
 Anderson revealed that Mafia figure Johnny Rosselli had, in fact, been the alleged initial source of the story . Anderson said the story had been told to CIA-linked Washington lawyer, Edward P Morgan .
 Rosselli's biographers, Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker, don't believe the Pearson/Anderson story in the least . With good reasons which they cite, they cited, they cite .
 Rosselli's story of CIA marksmen being ‘turned’ seems implausible, a product of Korean War recruiting films . Finally, with the benefit of hindsight, it seems highly implausible .
 Mafia enforcer and one-time ""acting boss"" of the Mafia families in California, Jimmy Fratianno, told of a meeting with Rosselli in 1976, around the time he was providing congressional investigators with details of CIA-Organized Crime assassination plots aimed at Fidel Castro
 "Sometimes I'd like to tell them the mob did it, just to see the expression on their stupid faces," says the author of the book .
 Castro retaliating against Kennedy because of our attempts on his life. You know, Castro retaliated against Kennedy . Castro was responding to Kennedy's assassination attempt .
 'I've also been dropping by Jack Anderson's office and we're getting pretty chummy, having lunch and dinner together together,' she said .
 Drew Pearson's own interest in JFK assassination cover stories was of long standing . Drew Pearson: "Drew Pearson has a long-standing interest in the assassination cover-up"
 Pearson and Khrushchev discussed the assassination of John F Kennedy . The two men were in touch with each other at the time of the assassination .
 The secret talks between Pearson and the Soviet dictator were never recorded in Pearson's gossip column . Pearson's column was never published in his column .
 Pearson promoted the Castro conspiracy theory which later came to the public's attention in 1967 . It was apparently during this period that Pearson first promoted the conspiracy theory .
 This apparently was the ruse needed to convince Warren to hide what he mistakenly believed to be the troublesome truth . Warren believed it was the truth when he mistakenly thought it was true .
 Pearson-Anderson story about the alleged Castro conspiracy against JFK created a sensation . Story muddied the waters at a time when JFK assassination conspiracy allegations were gaining widespread credibility .
 However rational the story may have sounded at the time, the evidence was flimsy at best as we have seen . However, however, the story was not as rational as it may have been, it has been revealed .
 PearsonAnderson ""revelations"" are nothing more than deliberate disinformation, says PearsonAnderson . PearsonAnderson's "revelation" is nothing less than deliberate disparity .
 Pearson-Anderson columns, in effect, ""cleared"" the CIA of involvement in JFK's murder . They pointed the finger at Castro . The columns shifted the focus of the CIA to Castro .
 The Pearson-Anderson columns shifted focus away from the Garrison investigation in New Orleans which was focusing on likely CIA involvement and which had stumbled upon the Clay Shaw-Permindex connection .
 Drew Pearson would have an interest in shielding any Israeli involvement as well, it's beyond doubt . That Drew Pearson, in particular, would have a interest in covering up any involvement in the investigation, is beyond doubt.
 Of Jewish extraction, Pearson was a devoted friend of Israel—from the beginning . Pearson was devoted friend to Israel from the beginning of his life . Pearson's work was published by the U.S. Holocaust Museum .
 Pearson functioned as a hit man for the Israeli lobby in the U.S. in the period leading up to the establishment of the state of Israel . Pearson was a hitman for the lobby, pounding away at those perceived inimical to Israeli interests .
 Pearson targeted then-Secretary of Defense James Forrestal . One of Pearson's favorite targets was Forrestal, who was secretary of defense .
 Pearson saw his opportunity when Forrestal persuaded Truman to take the Arab side against the Jews in Palestine for military reasons . According to Pearson's biographer, Pearson saw his opportunity .
 Forrestal was a voice for U.S. oil companies with enormous stakes in the Mideast . He lathered and shaved Forrestal as a bureaucratic voice for American oil companies .
 There are many who believe Forrestal was murdered because of his opposition to the Israeli lobby . Forrestal's opposition to Israel's influence in the U.S. has led to his death, many say .
 Pearson had engaged in behind-the-scenes intrigue with Israel's intelligence and propaganda arm, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith . Pearson himself had cemented his ties with the Israeli lobby .
 Stephenson was the brain behind the assembly of Israel's Mossad . He was also the brains behind Allied intelligence operations during World War II . Meyer Lansky and his organized crime network were behind Allied operations during WWII .
 He was a close associate and mentor of Louis M Bloomfield, president of the Mossad-backed Permindex entity that was central to the JFK assassination conspiracy . Bloomfield was also a mentor and mentor to Bloomfield . He was also close associate of Bloomfield's mentor, Louis
 Pearson's other connections point further to his interest in covering for Israel and its allies in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Pearson's connections include the CIA and Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate .
 Pearson was engaged in sharp business practices with his partner, attorney Max M Kampelman . Kampelman is a key figure in the Israel lobby in Washington . Pearson was a longtime top-level Anti-Defamation League director .
 Kampelman, the personal attorney for Hubert Humphrey, and Pearson were trying to wrest control of television channel 14 away from a Black-owned station, WOOK, in Washington . Kampelman was trying to wrestle control of channel 14 from WOOK .
 Pearson's connections with the Israeli lobby in Washington were even more intimate . Pearson was a prominent figure in the pro-Israel lobby in the U.S.
 Pearson's stepson Tyler Abell, an attorney, had been employed by the law firm of David Ginsburg, a registered foreign agent for Israel .
 Ginsburg, like several other top figures known for their interest in promoting Israel's interests in Washington, were among those close to Hubert Humphrey . Ginsburg was one of many top figures in Washington promoting Israeli interests .
 In 1968 Pearson worked hand-in-glove with Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, in an effort to wreck Richard Nixon's presidential campaign in favor of Democratic opponent, Humphrey .
 President Johnson arranged for Pearson to call Cohen, who was, by then, in jail . Cohen wrote in his memoirs, that Pearson arranged for Cohen to call .
 Pearson wanted to uncover dirt about Nixon from the former Vice President's days in California . Pearson provided underworld financial backing for Nixon, Cohen says . Cohen: Pearson wanted Nixon to expose dirt about him .
 Pearson's relationship with the publishers of the National Enquirer newspaper is interesting, particularly in light of its CIA and Israeli lobby connections . Pearson's connection with the Enquirers is also interesting, especially with their connections to the CIA .
 World Wide Features, Inc. had interesting origins . Pearson's legman, John Henshaw, wrote in the July 1, 1969 issue of the Washington Observer .
 It was owned by the three brothers, Anthony, Fortune, Fortune and Generoso Pope . It is owned by three brothers - Fortune, Generoso and Fortune Pope .
 The Pope family were longtime contributors to pro-Israel causes . The Generoso Pope Foundation was founded by the Pope family .
 The foundation was also suspected of being a secret conduit for CIA funds . The foundation is also widely suspected of having links to CIA .
 Pope, Jr. had worked for the CIA during the Korean war . He was himself famously friendly with Lansky's longtime partner, Frank Costello . Pope Jr. was himself friendly with Costello, who worked for CIA .
 Pope promptly gave Pearson a contract to write a weekly column for his £/ Progresso, the leading Italian language newspaper in the country . In return, Pope promptly signed a contract with the Italian newspaper in return .
 The $150-aweek contract was more than any other newspaper paid for just one weekly column . It was $150,000 a year for one weekly columnist .
 Pearson and Fortune Pope acquired the Bell-McClure Syndicate and the North American Newspaper Alliance in the mid-1960s . Lyndon Johnson's TV-and-radio advisor, Leonard Marks, was also involved .
 For a period, Generoso Pope's Washington bureau chief was Joe Trento . Trento emerged as an authority on the intelligence community . He emerged as a respected journalist .
 Trento co-wrote a controversial article alleging that former CIA man E Howard Hunt may have been in Dallas on the day JFK was shot . It was Trento, as we saw in Chapter 16, who wrote the article, who also co-authored it .
 Trento, as noted, had excellent CIA connections with James Jesus Angleton . Trento was being used as a media conduit by Angleton for whatever insidious purposes of his own .
 Jack Anderson had ties to the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate . Pearson's partner and protééé, Jack Anderson, himself had notable ties to both the Israeli lobby and Lansky .
 Anderson once shared his offices with at least one registered lobbyist for Israel, who was also close to Lansky's protégé, Carlos Marcello, ’* . Anderson maintained a close working relationship with Herman Greenspun, a longtime Lansky syndicate associate and arms-
 According to Lansky's biographer, Stacher's death affected Lansky greatly . According to biographer Robert Lacey, Lansky was deeply affected by the death .
 Hank Greenspun was dispatched by the Jewish underground to Hawaii to buy surplus U.S. Army arms and equipment . According to The Washington Observer, "Early in the Palestine War he was dispatched to Hawaii early in the war .
 U.S. Naval Air Station on Oahu raided a stockpile of armaments . 15 tons of .30 and .50caliber aircraft machine guns were stolen .
 The machine guns were packed in 58 crates marked ‘engine parts’ and shipped to Los Angeles . They were then transshipped to Mexico and on to Israel .
 Greenspun ran the British blockade in a ship delivering arms to Israel . Greenspun was involved in the blockade of Israel in the 1960s .
 Later he pleaded guilty to violating the United States Neutrality Act . Later he was given a 3-year suspended sentence .
 Greenspun established a chain of newspapers in Nevada and Colorado, publishing The Las Vegas Sun . Greenspun became a major figure in Las Vegas . He went on to establish a chain .
 As we saw in Chapter 7, the Israeli arms-smuggling underworld of which Greenspun was a part, was a very tightly knit little clique . Greenspun is a member of a tightly knit group of Israeli arms smugglers .
 Louis Bloomfield was once a key coordinator for Israeli arms smuggling working with the Lansky Syndicate and Greenspun . He was later chief executive officer of the Permindex entity . Bloomfield worked with Anderson's associate, Greenspun.
 Anderson and Greenspun were themselves involved in yet another venture linked to the Lansky Syndicate . Anderson was involved in another venture involving the syndicate, which was linked to Lansky .
 Pearson and Anderson were middlemen in the sale of Morris Dalitz's Las Vegas gambling palace, the Desert Inn, to Howard Hughes . The two, along with CIA-linked attorney Edward Morgan (the alleged conduit for the Castro conspiracy story floated by Pearson and . Anderson) were also middle
 Jack Anderson was also a very public and longtime friend of Mossad and CIA asset Frank Sturgis, beginning as early as 1960 . Three years before Sturgi played a part in the events in Dealey Plaza, Anderson played a role in the CIA .
 The media in general had initially backed the Warren Commission cover-up . But public dissent about the conclusions forced Israel's friends in the media to play their hand . The Warren Commission's conclusions were sparked by the work of Mark Lane and Mark Garrison .
 Stories that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" and about ""Castro"" plots against JFK suddenly began emerging . Stories about the assassination of JFK were also emerging in the 1980s .
 Pearson had a hand in convincing Earl Warren that there had been a conspiracy that made it necessary, for the public good, to cover up the truth . Pearson himself had a role in convincing Warren that the truth was wrong .
 Pearson and his Israeli and CIA allies were seeking to keep the real truth hidden . Pearson was seeking to hide the truth, but he was trying to keep it hidden, he says .
 Former CIA contract agent Hugh McDonald co-wrote a book with author Geoffrey Bocca . McDonald was a contract agent for the CIA during the JFK assassination . McDonald's book was co-written by Boccom and McDonald . McDonald is the author of the book .
 McDonald-Bocca's book, Appointment in Dallas, received wide distribution . McDonald's book was Appointment of Dallas . Appointment Dallas was published in Dallas .
 The book featured an interview with an international hit man named ""Saul" who confessed to being the real murderer of President Kennedy . The book also featured a interview with a hit man who said he was the real assassin of Kennedy .
 The hit man said he was hired by a private group, not by the CIA . He said he had done contract work for the CIA in the past . The private group hired him to carry out the hit .
 Many JFK assassination critics were skeptical about the book, looking upon it as some form of disinformation (perhaps from the CIA itself) It would have been more instructive to consider Geoffrey Bocca's role in the writing of the book .
 The appearance of an OAS propagandist as the coauthor of a book which effectively ""cleared"" the CIA of involvement in the crime is interesting, to say the least . Needless to say, in light of the ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination conspiracy, the appearance
 Robin Moore was best known for his famous book, The French Connection, on the French intelligenceand Lansky Syndicate-linked international heroin racket . His co-author, who had solid links to the CIA, Robin Moore, was also well-known for his book .
 McDonald's second book received little recognition, although it did muddy the waters further . Whatever the case, it received little, if any, recognition, from McDonald .
 The tell-tale hand of Israeli sympathizers within even the ranks of the ""critics"" of the Warren Commission's conclusions has also now become apparent . A pro-Israel 'critic' of the report's conclusions is also now apparent .
 A group of self-styled Warren Commission ""critics" formed an organization known as the Assassination Information Bureau . One of them included liberal journalist Jack Newfield, a devout supporter of Israel .
 The Post has been one of the media's primary pro-Israel voices almost to the point of obsession with Israel . The Post, of course, has been a major pro-Israeli voice .
 Any conspiracy that might somehow link Israel—or its allies in the CI[A—could not be tolerated . Any conspiracy to link Israel with its allies would be tolerated, he says .
 Establishment media picked up the scandal sheet's ""exclusive"" and began hyping it . Almost immediately, the rest of the Establishment media started hyping the story .
 "The purpose was to discredit the conspiracy that was finally being exposed to millions of Americans," the author says . The purpose of the purpose of this article was to expose the conspiracy .
 The Washington Post, long a CIA disinformation source, also published the story . The Post is a long-time CIA disrupated source .
 The staunchly pro-Israel conservative weekly, Human Events, consistently maintained, otherwise, that any conspiracy in the JFK assassination was a madman's fantasy .
 Ragano took the message to New Orleans rackets boss Carlos Marcello and to Tampa mob chieftain Santos Trafficante . According to Ragano's unlikely story, the message was to Marcella and Trafficante, both of whom, we have seen, were immediate underlings
 Ragano says he managed to ""suppress"" these memories until just recently . Ragano is a toplevel criminal lawyer with high-ranking connections . He managed to "suppress" the memories until recently .
 Ragano said he was "guilty and ashamed" because of his association with organized crime . According to Ragano, his guilt feelings caused him to suppress those memories . Ragano says he suppressed those memories because he was ashamed of his involvement .
 He might also have been interested in adding spice to his memoirs which were later published .
 Ragano was appealing a second federal income tax evasion conviction . Ragano might also have had something else in mind by telling this story, which clears the CIA and any other federal agencies .
 Hoffa biographer Dan Moldea shed some interesting information regarding the truth about Hoffa’s murder . Moldea also revealed that Hoffa was murdered by his wife .
 The Mafia has always figured among the major possible scenarios for the killing, Lerner says . According to Lerner, the Mafia has also been mentioned as a possible suspect in the case .
 Ragano account had the pieces of the puzzle begun to fall together . But not until Ragano's account was revealed that Ragano had been wronged . Ragano says Ragano was wronged by his actions in the 1990s .
 Marcello headed the Mafia operation in New Orleans, Trafficante in Tampa and Cuba . Trafficante headed the operation in Tampa, New Orleans and Tampa, Florida .
 He ignored the central part Meyer Lansky played in manipulating the activities of both Marcello and Trafficante . Trafficante was a key figure in the Mafia .
 That The Washington Times would have an interest in promoting the Hoffa-Mafia story is no surprise . That The D.C. Times would be interested in the story is not surprising .
 The Times has close links to the intelligence community and is a strident editorial supporter of Israel . After all, the Times itself has close ties to Israel .
 The Washington Times is funded by the bizarre global conglomerate of Korean cult figure Sun Myung Moon .
 Moon himself has been repeatedly linked to the Korean CIA which is, of course, intimately tied with its American counterpart . Moon has repeatedly been linked to North Korea's CIA which has been tied to the U.S. CIA .
 Moon has forged a close working alliance with Israel and its American lobby . Moon has pushed a pro-Israel agenda on the so-called ""conservative movement"" in the U.S.
 Moon's editor at The Washington Times at that time was Arnaud deBorchgrave, a reputed ""former"" intelligence operative . Moon was editor of the Washington Times .
 deBorchgrave himself is closely connected by marriage to the Rothschild family . The Rothschild family is closely associated with the Rothschilds .
 Rothschilds, as we have seen, have been longtime financial backers of the state of Israel . The Rothschilds are known for their support for Israel . Israel has been a major source of support for the country .
 The response to JFK conspiracy allegations from another ""conservative"" source is equally interesting . The response from another "conservative" source also interesting .
 Accuracy in Media, a self-styled conservative media watchdog, took great umbrage with suggestions that there might have been a conspiracy behind the president's assassination . The organization, which is self-described as a "media watchdog," was offended by the suggestion .
 At the time Mark Lane's Plausible Denial and Oliver Stone's JFK were released, AIM chairman Reed Irvine, seemingly inexplicably, signed on with the rest of the media in denouncing the conspiracy theories presented in the book .
 Irvine paid tribute to the Establishment media for its attack on the theories . Irvine wrote in the pages of the conservative weekly Human Events .
 Irvine dismissed Lane as a "leftist" and said that anyone who believes that there was any kind of domestic conspiracy behind the JFK murder was being taken in by Soviet propaganda . Irvine went on to dismiss Lane as an "anti-leftist," and said anyone who thinks there was a
 The AIM response was interesting, particularly in the context of the background of some of AIM's leading lights . AIM responded strongly to the criticism of the comments .
 Irvine was a former economist for the big bank-controlled Federal Reserve System . Irvine himself was himself a former banker-turned-economy economist .
 Lansdale's former Vietnam era associate would come out swinging against JFK conspiracy theories . Lansdale is a former member of the CIA, CIA and CIA .
 Yoh is also affiliated with the International Security Council, a think tank notable for its central devotion to the advancement of Israel's interests in U.S. foreign policy-making .
 Joseph Churba was a protééé of Jay Lovestone who coordinated CIA contacts with the Corsican and Sicilian Mafias on behalf of the CIA's James J Angleton . He was an ordained rabbi who worked for the CIA in the 1980s .
 Churba was also a key figure in the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs and in an entity known as Americans for a Safe Israel established in the United States as an outgrowth of the Israeli underground terrorist group, the Irgun .
 Another AIM figure is equally interesting in light of the organization's critique of JFK assassination conspiracy theories . AIM has a history of its critique of conspiracy theories, including the JFK assassination .
 It might be added, in passing, that AIM has consistently also been a strident defender of Israel and its interests .
 To even hint at any conspiracy which might involve Israel and its allies in the CIA would be an outrage, says AIM . AIM would be concerned, insofar as AIM is concerned .
 Oliver Stone has become a major factor in the continuing cover-up of the real truth about the assassination of John F Kennedy . The irony, as we shall see, is that although Oliver Stone himself seemed to have asked that very question in a big, big way—through the aeg
 Stone's film JFK has focused widespread international attention on the JFK assassination conspiracy . There has been quiet speculation that the media's furor might be part of a plan to further cover up the truth about the conspiracy .
 The facts about the assassination conspiracy are sensational enough without fictional details being added, he and others have pointed out .
 Stone's film referenced, in passing, the CIA connections of David Ferrie and Clay Shaw . The film's primary thrust was that the conspiracy originated in the so-called ""militaryindustrial"" complex .
 The primary conspirators were presented as high-level military men and their allies among the multi-billion-dollar defense contracting companies . The main conspirators are shown to have been high-ranking military men .
 The intelligence community's role was understated, to say the very least . "The intelligence community is understated," the official said .
 The distribution for Stone's film was handled by Warner Brothers . That distribution is somewhat unsettling in light of the conclusions reached in Final Judgment . The film was released in 1996 .
 Warner Brothers is a subsidiary of the giant Time-Warner media empire . It evolved from a film production company established by longtime Meyer Lansky associate, Louis Chesler .
 Chesler established Seven Arts Productions in Montreal, Canada, in 1956 . Lansky front man Chesler was Lansky's front man .
 Seven Arts functioned as a money-laundering facility for Lansky and others among his associates . Although ostensibly a film production company, Seven Arts was a money laundering facility . Lansky was convicted of money laundering in 2008 .
 Seven Arts gained control of Warner Brothers Studios in 1967 . Lansky take-over of the studio was a Lansky takeover of Hollywood .
 The move was a mystery to many at the time, but little did they know of the behind-the-scenes Lansky Syndicate dealings which made the wheeling and dealing possible .
 Bernie Cornfeld's Investors Overseas Service 'owned major blocks of stock' in Warner-Seven Arts . Not surprisingly, it just so happens, it was Bernie . Cornfeld .
 Cornfeld of IOS was a front man for Tibor Rosenbaum, a former Mossad official . Rosenbaum was prime mover behind the Lanksy-linked Permindex operation that was so central to the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 In 1981 a major scandal rocked Warner Communications . The 'Israeli MAFIA' was the subject of a major investigation . Warner Communications was accused of covering up an anti-Semitism scandal .
 Several of its top figures were caught up in tax fraud, bribery, and other racketeering charges brought by the Justice Department .
 On November 22, 1963, Swiss Israel assumed management of American Bank and Trust .
 David Graiver, himself a longtime Mossad operative, looted by financier . The latter firm, however, ultimately went belly up, having been looted by Graiver .
 Life correspondent Richard Billings sabotaged Jim Garrison's investigation into JFK assassination . Billings went to New Orleans and sabotaged Garrison's probe into JFK's assassination . Life's Gang at Time-LIFE is a weekly feature on CNN.com .
 Billings and company presented Garrison as a shill for New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello . But, of course, ignored the secondary positioning to Marcella's sponsor, Meyer Lansky . Lansky was the boss of the New Orleans mafia .
 Billings himself later served on the staff of the House Assassinations Committee which blamed the JFK murder on ""the Mafia,"" working alongside the committee's director, G Robert Blakey, who several years previously had been employed as a character witness on behalf of longtime Lansky confidant Morris
 Time-Life and Warner Communications merged, becoming Time-Warner . Warner Communications and Time-life merged in 2007 .
 Time-Warner's subsidiaries, Warner Brothers, ultimately became the distribution company for Oliver Stone's JFK . Warner Brothers blamed ""the military-industrial complex" for the JFK assassination .
 The Lansky syndicate-linked Bronfman family purchased a substantial controlling interest in Time Warner in 1993 . Time Warner is part of the tightly-knit circles of the CIA-Lansky Syndicate-Israeli Mossad connection .
 Major Louis M Bloomfield was longtime personal attorney for Bronfman interests and a major figure in the Israeli lobby in Canada . Bloomfield had been longtime personal lawyer for the Bronfman family .
 Oliver Stone's grand conspiracy theory is enough to make one wonder, to say the least . That a company which has been intimately tied from its earliest years not only with the inner circles of Meyer Lansky and his international crime syndicate, should be the sponsor of Stone's conspiracy theory .
 The film was directed by Hill & Knowton, a Washington, D.C. law firm . It is interesting to note that when it was released, it was the firm of Hill and Knowton .
 Hill & Knowlton orchestrated major propaganda in favor of U.S. involvement in the Persian Gulf War against Iraq . The firm also orchestrated major anti-Israel propaganda in support of Israel . Hill &
 Hill & Knowlton executive who handled efforts on behalf of Stone, Frank Mankiewicz, got his start working for the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith .
 In Washington, D.C., on February 16, 1994, an associate of this author attempted to present Oliver Stone with a copy of the first edition of this book, Final Judgment . The associate of the author tried to give Stone an autograph .
 This came several months after the book was first advertised in the program of the annual symposium on the JFK assassination sponsored by the JFK Assassination Information Center in Dallas, Texas .
 A full-page advertisement promoting a book featuring an introduction by Stone appeared opposite an advertisement for Final Judgment . After all, the book was featured in the ad, Stone's introduction appeared opposite a full page of Final Judgment.
 Self-styled freethinker, Stone, turned his back and walked away . Moments later accepting another package of material presented to him by another individual .
 Stone did, in fact, know of the socalled ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination documented in Final Judgment and referenced in the advertisement in the program of the JFK forum in Dallas .
 Ron Lewis, who was a friend of Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans, worked in Guy Banister's ""French""-connected operation, revealed something very interesting about Stone and the ""French" connection .
 Oliver Stone ignored the ""French"" connection to the assassination of John F Kennedy . Stone's film, "Fifty Shades of War," is based on the film's cover-up .
 A wise move for a film-maker whose sponsors had intimate ties to the guilty parties involved in the crime that Stone brought to grisly life on film . Stone's film-makers chose to focus on the crime in order to make the film, which was shot in New York City
 Oliver Stone's new film, "Mossad," is based on the film's adaptation of the novel . Stone's film is set in New York City, New York, where he stars in a wide-ranging variety of films . Stone has a history of being involved in the film
 Stone was, beyond question, the undeniably talented creative genius responsible for JFK . One must always remember that in the motion picture arena, it is ultimately money—pure and simple—that determines whether a film will be made .
 The all-important task of arranging financing falls into the lap of the film's producer . The film is set to be released in cinemas on November 28 .
 A company he owned was caught smuggling nuclear weapons fuses to Iraq . The company was once caught smuggling nukes fuses into Iraq .
 Riordan says Milchan made available what Riordan described as ""French money" for Stone's film . Riordan: Milchan also made available 'French money' for the production of Stone's movie .
 The film never once hints at JFK's bitter conflict with Israel, in particular the struggle over Israel's drive to assemble a nuclear arsenal . Mossad figure in the center of Israel's nuclear development program providing the financing .
 Oliver Stone has been a generous contributor to the America-Israel Public Affairs Committee, the lobby for Israel . Stone has never been able to confirm that Stone has made a generous contribution to the committee .
 If true, this is another interesting detail which helps further explain why Stone might choose to ignore all of the evidence which does demonstrate a definitive Israeli connection to the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 "I would relish the opportunity to debate Oliver Stone in a public forum," she says . She says she would like to debate Stone .
 We agree that Jim Garrison was on to something when he launched his investigation of Clay Shaw . After all, we do agree that he was on something . We do agree .
 Where we part company, it seems, is just how far the conspiracy really went . We're not sure how far it really went, but it seems to have gone too far .
 Final Judgment is a weekly feature of Final Judgement on CNN.com's new book, Final Judgment, by all means let me know. Please submit your questions to the author of this week's book .
 One political force opposed to John F Kennedy would benefit from his assassination was Israel, says Stone . Stone himself prefers not to name that particular force . Israel was opposed to Kennedy's assassination .
 Stone's film has led the way for new perceptions that it was a conspiracy that ended John F Kennedy's life . Despite all the criticisms we have aimed at Stone, the film has still led to new perceptions about the conspiracy .
 Stone failed to nail down the source of that conspiracy but in the pages of Final Judgment we have done just that . The film is set to be released in November 2015 .
 What a shame indeed that Oliver Stone could not have told the entire story of the conspiracy . Oliver Stone's film 'couldn't tell the truth'
 Clearly, the media's coverage of the JFK assassination was critical to the cover-up of the real origins of the conspiracy that resulted in the president's assassination . The media's role in the assassination of JFK was critical in its coverage of its assassination .
 That the media played a major part in perpetuating the cover-up is unquestioned . Israel and its lobby has a major influence in shaping the American media can likewise not be questioned . Israel's influence on shaping the U.S. media can also be questioned, as well as
 The media initially supported the Warren Commission's conclusions . Public skepticism forced the media to bring forth a wide variety of cover stories and limited portions of truth .
 The Heir to the Throne . The Assassination of Robert F Kennedy . Israel, Iran, Lansky & the CIA . The assassination of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy .
 Robert F Kennedy, younger brother of the slain president, was vital to the continuing cover-up of the truth about the JFK assassination . Robert F. Kennedy was a key figure in the ongoing cover up of the assassination .
 RFK would have had the power to bring his brother's killers to justice . RFK's brother was shot and killed in the early 1960s .
 The slaying of Robert F Kennedy links not only Israel and its allies in the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, but also SAVAK, the secret police of the Shah of Iran .
 The official explanation of the circumstances surrounding the death of former Attorney General Robert F Kennedy is as simple as the Warren Commission Report on the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 In both instances, so the story goes, ""one lone nut"" was responsible for the crime . In both cases, so far, it has been the case of a lone nut being responsible .
 RFK had won the critical California Democratic presidential primary in 1968 . RFK's assassination in Los Angeles came just after he won the state's Democratic presidential nomination .
 This put the younger Kennedy in the lead for his party's presidential nomination and thus potentially in line to move into the White House following the general election . The younger Kennedy is a potential presidential candidate .
 RFK delivered his California victory speech to an assembled crowd of supporters at the Ambassador Hotel . RFK's victory speech was delivered in the ballroom of the Ambassador hotel .
 Kennedy wanted to work his way through the crowd in the ballroom to make his exit from the hotel . After concluding his speech, the triumphant Kennedy made his way out of the ball room .
 Kennedy's handlers insisted that Kennedy exit through the hotel kitchen behind the ballroom . However, according to one campaign volunteer who was on the scene, one of the handlers insisted .
 Frank Mankiewicz started his career in the public relations business at the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith . He handled publicity for Oliver Stone's JFK extravaganza . RFK had to exit through the kitchen .
 The Arab-American assailant was pummeled to the floor, arrested, convicted and sentenced to prison . The Arab American assailant was arrested and convicted of the crime .
 The public was somberly told that Sirhan was dissatisfied with Kennedy's strong pro-Israel stand and that this was one of the driving motivations that led him to commit the crime . Kennedy was a strong supporter of Israel, according to reports .
 An ArabAmerican was held up to the world as the killer of a martyred American president's younger brother, himself a popular public figure . So it was that an ArabAmerican killed the brother of a popular president's brother .
 An Arab-American who would happen to be the assassin of the Kennedy brother who was perceived by "insiders"" to be an anti-Semite in the mold of his father . What an irony is that it was an Arab American who would be perceived by insiders to be anti-
 That Kennedy did indeed take a strident pro-Israel stand during his years in the United States Senate is not in doubt . Kennedy was known for his strident anti-Israel stance .
 An Arab patsy took the fall for RFK's murder . The crime evolved from a conspiracy that had evolved from an Arab conspiracy that was decidedly not Arabic in its origins .
 In this chapter we shall explore the source of the conspiracy that removed Robert Kennedy from the political arena and thereby precluded him from ever having the power to investigate the conspiracy . The conspiracy that ended his brother's presidency will be explored .
 Sirhan Sirhan responded almost without protest, with a certain passivity . Unlike Lee Harvey Oswald who proclaimed himself a ""patsy,"" Sirhan . Sirhan. Sirhan said he was a "pats"
 Public awareness of the serious questions arising from the second Kennedy assassination did not reach the same level . Yet, perhaps precisely because of the continuing doubts over the first Kennedy assassination, perhaps because of doubts over first assassination .
 Many believed Bobby Kennedy's murder was directly linked to the murder of his brother five years earlier . No one seemed able to fit the pieces of the puzzle together .
 Robert Morrow, a former CIA contract agent, has demonstrated in his little-noticed book, The Senator Must Die . Morrow: There are connections between the two events—deeper than one might have imagined .
 Khyber Khan, a high-ranking member of the Shah's SAVAK, infiltrated RFK's California campaign headquarters in 1968 . Morrow's own extensive investigation was conducted by Morrow in the final weeks of the Kennedy campaign .
 Khan additionally brought in other SAVAK agents to work on the campaign . Khan also brought in the campaign agents to help with the effort .
 RFK allowed Khan into his inner circle because he believed Khan was an opponent of the Shah of Iran . RFK believed Khan to be an opponent to the Shah . Khan was the son of the Iranian king .
 In the early 1960's Khan had become embroiled in a feud with the Shah over a business deal gone sour . In revenge had come to Washington where he provided then-Attorney General Robert Kennedy with evidence of the Shah's misappropriation of United States foreign aid to Iran .
 The resulting bad blood further strained relations between the Kennedy administration and the Shah which had never been stable . The Kennedy administration was never stable with the Shah .
 Khan and the Shah had made amends shortly thereafter and an alliance had been cemented . However, Khan and Shah had since reconciled . Khan was killed by Shah Shah Shah's forces in the early 1900s . The Shah and Khan's forces were later allied with the Shah .
 Khan set up SAVAK operations on the West Coast in 1963, unbeknownst to Robert F Kennedy . Khan, in fact, set up operations in 1963 . Khan was behind the assassination of JFK .
 Both Sirhan and the other gunmen were on the scene when RFK was assassinated, Morrow says . Morrow's account: Sirhan was one of the two gunmen involved in the assassination .
 Sirhan was using the .22 caliber pistol that was taken from him after the assassination . Sirhan is using the pistol that he was using after his assassination .
 The other gunman, however, was carrying a CIAmanufactured .22 caliber gun disguised as a camera . The gun was actually a CIA manufactured gun .
 After Kennedy gave his final address and made his way into the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel, Sirhan thrust his own weapon out and began firing toward the senator . Sirhan, the man who shot Kennedy, was killed in the attack .
 Sirhan never got close enough for a point-blank shot, according to a witness . This resulted in Sirhan being the focus of attention, although one witness said he had told the authorities that Sirhan was not close enough to a point blank shot .
 The other gunman, meanwhile, was also firing his weapon and probably delivered the fatal shot . The gunman is believed to have been shot by the other gunman .
 Obviously, it would not have done the assassination conspiracy good to have the other gunman captured with a CIA-manufactured weapon . The other gunman was captured with the CIA-made weapon .
 Conspiracy theorists have pointed in the direction of a character named Thane Caesar who was on the scene at the time of the senator's murder . Caesar was employed at the last minute by the Ambassador Hotel as a replacement for another security guard .
 Caesar Caesar has been popularly described as a ""bodyguard for Howard Hughes" Caesar's real connections are far more interesting . Caesar was a bodyguard for Hughes .
 Caesar had more firm ties to the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate through his Las Vegas connections . Caesar's connections to Lansky organized crime syndicate included Las Vegas ties .
 In the end, the Thane Caesar story is just another one of those distractions that really don't point anywhere . "In the end of the story, it's just another distraction," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Lisa Pease has come forth with evidence that a British national of Jewish origin, Michael Wien, who went by the name ""Michael Wayne,"" was in the Ambassador Hotel ballroom before the shooting of RFK .
 After the shooting there were allegations that Wien (or ""Wayne"") was carrying what appeared to some to be a cardboard tube or some similar item . Some people thought he had a gun concealed inside .
 Pease suggests that there are many more questions about Wien that remain unanswered . Although the police apparently took Wien into custody for a brief period, Pease says there are still questions about the incident .
 The operatives were officers Manny Pena and Enrique Hernandez, both of whom were known to have worked for the CIA, and for the police department .
 This, in essence, is the reconstruction of the RFK assassination conspiracy which Morrow documents so convincingly in his book The Senator Must Die . Morrow documents the assassination conspiracy in his new book .
 In his public persona, Goodaryi was the popular maitre de of the exclusive Rotunda Restaurant on Capitol Hill . He was also the immediate SAVAK superior of Khyber Khan, the West Coast operative who coordinated the RFK murder . In the public persona he was
 Goodaryi was murdered in 1977 just one month after he spoke with Morrow . Morrow was murdered just a month after speaking to Morrow in 1977 .
 Meyer Lansky once again appears in the murky background in the Kennedy assassination . Lansky was behind the assassination of a Kennedy .
 Sirhan Sirhan worked in the stables of the Santa Anita racetrack when he was being groomed for his role in the slaying of Robert F Kennedy . The young Arab-American worked there at the time .
 Santa Anita was one of the primary profit-centers for Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen . Cohen was the rackets boss of Southern California . Santa Anita, in fact, was a major profit-center for Cohen .
 We can only speculate that Cohen and his underlings may have had a hand in some aspect of the RFK assassination . We only speculate .
 The CIA's role in toppling a nationalist Iranian ruler, Mohammed Mossadegh, and restoring the Shah of Iran to his throne in 1953 is well-known and widely documented . The CIA played a key role in overthrowing a nationalist Iran ruler and restoring his throne .
 Iran's SAVAK and Israel's Mossad have a close working relationship, Mossad says . The relationship is less-known, however, because of their close ties between Iran and Israel .
 In 1958 Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion proposed to American President Dwight D Eisenhower a united front against Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser . In 1958 Israel proposed to U.S. President Eisenhower a unified front against Nasser in Egypt .
 Ben-Gurion: "With the purpose of erecting a high dam against the Nasserist-Soviet tidal wave, we have begun tightening our links with several states on the outside perimeter of the Middle East" Israel began tightening its links with states outside of the region .
 Ben-Gurion proposed Iran be part of a new alliance with Israel . Iran was one of those countries that Ben Gurion proposed be part-of the alliance .
 In fact, Israel had been actively engaged in attempting to interfere in Iran's domestic affairs for some time . Israel has been actively trying to interfere with Iran's internal affairs for years, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Cockburns wrote that the relationship between Iran and Israel was uneasy and involved much international intrigue . The relationship between the Shah's regime and Israel rested on firm foundations, according to Cockburn .
 The two nations shared a strong suspicion and dislike of Arab nations on their borders . The two countries shared a very dislike of the Arab nations .
 Israel could offer valuable expertise in the fields of intelligence and domestic security . Israel, for its part, could offer useful expertise in intelligence and security, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Rafizadeh reveals that SAVAK was set up at the joint urging of Israel, the U.S. and Britain . Rafizadh reveals in his memoirs that he was in charge of the organisation in Iran .
 In charge of the CIA's training of SAVAK operatives was an operation known as the International Police Academy in Washington .
 This academy also played a major part in training operatives of Israel's Mossad . This academy was also used to train operatives of the Mossad.
 The academy was run by one Joseph Shimon, a man with additional interesting connections . Shimon is a former member of the Jewish community in Israel .
 Shimon counted among his close friends Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana and the Mafia's roving ambassador, Johnny Rosselli . The Mafia's own roles in the JFK assassination conspiracy we reviewed in detail in Chapter 11 .
 Shimon testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee in 1975 that he participated in meetings between Giancana, Rosselli and CIA operatives in Miami in preparation for CIA assassination plots against Fidel Castro .
 When he received the news of Kennedy's death, he asked for a drink to celebrate . He asked for it to celebrate. When he got the news, he said he wanted a drink .
 The Shah viewed that course as a derided threat to his power and so had refused . The Shah had refused to take the course of action .
 The murder of Robert F Kennedy by the Shah's SAVAK was a reaffirmation of a long-standing hostility between the Kennedy brothers and the Shah . The murder was the result of a cover-up by the government .
 RFK's murder helped perpetuate the cover-up of the role that SAVAK's allies in the CIA and the Mossad had played in the previous Kennedy assassination . The CIA and Mossad played a major role in the assassination of RFK .
 JFK assassination was a case of mutual interests coming into play . It was again, as in the JFK assassination, a case where mutual interests came into play. The assassination was the result of a mutual interest .
 There is yet another interesting personal connection between the Shah of Iran and the CIA worth noting .
 Richard Helms (who later became director of the CIA in 1966) and the Shah had been best friends and schoolmates together as children at boarding school in Switzerland . In the early 1930's Helms and Shah were best friends . Helms became CIA director in 1966 .
 Robert Morrow notes that through his relationship with Iran and SAVAK, Helms would have at his beck and call a worldwide, covert strike-force of dedicated, trained, professional agents and assassins .
 Helms was the ""chief patron"" of the CIA's Mossad liaison, and devoted supporter of Israel, James Jesus Angleton . Angleton was the CIA chief patron of the Mossad liaisons . Helms' tenure at the CIA was during his tenure as CIA chief .
 Helms and Angleton became entangled in a little-noticed controversy involving a CIA memorandum that fingered CIA operative E Howard Hunt as having been in Dallas the day that John F Kennedy was assassinated . Helms became director of the CIA after Angleton resigned .
 With RFK eliminated from presidential race in 1968 those responsible for the assassination of his brother would have no fear of retribution in the event that RFK assumed the presidency . RFK was eliminated from the presidential race .
 The Globe supermarket tabloid was hit with a major libel judgment after a Pakistani-American filed suit against the tabloid for publishing Robert Morrow's allegations that this person was the ""second gun"" in the assassination of Robert Kennedy .
 Morrow died shortly after the judgment was reached, and which judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court on May 17, 1999 . Morrow himself died shortly before the judgment, which was upheld .
 Morrow alleged he was the second gunman, although it is now clear he was not . Morrow alleged that he was a second gunman . Morrow is no longer believed to have been the gunman .
 Morrow's theory doesn't mean that there was not a ""second gun" or that Morrow's basic theory is off base . Morrow: "That this individual was innocent does not mean, however, that there is not a second gun"
 I have long had reservations about many of Morrow's allegations regarding other matters . Yet, as I have noted elsewhere in the pages of Final Judgment, I have had reservations . I have also noted that he has also had reservations on many of his allegations .
 RFK's assassination was orchestrated by forces within Israel's sphere of influence . Israel's role in JFK assassination is a key part of JFK's assassination .
 In short, Morrow's overall thesis regarding RFK's assassination is correct, I tend to believe that, on the whole, he is correct .
 In the ""conclusion"" which follows we tie together the basic parameters of the JFK assassination conspiracy that have been outlined in the pages of Final Judgment . In the end of the book, the author concludes that the assassination was a conspiracy conspiracy .
 It has been a complex web, in a certain sense, but when one considers the fact that the Israeli connection is ever present, the assassination conspiracy that has been outlined is simple indeed .
 In appendices which follow, we will see that there are many other facets of the conspiracy and cover-up that have been ignored, suppressed, un-recognized or forgotten .
 In those appendices we will see, again and again, the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination that was never before documented until the publication of Final Judgment . Final Judgment. Final Judgment will be published in October 2015 .
 The State of Israel had integral links with all of the major power groups that wanted John F Kennedy removed from the U.S. presidency . Nehemiah 4:8 The State Of Israel had . integral links to all the major . power groups .
 Israel's global network had the power to orchestrate the assassination of Kennedy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Israel's network was behind the cover-up of Kennedy's assassination .
 Israel was indeed a key player in the JFK assassination conspiracy . The evidence suggests he was a primary instigator of the crime . Israel was a key figure in the assassination conspiracy and instigator .
 All of Israel's co-conspirators had good reason to assist in the cover-up of Kennedy's death . Israel had a good reason for helping cover up the death of Kennedy, the author says .
 Kennedy's brother Attorney General Robert Kennedy's prosecutions of Mafia and Meyer Lansky-bossed Organized Crime figures had many in the crime syndicate very angry, to say the least . His brother Robert Kennedy was Attorney General .
 The early stages for the prosecution of Meyer Lansky himself were already underway . The prosecution of Lansky was already underway for his crimes .
 A case had already been made against Lansky's New Orleans front man Carlos Marcello . A case was already made against the New Orleans band .
 Joseph P Kennedy Sr. was considered an enemy of the Jewish people by Lansky . Lansky believed to hold a grudge against him because of a Lansky-orchestrated hijacking of one of Kennedy Sr.'s illicit whiskeyrunning deals . The President's father
 Kennedy's war against Lansky's underworld syndicate was a double-cross that could not be tolerated . Kennedy's secret alliance with the mob during the 1960 campaign .
 The president was also planning to drop his Vice President, Lyndon Johnson, from the 1964 ticket . Lyndon Johnson's Vice President was also to be dropped .
 Johnson was long financed politically by Lansky and his New Orleans Mafia henchman, Carlos Marcello . It's possible that Johnson could end up spending the remainder of his years in prison .
 Baker conducted several of his major deals with Lansky associates, including Ed Levinson . Baker was a director of the Mossad-linked Banque de Credit International, founded by former Mossad official Tibor Rosenbaum .
 Kennedy was preparing for a rapprochement with Castro's Cuba . Lansky syndicate would not be able to re-invigorate its massive gambling interests there as a consequence .
 The change in Cuban policy was also distressing to the anti-Castro Cuban community in Miami, New Orleans and New Orleans .
 The anti-Castro Cubans had cooperated closely with the Lansky syndicate in anti-Cuba activities . The Cubans cooperated with the syndicate, which was behind the murder of Castro .
 The new Cuban policy enraged the CIA which was the primary sponsor of the anti-Castro forces . Likewise, the CIA was also angered by the new Cuban policies .
 Mossad played a major part in the intrigue involving the anti-Castro Cubans through its base in Miami . As we have also seen, the Mossad was also involved in the plot to oust Castro .
 He was making moves to dismantle the CIA . He was engaged in a secret war with that agency stemming from his clear intent to withdraw United States forces from Vietnam .
 This would have been a major blow to the so-called ""military-industrial complex"" that stood to make immense profits from a continuing U.S. presence in Southeast Asia . The U.N. has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Kennedy planned to merge all of the American intelligence agencies into a single entity under his brother Robert's direction . Ultimately, Kennedy wanted to merge the FBI, CIA and FBI into one entity .
 Kennedy also planned to dethrone FBI Director J Edgar Hoover following the 1964 election . This plan, of course, was not greeted enthusiastically by FBI Director Hoover .
 Hoover had his own secret arrangements with Lansky, individually, and with organized crime in general . Hoover, as we have seen, had many of his secret arrangements . Hoover's secret ties to Lansky and organized crime were revealed in the book .
 Hoover also had a foundation established in his name with funding from Lansky-linked liquor industries . The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith functions as a de facto U.S. propaganda and intelligence arm of Israel's Mossad .
 If Hoover himself did not actively conspire against the life of John F Kennedy, he certainly looked the other way if he knew a conspiracy to assassinate JFK had been hatched . Hoover looked other way in the wake of JFK assassination .
 Kennedy's intended change in Vietnam policy infuriated elements in the Pentagon and their allies in the military-industrial complex . Kennedy's plan to unilaterally withdraw from the imbroglio infuriated not only the CIA but elements of the Pentagon, the CIA .
 The joint Lansky-CIA operations in the international drug racket were a lucrative venture that thrived as a consequence of deep U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia as cover for the drug smuggling activities .
 Mossad has emerged as a major player as a ""middleman" in much of this drug-smuggling activity . We know today that the Mossad is a major . player in many of the drug smuggling activities .
 John F Kennedy's bitter behind-the-scenes conflict with Israel brought him into combat with an ally of not only the CIA but also the Lansky syndicate . Both entities maintained intimate connections to the anti-Castro Cubans .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson's Lansky-Mafia ties, defense industry ties, and close relationship to the Israeli lobby made him an acceptable alternative to the Kennedy dynasty . Johnson's close relationship with both the CIA and FBI made him acceptable alternative .
 Kennedy himself had long been suspect in the eyes of Israel and its allies as we saw in Chapter 4 . Kennedy himself was long suspected in Israel and his allies .
 Even the famed ""Chicago Mafia"" under Sam Giancana was heavily immersed in wide-ranging international dealings with Israel's Mossad . The real boss of the Chicago syndicate, Meyer Lansky's partner-in-crime, Hyman Lamer, was Hyman .
 The theory that even ""the Chicago Mafia killed JFK""—we find—has a very distinct ""Mossad connection"" beyond any doubt . So the theory that  the Chicago mafia killed JFK also has a strong Mossad connection .
 As early as 1960, Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, was using Kennedy's filmland bedpartner, Marilyn Monroe, as a conduit for attempting to learn Kennedy's intentions toward Israel .
 "official" history acknowledges the president's stormy affair with Miss Monroe . But its real origins and intent for which it was orchestrated have been forgotten .
 Cohen, a long-standing disciple of Israel and one of its earliest adherents, had more than a passing interest in the Middle East state . Cohen was one of his earliest adherents to Israel .
 According to one account, Cohen was less than happy with Kennedy's stance toward Israel . Cohen was unhappy with Kennedy, according to a report .
 At Kennedy's last official press conference, he bemoaned the Israeli lobby's deliberate sabotage of his own efforts to build bridges to the Arab world . Kennedy bemoans the Israeli lobbies' deliberate sabotaging of his efforts .
 Israeli leader David Ben-Gurion had developed an intense personal distrust—even hatred and contempt—for Kennedy . Little did JFK know that the seeds of his own destruction had been sown as a consequence of his efforts to bring peace to the Middle East .
 Ben-Gurion believed Kennedy's presidency was a danger to the very survival of the state of Israel . He believed that Kennedy's administration was a threat to Israel's survival . The nation he helped create was the nation that Ben Gurion had helped create .
 It was because of his contempt for Kennedy and the American president's stance toward Israel that Ben-Gurion left his post as prime minister . The Israeli prime minister was contemptuous of Kennedy .
 It is likely that his last act as prime minister was to order Mossad orchestration of a hit on John F Kennedy .
 Then-Mossad assassination team chief Yitzhak Shamir took care of the arrangements necessary to set the conspiracy in motion . We have learned that it was then Mossad assassination . Shamir was the chief of the assassination team who set up the conspiracy .
 Shamir knew, of course, that a diverse array of interests would like to see Kennedy removed from the White House . Shamir says he knew that a variety of interests—domestic and international — wanted to remove Kennedy .
 Ben-Gurion's hatred for Kennedy was a modern-day Haman in his eyes, he says . That code name would be as reasonable as any, considering his hatred for the Kennedy .
 A network of assassin recruitment and planning was set in motion through the aegis of the Mossad-CIA-Lansky combine, with the shadowy Permindex entity at the very center of the operation .
 Many people on the periphery of the conspiracy didn't know how or why they were being directed to undertake many of the actions that they did that advanced the ultimate aim of removing JFK from the White House . Many of those at the center of the plot did not know how they were directed to
 Throughout his career, Angleton's activities had intersected with those of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, particularly in the CIA's dealings with the Corsican Mafia . Angleton worked for the CIA in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Angleton coordinated the CIA's strange alliance with Corsican crime figures . Angleton's Israeli desk at the CIA coordinated the alliance with the Corsicans .
 As we have seen, anti-Castro elements in the CIA were involved in setting up the patsy, Lee Harvey Oswald . The CIA set up Oswald in the assassination of President Kennedy in Cuba .
 CIA assets in New Orleans were coordinating anti-Castro activities among Cuban exiles . CIA assets included Permindex board member Clay Shaw, Anti-Defamation Leaguelinked Guy Banister .
 Banister and Ferrie were also involved in the machinations outside New Orleans at Lake Ponchartrain of CIA operative Frank Sturgis . Banister, Ferrie, and others were involved with the CIA operative's machinations in the area .
 WDSU media empire of Stern family contributed to conspiracy by publicizing Oswald's activities . Stern family is major backers of the Anti-Defamation League and close friends of Permindex board member Shaw .
 CIAlinked French OAS operatives were also utilizing Guy Banister's headquarters in New Orleans . There are further indications that there were also indications that French operatives were involved .
 Many of these same OAS operatives also had ties to the Lansky drug racket . Many of the same operatives were involved in the drug racket that led to Lansky .
 They were hostile to John F Kennedy who had supported Algerian independence from France . They were also hostile to JFK's support for Algeria independence . They had also been hostile to President Kennedy .
 The CIA's chief liaison to the anti-Castro Cubans, E Howard Hunt, was also liaison to one of the leading longtime OAS operatives, Jean Souetre, whose own alleged presence in Dallas—like that of Hunt—is the subject of some controversy .
 A former French intelligence officer contends that a French assassin was involved in the events in Dealey Plaza on contract for the Mossad . His presence in Dallas was arranged through a faction in the French secret service, the SDECE, under the direction of Col. Col. Gen. Col
 Evidence suggests that the CIA's E Howard Hunt may have had his own anti-Castro operation underway . Hunt was involved in a faked assassination attempt on the president .
 It appears that this ""faked assassination attempt"" was manipulated and/or infiltrated by elements who intended, in fact, to kill the president . However, it appears that the president's assassination attempt was manipulated .
 Hunt himself was surprised when those shots were fired in Dallas, Texas . Hunt was a Dallas police officer . Hunt had been charged with murder in connection with an incident involving Hunt .
 Hunt can tell us just what he was doing in Dallas, Texas, when he was killed . Hunt is the only person to know what he thought he thought of doing .
 Hunt himself admitted, under oath, that he believed it possible that his former colleagues at the CIA would consider framing him for the Kennedy assassination . Hunt said he believed under oath that he could be framed for the assassination .
 Hunt has never explained what he was doing in Dallas on November 21, 1963, the day before John F Kennedy's assassination . Hunt has also never explained why he was in Dallas that day .
 Longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis met with Hunt in Dallas the day before the assassination . Hunt was also a CIA contract agent and Mossad double agent .
 Later Sturgis told Marita Lorenz, that he had been involved in the assassination itself . Later he told her that he was involved in it .
 A known Mossad asset has thus confessed to have played a direct part in the president's murder, Israel says . Looking at Sturgis alone, we can thus say, without qualification, that a known MossAD asset has confessed to the murder .
 The use of ""false flags,"" has been a classic Mossad tactic, a standard practice of Israel's spy agency . In addition, various sources have suggested that there were at least several people operating in Dealey Plaza on November 22 who believed that they were there as part of a
 Victor Ostrovsky says he and his fellow Mossad trainees were told by their superiors that Kennedy's assassination was, in fact, an accident . And as we saw in Chapter 16, he says he was told by his superiors that JFK's assassination had been an accident. O
 Cohen also had a longstanding link to Jack Ruby who was, himself, involved in smuggling arms to Israel . Cohen was also involved with Jack Ruby, who smuggled arms to the country .
 Al Gruber, a henchman of Mickey Cohen and a longtime Ruby friend, hadn't seen Ruby in years . Gruber showed up in Dallas shortly before the JFK assassination .
 Ruby called Gruber an hour after Lee Harvey Oswald's arrest was made public . Gruber called Ruby an hour later, Ruby said, "I'm sorry"
 It may be speculated that Ruby called Gruber to advise him that the chosen patsy had not been killed before his arrest, as planned, and that Ruby was then told it was his responsibility to finish the job . Gruber may have told Ruby it was then his responsibility .
 It was James Jesus Angleton of the CIA who attempted to perpetrate the fraud that the Soviet KGB was behind the Kennedy assassination . Angleton was a CIA official who tried to perpetuate the fraud . He said the KGB was responsible for the assassination .
 Angleton vehemently disputed the reliability of Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko who insisted that he had been Oswald's KGB handler in the Soviet Union and who said that Oswald had not been a KGB agent . Angleton also disputed the credibility of the defector who claimed to have been the KGB
 Angleton was the CIA's key "point man" in its relationship with the Warren Commission . He was at his own insistence, Angleton insisted . Angleton's role in the CIA was key to the Warren commission's success .
 Angleton's close friend William Sullivan, number three man at the FBI, was the FBI's liaison with the commission . What's more is more, Sullivan, who Angleton was a close friend with the FBI .
 Angleton fingered Hunt for possible involvement in the Kennedy assassination . Hunt fingered as a ""renegade"" agent, presumably acting on his own . Hunt was fingered in a strange inhouse CIA memo by Angleton .
 This frame-up took place at precisely the time when public suspicion of the CIA's institutional involvement was being widely discussed . This frame up took place during the time of public suspicion that the CIA was involved .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren was pressured into covering up what he mistakenly believed to be the truth about the assassination . Warren was apprised by the CIA of possible Soviet Communist involvement in the president's murder .
 Angleton presented the CIA's 'Mexico City scenario' as proof the Soviets were implicated in the president's murder . Angleton's desk at the CIA handled the scenario and coordinated by David Atlee Phillips, who was CIA's Mexico City station chief at the time .
 Pinning the assassination on ""one lone nut"" was Warren's way of protecting America's national security, he said . Pinning assassination on "one lone nut" was a way of keeping national security safe, Warren said .
 Warren probably never had any idea as to the real truth as to what really happened or where the assassination conspiracy originated . Warren himself probably never knew what happened or even part of the truth .
 There were immense and multiple Israeli influences on the Warren Commission staff itself . What's more, as we shall see in Appendix Four, there were also Israeli influences . The Warren Commission never considered until the release of Final Judgment .
 Warren was also under the influence of his close friend, syndicated columnist Drew Pearson . Pearson was also an asset of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith .
 It was Pearson who floated the blatantly fraudulent story that Fidel Castro had been the prime mover behind the JFK assassination . Pearson floated the false claim that Castro was behind JFK's assassination .
 Even Lyndon Johnson may not have known from where the order to kill Kennedy emerged . There have been allegations (never documented) that Johnson himself was in on the assassination planning .
 Johnson certainly had no reason himself to intervene or to attempt to stop the assassination from being carried out . Johnson had no reasons himself to try to stop his assassination .
 The assassination of Senator Robert F Kennedy was a part of the continuing cover-up of the murder of President Kennedy . The assassination was with an Arab as the ""false flag""—the fall guy—a fall guy .
 In the RFK assassination, as we have seen, the Iranian SAVAK was responsible for coordinating the hit on the senator . The CIA and Israeli Mossad were behind the assassination of RFK .
 Robert Kennedy's death prevented the younger Kennedy from ever bringing his brother's killers to justice . Robert Kennedy was killed by his brother in 1968 .
 Researchers into the JFK assassination over the past 28 years have not, until just recently, had access to the evidence of Kennedy's secret war with Israel .
 There has never been any suspicion that Israel may have had a reason to collaborate in a conspiracy against John F Kennedy . As a result, there has been no suspicion of Israel .
 The controlled media with its devotion to Israel, of course, has never pointed out this direction . The control of the media has never led to this .
 The media has been content with promoting the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" But the media ignores the Lansky connection . Lansky was the leader of the Mafia in the 1960s .
 Obviously, the full truth—all of the sordid details—will never be known . The full truth is never known .
 "We must rely upon the information that we do have," says President Obama . "Information that enables us to make a final judgment," he says .
 The assassination of John F Kennedy had a major political impact, far more profound than the simple elevation of Lyndon Johnson to the presidency . The assassination had a far greater impact than the elevation of LBJ .
 It is, beyond question, the final result that is the most striking of all, and it is not subject to debate . It is beyond question that it is the result of the vote, and that it will not be debated . The final result is that of the result, not subject
 In the pages of Final Judgment we have outlined, for the first time, the entirety of the conspiracy that led to the assassination of John F Kennedy and the cover-up that followed . We have outlined the entire conspiracy behind the Kennedy assassination . Final Judgment is available on Amazon.com and
 We do not pretend to have all of the answers, but we believe that the missing link has now been supplied . We believe that we have all the answers to the mystery of the missing .
 Never before has the evidence been assembled as it has been in these pages . The evidence has never been assembled in this pages .
 Close connections between a relatively small circle of people and those in their immediate spheres of influence is no coincidence . The close connections are no coincidence, says the author .
 That all of them, in some fashion, were part of the circumstances surrounding the assassination of John F Kennedy is also no coincidence . It is no coincidence that they were involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 Critics of JFK assassination conspiracy theories say it would require a vast number of people involved . Critics say a conspiracy so immense would require many people to be involved .
 The mechanics of initiating the conspiracy described in Final Judgment involved perhaps no more than 20 people . In fact, the mechanics involved perhaps only 20 people, the author says .
 Most of those ultimately involved in the conspiracy were probably not even aware of the activities of the others who were involved . Most of the conspirators were not aware of each other's activities .
 John F Kennedy was going to be killed on November 22, 1963, 1963 . So then, let us name, for the record, those whom we believe had advance knowledge of JFK's death .
 Evidence strongly points toward French mercenary Michael Mertz as one of those gunmen . Evidence strongly links him to the gunmen who carried out the attack . The gunmen were killed in the attack on a hotel room in Paris .
 At least one assassin was contracted by the Mossad through disloyal elements in French intelligence, although it is probable that there were several assassination teams in place . e CIA contract agent and longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis claimed to have played a part in Dealey Plaza .
 It is not clear that Meyer Lansky's Mafia lieutenants had advance knowledge of the impending assassination itself . Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana or the Mafia's ""roving ambassador,"" Johnny Rosselli, were actually involved in the planning of the assassination itself.
 Both Giancana and Rosselli were under the thumb of Mossad-connected crime boss Hyman Lamer . That opens up a whole new can of worms .
 The role of the Italian-American organized crime figures in the JFK assassination is more media-generated myth than reality . The role is more of a myth than a reality, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In Appendix Nine we will also consider the likely role—at least as an intermediary—that top-ranking Mossad figure Shaul Eisenberg played in the events surrounding the assassination . This suggests that Eisenberg did, in fact, have advance knowledge of the impending assassination .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, CIA operative E Howard Hunt, CIA station chief for Mexico City, David Atlee Phillips, CIA agent and Permindex board member Clay Shaw, CIA contract agent Clay Shaw and CIA operative Clay Shaw . Dallas mob associate Jack Ruby, Dallas mob associates Jack Ruby and Dallas
 Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, and Israeli diplomat Menachem Begin, had been involved in Israeli-related intelligence intrigue against President Kennedy . Cohen's associate Al Gruber may have given Jack Ruby the order to kill Lee Harvey Oswald .
 Members of the CIA, figures in the Mafia and the Lansky Syndicate, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, and some investigators for the Warren Commission and the subsequent House Assassinations Committee may have gleaned some information over the years . Few would be aware of the entirety of the conspiracy .
 Those on the periphery participated in various aspects of the cover-up as did certain figures in the media . Drew Pearson and Jack Anderson, among others, also participated in the cover up .
 French President Charles DeGaulle, whose own intelligence service was compromised by the Mossad . Mossad was responsible for Israel's spy operation in the 1970s .
 The evidence we have put forth demonstrates that there is a very strong foundation for the thesis presented in this volume . The evidence shows that there are very strong foundations for this thesis, the authors say .
 Israel's Mossad was a primary behind the scenes player in the conspiracy that ended the life of John F Kennedy . Mossad played a key role in the assassination of JFK .
 Israel had the means to play a major frontline role in the crime of the century, the author says . Israel had its own vast resources and through its international contacts in the intelligence community and in organized crime, it had the opportunity to play the role .
 Newly-emerging evidence strongly suggests George Bush has been a CIA asset for most of his adult life . Bush has had unusually intimate ties to the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination and the subsequent high-level cover-up .
 Mark Lane re-published, as appendices, two important articles that appeared in The Nation magazine . Lane did a great service to the American public by re-publishing the articles . Lane's articles received little national notice outside the elite circles who read The Nation .
 The Nation articles, written by Richard McBride (published in the July 16/23 and August 13/20, 1988 issues) took note of a declassified FBI memorandum dated November 29, 1963 .
 The memorandum, from FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, was addressed to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research at the Department of State . Hoover was FBI Director of FBI and Director of State at the time of the incident .
 Department of State felt some misguided anti-Castro group might capitalize on the present situation and undertake an unauthorized raid against Cuba, believing that the assassination of President John F Kennedy might herald a change in U.S. policy, which is not true .
 An informant who has furnished reliable information in the past and who is close to a small pro-Castro group in Miami has advised that these individuals are afraid that the assassination of the President may result in strong repressive measures being taken against them . The informant says that some people regret the assassination
 George Bush claimed to have had no prior service with the CIA prior to his appointment as director of the agency in 1976 . The existence of this memorandum presented a problem for George Bush who had claimed to be no prior CIA service .
 Bush's spokesmen suggested that there must have been another 'George Bush' working for the CIA at the time in question . However, Bush's spokesman said that it was he who was referenced in the controversial Hoover memorandum .
 A George William Bush worked for the CIA at the time, but only as a low-level researcher and analyst . The author of the Nation articles did some checking, only to find out that there was indeed a Bush who had worked .
 George William Bush told McBride that he was never part of any inter-agency briefing . He said he knew neither of the other people referred to in the memorandum . George William .
 Evidently working, as he had been for some time, as an operative for the Central Intelligence Agency . He was apparently working for the CIA .
 New research suggests that Bush was with the CIA as long ago as his college days at Yale . Bush was a CIA operative at the time of his Yale days .
 Henry Neil Mallon, longtime chairman of the board of Dresser Industries, gave Bush his first job in the oil business . Mallon is a Bonesman who helped Bush get the job at Dresser .
 Mallon set young Bush up as a salesman for International Derrick and Equipment Company . Mallon was a classmate and close family friend of Bush's father, Senator Prescott Bush . Bush was the son of Prescott Bush, a close friend of the late senator .
 Lee Harvey Oswald's friend—and suspected ""CIA handler"—George DeMohrenschildt . Lee Harvey O'Shyler's friend and suspected CIA handler George DeMohrensschildt. Lee Harvey Harvey Oswald was Lee's friend .
 Sources say Bush and DeMohrenschildt continued to meet secretly in Houston after Bush had left Midland to set up Houston office of his Zapata Off-Shore Oil Company . Kimery says sources contend that his sources say they met secretly .
 Kimery's research suggests that Bush-DeMohrenschildt relationship stemmed from their mutual interests in the oil business . Kimery: Bush and DeMohranschildt were both involved in intelligence work .
 All of these dealings between Bush and DeMohrenschildt would appear to be innocent behind-the-scenes intrigue between two spies named George . The more one traces Bush's connections, the more one finds that the CIA man is enmeshed all the more deeply in the circumstances surrounding
 The evidence strongly suggests that Bush was a major player in the CIA's drive to destroy Fidel Castro . Bush, in fact, was a key CIA operative in the effort to destroy Castro .
 Two of the ships used in the Bay of Pigs invasion were christened the Houston (Bush's home base) and the Barbara . Bush's connections to the CIA's operations against Castro go even deeper .
 There is evidence that prior to Bush's appointment as DCI in 1976, he was well-acquainted with legendary spook Theodore George ""Ted"" Shackley . Shackley joined the Agency in 1951 .
 When Bush arrived on the scene at Langley, it was clear to longtime Agency insiders that there was a bond between these two men that went back many years . Bush was the first President of the White House to join the CIA .
 Shackley served as CIA Station Chief in Miami, then the largest CIA station in the world . It was the base of the CIA's operations against Castro being jointly conducted with Meyer Lansky's syndicate henchmen .
 Bush promoted Shackley to Associate Deputy Director of Operations in 1976 . Kimery points out that, shortly after he became DCI, without seeking advice, Shackley was promoted to associate deputy director of operations .
 Bush himself was also developing intimate ties with Israel during his time as CIA director . Bush had already established ties with the country during his CIA career .
 In 1979, then Republican presidential candidate Bush attended the Jerusalem Conference on International Terrorism . The event was hosted by the Israeli government and attended by most of Israel's top intelligence officials .
 The delegates to the conference from the United States were all tried-and-true friends of Israel, Democrat and Republican alike . The delegates from the U.S. were all known for supporting Israel .
 Bush's Team B was a new, secret supervisory body for the CIA empowered to re-evaluate, criticize or dismiss CIA's intelligence reports . Team B is a supervisory group empowered to review, criticize, dismiss or dismiss intelligence reports from CIA .
 Team B was composed of a clique of high-level officials who were bound together primarily by their devotion to advancing Israel's interests . Significantly, however, Team B is composed of officials who are bound together to advance Israeli interests . Team B also included a group of Israeli officials who
 The Senate Intelligence Committee was probing the connections between Jack Ruby, Lee Harvey Oswald, the CIA, organized crime and the anti-Castro operations conducted by the CIA and its mob collaborators . For his own part, Bush served as CIA Director .
 George Bush was just a bit more curious about the inquiries into the JFK assassination than he would have us believe . Clearly, George Bush has been more curious than he thinks he is .
 Bush "telephonically advised that he wanted to relate some hearsay that he had heard in recent weeks," date and source unknown . Bush “telephoned’t relate hearsay’s source unknown,” White House says .
 It was after George Bush left the CIA in 1977 that he continued to maintain close ties with business interests which had, in turn, intimate ties to Israel and its lobby in the U.S. George Bush maintained close ties to business interests in the 1970s .
 Hunts were owners of a 15% controlling interest in a Houston based company which controlled half the world's supply of lithium, which is an essential component in the production of hydrogen bombs . The Hunts were owned of 15% of the company .
 Gulf Resources had taken over the Lithium Corporation of America as a wholly-owned subsidiary some years previously . Gulf Resources took over Lithium Corp. of America in 2007 .
 Among the directors of both Gulf Resources and the Lithium Corporation was John Roger Menke, who was also a director of Israel's Hebrew Technical Institute . Menke was also director of Israeli's Hebrew Tech Institute .
 The most monumental issue of conflict between John F Kennedy and Israeli prime minister David Ben-Gurion is discussed in detail in Chapter 5 . During this period Israel was continuing in its secret development of nuclear weaponry .
 George Bush in the center of a wider network of international corporate bodies with long-standing ties to Israel and its major backers . One corporation with a particular interest in the development of nuclear weaponry .
 Hunt was the mastermind behind the JFK assassination, presumably driven by his hard-line conservative opposition to Kennedy's progressive domestic and foreign policy stands . Hunt was a conservative conservative who opposed JFK's progressive foreign and domestic policies . Hunt is believed to have been Hunt's mastermind .
 Hunt's connection back to the Gulf Resources Corp. with its own intimate links to Israel . Hunt has been pointing the finger at Hunt, but those who have failed to do, however, are wrong .
 Hunt or George Bush may have been involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Hunt or Bush could have been in the conspiracy to kill JFK . Hunt was not involved in any of the JFK conspiracies .
 Israel and its high-level backers in the JFK assassination conspiracy have played a key role in the ever-converging circles surrounding the assassination conspiracy . However, they do pinpoint the strange and little-noticed tole played by Israel .
 Bush's closest associates during his CIA years have all repeatedly bound him to circumstances which tie together the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate in joint ventures . The CIA and Lansky organized crime syndicate was involved in the Castro assassination plots of the early 1960's .
 The evidence suggests that perhaps George Bush does indeed know more about the assassination of John F Kennedy than he might be willing to admit .
 Daniel Burros was one of those whose names appeared in Lee Harvey Oswald's address book . The alleged assassin's little-known ties to the Neo-Nazi Underground are well-documented .
 Just two years after JFK assassination, Burros died mysteriously of multiple gunshot wounds . Burros were found to have been shot at multiple times in the head .
 Burros' death was ruled a suicide by the owner of the Burros . Despite the strange circumstances, it was ruled as a suicide . The Burros were found dead in the early hours of the morning .
 Frankhauser claims to have been associated with Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination of John F Kennedy . He claims to be associated with Oswald before the Kennedy assassination .
 The story of Lee Harvey Oswald's possible connection to Daniel Burros has never been explored in any other work on the JFK assassination . Oswald's connection to Burros was never explored by any other study .
 Evidence suggests that there is much more to the Oswald-Burros connection than meets the eye . Yet, the evidence, as we shall see, suggests there is more to be done with Oswald .
 This expose was the ostensible trigger that led to Burro's ""suicide"" at the Reading, Pennsylvania home of fellow ""Nazi,"" Roy Frankhauser . Burro committed suicide at the home of his fellow "Nazi"
 In his short career in the political underworld, Dan Burros is known to have indeed been closely associated with ADL undercover informants . It is unlikely that the full truth will ever be known .
 Madole was apparently a dyed-in-the-wool Nazi, but it is established fact that his organization was infiltrated, funded in part and manipulated by agents of the ADL's undercover spy apparatus .
 ADL's operative inside the NRP was one Emmanuel Trujillo who also went by the name Mana Truhill . The ADL was one of the group's operatives . The NRP's operative also went under the name 'Mana Truhill' Truhill.
 Truhill worked closely with Sanford Griffith, then the ADL's chief spymaster . Truhill and Griffith worked closely together in the 1980s .
 Author Eustace Mullins and businessman DeWest Hooker say ADL was active in infiltrating rightist groups at the time . Griffith was a familiar figure moving in and out of the right-wing orbit .
 Daniel Burros was himself deeply a part of this unusual circle being manipulated by the ADL . The ADL is an intriguing fact that Burros himself was himself a member of the group .
 There is strong evidence that Banister was also being deployed by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in its own ""fact-finding"" operations aimed against left-leaning civil rights groups .
 The evidence suggests that the Minutemen were, for all intents and purposes, a government-infiltrated outfit . Perhaps even government-controlled, it's possible that the government-influenced outfit was an extremist outfit .
 Roy Frankhauser has been associated with both Oswald and Burros . He has been linked to the Oswald-Burros connection . The link opens up the door in some highly unusual facts about a strange individual named RoyFrankhauser .
 John George and Laird Wilcox, in Nazis, Communists, Klansmen, and Others on the Fringe, have provided us with a wealth of information .
 George and Wilcox wrote about the government's infiltration of the Minutemen and the role of Roy Frankhauser . Here's what they say about the role the government played in in the organization .
 The Minutemen cases were cracked with the assistance of government infiltrators and informants, according to Eric Norden . Norden says virtually all of the major Minuteman cases were solved with the help of the government .
 Frankhauser was well-known for having taken the Fifth Amendment thirty-three times when questioned about his Ku Klux Klan involvement by the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1965 .
 Unaware of Frankhauser's role, Norden interviewed him extensively for his article . Norden was not aware of his role in the interview .
 We have to put our main stress on the nigger question, of course, because that's what preoccupies the masses . But were not forgetting the Jew. "We have to be careful not to forget the Jew," he said .
 What's going to happen in America will make Nazi Germany look like a Sunday-school picnic . If the Jews knew what was coming, they'd realize what's coming, he'd say .
 Burros was a fanatic American Nazi who served as Rockwell's [American Nazi party] lieutenant for years . He resigned in 1962 to edit a magazine called Kill and finally became a Klan leader . Burros then became a KKK leader .
 Frankhauser may have encouraged Burros' suicide inasmuch as his cover had been blown . Another theory, also not confirmed, is that he encouraged his cover-up . Burros’ suicide may have been a suicide suicide .
 DePugh, who examined the gun, said it was unlikely Burros killed himself . Burros was found dead at the scene .
 Frankhauser may have been working as a government informant in 1965 . Dan Burros was too, perhaps reporting to Frankhuser, perhaps .
 At the time of this writing Frankhauser still resides in the Reading, Pennsylvania, house where he died . Blood stains are still imbedded in the ceiling of the house where the death occurred .
 Frankhauser denies it, but his own U.S. Army records suggest otherwise . He denies it .
 During October 1973 DePugh was a featured speaker at Liberty Lobby's annual Board of Policy meeting in Kansas City, Missouri . During October of that month he was featured speaker for Liberty Lobby .
 Frankhauser lived with the DePugh family in Norborne for several weeks, all the time working for the ATF as an undercover informant . He was the security director of security director at the home . Frankhausers was his constant companion .
 Frankhauser was enmeshed in deep personal problems long before he entered the army, Army documents say . Frankhausers was also involved in personal problems before he joined the army .
 The victim of a broken home and an alcoholic mother, he enlisted in the United States Army on November 6, 1956 . He was regarded by school officials and various employers as emotionally unstable and unreliable .
 Long a collector of Nazi memorabilia and a Ku Klux Klan sympathizer even as a young man, he was engaged in a number of half-baked plots . Army authorities caught him trying to carry out a series of plots .
 He developed a scheme to have himself declared officially dead so he could leave the army and join the neo-Nazi movement . He is hoping to rise to a position of prominence in the Nazi movement .
 In fact, he went AWOL and arrived in Miami, Florida, on July 5, 1957, to do precisely that . He arrived on the island of Miami in order to go AWOL from the Navy .
 He was taken into custody shortly thereafter and returned to his military unit .
 Frankhauser was assigned to infiltrate the 'Black September’ terrorist organization . He first came to light in 1975 when the Washington Star reported on his role in an undercover operation in Canada .
 He was indicted on February 28, 1974, on charges of stealing explosives . He used his relationship with the agency as a defense . This brought about his eventual indictment .
 The fact that Dan Burros died under mysterious circumstances in the home of a long-time covert operative is likewise quite interesting . Burros' death in mysterious circumstances is also interesting .
 Frankhauser's government-sponsored undercover activities were financed by a Jewish community organization, Justice Department documents show . Frankhausers' undercover activities may have been financed by the Jewish community, records show .
 In that instance, the Jewish Community Center of Reading, Pennsylvania, was the center's largest Jewish center in the world .
 There is an even more explosive Frankhauser link to the JFK assassination . There is also a possible connection to the assassination of JFK .
 Scott M Thompson's article regarding Frankhauser's Oswald connection was published in the November 20, 1975 issue of New Solidarity magazine . Scott Thompson wrote about Frankhuser's connection to Oswald Oswald .
 Inclusion of this material is in no way intended by the author of Final Judgment to serve as an endorsement of the information related therein . Final Judgment is simply provided so that there may be as complete a record as possible of all the little-known areas involving JFK assassination conspiracy research .
 Both Paines have been closely linked to Lee Harvey Oswald moments before he was shot in the Dallas jail . Oswald described himself as the 'patsy' in the Kennedy killing moments before being shot in jail .
 She was the one who drove Oswald to Mexico City so that he could be photographed by the CIA in front of the Soviet Embassy . She was one of the ones who drove him to the city to be photographed .
 She also took Oswald to New Orleans where together they opened a franchise of the SWP front, Fair Play for Cuba .
 Frankhauser's reports were turned over by Governor Patterson's office to the FBI in Mississippi . No arrests were made . The FBI was involved in the operation .
 Duggan recruited Gusanos for the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion . Duggan worked within the Buckley family network of Catholic fascist terrorists, recruiting Gusanos . Also a CIA stringer, Duggan was also a CIA .
 Duggan recruited and trained several teams in preparation for the Kennedy assassination . Duggan also recruited several teams to prepare for the assassination .
 The FBI deployed him to the Minutemen where he quickly became a national figure . The FBI in turn deployed him into the Minutsemen . He quickly became an important figure in the U.S.
 Tabbett worked for the FBI in the Klan Bureau of Intelligence before joining De Palma in Connecticut . 1964 subpoena to testify before the Warren Commission quashed by the FBI on ‘national security’ grounds .
 Frankhauser alleged Ken Duggan had ties to some aspect of the JFK assassination conspiracy . It is interesting to note that Duggan's connections to the JFK conspiracy are also interesting . Duggan is a former FBI agent who worked for the CIA .
 Among those with whom Ken Duggan was associated were two Cuban brothers, Guillermo and Ignacio Novo . Both brothers are brothers of two brothers .
 Novo brothers trip to Dallas, Texas in the company of CIA contract agent Marita Lorenz as well as long-time CIA and Mossad asset Frank Sturgis .
 The Novos and their associates met with Jack Ruby, who later killed Lee Harvey Oswald . Hunt was a CIA officer, E Howard Hunt, and later killed Oswald . Ruby was the CIA officer who later shot Oswald .
 The Novo brothers were involved in some fashion in the circumstances surrounding the JFK conspiracy . They were convicted in the murder of maverick Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier in the 1970s .
 IOS, of course, was the operation run by financier Bernard Cornfeld, front man for veteran Mossad official Tibor Rosenbaum . Permindex, the shadowy corporate body linked to all the primary forces behind the JFK assassination, is also linked to the Mossad .
 James L Buckley (brother of William F Buckley, Jr.) that the Novos plotted the Letelier murder . William F. Buckley Jr. was the son of William Buckley Sr. James Buckley, Sr. William Buckley Jr., Jr., was the author of a book about the murder
 It appears likely that there were at least several assassination teams in place in or near Dealey Plaza before and during the JFK assassination . The assassination was all part of a grand multi-leveled ""false flag"" operation .
 The allegations made by Frankhauser, indeed, jibe completely with the conclusions reached in Final Judgment . The allegations were made in Final Judgement, the judge said .
 The author is indebted to Van Loman, who brought the magnitude of the little-noticed Oswald-Burros connection to my attention .
 Loman himself has his own unusual connection to the netherworld of intelligence .
 As a teenager Loman adopted as his father figure and mentor a cagey and colorful Cincinnati, Ohio-based roustabout named Jim Harris . Harris' remarkably checkered career came to an end with his death in 1994 .
 Harris publicly postured as the Grand Dragon of the Ohio Ku Klux Klan, he was a long-time informant for J Edgar Hoover's FBI . Harris was a self-described contract agent for the CIA, actively collaborating in the CIAMafia plots against Castro .
 Among Harris' key associates was Roy Frankhauser, his fellow intelligence operative . Harris was a key intelligence operative in the 1980s and '90s .
 Thanks indeed to Van Loman for pointing out the significance of the OswaldBurros connection . Thanks indeed for pointing to the significance .
 To dig too deeply into this little-explored area will, inevitably, begin turning up rocks under which the tentacles of the ADL and its collaborators in American intelligence lie hidden .
 This author believes that the Oswald-Burros connection is indeed another avenue that JFK assassination investigators should explore further . The connection adds further compelling evidence that solidifies the foundation upon which our final judgment is based .
 The conflict led to Ben-Gurion’s abrupt resignation in June of 1963 . The conflict set the stage for a role by Israel's intelligence agency in the assassination of JFK .
 The driving force behind Permindex was the Geneva-based Banque De Credit International . It was founded by Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum, a financier and arms procurement officer for the Mossad .
 Rosenbaum's bank also served as the chief money laundry for the crime syndicate of international mob boss, Meyer Lansky . Lansky's criminal empire came under fire when the Kennedy administration launched a major crackdown on organized crime .
 Garrison apparently concluded that the Mossad was linked to the assassination but expressed his suspicions only in an unpublished novel . Garrison ultimately concluded that Mossad had been involved in the assassination . Garrison said he believed Mossad to be responsible for the assassination in his novel .
 The chairman of Permindex was Montreal attorney Louis M Bloomfield . Bloomfield was a longtime henchman of liquor baron Sam Bronfman who was both a major patron of Israel and a top-level figure in the Lansky Crime Syndicate .
 New Orleans-based CIA contract agents Guy Banister and David Ferrie worked with the operatives of the French Secret Army Organization in plots against Charles DeGaulle . The plots were being financed through the Mossad’s Permindex front .
 Shaw, Banister and Ferrie also were responsible for the “sheep dipping’s” operation that portrayed accused JFK assassin Lee Harvey Oswald as a “pro-Castro” agitator . They were behind the ‘sheep dip’ operation
 A 1970 article by Courtney Buss lanl fy ansion hails Israel as a roadblock in the path of Soviet expansionism . Shown is a 1970 article hailing Israel as an important ally in the Soviet Union .
 Courtney’s view of Israel exactly reflected that of James Angleton, b ont LOUrnyy ennener 2 19] Israel-the historic, ideological homeland of the the the Mossad liaison .
 Angleton is honored in Israel for his services to the country . Angleton was a prominent diplomat for the U.S. State Department of Defense in the 1950s .
 The photograph of the monument was taken exclusively for this book . It is the only known photograph of this monument ever to be published . The photograph is taken exclusively .
 Georges deLannurien is a high-placed Mossad ally in French intelligence . He is a former French intelligence chief .
 It is no coincidence that on the day of the JFK assassination, deLannurien was huddled at CIA headquarters with the Mossad’s high-ranking ally at the CIA, James J Angleton .
 Media disinformation promotes the myth the Kennedy family was involved in Monroe's death . Evidence suggests Cohen was responsible for the death .
 Many people believe Phillips was the CIA operative seen with Oswald in Texas shortly before the assassination . Phillips later went to work for a company involved in smuggling arms for the Mossad .
 “Artist’s impression” of “Maurice Bishop” was issued by the House Assassinations Committee .
 In 1986 Israeli nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu blew the whistle on Israel and revealed to the world that Israel did indeed have nuclear weapons . In 1986 Israel's nuclear technician revealed Israel had nuclear weapons in Israel .
 Peace activists Nicholas and Mary Eoloff of St. St. Peter's St. Louis, Missouri, were killed in a car crash . Final Judgment is the fourth edition of Final Judgement .
 Vanunu alleged there was a link between the JFK assassination and the 1967 Six Day War that Israel launched against its Arab neighbors . The letter was sent to the parents of Vanununu's adopted son in 1997 .
 Vanunu’s revelations point toward confirmation of the allegations that had already been made in the first edition of Final Judgment released in 1994 . Vanununu's revelations are particularly in light of his background in nuclear program .
 Evidence indicates Israel’s CIA ally, James Angleton, was behind the scheme to frame Hunt . Angleton was a CIA ally of Hunt, according to evidence . Hunt was the prime suspect in the murder of Hunt .
 Angleton’s confidant, journalist Joe Trento, believes Angleton sent Hunt to Dallas in November of 1963 . Trento then—15 years later—leaked a CIA memo placing Hunt in Dallas at the time of the assassination .
 Hunt was working with many of those involved in the assassination and knows far more than he will admit . Hunt was involved in many of the assassination attempts to cover up his involvement . Hunt has been in contact with many people involved with the assassination .
 CIA-connected British writer Christopher Andrew asserts the famous letter to “Dear Mr Hunt’ —purportedly written by Lee Oswald two weeks before the JFK assassination— was a KGB forgery . This letter was more likely part of the “limited hangout” campaign by
 The letter came to light at precisely the time in 1975 that Mike Canfield and Alan Weberman were releasing Coup d’etat in America which promoted the myth Hunt was one of the ‘tramps” picked up in Dallas after the assassination . Hunt was the 'tr
 Weberman has been closely associated with Mordechai Levy, a known operative for the AntiDefamation League . Weberman revealed that the Capitol Hill power broker who played an early instrumental role facilitating Weberman’s effort to spread the “Hunt as tramp” theory was
 Nigerian who published Weberman' s book was also publisher of Israeli leader David Ben-Gurion’s writings . In addition, the Nigerian also published the writings of the Israeli leader .
 Weberman revealed that New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison was quietly suggesting Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination . Even many Garrison admirers are hesitant to acknowledge this point .
 Testimony by former CIA operative Marita Lorenz revealed Hunt had met with CIA-Mossad asset Frank Sturgis and a team of anti-Castro Cubans the day before JFK assassination .
 A Mossadandand CIA-connected intelligence asset, Andrew Allen, orchestrated another lawsuit against The Spotlight forcing the newspaper into bankruptcy . The Spotlight was shut down in 2001 after being sued by a federal judge .
 Veteran CIA asset William R Corson leaked the ‘Hunt in Dallas’ story that embroiled The Spotlight in the Hunt lawsuit . Corson was a longtime media “cutout’ for the Mossad’s CIA liaison, James Angleton .
 One of Corson’s associates carried on his work, energetically scheming behind the scenes to discredit Mark Lane and Michael Collins Piper and to stop distribution of Final Judgment . Later, after Corson's death, one of Corsons associates continued his work to discredit Lane and
 The “black operation’s” against Lane and Piper involved distribution of disinformation documents purporting to “admit” CIA and Israeli involvement in the JFK affair . The operation was part of the “Black operation”
 The phony documents were released with the expectation that they would be easily discredited, as indeed they were . They were released in expectation that the phony documents would be widely discredited .
 Marita Lorenz testified that Sturgis led the two-car caravan from Miami to Dallas that arrived one day before JFK assassination . Lorenz said Sturgs and his team of anti-Castro Cubans met up with CIA officer E Howard Hunt and Jack Ruby .
 Miss Lorenz says Sturgis later told her that his team had been involved in the events in Dealey Plaza . She says he told her his team was involved in events that occurred in the area .
 Cuban intelligence concluded, based on its own investigation, that Sturgis was indeed involved in the JFK assassination . Cuban intelligence concludes, based upon its own .
 The unique positioning of Sturgis places a known Mossad asset in CIA circles in the center of the intrigue surrounding the assassination . It provides yet another “missing link” pointing toward Mossad collaboration with the CIA in the murder of President Kennedy .
 Legendary CIA contract operative Gerry Patrick Hemming was associated with Mossad-linked CIA figure Frank Sturgis in training anti-Castro Cuban exiles outside New Orleans . JFK assassination figures David Phillips, Guy Banister, David Ferrie and Clay Shaw were involved .
 A key sponsor of Hemming’s anti-Castro intrigue involving Sturgis was Theodore Racoosin, described by Hemming as “one of the key founders of the state of Israel’’ Mossad-connected American Jewish gambling interests are known to
 Hemming told author Michael Collins Piper that he had known since the late 1960s that the Mossad was aware of the impending assassination of President Kennedy . Hemming says he knows of no evidence of direct Mossad involvement .
 The Mossad launched its own investigation of the JFK assassination and maintains the files of its investigation to this day . Hemming says the Mossad is still investigating the assassination of JFK .
 The Novos were convicted along with international adventurer Michael Townley for the 1976 murder of Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier . Later, they were convicted of murdering an international adventurer in 1976 .
 Nominally headed by Bernie Cornfeld, IOS was a front for the wide-ranging Mossad intrigue of Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum's Permindex operation was central to JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Robert Vesco alleged that “the same forces” behind JFK assassination were behind the ‘Watergating’ of Richard Nixon . Vesco later broke with Mossad and alleged that the same forces were behind JFK's assassination . IOS ultimately broke with Vesco and alleged
 Blakey never once pointed a finger at Lansky and tried to keep the Lansky connection to the assassination under wraps . Yet, Blakey did not blame Lansky .
 Blakey had been on the payroll of Lansky associate and Permindex investor Morris Dalitz . His chief lieutenant, Ed Levinson, served on the board of Mossad official Tibor Rosenbaum’ s Banque De Credit International which laundered ‘dirty money’
 The major media promotes Blakey’s legend that “The Mafia Killed JFK,” but the wide-ranging interplay between Israeli intelligence and American organized crime is suppressed .
 The media ignores the pivotal role played by Jewish mobsters at the highest level of organized crime . Media focus on Italian Mafia “Godfather’s image, focusing instead on the Italian Mafia Godfather .
 Owners and editors of major media news sources have determined that it is inappropriate to provide accurate coverage of the Jewish and Israeli ties to the American mob . Although discussion of the subject is considered taboo, discussion of such ties to mob is taboo .
 This means then to even suggest “The Chicago Mafia Killed JFK” points even further to Mossad involvement . This means that even suggesting ‘The Chicago mafia killed JFK’ point even further .
 The Mossad connection to the JFK assassination is simply inescapable . Mossad's connection to JFK assassination through numerous venues and on several levels is through various venues .
 New evidence indicates that Dallas mob figure Jack Ruby was actually on the Bronfman’s payroll . Louis Bloomfield, chairman of the Mossad-sponsored Permindex corporation, was also on the payroll .
 Oilman Jack Crichton functioned as a ‘translator’ for Lee Harvey Oswald’s widow after the JFK assassination . Another Bronfman functionary—‘super lawyer’ John McCloy } served on the Warren Commission .
 McCloy was a director—and vice president—of the Empire Trust, a financial combine controlled in part by the Bronfman family . McCloy and Crichton served as vice president of the trust .
 As far back as 1949, Allen Dulles served as an attorney involved in the private business ventures of Bronfman’s daughter Phyllis . Dulles was fired by JFK and also a Warren Commission member .
 Eugene Rostow lobbied for the establishment of the Warren Commission that covered up the truth about the JFK assassination . Rostow was dean of Yale Law School at the time of the assassination of Lee Harvey Oswald .
 Rostow founded the Committee on the Present Danger, which deemed Israel’s security to be central to all U.S. foreign policy concerns . Rostow was a fanatic hard-line Cold Warrior, a founder of the “neo-conservative’’ Committee on
 Fisher had longstanding ties to the Lansky Crime Syndicate . He was also a business partner of Mossad officer Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum and Israeli billionaire Shaul Eisenberg who were prime movers behind the Permindex web .
 Eisenberg was Mossad’s longtime liaison with Red China . He was a key player in the highly secretive joint nuclear bomb development programs between Israel and Red China.
 President Kennedy’s plan to launch a military strike on Red China was reversed by Lyndon Johnson within 30 days of the JFK assassination .
 Evidence suggests that “China’s” first explosion of a nuclear device was, in fact, a joint venture between Israel and Red China . Red China's first nuclear explosion was, say experts .
 Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands was one of Mossad's partners in intrigue . The Dutch prince's dealings with Mossad were the object of scandal .
 Bilderberg founder Bernhard was playing host to not only Ford but also another commission member, John McCloy, at one of the conclaves . Perhaps not coincidentally, at the time of the Warren Commission inquiry, Bernhard played host to both Ford and McCloy at one
 Bernhard also had dealings with Rosenbaum’s Permindex associate, Clay Shaw of New Orleans, going back as far as 1954 . Bernhard and Shaw had dealings dating back to 1954, Bernhard says .
 Like most of the key Warren Commission staffers, both Specter and Jenner had close ties to the Israeli lobby . Specter, Jenner had ties to Israeli lobby.
 Jenner, prior to serving on the Warren Commission, was attorney for Chicago billionaire Henry Crown who was linked to the Lansky Crime Syndicate . Jenner was also attorney for Henry Crown, whose vast financial empire helped bankroll Israel’s nuclear weapons development program which was a thorn in the side
 Russian-bom nobleman George DeMohrenschildt functioned as a “CIA babysitter” for Lee Harvey Oswald in the spring of 1963 . Later claimed that there was a conspiracy behind the assassination and that he had been unwittingly used as part of that conspiracy .
 Just prior to his purported suicide DeMohrenschildt said that ‘the Jews’ and “the Jewish Mafia” were out to get him . He said that the Jews and the Jewish Mafia were out for him .
 Gerald Posner is quick to assert that DeMohrenschildt's claims were evidence of the nobleman’s paranoia and insanity . Posner's Case Closed, which claims that Oswald was a “lone nut,” is also a ClA-connected writer .
 Sullivan coordinated the FBI’s infamous COINTELPRO operations infiltrating dissident organizations . Sullivan was the FBI's director of operations in the 1960s and '90s .
 There is evidence that veteran CIA asset David Ferrie was one of Sullivan’s COINTELPRO operatives involved in the burning of a Black Masonic lodge in Louisiana in 1962 .
 New information suggests that Barry Seal launched his career as Ferrie’s CIA protégé and that it was Seal who was a get-away pilot in the JFK assassination . Barry Seal was a top drug smuggler involved in the CIA's Iran-contra operations .
 Seal himself was assassinated in 1986 in what sources say was a contract hit ordered by the Mossad . Sources say it was a hit using assets from the CIA and a Colombian drug cartel . Seal was killed in 1986 .
 Mae Brussell contended that former Nazi general Reinhard Gehlen was a likely conspirator in JFK assassination . Gehlen worked for Western intelligence following World War II . Noted conspiracy theorist Brussell said Gehlen may have been involved in the assassination .
 If Brussell was right about a “Nazi connection’s to the assassination, one could logically suggest that the ex-Nazi orchestrated the JFK assassination on behalf of his allies in the Mossad .
 One can indeed find a Mossad connection to the JFK affair in the most unlikely places . Mossad was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Levine expressed unusual interest in Oswald’s association with Alexander Ziger, a Russian Jew who may have been involved in intelligence intrigue . Ziger may have worked for the CIA and/or Israel's Mossad, perhaps directing Oswald .
 Clearly, these are the little known ‘ugly rumors’ circulating overseas that the Warren Commission was determined to squelch . The Warren Commission is determined to quelch the rumors .
 Had Americans heard these rumors, they might have started investigating JFK’s policy toward Israel . The Mossad did have the motive, means and opportunity to collaborate in the JFK assassination, author says .
 In recent years, Syrian defense minister Mustafa Tlas declared publicly on Syrian television that he believed there was a Mossad role in the JFK assassination .
 At right is the famous, well-dressed “umbrella man’s” widely believed to have played a part in the assassination . At right, the man is believed to be the man responsible for the assassination.
 The “umbrella man’s” companion is often said to be “Latin looking,” a veteran of Middle East travel told Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper that the individual instead has the appearance of a typical Sephardic Yemenite Jew .
 Mossad assassinations specialist Michael Harari was in the field in 1963 . Harari may be the "umbrella man" of assassinations . He was Mossad's assassin in the event of 1963 .
 Attorney for Martin Luther King’s alleged assassin, James Earl Ray, links “Raul’—along with Jack Ruby—to a U.S.-based arms smuggling operation which, in 1963, included a top Mossad officer who was almost certainly Harari .
 The ever-exquisitely-attired fashion plate and Mossad assassinations specialist Michael Harari is shown in a rare 1985 photo of him .
 Harari's record suggests that if Mossad deployed any of its own operatives in Dallas, it would have been Harari . Harari’s record shows that if any Mossad operative was deployed in Dallas it would be Harari himself .
 CIA official Richard Helms was a close friend of the Shah and James Angleton’s CIA patron . Helms implicated in the plot to frame E Howard Hunt for involvement in the JFK assassination in 1978 .
 President Richard Nixon attempted to blackmail Helms and the CIA over the CIA’s role in the JFK assassination . Later, hoping to derail the Watergate scandal, Nixon tried to blackmail the CIA with the help of the CIA .
 The Watergate affair was orchestrated by Angleton’s little-known CIA desk in the White House to force Nixon from office . Angleton was the CIA's desk at the CIA in the Nixon White House .
 Garrison’s family brought legal action against Milchan because the family did not receive all of the proceeds their father was promised when Stone bought the rights to Garrison's memoir . Garrison's family is suing Milchan for not getting the proceeds they were promised .
 James DiEugenio's Destiny Betrayed is a fact-filled examination of Jim Garrison’s investigation of Clay Shaw . The book has been careful not to explore the multiple Mossad links of the Permindex corporation on whose board Shaw served .
 Close friends of Clay Shaw, the Sterns were owners of the WDSU media empire which played a central role in Shaw’s “sheep-dipping’ of Lee Oswald as a “pro-Castro agitator’ prior to the JFK
 Garrison recognized Mossad involvement in the JFK affair in an unpublished novel . Garrison voiced his suspicions only in his unpublished novel, a fact many choose to ignore .
 Foxman made the preposterous assertion that anybody who believed that even the “militaryindustrial complex” had been involved in the assassination might also believe that the Holocaust was a hoax . Foxman said anybody who thought that even even the militaryindustrial complex was involved in .
 Marcia Milchiker, an ADL-affiliated college trustee in Orange County, California, played a key role in the ADL’s successful effort to prevent author Michael Collins Piper from speaking about his book .
 A major frenzy erupted and newspapers across the country reported on the controversy . ‘College coiiee’e ‘FK slain in conspiracy 2 Vemeene cane Sa and. ‘Killing in conspiracy’ was a major frenzy .
 Dr. Martin Luther King’s alleged assassin, James Earl Ray, hinted in his book that he suspected a Mossad link to the murder of Dr. King . Ray's book, "James Earl Ray," was published this week in New York, New York .
 Final Judgment has also demonstrated a number of other strange details relating to King’s assassination which point toward a very definitive Israeli connection . Final Judgment also has demonstrated that there is also a very definite Israeli connection to King's assassination .
 Jared Taylor once tried to sabotage a speaking engagement by Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper because he was offended by Piper’s criticism of the CIA and the Mossad . Taylor is best known for writing a book proclaiming blacks to be inferior to whites .
 Taylor’s writing has been featured in CIA man William F Buckley Jr. of the National Review and praised in Commentary, edited by ClA-connected Norman Podhoretz of the American Jewish Committee .
 Taylor’s opposition to Final Judgment is no surprise since he once maintained behind-the-scenes contact with the late Irwin Suall . Suall was longtime chief “fact finder’ for the ADL which shares Taylor's opposition to affirmative action .
 One American conservative, Morris Bealle, figured out Welch’s game early on .
 Welch had declared Bealle’s book, The Guns of the Regressive Right, “all wrong” and told his Birch followers that it was not the CIA but Lyndon Johnson behind the JFK assassination . Welch said Bealle's book pointed a finger in the direction of the
 Newhouse has played a key role in suppressing evidence of conspiracy in the JFK affair . Newhouse is a major power in the Israeli lobby, a key figure in the investigation .
 Mob attorney Roy Cohn was a foe of the Kennedy family and linked to the Mossad’s Permindex operation that played a central role in the JFK conspiracy . Roy Cohn used his clout to influence Newhouse publications . It's probably no coincidence that Roy Cohn's longtime friend,
 Jack Newfield is a columnist known for his sympathy toward Israel . The story was written by Newfield, a well-known supporter of Israel .
 Pro-Israel factions in the media are trying to cover up the truth about the assassination of President Kennedy . This is all part and parcel of efforts by pro-Israel groups to confuse the public with wildly diverse theories .
 Readers say Final Judgment is the first book ever to tie most of the conventional theories together in a way that makes ultimate sense . Readers say it's the first to tie up conventional theories with a way of making ultimate sense in the book .
 Findley: Diplomat had been urging Findley to write a book documenting Mossad role in JFK assassination . During that time, Findley noted that he had been urged by the diplomat to write the book .
 Findley offered to forward Piper’s manuscript to the diplomat for his review . Findley also offered to send Piper's manuscript to Findley for review .
 Diplomat gave Piper inside information delineating the so-called “French connection’—which the diplomat asserted was, in fact, a key Mossad link— to the JFK assassination . Piper contacted the diplomat after receiving the manuscript .
 The details confirmed Piper’s initial findings . Piper researched further and substantially enhanced his manuscript regarding the “French” connection prior to publication .
 Zionist Organization of America gave award for “outstanding journalism” to “conservative” Joseph Farah . Farah was editor of the Internet-based WorldNetDaily.com .
 Farah’s writers studiously avoided mentioning the multiple Mossad links that can be found though the “French” connection to the JFK conspiracy .
 A CIA document relating to a French mercenary had already been noted by Piper and scores of JFK writers before him . What the authors call “new evidence’s ‘new” evidence, the authors say .
 Piper suspects Farah’s book is “black propaganda’”’ designed to distort the picture and suppress the real truth about the “French” connection .
 Cette condamnation atest couverte par aucune des dispositions ammistiantes actuellemeat en vigueur . J'ai L*honneur de vous demander de bien vovloir .
 Pierre Neuville was sentenced in absentia to twenty years of forced labor for “treason” and “breach of state security” for exposing a joint Mossad French intelligence plot to kill Egyptian President Nasser in 1956 . The never-before-published document
 Pierre provided critical information in the writing of Final Judgment . Pierre later fled France and went into exile . He later provided Michael Collins Piper with critical information to the writing .
 Pierre believes that Bernard Ledun (the French government official who released this document against the wishes of his superiors), was murdered in retribution in Paris on February 1, 1994 when the Mossad realized that Pierre was a source for Piper .
 John F Kennedy, Jr. enraged the Israeli lobby when he published allegations of Israeli intelligence collaboration in Rabin’s murder in his magazine, George. George. Kennedy .
 Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper received an anonymous typewritten letter praising him for being “gutsy” and saying the author of the letter “knew” Piper’s thesis was right .
 Piper later discovered that the typewritten return address on the envelope was that of the office of JFK Jr.’s magazine . Piper later found out that the return address was actually the magazine office of the magazine .
 Friends of JFK's White House inner circle have privately endorsed Piper's thesis of Mossad involvement in JFK’s murder .
 There were Israelis in Dallas on the day of the assassination, including future Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin . Rabin was purportedly on a “military briefing tour,’ according to Rabin’s widow .
 Two weeks later Rabin was promoted to chief of staff of the Israeli Defense Forces . Rabin became Israel's chief of chief of defense forces in 1994 .
 U-S. dual citizen and self-described former Mossad operative, C David Heymann popped up in the wake of the tragedy that claimed the life of John F Kennedy, Jr. and told what now appears to be a thoroughly fraudulent —although widelypromoted—story .
 Kenan, founder of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, founded by the lobby for Israel . Kenan is a former member of the committee .
 Kenan’s attacks on JFK prove beyond doubt that JFK was not a ‘special friend of Israel” as the Israeli lobby have suggested in order to counter the foundational thesis of Final Judgment . Kenan: Kenan's attacks against JFK show beyond doubt .
 The 2003 book, Support Any Friend by Israeli educated Warren Bass, was funded by pro-Israel foundations . Final Judgment is clearly part of the operation to defuse growing awareness of the assertions made in Final Judgment .
 The Israeli-sponsored book makes the contorted argument that JFK’s conflict with Israel actually strengthened the U.S.-Israeli relationship . It claims that because JFK provided Israel with conventional weapons (effectively paying extortion hoping to stop Israel from building nuclear weapons) is somehow “�
 American media, particularly Jewish newspapers, have given the book wide play . Not surprisingly, the book has been given wide play by the U.S.
 Critics cite the Bass book as an effective refutation of Final Judgment . Bass' book is cited as a means of refuting the book .
 Documents also demonstrate that other aspects of JFK’s policy were highly controversial as far as Israel was concerned . The documents also show that JFK's policy was highly controversial .
 The more recent book, Israel and the Bomb, by Israeli historian Avner Cohen, also provides new light on the long-secret conflict between JFK and Israel . Cohen himself has denounced Final Judgment .
 Letter from Secretary of State Rusk to the Deputy Secretary of Defense , August 30, 1961 . Letter was signed by Secretary Rusk in 1961 .
 "From a domestic point of view, the American supporters of Israel would be pleased and would be less critical of our policy," says President Obama .
 Would constitute a direct challenge to the Arabs by the US, destroying growing Arab confidence in our impartiality, and remove the protective covering of the UN behind which we deal with most Palestine issues . i.ii. Against would constitute a . direct challenge . to the Arab confidence . in our
 i. Could not be counterbalanced by creation of a corre-— sponding relationship with the Arabs . i.iii. Couldn't counterbalance by creating of an alliance with the Arab world . ii. i. Would not be countered by creating an alliance of Arab nations .
 Would render the U.S. responsible in Arab eyes for every Israeli military venture . Would make it responsible for all Israeli military ventures .
 Would encourage the more fanatical Arabs to seek a similar relationship with the Soviet Union . Would hand the Soviets a very useful propaganda weapon. Would hand them a good propaganda weapon .
 Would be the only U.S. security arrangement with another country not directed against the Sino-Soviet bloc . Would cause us further problems with Pakistan in refusing to take Pakistan’s side in Kashmir dispute .
 Would lead to increasing Israeli demands for sophisticated weapons. vii. would lead to increased Israeli demands of sophisticated weapons . vii . Would be increasing Israeli demand for sophisticated arms .
 Would put greater pressure on Arab leaders well-dis-— posed toward the U.S. v. i. viii. Would put . greater pressure . on Arab . leaders .
 "We consider it important not to give in to Israeli and domestic pressures for a special relationship in national security matters," says Israel . Israel and the U.S. consider not giving in to Israel's "special relationship" pressures for national security .
 To undertake, in effect, a military alliance with Israel would destroy the delicate balance we seek to maintain in our Near East relations . Israel is a major ally in the Middle East, writes David Cameron .
 Final Judgment graphics were designed by Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper . Final Judgment will be released this week at 9pm ET .
 The shaded area represents the Mossad linkage which interconnects with all of the other commonly accepted ‘suspects” linked to the JFK assassination and its cover-up . The shagged area represents Mossad .
 All of the major theories about the JFK assassination which are widely accepted all fit easily into the “Mossad Box’s” if all of the evidence (as laid out in Final Judgment) is taken together . According to Piper, this model demonstrates that this model .
 Piper adds that ‘the oil barons” and “right wing extremists’ and the FBI itself could also be added to the list, as Final Judgment has shown . Piper says that “the FBI itself’s” own could be added .
 All of the pieces on the front of the puzzle are, in intelligence jargon, “false flags,” used with exquisite skill to confuse those seeking the truth about who really knew what happened .
 All the pieces taken together illustrate a startlingly clear picture of the Israeli flag . However, if you look at ‘the other side of the jigsaw puzzle’ you see that all the pieces take together .
 Israel’s Mossad which, in this model, is represented by the Mossad logo in the center . Israel's Mossad represents Israel's security forces in the Middle East .
 This fourth model shows the centrality of the Mossad link to all of the key elements involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up in one aspect or another . Piper calls “the Permindex Star’’
 Mossad’s Shaul Eisenberg is a key player in the Permindex web . This model includes the ‘Peking’ connection referring to the secret joint nuclear bomb production program between Israel and Red China . Mossad's Eisenberg forged by the Mossad,
 Jack Ruby’s ties to Lansky and to Israeli arms smuggling or the control of the Chicago Mafia by Mossad collaborator Hyman Larner . Jack Ruby was a member of the Mafia in the early 1950s .
 The relationship between all of these seemingly diverse elements is outlined in Final Judgment . Final Judgment is based on the relationship between the film and the book .
 Frank Sturgis was a longtime CIA and Mossad asset who claimed to have participated in the JFK assassination . He also trained anti-Castro Cuban exiles outside New Orleans to fight the Castro regime .
 Chamish accepts Final Judgment’s contention that the Permindex corporation was a Mossad front for covert operations . Chamish is a self-described “Zionist” who says he is “committed to the strength and survival of Israel .
 Ray Kalainikas, a reader of Final Judgment, encountered Cronkite at the farmer’s market in West Tisbury on Martha’S Vineyard in 1996 . Earlier, on Aug., 1996, on August 22, 1996, Ray Kalaineikas encountered Cron
 Kalainikas outlined the thesis of Final Judgment to Cronkite, who listened intently . The author of the book, "Final Judgment," is credited with bringing the story to the fore .
 This revelation added fuel to the impeachment drive against Clinton at a time when there was growing conflict between Clinton and Israel . Clinton was accused of lying to the Israeli government in the 1990s .
 Later, Clinton enraged the Israeli lobby by publicly raising questions about Israel’s ‘secret’ nuclear arms program . Clinton followed in the footsteps of his hero, John F Kennedy who had done the same thing privately .
 The full story about the Mossad role in the Lewinsky affair remains untold . Although numerous Israeli “connections” to the circumstances surrounding the affair did emerge, the full story is still untold .
 The program noted that “This event is a tribute to the strong bond between the Kennedy family and the State of Israel’ — although, of course, that is simply a myth that has no bearing in geopolitical or historical reality . The program said that ‘This event was a
 The 1966 U.S. Note is in the possession of a highly regarded veteran critic of the Federal Reserve . The 1966 note was written by a senior Federal Reserve official .
 The existence proves, beyond question, that it is an absolute myth that no U.S. Notes were issued after the JFK assassination . It refutes the theory that JFK was killed because he ordered United States Notes taken out of circulation and that, upon his death, his successor, Lyndon
 Final Judgment demonstrates that JFK’s order had nothing to do with United States Notes whatsoever . Final Judgment. Final Judgment . .
 The myth about “JFK’s Greenbacks” has muddied the waters in the debate over the JFK conspiracy . It is a myth that simply refuses to go away, the facts notwithstanding. The Kennedy family did oppose the Federal Reserve .
 Banister's best-known associates were staunch supporters of Israel . They were widely suspected of being assets of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith .
 The truth about the Courtneys puts a new light on the Banister connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy . The Courtneys were a prominent figure in the family of JFK's widow .
 There's much more to the New Orleans aspect of the conspiracy that needs to be told, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Banister's connection to Kent and Phoebe Courtney, founders of Conservative Society of America . Most often noted is his connection to a flamboyant couple .
 Courtney is even said to have ordered her steaks ""Communist Blood Red" for which we thank her for the title of this appendix . Courtney's steaks are said to be 'Communist blood red'
 The Courtneys reportedly claimed after the assassination that Oswald had tried to get employment on their newspaper, The Independent American . Oswald was in New Orleans the summer before his sojourn in August .
 A wide-ranging group of American conservatives were gearing up to form a third party to compete in the 1960 presidential election . Perhaps the most notable and most readily documentable instance of this came in 1960 .
 Courtney's action created much controversy among conservative circles . Verne P Kaub, the president of the American Council on Christian Laymen, released an ""Open Letter to Phoebe Courtney"" responding to her allegation that ""haters" were behind her .
 The infiltrators are representatives of Communist and Zionist organizations and influences . The infiltrator is a member of the Communist Party .
 "It is these forces of deception and dissension . . . which raise the false cry of anti-Semitism, thus resorting to the worst possible form of bigotry," he said .
 This outfit is merely a front for the Anti-Defamation League . It is as Red as they come, and merely an anti-Semitic outfit .
 There were widespread rumors within the ""right wing"" that the Courtneys were financed by the Stern family of New Orleans . Mrs. Courtney was a prominent member of the "right wing"
 Lee Harvey Oswald's activities in New Orleans were, in fact, part of an ADL ""fact finding"" operation contracted out by the ADL to Banister's private detective agency .
 In this context, it is appropriate to recall other interesting details that have been lost in the debate over who was manipulating Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination of President Kennedy .
 In 1962, Ned Touchstone, editor of the Bossier Press in Bossier City, Louisiana, investigated the bombing of a black Masonic lodge in Louisiana . Touchstone: The bombing of the lodge in 1962 was an act of terrorism .
 Touchstone believed that since most of the KKK leaders in the area were Masons that it was unlikely they would destroy a Masonic lodge . Touchstone: Most of the media portrayed the crime as the act of the Ku Klux Klan, but Touchstone thought it was likely the KKK would destroy
 Touchstone concluded Ferrie had been working as an agent of the FBI's COINTELPRO in association with Banister's ADL contact, Botnick . Botnick was indeed working closely with the FBI in connection with the bombing . Touchstone concludes Ferrie was working for the FBI
 Touchstone had independently pinpointed Ferries connection to the JFK assassination . Touchstone said it was all the more pertinent because of Ferries ties to both Oswald and Banister. Touchstone also pinpointed the connection .
 Oswald had connections with CIA contract operative David Ferrie . Photographs refuting would-be conspiracy debunkers' claims .
 Touchstone's discoveries have remain suppressed precisely (or at least in part) because they pointed directly toward the ADL's ties to these key figures in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Touchstone also pointed directly to the intrigue of both the FBI and the CIA in the same time frame .
 The ADL most assuredly would have been one of Hosty's primary contacts . Hosty would likely have been a primary contact with the ADL .
 Guy Banister and David Ferrie worked with Oswald in New Orleans prior to the assassination . Ferrie and Banister were both closely connected to the ADL . The actual details of the affair will probably never be known .
 For every 25 Ku Klux Klan members there were 3 COINTELPRO operatives among them, an FBI official once estimated . William Sullivan once estimated that for every 25 KKK members, 3 operatives would be among them .
 Jack Ruby, the nightclub keeper who killed Lee Harvey Oswald, was a nightclub keeper in Dallas, Texas . Sullivan's figures are based on the fact that Ruby killed Oswald in Dallas .
 The Courtneys were functioning as ADL assets . Thus, for all intents and purposes, the Courtneys had been functioning as assets .
 It is highly unlikely that they would have associated so closely with Guy Banister if they had perceived him to be among the ""haters"" that they so loudly opposed . And it is highly likely that they . would have . associated so close with Guy . Banister .
 CIA's James Angleton and others of that mode proclaimed Israel as some sort of bulwark against Soviet aggression . The theory lost much of its luster after the fall of the Soviet Union as a Cold War target for American anti-communists .
 Kent Courtney outlined this theory in an editorial in yet another of his publications, The Patriot Tribune, which he published out of Pineville, Louisiana .
 Courtney laid to rest any doubts about his support for the Zionist cause . Courtney published a May 28, 1970 editorial entitled ""Israel Can Stop Russian Expansion" Courtney: "Israel can stop Russian expansion"
 Israel is surrounded by enemies who were administered a stunning defeat in June 1967 . Israel was defeated in the Arab Spring of the year 1967 .
 Courtney was sympathetic to the Zionist cause, but evidence is just as logical that he was sympathetic . Courtney's ideological affinity for Israel is based on his ideological affinity with Israel . Courtney was a prominent supporter of the Israeli government .
 This is not to suggest that Banister was cognizant of a Mossad connection ultimately behind the JFK assassination conspiracy . Banister is not aware of the Mossad-linked connection .
 Banister was very clearly moving in circles that were sympathetic to the interests of Israel . What it does suggest, however, is that he was sympathetic to Israel's interests .
 Courtney theory regarding Israel (mirroring that of James Angleton at the CIA) was adopted by many of those on the ""right wing" in America . Courtney theory was the guiding theory behind much of the U.S. arms buildup during the Reagan era of the 1980s .
 It is neither here nor there as to whether or not the Courtneys were actually paid ADL informants or assets, for there is no question (as we have seen) that they shared the ADL's world view .
 The fact is that they were moving in the same circles—more so than many people realize . The fact that many of them are moving in circles is more so than people realize, they say .
 In fact, in the end, there is really some question as to whether Edgar and Edith Stern of New Orleans were really so "liberal" after all .
 Sterns were members of the New Orleans-based Information Council of the Americas, run by noted anti-communist, Dr. Dr. Martin Martin . The Sterns' financial ties to the group were also major financial supporters .
 Alton Ochsner, Sr. who himself had long-standing and intimate ties to the intelligence community, had ties to CIA . Alton's father, Alton, Sr., is a former CIA director and CIA director .
 Stern's close friend, Clay Shaw,**® also served on the board of the Mossad's Permindex operation which was so central to the JFK assassination conspiracy . Ochsner himself served on board of directors of the Foreign Policy Association of New Orleans with Shaw . Shaw also
 This sheds new light on the Courtney connection, although it is not something that fits in with the standard perception of Kent and Phoebe Courtney .
 The right-wing was right wing more in appearance than in reality, he says . "When I saw that, I realized that the right wing was ... not right wing," he says. "I realized that . When I saw . that, he realized that."
 Garrison added that the CIA had actually penetrated numerous groups and used them for its own nefarious purposes . Garrison, it might be noted, could just as easily have commented that Israel's Mossad—through the ADL—had done likewise .
 Had Garrison then been cognizant of many of the then-hidden factors documented in Final Judgment, he may well indeed have uncovered the Mossad connections that we have uncovered here . Garrison later did discover on his own, which he later did .
 Final Judgment concurs with Garrison's basic conclusions . Garrison's memoir, On the Trail of the Assassins, published by Sheridan Square Press, was published by the press .
 CAQ's opening thrust speared The Spotlight for publicizing the release of Final Judgment with much fanfare in January of 1994—+esulting, it might be added, in the sale of nearly 8,000 copies .
 In fact, the results of Lane's work in that case have never once been mentioned in CAQ .
 CAQ's professed role as a CIA watchdog is unusual, especially in light of its professed mission . CAQ is accused of leaking classified documents to the U.S. government .
 Institute for Media Analysis has received substantial funding from an influential foundation known as the Stern Family Fund . The Stern family is funded by that same Stern family about whom we have heard so much in this book .
 CAQ could not very well have ignored the ADL spy scandal affair, inasmuch as even ""mainstream"" media outlets (including Editor & Publisher magazine) actually carried reports on the scandal .
 CAQ was obligated to comment on the affair because of its claim to be a voice for those same progressives . CAQ is one of many self-styled "progressive" groups and individuals that were targets of the ADL .
 CAQ is otherwise reticent about daring to criticize the Mossad . CAQ remains reticent to criticize Mossad, however .
 CAQ's effort to discredit The Spotlight and its publicizing of Final Judgment is no surprise, especially in light of the financial backing of the Stern family . CAQ has received financial backing from Stern family so central to the New Orleans intrigue documented in this book .
 The Sterns are intimately connected in so many ways to the circumstances surrounding the assassination of John F Kennedy . That we find the Sterns so intimately connected to the assassination is interesting indeed .
 Since this was originally written, CAQ has come under new direction and has been more forthright in its criticisms of Israel and the intrigues of the Mossad . Since this article has been published, it has become more outspoken in its criticism of Israel .
 Lee Harvey Oswald's sojourn in New Orleans, moving in the Banister-Courtney-Shaw-Stern sphere of influence, has been heavily documented . There are a few mysteries that remain, but there are still a few still mysteries .
 Leon Israel Company was engaged in the import of coffee . What we do know is that the Leon Israel company was engaged .
 What we don't know is why Lee Harvey Oswald claimed that he worked there . Oswald claimed to have worked there, but it's not clear why .
 Evidence suggests that Samuel Israel Jr. was indeed connected to Clay Shaw and the International Trade Mart during the period surrounding the JFK assassination .
 According to Who's Who in America in America, Israel was more than just a coffee importer . Israel was also a coffee exporter, according to the report .
 Israel served as vice president of the Board of Commissioners of the Port of New Orleans and on the Council of the Lower Mississippi River Port Interests . Israel also won the French Medal of Merit for his service in the United States Army transportation corps in Europe .
 There is yet one last matter relating to the New Orleans connection that bears mentioning . The Navy SEAL is believed to have been involved in the sinking of the Black Hawk .
 Barry Seal is best known for his role in the CIA's arms-drugs-and-money laundering operations out of the tiny Mena, Arkansas airport during the 1980s as part of the infamous Iran-contra operations that (largely unknown to the American public) involved Israel
 Seal may have been a get-away pilot for one or more of the JFK assassins, says Hopsicker . Seal was a pilot for JFK assassins . Seal may be a pilot of one of the assassins .
 Ferrie's famous mad dash across Louisiana into Texas immediately after the assassination . Ferrie was coordinating Seal's get-away pilot role .
 The CIA and the Mossad have worked closely in the global drug trade, using its resources to finance their joint international operations . And although Hopsicker does not delve into Mossad connection, the fact is the fact that the CIA and Mossad are working closely .
 David Ferrie is believed to have been involved with the Mossad . Ferrie's activities may be linked to an as-yet-undetermined Mossad connection . It is conceivable that this would provide us yet another Mossad-linked connection .
 The New Orleans connection is critical to understanding the forces behind the intrigue surrounding Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the murder of President Kennedy . These are the types of details that paint a picture fully in line with the thesis of Final Judgment .
 One of the commission's most active members was the protééé of a figure long linked to both the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate . Gerald R Ford was one of the most prominent members of the committee .
 Another commission member, John McCloy, was intimately associated with some of the most powerful families in the Jewish elite . McCloy was a member of the commission .
 If the Warren Commission had been sincere in investigating the JFK conspiracy, an Israeli connection could have been covered up . The immense ""Jewish presence"" within the commission could have provided the means whereby the Israeli connection would be covered up.
 The Warren Commission has been damned to the ends of the earth for nearly forty years . Few actually know who really pulled the strings behind the scenes as this now-infamous deliberating body carried out its purported investigation into John F Kennedy's assassination .
 On November 22, 1964 The Washington Post published a glowing endorsement of The Warren Commission Report . Eugene Rostow, then dean of the Yale Law School, was the author of the report . The Warren Report was published by the Washington Post .
 Rostow's pivotal role in the creation of the commission was not publicly detailed in any consequence until thirty years after JFK assassination . Rostow and the Post were able to get away with this deception because the truth is that Rostow created the commission in secret .
 For those thirty years, the ""idea"" for the commission had been attributed to others . For those 30 years, it had been assumed that the idea had been passed on to others, but it was never discussed .
 Transcripts of recorded telephone conversations in the Johnson White House were released for the first time in 1993 . In 1993, transcriptions of recorded White House conversations were released by the White House .
 The idea of a presidential commission to report on the assassination of President Kennedy was first suggested by Eugene Rostow in a telephone call to LBJ aide Bill Moyers during the afternoon of November 24th,""** within minutes of Lee Harvey Oswald's murder by Jack Ruby . According to JFK
 Arab press was alleging ""the Zionists"" were behind the president's murder, *° —citing, as an indication, for example, the fact Jack Ruby was Jewish . These were among the kind of ""ugly rumors" the Warren Commission was established to suppress .
 The facts demonstrate that there was a substantial ""Jewish presence"" at this staff level . That could have impacted substantially on the handling of any evidence of Mossad involvement or Mossad connections .
 This author does not buy the theory that all Jewish Americans are necessarily partisans of Israel or obligated to be . For the record, this author doesn't believe that all Jews are necessarily partisan of Israel .
 Some of the most forthright critics of Israel and its misdeeds have been Americans of Jewish descent . In fact—to reiterate what has already been said here—some of the worst critics of the country have been Jews .
 Final Judgment: Jewish Americans are sensitive to Israel's concerns . The ADL says the thesis of this book is offensive to the Jewish community . We will accept the ADL's contention that Jewish Americans .
 It is not a leap of logic to contend that in the event evidence linking Israel's Mossad to the JFK assassination had come forth that Jewish Americans on the commission staff would be constitutionally inclined to cover up any evidence that did emerge .
 The unusually-pervasive ""Jewish presence"" on the Warren Commission staff at the investigative level . The Warren Commission has been accused of wrongdoing .
 What follows is a summary of Kaplan's details, and additional information readily available in the public domain .
 Kaplan: Of the seven ""other staff members"" named in Kaplan's article, four were Jewish . Kaplan: "Of the seven other staff members" named, four of them were Jewish.
 Of the 22 lawyers in question, nearly half of them could be described as constituting a ""Jewish presence"" on the commission . This means that of the lawyers involved in the case, nearly . half of those lawyers could be considered to have a Jewish presence on the panel .
 Political connections of other staff lawyers suggests that the ""Jewish presence"" was even more substantial . However, as we shall see, as well as the political connections of others involved in the legal process .
 Redlich was the actual author of the final disreputable document known as the Warren Commission Report . He was a deputy to the commission's chief counsel, J Lee Rankin . Redlich is a former deputy to Rankin's chief lawyer .
 He was involved at a high-level in Jewish community affairs prior to service on Warren Commission . He was recruited as a member of the American Jewish Congress committee on law and social action in 1962 .
 This firm once represented shadowy conservative operative John Rees . Rees is known for his ties to Israeli intelligence . This firm also represented shadowy right-wing conservative operative .
 Eisenberg served as the assistant to Norman Redlich on the Warren Commission . Eisenberg was also responsible for analysis of scientific evidence on ballistics . He served as an assistant to Redlich .
 Eisenberg has been eclipsed in infamy by his Warren Commission colleague, Arlen Specter . Eisenberg was a member of the Warren Commission, but was eclipsed by Specter's colleague .
 Specter is one of the Israeli lobby's chief legislative tacticians in Congress . Specter has been a steadfast enthusiast of the Warren Commission Report .
 Specter frequently travels at United States taxpayer expense on ""official business"" to Israel where his Americanborn sister has taken up residence . Specter's sister is an American born American born in Israel .
 Until his recent demise, Belin remained perhaps the most vocal former staff member defending the Warren Commission . Belin's death was the last of many former staff members defending the commission .
 Belin popped up in 1975 as staff director of the so-called ""Rockefeller Commission" instituted by Gerald Ford . Described as a ""respected Midwestern Republican lawyer who would add geographical diversity to the staff"
 Belin proved himself a valuable defender of CIA interests . Ostensibly charged with investigating CIA misdeeds, Belin is a CIA insider .
 JFK researcher James DiEugenio says Belin was trying to refute the idea that Hunt was connected to the events in Dallas . In the 1975 inquiry one of Belin's major concerns was the CIA's E Howard Hunt . Hunt was a CIA official, according to the JFK researcher .
 Stern was a former law clerk for Chief Justice Earl Warren from 1955-1956 . Stern was well-placed to influence the chief of the commission on an intimate level .
 Stern has almost necessarily had connections with the intelligence community as part of his global ventures . Stern has been involved in many of the world's most successful businesses .
 He was recommended by a childhood friend, attorney Nathan Lewin, who was then a special assistant in the U.S. solicitor general's office .
 Mosk was the son of California State Supreme Court Justice Stanley Mosk . Mosk is one of the most prominent members of the powerful Los Angeles Jewish community . Another staffer, Mosk, was also a son of a prominent L.A. Jewish leader .
 Pollak was a former law clerk for Chief Justice Warren . Pollak later served in the Justice Department and as an attorney in private practice in San Francisco . San Francisco is reported to be a key American ""station"" for Israel's Mossad .
 In 1993 the ADL was revealed to be running its number one undercover informant, Roy Edward Bullock, out of San Francisco . Bullock was the Mossad's number one informant . The ADL's intelligence and propaganda unit—the ADL—was revealed to have been running its
 Weinreb clerked for United States Supreme Court Justice John M Harlan from 1963-1964 . He assisted Norman Redlich in the editing and final preparation of the commission's report .
 Weinreb went on to serve as a Harvard law professor . After a brief stint in the criminal division of the Justice Department, Weinreb served as a law professor.
 The other Warren Commission lawyers who were not Jewish did still have connections to political interests and individuals who were, in turn, attune to the powerful Israeli lobby .
 Rankin was the chief counsel to the Warren Commission . Rankin knew Warren from the time that Rankin served as U.S. solicitor general under President Eisenhower .
 Ball, in short, was a political crony of the chief justice and certainly not one to rock the boat . Ball was not one of those to rock up against the Chief Justice's decision to appoint him .
 Ball was purported to be the commission's ""expert" on Lee Harvey Oswald . Ball can rightly be called one of the great myth makers of all time . Ball is a myth-maker who can be said to be one of America's greatest myth makers .
 Jenner was a member of a commission group that prepared the commission's fraudulent profile of Lee Harvey Oswald as "one lone nut" Jenner was personally recruited to the commission by Earl Warren .
 Jenner served as the personal attorney to Chicago construction and real estate tycoon Henry Crown . Jenner was named to the commission as a member of the commission .
 Crown established much of his clout in Chicago through his ties to organized crime . Crown was highly ""reputable"" in his later years, but became highly "reputable" in later years . Crown established a reputation in Chicago in his early years .
 Jenner, too, can be deemed—through his association with Crown—as part of the ""Jewish presence” on the Warren Commission . Jenner is a member of the "Jewish presence" on the commission .
 Hubert was a former New Orleans District Attorney who could have uncovered details about Lee Harvey Oswald's sojourn in New Orleans . Hubert instead was assigned to investigate the activities of Jack Ruby in Dallas .
 Boggs and Hubert were positioned to restrict inquiries into the Shaw-Banister-Ferrie apparatus in New Orleans that was intertwined with the Lake Ponchartrain Cuban-exile training operations of CIA contract agent Frank Sturgis .
 Griffin was a junior member of Leon Hubert's commission team investigating Jack Ruby's background . He was a former assistant United States attorney and practicing lawyer in Cleveland .
 Later a Cleveland trial judge, Griffin—like Hubert—ultimately expressed some doubts about the commission's findings but was never vocal about his reservations . Griffin, like Hubert, was a trial judge .
 Coleman was one of the most prominent Black attorneys in the nation at the time of his appointment to the commission . Coleman was associated with the ""political"" law firm of Dilworth, Paxon, Kalish, Levy & Coleman, headed by Philadelphia's former Democratic Mayor Richardson Dilworth .
 Coleman clerked in 1948-49 for Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter, one of the most ardent leaders of the Jewish community in America . Coleman's edge up the political/legal ladder came, however, when he clerked for Justice Frankfurters . Coleman: "I'm
 Coleman's clerkship came at the very time that the state of Israel was being established . Coleman served as a clerk at the White House in Washington, D.C. Coleman died in 1946 .
 Adams was supposed to be teamed with Arlen Specter to track President Kennedy's activities in Dallas as well as investigate the motorcade . Chief Justice Warren mistook him for a coroner .
 The commission's only female staffer was the only female member of the commission .
 Scobey, then 51, was appointed to the staff at Russell's recommendation . She was then 51 and considerably older than virtually all of her colleagues .
 She served as his ""observer"" since the senator did not attend many commission meetings . She was his 'observer' since she was not a member of the commission .
 Russell was later known to be one of the Warren Commission ""dissenters,"" Ms. Russell later became known as one of Warren Commission's "dissents"
 Among all the commission staffers—and perhaps precisely because of her alertness—Ms. O'Neill was among the most alerting staffers .
 Scobey never rose to any type of prominence, returning to work as a law clerk until her retirement . She was never a prominent figure in any way .
 Shaffer was an aide to the U.S. attorney general both before and after the Warren Commission . Shaffer also worked as a staffer for the Warren commission .
 Shaffer's claim to fame is that his most famous client was Watergate figure John Dean . John Dean helped bring down the Nixon administration . Shaffer worked with Dean to help bring down Nixon .
 So perhaps Shaffer's reappearance in Watergate is really not a coincidence after all . Shaffer reappeared in Watergate in the 1970s .
 Yale graduate was rewarded for his service with a clerkship under Chief Justice Warren after the commission closed up shop .
 Clearly, there was a definitive ""Jewish presence"" on the staff of the Warren Commission in virtually every key aspect of its inquiries . Clearly, then, there were a definitive "Jewish presence" on the . Warren Commission .
 Even where a Warren staffer was not necessarily Jewish, many of those staffers had other connections which would make them ""sensitive"" to Jewish concerns .
 This is not a pleasant topic and one which invites allegations of ""anti-Semitism,"" but it is a topic that deserves examination for the record, particularly in light of what is suggested in Final Judgment .
 The ""Jewish presence"" on the Warren Commission has another interesting facet—and one that has never been explored elsewhere to the knowledge of this author . GERALD FORD'S MOSSAD-LANSKY CONNECTION .
 This startling allegation, on its face, might appear to be a bit extraordinary to some, but let's look at the facts . This is not the first time the president has been accused of lying about his actions .
 At the time that Ford was appointed to the commission, one of his closest political allies and major financial backers was a Detroit-based figure named Max Fisher . Fisher was a major financial backer of Ford .
 Fisher was a prominent Detroit businessman who was chairman of the Jewish Agency for Israel . Fisher, he said, was a "prominent Detroit businessman" who was also a prominent businessman . Fisher was the son of a Jewish businessman .
 Fisher's less public political and financial antecedents—prior to his rise to prominence—are far more interesting, particularly in light of his access to the Warren Commission through Gerald Ford . Fisher's political, financial and financial ties to Ford are also interesting .
 At the time of the JFK assassination, Fisher was actually a business partner of longtime Mossad figure Tibor Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum was the driving force behind the shadowy Permindex corporation, which played a central role in the assassination conspiracy .
 In 1957, in partnership with Tibor Rosenbaum's Swiss-Israel Trade Bank, Fisher bought a controlling interest in Israel's Paz conglomerate . Paz was owned by the Rothschild family of Europe, which maintained a monopoly over Israeli oil and petrochemical interests .
 Fisher's Israeli connections went back much further and were far deeper . Fisher's connections to Israel went back to the 1970s and '80s .
 General Julius Klein played a major role in helping set up Israeli's Mossad and later served as president of the Swiss-Israel Trade Bank . Fisher's mentor was former U.S. army officer who helped set up Mossad .
 In the late 1940's and early 1950's Fisher traveled to Israel with Klein and was involved in training the Israeli armed forces and intelligence services as part of the activities of the Sonneborn Institute with which Major Louis Bloomfield was associated .
 Bloomfield would serve as president and chairman of the board of Tibor Rosenbaum's Permindex operation . Later, he would be president and board chairman of Perm index operation .
 Institute had wide-ranging intelligence connections, but also ties to the Lansky Syndicate . Institute had close ties to Lansky syndicate . Institute's connections to the syndicate include CIA, FBI, CIA and CIA .
 Fisher's contacts in both petroleum and weapons smuggling to the Jewish Haganah through Sonneborn was rising Lansky Syndicate figure Morris Dalitz, then of Detroit's Purple Gang . Dalitz was one of the leading Mid-West dealers in military surplus .
 Fisher had been a ""runner"" for Dalitz's Purple Gang in Detroit, carrying cash receipts to Bronfman family bootleggers in Canada in advance payment for forthcoming shipments of illicit goods . Fisher and Dalitz should be working together, inasmuch as during the early 1930's
 Two successful businessmen who rose to affluence in the seamy world of the Lansky Crime Syndicate were now engaged in covert activities to advance the cause of Israel . The two successful businessmen rose to . affluence .
 Fisher's activities in the public arena on behalf of Israel brought him to public respectability . Fisher was known for his work in the Israeli community .
 Until then he was simply known as a successful but still relatively small-time oilman . Until then, he was known only as an oilman.
 Fisher was brought into Israel's Paz conglomerate in 1957 when he was a partner with Tibor Rosenbaum and Shaul Eisenberg . Fisher's fortunes and political influence grew immensely in 1957 .
 Ford and Rosenbaum shared another interesting mutual friend, Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum and Ford were friends for years before .
 Max Fisher played a pivotal role in advancing Gerald Ford's political career at a critical juncture in time . And, as we shall see, this mutual friend—like Max Fisher— played a crucial role in Ford's career .
 Authors Dennis Eisenberg, Uri Dan and Eli Landau feature an entire chapter devoted to Lansky's Mossad associate, Tibor Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum's colorful and intriguing international connections are explored .
 Bernhard was also bringing Gerald Ford into the highest circles of the international elite . At any time, he was engaged in intrigue with Rosenbaum .
 Bilderberg meetings had been held regularly at locations around the world since 1954 . The meetings were named after the first such meeting in 1954 at the first of its kind in Holland .
 On April 11, 1964 Senator Jacob Javits announced that he had been in attendance at the 1964 meeting in Williamsburg, Virginia . Javits rose on the Senate floor to announce that he was in attendance . The 1964 meeting was held in Virginia .
 The international meeting concluded four months after the death of President Kennedy . It could not have failed to have addressed the impact of JFK's assassination on world affairs .
 There can be no doubt that the ramifications of a possible conspiracy in the assassination were also the subject of discussion . What's more? The ramifications of an assassination emanating from a foreign source, such as the Soviet KGB .
 The subject of Bilderberg and their impact on world affairs is beyond the scope of this book . There is no question Bernhard had ushered Ford into higher ranks than he had ever been before .
 Bilderberg meetings are financed jointly by Rockefeller and Rothschild families . Rockefeller and the Rothschild families are very much in attendance, along with a handful of political figures .
 Also on hand are big names from the media, although they are sworn to secrecy and never report about the private discussions held .
 Gerald Ford himself was cognizant of the big honor that had been bestowed upon him by Prince Bernhard when he was invited to attend .
 Ford's first participation in the Bilderberg meeting in 1964 was not, in fact, the first time he was invited . Ford was invited to the meeting at the start of his career in the 1960s .
 In 1961 Ford was invited to attend a Bilderberg gathering in Quebec, but due to a heavy work load and family problems, he was unable to attend that elite confab . Ford's children were ""quite ill with scarlet fever"" ““’—his children
 It is no stretch of the imagination—nor is it any ""conspiracy theory"—to suggest that precisely because of his service on the Warren Commission (coupled with his entree into the Bilderberg elite at precisely the same time) Gerald Ford's ascension to higher
 Ford's fellow participant at the 1964 Bilderberg meeting (and fellow Warren Commission member) John McCloy . McCloy was a member of the Warren Commission, the same group as Ford .
 McCloy served as a director of the Empire Trust,*’ a joint financial venture of such powerful international Jewish families as the Lehmans, Loebs and the Bronfmans . McCloy's career had long been intertwined with the Warburgs, **° to the extent
 John McCloy was conveniently serving on the Warren Commission, carefully placed to cover up any Israeli connection to the JFK affair that might emerge . And in 1964 their close associate John . McCloy served as a cover-up member of the Warren .
 We can rest assured, considering Ford's fealty to Max Fisher, that if Fisher and his mob and Mossad cronies wanted ""inside information relating to the Warren Commission inquiry that Ford was willing and able to provide what they needed .
 John McCloy's close ties to the Warburg family and other interests intimately associated with the fortunes of the state of Israel . Similar conclusions can be reached about McCloy in light of his ties to Warburg .
 There was no way that the Warren Commission would have--or could have--determined the truth . The Warren Commission will not have been able to determine the truth of the truth, CNN.com reports .
 Appendix Five: JFK's Greenbacks . The truth about the Federal Reserve Connection . The Federal Reserve is a secret .
 Final Judgment was the first book ever to document the fact that the Kennedy dynasty did indeed have intentions of ultimately breaking the back of the Federal Reserve financial monopoly over America's money system . Final Judgment is the first of the book ever written by the Kennedy family .
 JFK famously introduced non-Federal Reserve controlled "United States Notes" into the U.S. economy during his administration . JFK was assassinated by the assassination of George Kennedy in 1968 .
 The U.S. Notes were issued during the Kennedy administration, but there's much more to the story that needs to be told .
 The story that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK"" is a part of the lore in the JFK assassination conspiracy controversy . The Federal Reserve killed JFK JFK .
 There is much misinformation about this subject and here I will attempt to address the issue . I am certain that no matter what I say there will be those ""true believers"" who will not be interested in the facts .
 This was almost certainly the primary reason that he was assassinated, but you only mention the Fed in passing . This is almost certainly . The Fed is almost . certainly . certainly the . primary reason . that was assassinated .
 In Chapter 4 of Final Judgment, 1 do document—for the first time—a Kennedy family plan to move all-out against the Fed . To my surprise, I received such complaints despite the fact that in Chapter 4, 1, 1 document document .
 This was outlined by Joe Kennedy in a private meeting with a long-time friend of mine, DeWest Hooker, years before JFK was elected president . Joe Kennedy told Hooker in private meeting that JFK was a good man .
 There's no question but that the Kennedys were indeed wise to the ways of the Fed and eager to bring it in line when they could . So there's no doubt but that there were no question about the ways .
 Joe Kennedy was talking in the long term when talking about the Fed . Joe Kennedy: "I'm not going to let the Fed take control of my family's finances."
 He knew that it would be impossible, virtually overnight, to dethrone the Fed and its controllers in the international banking community . The Fed knew it would not be able to take control of the world's largest banks .
 The ultimate goal of the Kennedy family was to consolidate their power and then move to strip the Fed bare . That's why the ultimate goal is to consolidate power and strip it bare .
 There were interest-free U.S. Notes issued during the Kennedy administration . The fact is, as I do additionally point out in Final Judgment, that there were interest free United States Notes .
 These notes would have been issued no matter who was president at the time . Unless a populist president had come to power and knocked out the Federal Reserve completely, the notes wouldn't have been released .
 Kennedy apparently reasoned that by returning to the Constitution, the soaring national debt could be reduced by not paying interest to the bankers of the Federal Reserve System . Kennedy: Only Congress shall coin and regulate money .
 I'm sorry to report that he cites my own former newspaper, The Spotlight, specifically its issue of October 31, 1988, as the source of this information . The Spotlight was published in 1988 .
 An inexperienced junior editor had inserted a brief news item in a column in the newspaper . The article slipped past the other editors and slipped past them .
 The information, in fact, was based on misinformation that had been circulating for years in an assortment of other newsletters that reprinted the story verbatim, without question .
 Our junior editor had seen the story, found it thought-provoking, and committed it to print .
 Executive Order 11,110, signed by JFK on June 4, 1963, was supposedly repealed by LBJ within hours of JFK's death . It's unclear whether LBJ repealed the order, which was supposed to have been approved by JFK . At issue is whether $4 billion in U
 EO 11,110 was repealed by Reagan administration, not LBJ, in fact . Reagan administration—not LBJ—repeatedly repealed EO11,110 .
 Reagan signed EO 12,608, which revoked several outdated executive orders . And this EO dealt with silver certificates, not greenbacks, when Reagan signed the order .
 EO 11,110 dealt with granting the Secretary of the Treasury the authority to issue rules and regulations pertaining to freeing the secretary to act without presidential approval on silver bullion sales .
 JFK's EO 11,110 was not even the subject of the EO . To repeat, the issuance of ""greenbacks" (technically known as United States Notes) was not a subject of JFK's .
 The greenbacks that were issued during the Kennedy administration were issued pursuant to long-standing federal legislation mandating that a certain number of United States Notes always be in circulation by the Treasury Department . The Treasury Department has not been following that mandate .
 If all the money in use in this country were issued by the U.S. government, we would not have periods in which the volume of money suddenly diminished for some ‘mysterious’ reason .
 United States Notes were indeed issued during the Kennedy era . However, for the record, we will cite here the correct explanation as to why .
 The Treasury was not issuing U.S. Notes into circulation even though it was mandated to do so by the long-standing congressional legislation . Rudy Villareal, the director of the Currency Operations Division at the Treasury Department admitted to The Spotlight in a 1982 interview, that the Treasury itself
 The issuance of U.S. Notes during the Kennedy era was done in pursuance of a law already on the books . Instead, the issuance of United States Notes was issued during that time .
 Those who cite an executive order by JFK that, in fact, refers to Silver Certificates, are making a big mistake . They are doing a disservice to serious research in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 The Spotlight published these stories to try to counteract the misinformation that it played a part in circulating, only to find that there have been so many people committed to the story and so determined to prove that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK"" that they have taken umbrage .
 The Spotlight was not part of any ""cover-up" of Fed involvement . But suffice it to say that The Spotlight wasn't part of a cover-up . The Spotlight is not a political party .
 The Spotlight was trying to get at the truth of the matter, no matter what the Fed was doing . Instead, it was attempting to prevent sincere patriots and critics of the Fed from embarrassing themselves .
 The would-be Kennedy Dynasty had big plans to undo the Federal Reserve monopoly on America's money, but EO 11,110 was most emphatically not part of that long-range plan .
 This story does continue to pop up again and again despite the efforts by The Spotlight and others to set the record straight, it's taken on a life of its own . I'm truly afraid that the story will never be put to rest. This story continues to pop .
 Brown delves into the sticky question of JFK's stance in relationship to the privately-owned money monopoly known as the Federal Reserve System .
 The fact is that Brown's perception of what constitutes ""right wing"" versus ""left wing" in American politics is obviously off base . Brown would find that it is the American "right wing" that has been so critical of the Federal Reserve System .
 With a few rare exceptions, two Texas populists of the left— Rep. Ted Cruz and Rep. Tom Steyer -- have been in Texas for years .
 The fiercest and most vocal critics of the Federal Reserve and its money manipulation have been ""right wing"" populists, ranging from Father Charles Coughlin, the radio priest of the 1930s .
 James ""Bo"" Gritz ran for president as an independent candidate in 1992 election . Gritz was a Vietnam War hero who served in the Vietnam War .
 Gritz himself claimed that the first thing he would do when elected president would be to re-instate JFK's executive order issuing United States Notes into the economy .
 It is interesting to note that the aforementioned Jim Marrs also includes the theory that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK" in his chapter in Crossfire entitled ""Rednecks and Oilmen—Rightwing Extremists and Texas Millionaires" as though there is some relation between the interests of
 This is based on misperception at best at best and bad research at worst, but it does further muddy the waters on an already controversial element of an even more controversial overall topic .
 The Federal Reserve certainly has it within its power to manipulate ""right wing extremists"" for its own purposes . Federal Reserve has it under its power .
 The banking interests that profit from the Federal Reserve monopoly are, it should be noted, tied to the European Rothschild dynasty . Eustace Mullins' monumental study, The Federal Reserve Conspiracy, is undoubtedly the most authoritative work on the subject .
 The Rothschild family has been a primary patron of the state of Israel . The role of Israel's Mossad, in league with the CIA and the Lansky mob, does indeed point back to a Rothschild and Federal Reserve connection to the assassination conspiracy .
 It is in the private possession of a veteran critic of the Federal Reserve System . The Fed has been criticized for its handling of the financial crisis .
 The very fact that this 1966 United States Note exists is proof positive that it is a myth that no U.S. Notes were issued after 1963 . It is an absolute myth that it was an issue after 1963, the author says .
 In the end, those who are seeking the facts about the JFK assassination conspiracy do themselves no service by promulgating false information about the Federal Reserve connection .
 "I am pleased to be able to use this opportunity in an attempt to set the record straight. Thus, I'm pleased to use it to set a record straight," he said .
 William Colby died in a strange boating accident in the spring of 1996 . Colby was a former CIA director . The death of Colby gave conspiracy theorists much grist for the mill .
 Colby's death was highly reminiscent of the equally bizarre death in 1978 of former CIA official John Paisley . Colby was a CIA official who worked for the CIA .
 Colby and Paisley were sharp critics of Israeli influence at the CIA . Colby himself was preparing to begin active work on behalf of the Arab cause before his death .
 There is indeed strong historical evidence to suggest that both men died precisely because of their opposition to Israel . Both men died because they opposed Israel .
 Paisley's connection to the JFK assassination connection needs further exploration . The actor's story may be the subject of a new book .
 Colby's strange demise did give many people a reason to pause . The tabloid provided no evidence whatsoever that this was the case .
 Colby made cryptic remarks about JFK assassination in one interview shortly before his death . Colby himself had indeed made cryptic comments about the JFK assassination shortly before he died .
 William Colby would have been the most likely former high-ranking intelligence figure to blow the whistle . However, as we shall see, there is strong evidence to suggest that if indeed Colby did have ""inside knowledge about the assassination of President Kennedy and knew that Israeli intelligence was indeed involved
 William Colby was considered hostile to Israel's interests, so much so that it was Colby who fired the Mossad's longtime agent-in-place at the CIA, James Jesus Angleton, who has been documented in Final Judgment as the key CIA player in the JFK assassination conspiracy
 Most press reports at the time, describing Colby's sacking of Angleton, didn't tell the whole story . Evidently, most press reports about the sacking didn't detail the truth .
 CBS News reporter Daniel Schorr has described meeting with Angleton just shortly after he had been dismissed by Colby . Angleton was fired from Colby just weeks after Colby was dismissed .
 Angleton "rambled on circuitously, the conversation disjoined," Schorr wrote . Angleton died of his injuries in a plane crash at the end of the war .
 Israel's biggest partisan at the CIA had gone completely out of his mind . Angleton was perceived as being hostile to Angleton’s friends in Israel . New CIA director, William Colby, was perceived to be hostile .
 Their assessment of the U.S. national interest has dovetailed more with the traditional Arabist view at the State Department than with the Angleton school of thought .
 The November 1975 testimony on the Middle East arms balance offered by outgoing CIA Director William Colby was one of the first indications of this attitude . Colby testified on the matter in 1975 .
 His testimony, which disputed figures offered by Israeli officials, was widely seen as damaging the administration's pending request for $1.1 billion in military aid for Israel .
 William Colby himself was ultimately fired from the CIA, having run afoul of Israel and its lobby in Washington . Colby was fired by the Israeli lobby in D.C. for his actions .
 Shortly before his ""accidental"" death, Colby had entered into negotiations to begin high-level consulting work for Arab interests . An interesting little detail seems to have been forgotten in much of the speculation surrounding Colby's death .
 Colby and his Arab associate "had shared concerns," a former federal security administrator says . Colby's Arab associate says he and the Arab associate had "shared concerns"
 Both men knew that their respective governments were being infiltrated and manipulated by Israeli agents . Both knew that they were being manipulated by the Israeli government .
 Colby's death came at a critical time when the Israeli lobby in Washington was engaged in a major effort to substantially expand the power of the CIA and its thendirector, John Deutch, a Belgian-born Jewish refugee .
 The so-called ""reform"" measures were designed to increase the power of the CIA director . William Colby would have certainly emerged as a very loud and very public critic of such proposals, particularly since the fine hand of the Israeli lobby was very clearly at work behind the scenes .
 On April 24, 1996, a little-noted Senate committee vote laid the groundwork for a proposed restructuring of the U.S. civilian and military intelligence system . Two days before Colby disappeared, the Senate voted on a proposal to reorganize the system .
 Arlen Specter pushed through a vote on a measure to extend the author of the CIA director to control the budgets of all U.S. intelligence agencies . Most of the intelligence agencies were then under the purview of the military divisions .
 Under Specter's proposal the CIA director would also have the authority to play a major role in the appointments of the directors of the various intelligence agencies, including those inside the Pentagon .
 On April 25 even the Washington Post was moved to comment (quite correctly) that such a radical change is likely to run into strong opposition from the military services themselves .
 Colby Colby does not buy the claim that her husband's death was an accident . Colby herself does not believe the claim was true . She says her husband was killed in a car accident .
 She has no percentage in going public with her suspicions and probably never will . However, as an experienced diplomat, wise to the dangerous ways of the world of intelligence, she has no .
 It is highly unlikely that Colby's real views on the JFK assassination will ever be made public .
 President Obama's views on Israel and its influence on U.S. policy-making are not known . However, we do know his views toward Israel . Israel is a key ally of the United States in the Middle East .
 One of Colby's protéégés from the days when Colby served in the CIA in Vietnam is a sharp critic of Israeli intrigue . It is probably no coincidence then that one of his protégs is a critic of Israel . Colby, like his mentor, is
 John DeCamp tangled with the Israeli lobby during the years that he served in the Nebraska legislature . DeCamp is now a prominent maverick lawyer in Nebraska .
 Colby's death on the water recalled to many another similar strange death and one that, in fact, may truly be linked in some way to the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Although his death was ruled a ""suicide,"" few believed it then and few believe it today . Few believed it was a suicide .
 It was not only the similar circumstances of the deaths of the two men that observers found so intriguing. It was also the same circumstances that led to their deaths .
 Paisley, like Colby, had adamantly tried to resist high-level Israeli intrigue . What was more notable is that he had tried to avoid such an issue .
 Paisley had discovered a major Israeli penetration operation targeting the CIA's Office of National Estimates . The CIA's National Estimates are the command-level intelligence summaries guiding U.S. presidential decisions were compiled .
 There is no question but that Paisley—perhaps even more so than Colby—had good reason to know long-hidden intelligence secrets relating to JFK's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald . What's more there is more than a question is that the CIA knew about Oswald's alleged
 Paisley died at a critical juncture during the House Select Committee on Assassinations Investigation at which time the committee was exploring—or at least pretending to explore—possible CIA links to Lee Harvey Oswald and President Kennedy .
 Ex-CIA employee had revealed that the CIA maintained a large volume of information on the radio factory in which Oswald had worked . Paisley's name never came up during the House investigation .
 The information was stored in the Office of Research and Reports" °'’—which would have been Paisley's office at the time .
 If Oswald were in fact a CIA asset while posing as a ""defector"" in the Soviet Union, as many have suggested, John Paisley would have known it .
 The 25-year-old Paisley was recruited into the CIA in 1948 when he went to Palestine as a radio operator for the UN peacekeeping mission . He was recruited by the CIA when he was 25 years old .
 James Angleton recruited Paisley into the CIA at this time, Szulc says . Angleton was a friend of Israel's friend at the CIA, according to the author .
 Angleton's denial of having known Paisley recalls his similar denial of knowing Hunt when all evidence would suggest otherwise . Angleton also denied having known Hunt when evidence would show otherwise .
 Veteran JFK assassination investigator Dick Russell has looked into the Paisley affair . Russell has also looked at the Paesley affair in his book .
 The answer to this question points directly to solving the question of who killed Paisley and why . The answer points directly toward solving the murder of Paisleys and solving the mystery .
 Final Judgment: Who killed John F Kennedy and why? Final Judgment on Kennedy: "It relates again—precisely, to the conclusions that we have reached in Final Judgment"
 The death of John Paisley has been of much fascination to those who have charted the covert wars between the CIA and the KGB . Those who have delved into the death have been reticent to discuss what is very clearly the Mossad connection .
 In the years prior to Paisley's demise, hawkish factions in the Israeli government were lobbying hard for more arms aid and cash infusions through the United States foreign aid program .
 U.S. intelligence analysts scoffed at Israel's alarmist cries . United States intelligence analysts were scoffing at the alarmist cry .
 Office of National Estimates reassured the White House that the Soviets had neither the intent nor the capability to attack a major target of vital U.S. interest . Israel's Washington allies maneuvered in an effort to counter-balance the findings .
 Harvard professor Richard Pipes, a devout supporter of Israel, became an outpost of Israeli influence . However, as we noted in Appendix One of Final Judgment, the newly established and ostensibly ""independent" group—B-Team" became an outposts of Israel's influence .
 CIA Director George Bush became a promoter of the B-Team's findings . Bush's familial attachment to Leo Cherne was a strong supporter of the project .
 John Paisley, recently retired from the CIA, was assigned to provide liaison and guidance between the CIA's in-house A-Team and the BTeam . He was tasked with liaising between the two teams .
 Paisley launched his own internal intelligence community campaign against the Israeli attempt to manipulate U.S. policy-making .
 He also started talking to Washington newsmen and congressional investigators, exposing what he saw happening .
 Paisley met with physicists and other scientists who knew Israel was wildly exaggerating Soviet military capabilities and war plans . According to one of his friends, Paisley's friends said he met with physicist and others who knew Israeli military capabilities were exaggerated .
 Israeli-influenced B-Team report said Soviets were secretly developing a so-called ""first-strike"" capability . Soviet strategic doctrine assumed that such a sneak attack would make them the winners of a nuclear exchange .
 The B-Team dismissed the estimates of analysts such as Paisley and others who held that Moscow was unlikely to start a nuclear conflict unless attacked .
 The B-Team findings prevailed and there was a virtual revival of the arms race and a massive new infusion of U.S. military and other aid to Israel during the 1980s . In the end, of course, the findings prevailed .
 The B-Team report was the warning that the Soviet Union was running out of energy . Drawing on fraudulent estimates provided by Israeli intelligence—the foundation of the report was .
 The B-Team forecast that beginning in 1980 Soviet oil production would suffer critical shortfalls, forcing Moscow to import as much as 4. million barrels a day for its essential needs . As a consequence of this, Moscow would have to import up to 4 million barrels of oil a day .
 Israeli disinformation claimed that the Soviets would invade Iran or another oil-rich Gulf state even if it meant a nuclear confrontation with the U.S. The Soviets were hungry for oil, Israel said, and would invade the region .
 Paisley carried on his one-man drive to counter the distortions, exaggerations, and Israeli influence behind the B-Team arguments . Nonetheless, he carried on .
 Those of us familiar with the case of Paisley know that he was killed by the Mossad . We are aware of the case, and we are happy to share it with you .
 Inman says he was being attacked in the media because he had run afoul of William Safire and the Israeli lobby in years prior . That is, Inman said . Inman: Inman is being attacked by Safire because he ran afoul with Safire over years prior
 Inman was acting CIA director during CIA director William Casey's absence from the country . Inman gave orders limiting Israeli access to such strategic national intelligence .
 Casey made an unsuccessful bid for Congress when he returned to the U.S. after returning to the United States . William Safire, Casey's former campaign manager for Casey, complained to Casey who countermanded Inman's decision .
 Casey's own ties are somewhat suggestive of a long-standing connection to Israeli intelligence . Casey's ties to Israel and other elements that have popped up in the course of inquiries into the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 Casey was the founder, general counsel and member of the board of directors of Multiponics, an agribusiness firm that owned some 44,000 acres of farmland in several southern states including Louisiana . Casey was also the founder and general counsel of the firm, which owned 44,
 When the Multiponics venture between Casey and Marcello associate filed for bankruptcy in 1971, it owed some $20. million to various creditors . Bernard Cornfeld of Investors Overseas Services was a front man for Tibor Rosenbaum's international money laundering ventures for the Mossad .
 There has been a long and definitive and influential Mossad influence within the CIA . The CIA's deputy director, Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, was slapped down by William Casey on more occasions .
 Bobby Ray Inman's conflict with Israel and its powerful lobby in Washington illustrates what can happen to high-ranking U.S. officials who run afoul of Israel by questioning its power and influence .
 Inman, in his own fashion, was as much a casualty of behind-the-scenes secret wars with Israel as were those before him . William Colby, John Paisley and John F Kennedy were also casualties of secret wars between them .
 Whether, in fact, there is a direct link between the deaths of Colby and Paisley and that of John F Kennedy we will not likely ever know .
 The facts about the deaths all do point toward an Israeli connection . But the facts about their deaths do point to a greater Israeli connection.
 Final Judgment: Final Judgment. Final Judgement. Final Judgment . Final Judgment . Final Judgment is a final judgment for humanity .
 James Angleton has not been seen in the pages of Final Judgment . Rest assured that we have not seen the last of Israel's CIA ally—and Colby's nemesis—James Angleton .
 There is a connection between Watergate and the JFK assassination, and that connection is Angleton . Angleton was Angleton, a CIA operative, who was involved in the Watergate scandal . The CIA director is now in charge of the CIA .
 Dallas and Watergate Were Connected, But Not in the way that many people think . Appendix Seven: "Deep Throat"
 The Dallas-Watergate Connection has been the basis for an incredible amount of misinformation and disinformation since the fall of Richard Nixon in 1974 . James Jesus Angleton, Israel and the Fall of Richard M Nixon .
 The true Dallas-Watergate Connection is the long-hidden role of Israel's CIA man, James Jesus Angleton . Angleton was the prime CIA mover behind the JFK assassination and the forced resignation of Richard M Nixon .
 Peter Dale Scott and Carl Oglesby have written at length on the subject of the subject . The two men have been married for more than 30 years .
 There is much more to the "Dallas-Watergate Connection" than meets the eye . The real connection is the hidden role played by Israel's CIA ally, James Jesus Angleton, not only in the assassination of President Kennedy but also in the Watergate intrigue .
 Nixon, like JFK, had begun to run afoul of the Israelis and—like JFK—was targeted for destruction . In fact, as we shall see, Nixon had begun running afoul with the Israelis .
 Nixon barely won the presidency in 1968, narrowly defeating Hubert Humphrey . He was a devoted supporter of Israel who was highly popular among Jewish voters .
 In 1972 Nixon was overwhelmingly re-elected in one of the largest popular landslides in American history . Nixon evidently decided that he had a genuine mandate to actually begin flexing some real clout .
 Haldeman, writing in his book The Ends of Power, wrote that the president intended to overhaul the entire federal bureaucracy . He said he intended to bring it under the direct control of his own handpicked loyalists in the White House inner circle .
 The reorganization in the winter of 1972 spurred into action against Nixon the great power blocs in Washington . That reorganization was little known to the American public .
 I'm going to tell the American people, "We didn't do it when we came in before, but now we have a mandate," he says .
 This move, needless to say, made many in the American Jewish community uneasy . Many in the Jewish community are uneasy about it .
 Rumors of Nixon's ""lists"" of Jews in high-ranking positions in the executive branch and the agencies began circulating . The list added fuel to the already long-standing suspicions of Nixon .
 Events in the Middle East began to unfold that set a new tone to Israel's perception of the U.S. President .
 Nixon crossed the line as far as his previous support for Israel was concerned . Nixon was re-elected in 1972 to a massive re-election victory .
 Nixon was well aware that, apart from J Edgar Hoover, only the Israelis knew enough about his past to cause him major political damage . Nixon was aware of his past and knew that only he could be trusted in Israel .
 As early as 1973 Kissinger was warning the government of Israel that Nixon might be preparing to cut off arms to Israel . Henry Kissinger warned that Nixon may have been preparing to stop arms being sent to Israel from being cut off .
 The truth is, as Hart has pointed out, Nixon was actively aligning himself with King Feisal of Saudi Arabia in attempting to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
 Hart has described Nixon's efforts (through the good offices of King Feisal) to engage Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in back-channel negotiations for a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement .
 Kissinger put a kibosh on the NixonFeisal peace effort, evidently viewing it as a threat to Israel . Kissinger learned of the negotiations (which had initially been conducted behind his back) he intervened .
 Sources say Nixon told King Feisal that if the Israelis and their American lobby continued to frustrate Nixon's efforts to settle the Middle East conflict, Nixon would tear up his pre-prepared State of the Union address .
 Clearly, there was much more afoot behind the scenes in the fateful years of 1973-1974 . The Watergate scandal began to escalate and—ultimately—bring down Richard Nixon .
 There is evidence that high-level plans to move against Nixon were already underway . Nixon won re-election in 1972, but was re-elected again in 1972 .
 Robert Vesco had some interesting allegations in an interview with Walter Cronkite of CBS . Vesco was living in exile in Costa Rica, fleeing prosecution in the U.S. in the 1970s .
 Six months before the Watergate break-in, the Democrats had come to you with a plan for impeachment of the president, Vesco said . Mr Vesco: 'Six months before Watergate, you said . . that six months before . the break-ins, Democrats had . come to
 The plan was essentially as I have stated previously, where they were going to attempt to get initial indictments of some high officials, using this as a launching board to get public opinion and—in their favor and using the press media to a great degree .
 Oglesby never takes into consideration the fact that both the ""liberal Democrat"" and the ""conservative Republican"" had come into conflict with Israel and its American lobby . Because he is blinded by the "liberal-conservative"" dichotomy, Oglesbys fails to understand the big picture .
 Vesco said the forces that threatened him were the same political forces that assassinated John F Kennedy and then moved against Richard Nixon . Clearly, as Vesco says, the forces were ""the same politically"" that assassinated JFK and moved against Nixon .
 Vesco's rise to power in the financial world came when he assumed control of Bernard Cornfeld's Investors Overseas Service . The firm was an integral part of the Kennedy assassination-linked Permindex network set in place by longtime high-level Mossad operative Tibor Rosenbaum .
 Michael Townley was an IOS operative at the time of the JFK assassination . He was later convicted of the murder of Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier . Townley is a former CIA operative who was involved in the assassination .
 Cuban exiles Guillermo and Ignacio Novo arrived in Dallas on November 21, 1963 . They met with CIA man E Howard Hunt and evidently played some role along with Hunt in the circumstances surrounding events in Dallas that were linked to the assassination conspiracy . Townley's co-cons
 "There would have been some poetic justice in the event had Vesco succeeded with this ploy,""””' he added .
 Vesco's intimate connections to the Permindex web behind the JFK assassination conspiracy, it is likely that Vesco indeed knew the facts about Mossad complicity with the CIA in the JFK affair . Vesco was likely using his leverage to strike out at those who were attempting to bring him
 Vesco ultimately took refuge in anti-Zionist Cuba with Fidel Castro's assent . He undoubtedly gave Castro an earful about what he knew about JFK affair .
 JFK assassination plotters went to great lengths to identify Lee Harvey Oswald as a Castro sympathizer . Oswald was the president's alleged assassin . Oswald is alleged to have been a sympathizer to Castro . Oswald's alleged involvement in the JFK assassination would have been of special interest in Castro .
 Castro ultimately had a falling out with Vesco and the famed ""fugitive financier"" was imprisoned by his long-time host on charges of involvement in drug trade .
 Nixon sought to have the CIA intervene to prevent the Watergate scandal from going further . Haldeman described how Nixon sought the CIA intervention to prevent it from going any further . The CIA was involved in Watergate scandal in the 1970s .
 Nixon told Haldeman how he should approach then-CIA director Richard Helms and convince Helms to cooperate with the CIA . Nixon said he should be able to get Helms' cooperation with the government .
 Nixon advised Haldeman to remind Helms how ex-CIA man E Howard Hunt was one of the Watergate burglars . Hunt was a CIA man who worked for the CIA in the 1970s and '70s . Hunt is Hunt's co-conspirator in Watergate .
 Haldeman said at the time he had no idea what Nixon was talking about . Nixon said: "This involves these Cubans, Hunt, and a lot of hanky-panky that we have nothing to do"
 "For the good of the country don't go any further into this case. So they should call the FBI in," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There were others who also believed that the CIA was a prime mover behind Watergate scandal .
 Colson portrayed the president as a virtual Oval Office captive of suspected high-ranking conspirators in intelligence circles . The president dare not act for fear of international and domestic political repercussions .
 His underlying suspicion was that the CIA planned the break-ins at Watergate . He said he suspected it was a cover-up for the CIA .
 There is a great likelihood that, from the very beginning, the bungled ""break-in"" at the Watergate was actually a set-up that was designed to fail . However, there is a very high likelihood that this is not the first attempt to break-in .
 A piece of masking tape ""accidentally"" left over a door latch --horizontally, rather than vertically, thereby exposing it— alerted Watergate security that shenanigans were afoot . The tape was left over the door latch, instead of over the top of the latch .
 E Howard Hunt himself was one of those who helped ""bungle"" the break-in . Another likely double agent was James McCord who was directly responsible for the travesty of the tape .
 He had been the senior CIA security official in Europe and later responsible for security at CIA headquarters at Langley,’ not insignificant positions .
 In ostensible ""retirement"" the CIA's high-ranking security expert managed to ""bungle"" a two-bit burglary . Yet, in ostensible "retirement" he managed to "bungle" a two bit burglary .
 In fact, McCord was a close friend of Angleton,”” and in his long-standing capacity as a CIA security official, worked directly with Angleton.”
 McCord shared Angleton's devotion to Israel with Angleton . McCord was a Biblequoting Christian . Angleton was a devout Christian .
 CIA contract agent Frank Sturgis and his old CIA partner E Howard Hunt back in the loop in the bungled burglary is also significant indeed . The fact that we also find a veteran Mossad asset, Frank Strugis, and former CIA partner Hunt, is significant indeed indeed .
 For years there has been speculation as to the real identity of ""Deep Throat" General Alexander Haig served as White House chief of staff at the time of Nixon's demise . Haig denies it, but his name has often been mentioned in the past .
 Among those who point to Haig as ""Deep Throat"" are John Loftus and John Aarons . Haig was a prominent pro-Israel writer for decades .
 Historians speculate that by October of 1973 Haig became embittered by President Nixon's anti-Jewish outbursts and even angrier that Nixon had nearly let Israel be victimized by a surprise Arab attack . He became ""Deep Throat"" for the purpose of doing in Nixon and
 There is much stronger evidence that suggests that we should lay the wreath of honor at the tomb of James Angleton. However, there is much more evidence that . that suggests . that there should be a wreath laid at Angleton’s tomb . Angleton was a British
 Angleton was responsible for the destruction of Richard M Nixon . Angleton wasn't "Deep Throat" per se, but he was certainly the CIA handler for ""Deep Throats" Angleton .
 Graham put forth her immense clout and had it pulled from the bookstores and pulped . Graham had it pulped out of the book . Graham put it in the hands of the publisher, but it was pulled out .
 Ben Bradlee, recently remarried, is a European correspondent for Newsweek . He is recently married .
 CIA director Allen Dulles authorized one of his most skilled and fanatical agents, former OSS operative James Angleton, to set up a counterintelligence staff . He left the embassy [in Paris, where he served as press attaché] for Newsweek in 1953 .
 By the time Bradlee had begun his work for Newsweek and was collaborating with James Angleton ""with the Israelis in Paris,"" Ober was Angleton's trusted deputy .
 Angleton and Ober are intelligence operatives who travel between Washington and Paris, London, and Rome . Angleton is a former CIA operative who travels between Washington, Paris, and London . Ober is an American intelligence operative .
 Bradlee also managed to find himself in the thick of the Algerian controversy that, back in the United States, young Sen. Barack Obama was in the middle of the controversy .
 John F Kennedy embroiled himself with Arab Algeria, much to the dismay of Israel's supporters who objected to the concept of Arab Algeria becoming an independent republic .
 Bradlee's "most notable feat as a foreign correspondent was to obtain an interview with the FLN, the Algerian guerrillas who were then in revolution against the French government . According to Davis, Bradlee was a reporter for more than 30 years .
 Bradlee was working with Angleton, some 17 years before Watergate, in the midst of yet another project of special interest to Israel . The project was part of the so-called ""French Connection"" to the JFK assassination conspiracy of which Angleton was a central player .
 Angleton and Bradlee secretly worked together behind the scenes shortly after the JFK assassination . Angleton, Bradlee are seen again working together shortly after JFK's assassination .
 JFK's mistress, Mary Pinchot Meyer was found shot to death on October 12, 1964 . Angleton obtained Mrs. Meyer's identity after she was shot dead .
 Angleton and Bradlee's procurement of Mrs. Angleton came to light after a Washington Post editor, James Truitt, became engaged in a conflict with Bradlee .
 Angleton's connection to the Mary Meyer intrigue brought him unwanted public recognition . Prior to this time Angleton had managed to avoid the spotlight .
 The operation was run for Angleton by his longtime deputy, Richard Ober . Angleton was Angleton's deputy .
 This particular fact— reported by Deborah Davis—has apparently never been mentioned elsewhere in all the wealth of information published in reference to Watergate and the intrigue of that era . Deborah Davis: "This particular fact" has apparently never mentioned elsewhere .
 Angleton's Israeli desk at the White House was a virtual Mossad outpost . Handling the affairs of the Israeli desk was his deputy, Richard Ober . Ober handled the affairs .
 Angleton and Ober were well-placed at a critical time when Richard Nixon, flush with victory following his triumphant landslide re-election, began moving to assert control over the CIA and against Israel . As we have seen, the bungled two-bit Watergate burglary of 1972 had already taken
 The evidence suggests that the burglary, from the beginning, was a set up . But the evidence suggests the burglary was set up by the burglars .
 James Angleton's longtime ally at the Washington Post, Ben Bradlee, began the media push that made ""Watergate"" a household word and led to the series of official inquiries that brought down Nixon . It was Bradlee's long-time ally at Washington Post .
 "Deep Throat" was a highly-placed White House insider who provided key information to Watergate reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein . But the Post couldn't have orchestrated the public outrage if it hadn't relied on ""Deep Throats"
 Davis concluded that the ""voice"" for the source, ""Deep Throat,"" in fact, was James Angleton's deputy, Richard Ober . Davis has concluded that Richard Ober was the source of the source . Richard Ober is the deputy of Angleton .
 Ober most assuredly was doing Angleton's bidding as part of a campaign to bring down Richard Nixon . And this means, of course, that Ober was doing the bidding of Angleton .
 Angleton sent Ober to Woodward or Angleton directed Bradlee to have his longtime Post ally, Bradlee, seek out Ober .
 The answer lies in the simple proposition that Nixon, like John F Kennedy before him, had become perceived as a threat to Israel's survival . The answer to the question is that Nixon had been perceived as an enemy of Israel .
 Watergate operation was set in motion to remove Nixon from the White House . And so it was that the Watergate operation began, Nixon was removed from the presidency .
 Once Nixon and his inner circle were enmeshed in the web and began their often-ridiculous cover-up attempts, they helped set the stage for their own undoing . Nixon's inner circle helped set up the cover-ups, which were their own doing .
 Nixon began making blackmail attempts against the CIA, clearly threatening the agency, with use of his knowledge of CIA involvement in the JFK assassination . Nixon, further, began making threatening threats against the agency .
 Once, however, that the Washington Post became actively involved in the campaign against Nixon, the president's fate was sealed . The Washington Post, at Angleton's instigation, was actively involved with the campaign .
 Watergate investigation became a daily staple of television coverage . House of Representatives began proceedings for impeachment . Senate investigation of the Watergate affair became a major media focus .
 Sam Dash was the chief counsel to the Senate Watergate Committee . Dash was a former national commissioner and member of the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith . Dash is the American intelligence conduit for Israel's Mossad .
 Albert Jenner was a former Warren Commission staff member with intimate ties to mob-linked Chicago empire of Zionist billionaire Henry Crown . Jenner served as the ""Republican"" minority counsel . Jenner was well placed to monitor Nixon's GOP defenders . Jenner's ties to Crown empire included ties to the mob-
 All interested parties were fully versed in the secrets of the Watergate affair and its progress . We can thus rest assured that all interested parties in Watergate were fully aware of the affair .
 His only chance for survival, once Watergate unravels, would have been a virtual counter-coup . Watergate unraveled, he would have had a virtual reverse coup .
 Alexander Haig, Israel's other key partisan inside the White House, actively moved to prevent Nixon from making any attempts at fighting back . Haig was also involved in preventing Nixon from trying to fight back .
 Haig instructed the armed forces to ignore any military orders by President Nixon unless they were cleared with him first . More than one published account has described how Haig actually instructed the military to ignore military orders .
 Angleton, Haig and the Post never had to play their ""Mafia"" card against Nixon . As it was, Angleton and Haig had no need to play the "Mafia" card .
 It might be added that it seems that the choice of the moniker ""Deep Throat"" was some sort of ""inside joke"" on the part of Woodward and his colleagues at the Post .
 Angleton was a heavy drinker and chain smoker who was often enveloped in a haze of smoke . Angleton, of course, was known for his heavy drink and chain smoking .
 The use of the ""Deep Throat"" code name was obviously a not-sosubtle way of signaling to those in the know in official Washington that the real force behind the leak was, in fact, James Angleton . Angleton was Israel's CIA ally, Israel's
 Angleton conducted dirty tricks operation out of Angleton's Israeli desk in the White House . Anyone in the loop would realize immediately that the ""Watergating"" of Richard Nixon was a dirty trick operation being conducted out of the Israeli desk .
 Richard Ober appears to have been the actual ""voice"" for ""Deep Throat" James Angleton was the ventriloquist behind the scenes . Angleton appears to be the actual "voice" for the character .
 This is the real key to understanding Watergate and the "Dallas-Watergate connection" that has so long been pondered but never fully understood . But there's no question .
 William Colby forced Angleton out of the CIA in 1974 . No wonder why Colby was forced out of CIA .
 Angleton's ouster from the CIA was certainly a setback for Israel and its Mossad at a critical time . Angleton was old and sickly (perhaps verging on clinical madness by some less than friendly accounts) and he would have ultimately been forced into retirement .
 Angleton, in the end, was an expendable anachronism who, in his heyday, had served his Israeli allies well . Angleton's heyday was a heyday for Israeli allies, but he was expendable, he says .
 The Israeli connection can be traced in scandals that encircled both Vice President Spiro Agnew and former Texas Gov. Mike de Blasio .
 John Connally was Nixon's first choice as a successor in 1976 . Connally had joined the Nixon administration as Treasury Secretary . He had been Nixon's Treasury Secretary in the early '70s .
 If Nixon stood firm and backed Agnew when Agnew himself came under fire, he may not have been forced to resign . Or Else, if Nixon had stood firm, he would have been allowed to resign from office .
 In fact, in Agnew's view, he, Agnew, was even more hated by the powers-that-be than Nixon, he says . Agnew: "I was more hated than Nixon. I'm not sure what happened to me."
 President Nixon refused to come to Agnew's defense because he was already under siege from Watergate scandal . Agnew resigned after the investigation led to the resignation of Agnew . Nixon would not try to quash the investigation that ultimately led to his resignation .
 In retrospect, there's no question that the scandal that brought down Agnew was as contrived as any in U.S. history . Agnew scandal was contrived and contrived, as well as any other in American history .
 Barnet Skolnik, a liberal Jewish prosecutor in the U.S. attorney's office in Maryland brought bribery charges against Agnew . The charges were brought by the United States Attorney's Office in Maryland .
 Skolnik got his chance to ""get" Agnew when Lester Matz, a prominent Jewish businessman, dredged up his previous on-again, off-again relationship with Agnew during the vice president's years in Maryland .
 M Hammerman and Jerome Wolff also claimed to have paid off the former Maryland governor . The two men claimed to be part of the deal .
 The swift rise like a Fourth of July rocket, the sudden fall from political grace—both involved Jews . Both involved Jews.
 Not as the victim of Israeli intrigue, as he most certainly was, the naysayers notwithstanding notwithstanding . Not as a victim of Israel intrigue, but as he was, he was the prime minister .
 One Jake Jacobson, a lobbyist for the milk industry, claimed that Connally, a multi-millionaire, had accepted a $10,000 bribe . Jacobson said Connally accepted a bribe in return for helping secure a 1971 increase in government milk price supports .
 In his capacity as treasury secretary Connally had no official powers in regulating the Department of Agriculture's milk price support programs . The fact is that in his . capacity as . treasury secretary he had no . official powers .
 Connally's accuser Jacobson had previously been indicted by the Justice Department for misappropriation of funds involving nearly $1 million in loans from a Texas savings and loan . Jacobson suddenly remembered the ""bribe"" he purportedly had given to Connally and entered into a plea bargain .
 In order to avoid going to jail himself, Jacobson became the ""star witness"" against Connally . Jacobson was the "star witness" in the case .
 Connally was acquitted, but his 1976 White House ambitions were shattered . Evidence against him had been brought by an unsavory felon who was angling for a reduced sentence in an unrelated criminal case . Connally's White House hopes were shattered, even though the evidence against him was brought
 As in the Agnew case, the media gave full play to the charges against Connally . It helped further the perception that Nixon and his intimate associates were engaged in widespread criminal conduct .
 Most of Nixon's key lieutenants, with the notable exception of Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Chief of Staff Alexander Haig and legal adviser Leonard Garment, went to jail . Kissinger, Haig, Garment and Garment were pro-Israel partisans . Kissinger and Haig
 Some anti-Semites said that Jacobson was part of a ""Jewish plot"" to get John Connally . But the Texan did ultimately, in fact, fall victim to a very real plot . Jacobson fell victim to the very real ""Jewish Plot"" that prevented him from
 Connally challenged the power of the Israeli lobby in a highly controversial speech in 1979 . Connally launched a well-financed bid for the 1980 Republican presidential nomination in 1979 when he launched his own campaign for president .
 Rabbi Rackman issued his call for Connally's assassination in the November 18, 1979 issue of The Jewish Week-American Examiner . Comparing Connally to Haman, the ancient enemy of the Jewish people, Rackman said .
 Connally is telling the American people that he does not want the support of Jews . He wants to prove that one can be elected president without Jewish support, he says . Connally says in no uncertain terms, he doesn't want Jewish support .
 If only we had stopped Hitler early enough, millions of Jews would still be alive . Millions of Jews still live today, Jewish leader says . Hitler's "first step" was to stop Hitler early, he says .
 It is sufficiently early to make Connally look ridiculous and destroy him politically without bloodshed . Connally would look ridiculous, but it's too early to destroy him without bloodshed, he says .
 "He encountered us in his path and casually sought to exterminate us as vermin," he said . He encountered us on his way to kill us, he said. He said. "We encountered him in our path. He encountered him on his path." He said: "He
 His political career came to a halt after the major media began a campaign against him . But his political career ended after the media began to smear him .
 When John Connally died in 1993, doctors said that Connally's fatal lung condition was a direct outgrowth of the chest wounds that he had received in the Dallas shooting in 1963 .
 John Connally did prove to be yet another victim of Israel . Connally proved to be a victim of the Israeli state . He died on the same day as John F Kennedy .
 Gary Hart from the race for the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination . Gary Hart ran for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988 . Hart won the Democratic nomination for President in 1988.
 As a member of the Senate, the maverick Hart had been in the forefront of inquiries not only into the JFK assassination, but also into the intrigue of the CIA in general . Hart was in the Senate investigating the CIA's involvement with the Lansky Syndicate and the Mafia in assassination
 Hart has been accused of being racist and homophobic in the past . He has since apologised for his actions in the wake of the incident .
 His affair with a young woman, Donna Rice, was bared by the press, forcing Hart out of the race for the presidency . Hart was forced to run for president after his affair with Rice was exposed .
 Some of those involved in Hart's Miami-Bimini weekend turned out to have links to organized crime and cocaine trafficking . Others possessed ties to the United States intelligence community dating back to the Bay of Pigs and earlier .
 Hart had been under surveillance by unknown parties for days and perhaps weeks before the scandal that led to his death . Independent investigation would show he had been monitored for days, perhaps weeks .
 One more politician who had run afoul of the CIA and the Mossad and the Lansky syndicate thus was removed from the scene . The CIA and Mossad removed the politician from the political scene .
 "Dallas-Watergate Connection" has never been outlined before, placed on the record in its complete context for the first time . TWO PRESIDENTS, TWO COUPS—SAME PL PL PLOTTERS. Two presidents, two presidents and two presidents were at the center of
 Watergate was a coup d'etat conducted by traitors within the U.S. government who were under the discipline of the same foreign influence . Watergate—like the Kennedy assassination, it was conducted by a traitor within the American government .
 James Angleton and Frank Sturgis were key CIA players in Watergate . Angleton, Hunt and Hunt were both Mossad operatives . Hunt and Angleton were key to the CIA's Watergate plot .
 Two different American presidents from two different political parties were brought to heel by Israel . The results of two elections were thus negated . Two different U.S. presidents from . two different parties were . brought to . heel .
 As in the JFK assassination before, the media played a critical role in keeping the real facts buried away from the eyes of the American people . The real facts are buried in the media, as is the truth about the assassination, the author says .
 A Commentary on the Major Published Works Relating to the Assassination of John F Kennedy . By no means have I read all of the books on the JFK assassination, but I certainly have read the primary works (along with some lesser-known volumes)
 Books about the assassination come from a wide variety of approaches, so I'd like to examine these volumes from that perspective . There are, first of all, the books that examine the flaws of the Warren Commission .
 The assassination books were essentially the first books that were published on the subject of the assassination . They were essentially first books published on subject of assassination .
 With the advent of Jim Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw there were a number of books written exclusively about that subject . Then, as time went by there were overviews of the theories about the assassination that had been emerging, encompassing critiques of the forensic evidence, autopsy information, etc.
 Although they were novels they were important because some of them contain grains of truth . "Some of these are important because of the truth," says the author of one of the best novels .
 Both authors accept the basic conclusions of the Warren Commission . The volumes provide a good historical background and overview of the assassination and immediate events .
 "It's important for people to read these books to become familiar with the subject," says author . It's important to read the books to learn more about the subject, he says .
 It wouldn't hurt to even read the Warren Commission Report or the hard-to-find multiple volumes of exhibits that were issued along with the report . The Warren Commission was released in 1996 .
 Rush to Judgment, by Mark Lane, was the first major book to expose the Warren Report's claim that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone assassin for the outrageous fraud that it was . Lane's book was first to expose Warren Report as a fraud .
 The Warren Report remains the single book that anyone must read if they wish to understand why people began to doubt the Warren Report . And although the book is now nearly 30 years old, it still remains the one book you must read .
 This book sparked the explosion of research into the JFK assassination that led, in the end, to my own writing of Final Judgment . This book, "Final Judgment," is based on the assassination of JFK JFK .
 Rush to Judgment led Jim Garrison into his monumental investigation that came as close to anything in revealing the truth about the JFK assassination .
 Mark Lane also wrote a book called A Citizen's Dissent that appeared in 1975 . Rush to Judgment is not one that many people are familiar with . Lane's book was published in 1975, a few years after Rush To Judgment .
 I've told Mark myself that I think this book is even better than Rush to Judgment, for several reasons . I've also told Mark himself that he thinks this book will be even better . Mark says he's told Mark that he's not disappointed with Rush to Judgement .
 Rush to Judgment came out later and incorporates many of Mark's new findings in the wake of Rush To Judgment . The new book is based on Mark's findings, which he says are 'compelling'
 Mark delves into the aspect of how the media treated his inquiries into the JFK assassination and how the FBI and the CIA and the rest of the Establishment responded . It's highly significant in this second book .
 The book is hard to find, but I would suggest that anyone who wants a startling perspective on how the government responded to what Mark called ""a citizen's dissent" read this volume .
 Mark Lane's final volume on JFK assassination, Plausible Denial, represents many ways Mark's own unique long-term perspective . Final Judgment, he writes, will be final volume of his book on the JFK assassination .
 Final Judgment is perhaps a sequel to Plausible Denial, or so it has been suggested . Final Judgment will be released in September 2015 .
 This is a highly detailed examination of the Warren Report that is a valuable exposition of all the flaws in the case against Lee Harvey Oswald . The Warren Report is highly detailed and detailed .
 This book will interest those who are fascinated by ballistics, autopsy evidence, etc. This book is about ballistics .
 This volume establishes that there were several assassins in Dealey Plaza beyond any question . The official autopsy evidence doesn't jibe with the truth, the author says .
 Those interested in the photographic evidence should refer to Robert Groden's The Killing of a President . Those who want to know more about the case need to refer to the book, The Killing Of a President.
 James Fetzer's Assassination Science is the latest look at the scientific evidence of the assassination . Assassination science is a look at all the evidence surrounding the assassination of President Obama .
 In the area of books that consider the JFK assassination from a larger overview, Crossfire, by Jim Marrs is probably the best . Crossfire is probably one of the best way to understand JFK's assassination .
 This book is flawed largely because Marrs presents multiple theories, one on top of the other, and does not really reach any firm conclusions . This book does not reach firm conclusions, but it is flawed because it does not quite reach a firm conclusion .
 Those who think that they will find the solution to the assassination in the book, more than likely, will find themselves overwhelmed by the multiple theories .
 Marrs never firmly establishes in the reader's mind that there can be multiple interests working together to achieve the same goal . Marrs: "Marrrs is never firmly established in the readers' mind that ... there can't be a single interest working together in the same way"
 He seems to treat the assassination in the context that either A did it or B did it, or C did it . Never really suggesting a combination of elements were responsible for it .
 Conspiracy by Anthony Summers is an interesting treatment of the JFK controversy up to and including the House Assassinations Committee investigation in the late 1970's .
 Summers himself had also written a book on the life of Marilyn Monroe . He leaves the reader with the idea that the Kennedy family had a hand in her death .
 In his revised edition Summers also falls flat by failing to give the French Connection, which he mentions, the analysis it is certainly due . Summers' revised edition of the book also fails to give it the proper analysis .
 Robert Sam Anson's They've Killed the President is an interesting book . The book is about the president's assassination . Anson also wrote a book about the White House .
 I find Anson's attack on Garrison off the mark and reprehensible, but I hasten to add that I find it off-the-mark . Garrison's attack was off- the- mark, reprehensible .
 Garrison never mentioned in his own book that he had been indicted on corruption and tax evasion charges, Anson claimed . Garrison was charged with corruption, tax evasion and other charges . Garrison has never been convicted of corruption or tax evasion in his book .
 In fact Garrison has a whole chapter on this in his book and this leads me to believe that Anson hadn't read the book . Anson had not read Garrison's book, but Garrison had a whole section on this topic .
 The Facts & Theories by Carl Oglesby is quite good, but his own problem is that he falls into that peculiar trap of suggesting that Permindex is some sort of ""Nazi Connection"" to the JFK assassination . As we've seen, nothing could be further from the truth
 The Dallas-Watergate Connection by Peter Dale Scott, a slim monograph on the subject, is fascinating . It's fascinating to learn about the Dallas connection with Watergate .
 It examines the special interest groups in Washington that were opposed to JFK and their ties to Organized Crime and the intelligence community . The special interest group was opposed to the JFK assassination .
 Scott doesn't get into the Israeli Connection . Scott says he's not sure about the Israeli connection .
 This book is severely flawed in that just when one thinks that Scott is about to get into the Israeli Connection , Scott very carefully tiptoes away . This book was severely flawed . Just when one thought that Scott was about to . get into an Israeli Connection, Scott tiptoed
 Scott's research is deficient in that despite the depth and breadth of his work he never gets into the Garrison investigation whatsoever . Despite the depth of his research, Scott never gets in the Garrison probe whatsoever .
 Scott never knows exactly who Scott suspects of responsibility for the assassination . Scott's son was killed by a bomb blast in 1992 .
 As I have said, Scott says very much, but at the same time, says very little . Scott says 'very much' but 'very little' about what he says about the Obama administration .
 At this juncture I'd like to discuss several of the novels that have appeared over the years dealing with the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination is the subject of several novels dealing with that assassination .
 Executive Action by Mark Lane and Donald Freed appeared in the wake of the film by the same name . The most notable is Executive Action, which actually appeared on the film .
 This book demonstrates how high-level power brokers could have orchestrated the assassination of JFK . This book is based on the book's author's research into JFK's assassination .
 Robert Morrow's novel, Betrayal, is similar in many ways to Executive Action . Executive Action is similar to the novel written by Robert Morrow .
 Morrow's own purported experiences as a CIA contract operative who became unwittingly enmeshed in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Morrow's book is presented as a novelized treatment of Morrow's experiences .
 In subsequent years Morrow issued a revised edition of this book in a nonfiction format and I will discuss that later . Morrow has since issued an updated version of the book in nonfiction .
 I think it's interesting in that it provides a good overview of the intrigue in a Kennedylike family and their inter-play with the American Establishment . The book is about the Kennedy-like family .
 Promises to Keep by George Bernau paints a Kennedy-like president actually surviving the assassination attempt . Promises To Keep by Bernau shows post-attempt intrigue involving some very recognizable characters .
 Libra by Don DeLillo has Lee Harvey Oswald as its main character and shows how Oswald may have been manipulated into the assassination conspiracy by ClIA-connected plotters .
 There's a character in the book who is a CIA operative along the lines of the real-life E Howard Hunt . This character is portrayed setting up a ""dummy"" assassination attempt that others turn into the real thing .
 American Tabloid by James Elliott presents the interplay between Organized Crime, Jimmy Hoffa, the FBI and the Kennedy family and ends with the JFK assassination . The film is based on the book by James Elliot .
 This book is interesting in that it sets the tone for what undoubtedly was a lot of the inter-play between these real-life figures who appear as characters in the book . Quite a good read, this book is quite a good book .
 There may be a few 'fictitious' elements that are really not far off the mark . There are a few "fictictitious" elements that may not be far from the mark.
 The books that have appeared on the Jim Garrison-Clay Shaw case are in a category of their own and are important . The books on the Garrison-Shaw case are also important .
 The first major book on this was Paris Flammonde's The Kennedy Conspiracy . The Kennedy conspiracy is a conspiracy theory .
 The book was published before the Shaw trial was finished . It contains much valuable material and is interesting reading .
 I should point out that although Flammonde does mention Permindex, he does not draw out the Israeli Connection out as he could have done and should have done .
 Kirkwood was a major Shaw booster, but the book contains a lot of material taken directly from the Shaw trial itself . The book contains detail about many of the interesting people who appeared in the course of the Garrison investigation .
 "Every time I re-read the book I continue to be amazed that the author couldn't see how much evidence there really was against Shaw and it's evidence that Kirkwood actually presents"
 Epstein's book is an all-out attack on Garrison . Garrison is a slender volume that I wouldn't mention if it otherwise weren't for the fact that it was Epstein who wrote the book . Epstein was Epstein's editor at the time .
 Epstein suggests that Oswald had been co-opted by the KGB and that he committed the crime acting alone . Epstein: Oswald committed the murder acting alone—with or without the orders of his KGB superiors .
 Epstein wrote the book Inquest that was hailed by the media as an important critique of the Warren Commission Report . Epstein also wrote Inquest, which was hailed as a critical critique of Warren Report .
 This volume was an Establishment ""cover story"" suggesting that while there were problems with the way the Warren Commission conducted its investigation, there was nothing to worry about in the end . However, I've always felt that this volume was a cover story .
 Entitled On the Trail of the Assassins, it's an interesting and well-written book . The book is written by John Sutter .
 The book is somewhat of a disappointment in that it is more a free-flowing personal memoir on the case, rather than a detailed account of the investigation .
 The most recent study focusing on the Garrison investigation is James DiEugenio's Destiny Betrayed . The Garrison investigation will be published in the next edition of this week's edition of the book, "Destructive Betray"
 This is an important book in that it examines much of the evidence in the Garrison investigation . It essentially proves that Garrison was right when he targeted Clay Shaw for involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 DiEugenio demonstrates beyond question that he was mixed up somewhere in the middle of the conspiracy . We don't know exactly what role Shaw played in the conspiracy, but he was involved in it .
 DiEugenio's book fails in that he does not pursue Shaw's Permindex Connection to its ultimate Israeli Connection . As I told DiEgenio in correspondence, his book fails .
 The book was published under the auspices of the Sheridan Square Press, which is affiliated with the Institute for Media Analysis . Garrison's book is published by the same press as Garrison's own .
 This institute, as we already noted, receives money from the Stern Family Fund . This institute is based in New York City .
 Garrison's inquiry may have unearthed the truth about the JFK assassination long before Final Judgment was ever released . Garrison's inquiries were sabotaged so repeatedly and relentlessly that they may have been able to uncover the truth . Garrison: "Had Garrison not been sabotaged, it may have ultimately unearthed the
 I strongly suggest that people focus, focus on the Garrison investigation . The Garrison investigation is ongoing .
 Clay Shaw and Guy Banister and David Ferrie were up to in New Orleans involving Lee Harvey Oswald . We will be able to come a little bit closer to knowing more of the truth about the JFK assassination .
 The next series of books in JFK assassination lore are the ones that might be described, for want of a better term, as those of an ""offbeat"" nature . The 'offbeat' books will be the ones of an "offbeat" nature .
 The Assassination Tapes by former CIA analyst George O'Toole is one of the best known films about the assassination tapes .
 The book describes O'Toole's use of voice stress analysis to determine whether key witnesses in the JFK case lied . The book is based on the analysis of a witness' voice stress .
 He concludes that Oswald did not lie when he denied having killed the president . Some Dallas police officers on the case may not have been telling the truth either either .
 O'Toole has a certain bias in that he seems to suggest that the FBI might have been somehow culpable in the JFK assassination cover-up . But all in all the book is worth reading and people will find it entertaining .
 David Lifton's Best Evidence contends that there were post-death alterations made of President Kennedy's wounds even prior to the official autopsy back in Washington . Lifton says there were alterations made prior to official autopsy in Washington D.C.
 This book is a ponderous volume and quite detailed but I must say that it is so overwhelming that one becomes lost . The book is so detailed that one is lost .
 Much of the technical evidence is beyond the comprehension of the average reader, says author . "The book doesn't make a major contribution other than to confuse the JFK assassination controversy even further," he says .
 Flashback by Ron Lewis is a very interesting first-hand account of the Vietnam War . Flashback is Flashback . Ron Lewis was in the U.S. Army in the early 1960s .
 Lewis was associated with Lee Harvey Oswald through Guy Banister's CIA contract operation in New Orleans . Lewis was a man with a rather checkered background, Lewis was involved in the CIA contract .
 A few people question Lewis's credentials, but his book provides a unique first-hand account of Oswald's association with Banister . Lewis's book does provide an account of Banister's association .
 I couldn't find anything in Lewis' book that conflicted in any way with my own findings in Final Judgment regarding Banister's office . "I'm not sure what happened to Banister," Lewis says .
 Conspiracy of Silence presents a firsthand account of what the doctor saw in the emergency room in Dallas . It shows the ""official"" JFK autopsy reports to be garbage . The book is written by a doctor who was in the Dallas emergency room .
 Crenshaw took a lot of heat for daring to come forth with his knowledge . He deserves quite a bit of credit for having done so . The former first lady of the U.S. House of Representatives says she is proud of her actions .
 Another book that I must mention (because I have been asked about the book on more than one occasion) is Mortal Error by Bonar Menninger .
 This book contends that the fatal shot that killed the president was accidentally fired by a Secret Service agent in the follow-up car behind the JFK limousine . The fatal shot was fired accidentally, the book contends .
 I have read the book and I will say right up front that it is not akin to the outlandish, nonsensical story that JFK was killed by a shot fired by his Secret Service chauffeur . JFK was believed to have been shot dead by Secret Service agent .
 Final Judgment contends Oswald was in the midst of circles within circles who were conspiring against the president and trying to frame Oswald to make it appear as if he did fire from the book depository . But if, per little chance, the thesis was right, it doesn't essentially conflict with the
 If indeed a shot was accidentally fired at JFK by the Secret Service, it doesn't remove the fact that shot was fired in response to an assassination attempt from elsewhere .
 No matter how sincere the authors of the volume, the book is a wild distraction for serious students of JFK conspiracy .
 It's quite an inventive theory, but I don't think it has much credibility, to be honest . It's not a great idea, but it's quite a good idea, I think it doesn't have much credibility .
 "This volume evidences a new widening of horizons in JFK research," he says . "It's essentially, essentially, in my view, this volume of JFK research is very different," he adds .
 L Fletcher Prouty, former liaison between the Pentagon and the CIA during the Kennedy years, is a former CIA liaison . He says the CIA and the Pentagon were at the center of the Kennedy administration . He said the CIA was at the heart of Kennedy's administration .
 Prouty does not delve into the Mossad arena . Unfortunately, when it comes to discussing the CIA's ""allies"" ProutY does not discuss the CIA .
 The CIA did its best to keep the book under wraps . Otherwise it's a very important book . The book is published by the CIA .
 Prouty's other book, JFK, is subtitled ""The CIA, Vietnam and the Plot to Assassinate John F Kennedy" JFK is equally interesting .
 The title itself is somewhat misleading as even Colonel Prouty himself has said, noting that it was his publisher who insisted on the title . The title has been somewhat misleading .
 The book focuses on the role of the U.S. in Indochina and the behind-thescenes maneuvering in the years leading up to that tragedy .
 The book is important in that it demonstrates conclusively that President Kennedy did want to get out of Indochina and that he faced the opposition of power forces . This was one of the key considerations by the CIA in its decision to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 The popular perception of JFK being a ""friend"" of Israel is far from being on the mark . JFK was not a friend of Israel, according to the Israeli leadership at the time .
 By the time of his death JFK was considered by the Israeli leadership to be a threat to Israel's continued survival . There's no question but that by the . time of JFK's death, he was considered . considered by . the . Israeli leadership . to be considered a threat . to
 "Anyone who has any ambitions of being an authority on the assassination of JFK can not—I repeat, can't—examine the assassination without reading these books," says President Obama . The books touch on this aspect of JFK's foreign policy .
 Those who avoid the subject are obviously afraid of getting dirtied up in the Israeli Connection . The Israeli Connection is an important part of the world's history .
 I've already discussed these volumes and their highly flawed thesis at various junctures throughout the pages of Final Judgment . Final Judgment is the latest in a series of books by the author of Final Judgement .
 These volumes have, nonetheless, received widespread coverage in the Establishment media because, I'm certain, it takes the focus off the real conspirators . The Establishment media has been largely focused on the fact that these volumes have been published .
 At this point I want to discuss the works of Robert Morrow . Robert Morrow is a renowned author and author of several novels . He is best known for his work in New York .
 It's an interesting book but I am cautious about the volume if only for the reason that, as I pointed out in Final Judgment, it was printed by an American affiliate of an Israeli publishing concern .
 Morrow was involved with people who were involved in the intrigue surrounding the assassination of Fidel Castro . Morrow was also involved with those CIA elements that were collaborating with the anti-Castro Cuban exiles, he says .
 Cuban exiles were being manipulated as much as Lee Harvey Oswald, author says . "Facilitators" weren't real conspirators, but they were "facilitators," he says .
 The Cubans were, in my view, little more than additional ""false flags"" planted in the midst of the assassination conspiracy landscape by those ultimately responsible for the crime . Both the proand antiCastro Cubans and pro-Castro Cubanans were little more .
 In Final Judgment I relied heavily on Morrow's book, The Senator Must Die, for information on the assassination of Senator Robert F Kennedy . In Final Judgement I relied on Morrow for information .
 There had long been a close covert relationship between the Mossad and the CIA and the Iranians, although many people have been unaware of this fact . The Mossad had a long covert relationship with the CIA .
 If RFK was killed by SAVAK as Morrow says, that to me suggests that we should look further into an Israeli connection there .
 I do have some doubts about Morrow's reliability in the sense that it is sometimes very difficult to determine what is indeed his own first-hand knowledge or what is his opinion or what others have told him .
 Morrow seems to suggest that James Angleton of the CIA was somehow out of the loop as far as the JFK assassination and cover-up was concerned . Nothing could be further from the truth, Morrow says .
 The fact that Morrow was a CIA contract operative moving in some rather unsavory circles is another factor to consider in all of this . Morrow is accused of being a contractor for the CIA .
 People in such a position don't always know who they really are working for, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Sometimes they think they are working for one purpose when, in fact, they're working for another purpose . Sometimes, they are trying to get the best out of their work, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Morrow's own experiences have inevitably been colored by all of this, he says . Morrow: "I'm not sure how much of this is going to be true to me. So I'm sure it's a good thing for me to say yes"
 I'm not suggesting that Morrow was a dupe or a patsy, but I suggest that we should look at his first hand account with caution . Morrow is not suggesting he was either a dupe or a patsy .
 Morrow is familiar with the thesis presented in Final Judgment and by this time he may well have read the book . Morrow is known for his knowledge of Final Judgment . Morrow has been reliably informed that he is aware of the thesis .
 I've pointed out that I don't find either of these works particularly credible . I'm not convinced that they are particularly credible, but I'm sure they are .
 The second book, co-written by Robin Moore, parrots the James Angleton line that the Soviets were behind the JFK assassination . The book is written by Moore who's long had ties with the intelligence community .
 The book also says that the KGB manipulated Lyndon Johnson into covering up the Soviet connection . The book says the CIA manipulated the president to cover up the connection .
 The only reason I mention them here is because people continue to ask me to comment on their contents . I'm not sure why I'm mentioning them here, but I'm glad they're here to talk about the contents .
 The books are High Treason I1, Killing the Truth and Killing Kennedy . They are all published by Carroll & Graf . The books were published in the 1970s .
 The third title is a pretty apt summary of what all four volumes really do . "I would have to say that . I would have said that the third title . is the best summary of the four volumes .
 As a writer myself, I hate to be critical of the writing styles of other authors . I hate being critical of others' writing styles, but I'm glad to be able to make this point .
 "I've been critical of the motivations of other writers in the JFK field, recognizing that they have axes to grind," says author . "They have special interests behind them promoting their efforts for often less than noble causes"
 In the case of Harrison Livingstone, however, I am amazed that his books were ever published in the first place . I'm amazed that he was ever published .
 This is perhaps more than a reflection upon his publisher than upon Livingstone himself . Livingstone's book is published by the Livingstone family .
 The second and third volumes, in particular, appear to have had no editing whatsoever . The first and second volumes appear to be edited with no editing .
 One gets the impression that the publishers gave Livingstone free rein to rant and rave and wander from subject to subject without any restraint of any kind .
 He lashes out at his own critics in a highly personal fashion and suggests that he is the one and only author who has written anything on the JFK assassination worth reading .
 His co-author on the first edition of High Treason, Robert Groden, is also subjected to savage attacks by Livingstone in the subsequent volumes . Groden is a respected JFK researcher .
 Livingstone says Lane had a 'left wing' reputation that he had no business getting involved in researching the facts about the JFK assassination . Livingstone actually says that because Lane . had a ""left wing"" reputation he had . no business . Getting involved with the facts of the assassination .
 Livingstone said Americans were not interested in the assassination . That made it appear that only ""left-wingers"" were interested in it, he said . Livingstone: 'Average Americans' were not.
 Livingstone scoffs the idea that the CIA was involved in the assassination . Livingstone also scoffs at the CIA's involvement in the killing .
 These mammoth volumes contribute absolutely nothing to JFK assassination research, yet a major publisher has picked up these volumes, printed them and given them widespread distribution .
 There is emerging evidence that the Zapruder film itself has been doctored . However, there is also emerging evidence of the film being doctored by the Soviets .
 Livingstone says he's disturbed that Livingstone's books have widespread distribution . Livingstone: "I am disturbed that they have gotten the widespread distribution that they've had"
 I bear Livingstone no ill will and I emphasize that J don't doubt his personal sincerity, but I question the motivations and the wisdom of his publisher . Livingstone's publisher is responsible for publishing the book, but the publisher is not .
 The case of Gerald Posner is one that deserves special analysis, to say the least . Posner's case is one of the most prominent examples in the country's history .
 I personally discovered more than a handful of blatant contradictions and distortions appearing in the pages of the book after only a cursory review . The book is available on Amazon .
 The Warren Commission Report's biographical overview of the life of Lee Harvey Oswald is little more than a rehash of the report . The book was published by the CIA, the FBI and others .
 There are lots of criticisms of Case Closed by many, many people . T'll outline just a few of my own random comments based upon my own review of the book .
 Posner's volume contains many contradictions, but those that I cite here, I think, are highly representative of his highly misleading work . Had I spent more time reviewing the volume, I could have found many more contradictions, I'm sure .
 Posner dismisses the HSCA out of hand when a finding doesn't jibe with Posner . Posner says he dismisses a finding by the body as a result of its findings .
 Other witnesses who contradict Posner's thesis had not come forth and told their stories initially, Posner questions their reliability . This is interesting because of other instances when other witnesses who contradicted Posner’s thesis had come forward .
 A late-coming witness seems to confirm Posner's thesis, Posner cites such a witness as being reliable and ""proof of his correctness" Posner says such a late-committed witness is a reliable and proof of his accuracy .
 Posner's primary talent is ad homenim attacks on witnesses whose testimony does not jibe with his conclusions . His conclusions are, of course, nothing more than the same conclusions reached by the Warren Commission some thirty years before . Posner: "The Warren Commission's conclusions are nothing
 In an attempt to discredit Delphine Roberts, Posner attacks some of her rather exotic political and religious beliefs . Roberts was the secretary and mistress of CIA contract operative Guy Banister . Posner attacked some of Roberts' beliefs, which have nothing whatsoever to do with the fact that Mrs
 Roberts claims that Lee Harvey Oswald had a close association with Banister and his activities . e When Posner approaches the allegations about Oswald's CIA connections made by well-known former CIA contract operative Gerry Patrick Hemming, Posner calls Hemming a ""self-promoter"" who has
 Hill has repeatedly and consistently said that the transcription of the deposition was inaccurate and a distortion of what she actually told Specter to begin with . Hill has said she has repeatedly said that she believes the transcript is inaccurate and that it was inaccurate .
 Specter would not have permitted his own threatening remarks to become a part of the record anyway . Specter says he would have allowed the remarks to be made public anyway .
 In another instance Posner seeks to discredit one of Garrison's witnesses who says that he contacted the FBI about Oswald (after the assassination) to report on an apparent visit by Oswald to Clinton, Louisiana, Louisiana . e
 This suggests that the FBI was totally above-board in the JFK assassination inquiry and kept records of all matters relating to Oswald and the assassination conspiracy . We know is not the truth. This, of course, suggests .
 Posner would have us believe Oswald had just achieved the greatest accomplishment of his pathetic life and now had nothing to say about that fact . Posner relies on the CIA's own repudiation of a claim by a former CIA employee that Oswald was indeed on CIA's payroll .
 In his appendix on many of the mysterious deaths surrounding the JFK assassination, Posner commits a number of outrages against the truth . e
 Many of the so-called ""mysterious deaths"" are not so mysterious at all, says author .
 There are at least two glaring instances where Posner plays fast and loose with the facts . But in the case of Posner, he plays fast-and-loose with the truth .
 Gatlin died after he fell from a hotel window, perhaps after having been pushed, of course . In fact, Gatlin fell from the hotel window .
 Posner says that Davis was a gun-runner who ""also knew Ruby"" and suggests that there is nothing to actually link him to the JFK conspiracy . Posner also says there is no link between Davis and Ruby .
 Posner does not mention that Davis ran guns to the French OAS and had been picked up in North Africa just prior to the JFK assassination . Davis was initially reported to have on his person letters making reference to Lee Harvey Oswald .
 Posner's most egregious assault on his readers, actively aided and abetted by his Establishment media promoters, is his claim to have solved the JFK mystery through computers . Posner is one of the most egregious attacks on the public by the Establishment media .
 In his book Posner relies heavily on a computer-generated analysis of the JFK assassination by a company known as Failure Analysis Associates . The company says it ""proves" that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone .
 The media gave such coverage of the assassination is itself based upon distortions of the truth as they appeared in the pages of Posner's book . So the primary selling point of the book is the famous computer analysis of assassination .
 As I pointed out earlier in Final Judgment, one of Posner's collaborators, Johann Rush, who provided Posner an ""enhanced"" version of the Zapruder film of the assassination, also just happens to be the same Johann Rush who was one of the cameramen for W
 "No one really takes his book seriously, not even, the sponsors behind the scenes," he says . "I suppose, I suppose, his sponsors are trying to make him take the book seriously."
 They do know who killed JFK, but they don't want you to know . That's why they have people like Posner ready to pull out of a hat .
 Seymour Hersh's new book, The Dark Side of Camelot, is being published by Seymour Seymour . The controlled media in the U.S. has put forth the message in the wake of the release of the book .
 Those who haven't heard about Hersh's book attacking the character of John F Kennedy, were not reading the mainstream press at the time of the 34th anniversary of JFK assassination .
 The book was being promoted everywhere, including a cover story on the November 17 issue of Time magazine .
 Dozens of other books have talked about Kennedy family links to mob, womanizing, etc. Dozens of others have written about JFK's links to the mob, including his womanizing .
 We all have heard about the Kennedy family's antics—the subject of endless media coverage for nearly thirty years . The Kennedy family has been the subject of constant media coverage of nearly 30 years .
 It's been that way since Mark Lane started asking questions about who really killed John F Kennedy and why .
 Lane's book, Rush to Judgment, opened up some real problems for the people who orchestrated the JFK assassination and cover-up . Lane: "Rush to Judgment" is a book that opens up a lot of questions for those involved in the assassination .
 Plausible Denial Lane documented the CIA's link to the assassination . The powers-that-be determined that conspiracy theories about the assassination had to be contained .
 Those theories that say that the Mafia did it are "acceptable" and place blame on long-dead mobsters . Those theories are not acceptable, they say that it was the Mafia who did it .
 Time magazine, which is promoting the new ""debunking"" of JFK, is owned by the mega-rich Bronfman family . Time magazine is promoting a new 'debunk' of JFK .
 Louis M Bloomfield, a henchman of the Bronfman family, was a key player in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Bloomfield was a member of the family who was involved in the assassination of JFK .
 JFK engaged in a long-hidden behind-the-scenes war with Israel's Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, over Israel's effort to build a nuclear bomb . It was Hersh's book, The Samson Option, which first exposed that JFK had been engaged in behind-
 Final Judgment cites Hersh's work extensively—much to the dismay of those who want to keep Israel's war with JFK a deep dark secret from the admirers of President Kennedy .
 The November 1997 issue of Vanity Fair magazine revealed that Hersh worked closely with Michael Ewing . Ewing was involved in the 1978 House Assassinations Committee investigation into the president's murder . Hersh was involved with Ewing in the investigation into President Kennedy's assassination .
 Final Judgment demonstrates the ""French connection"" is, in reality, the Israeli connection . Final Judgment shows the 'French connection' is, rather than a French connection .
 Hersh clearly knew about JFK and Israel, it's obvious he could not have helped but had some inkling of the connection . And in light of what Hersh knew, it was obvious he knew about the Israeli connection .
 Hersh dropped his own research into a book on the JFK assassination and shifted his focus to JFK's personal shenanigans . Hersh has been working on a book about the assassination .
 This apparently happened after Final Judgment came out in January of 1994 so it appears as if Final Judgment stole Hersh's thunder . Hersh died in 1994 .
 Hersh now says he never found any evidence of a conspiracy behind JFK assassination . Hersh says he found no evidence of any evidence that there was a conspiracy .
 All he can find evidence for is the fact that JFK had a very interesting personal life and that JFK was supposedly engaged in assassination plots against others .
 Time admitted Hersh's "evidence" as even Time admitted . Hersh has been accused of being a stonewalling journalist . However, there are those who say Hersh is wrong .
 Hersh'’s new book is regurgitating ancient allegations about Kennedy, putting them into circulation once again . Whatever the case, Hersh’’�s . new book will put them in circulation again and again .
 Those behind the assassination are thrilled to give Hersh's book all the free publicity it's receiving . That's why those who were behind it are thrilled . Hersh: The assassination is the most powerful assassination of the day .
 This has been an extended summary of my own personal reactions and opinions regarding books about the JFK assassination . Make your own final judgement of the books about JFK JFK .
 If you haven't read the books that I've recommended, I suggest you do so . If you want to know more about the books, read them here .
 "Once you've read all of these books, I think you can make your own final judgment," author says . "I don't think you'll find that my own general conclusions are off base," he says .
 For those who are interested in writing their own books on the JFK assassination, I would urge them to avoid the distractions, the nonsensical areas that bog down otherwise serious research . For those interested in researching the assassination, avoid distractions .
 Don't try to write yet another overview of the assassination conspiracy . And don't write another attempt at explaining the assassination . Don't write about it.
 "That's what I did, but I added a new angle that had never been considered before," he says . "I added a different angle," he adds .
 Final Judgment is set to be released in October . Final Judgment will be released on October 26 .
 Find some new area of interest related to JFK assassination and explore it in every way possible . Find out what you need to know about the JFK assassination .
 Not only U.S. policy toward Israel reversed upon JFK's assassination . Not only United States policy toward Israeli cooperation reversed .
 John F Kennedy was planning a military assault on Red China's nuclear weapons development facilities in the months prior to his assassination . Red China was developing nuclear weapons facilities in China .
 One month after JFK's death, Lyndon Johnson canceled the project and allowed China to proceed with the assembly of its nuclear arsenal .
 At the time of JFK's assassination, Israel's Mossad and Red China's intelligence service were working behind the scenes on joint nuclear weapons development .
 The evidence suggests that ''the China card"" played a critical factor in Israel's participation in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Israel's involvement in the assassination conspiracy was a key factor in the conspiracy .
 In early November of 1997, 1997, while preparing the fourth edition of Final Judgment, I discovered an item buried in a stack of old news clippings about the JFK assassination . I discovered the item buried among a pile of old old news .
 Just prior to his assassination, John Kennedy was planning a military attack on Red China's nuclear weapons development program . Paul Scott was a Washington pundit, who pointed out that John Kennedy planned to attack Red China .
 President Johnson ordered the impending attack halted one month after JFK's assassination, Scott says . President Johnson, President JFK's successor, ordered the attack halted .
 JFK was not only working to thwart Israel's nuclear bomb program but that he was also taking active steps to thwart Red China's as well . I found it interesting, indeed, that JFK worked to thwart Israeli nuclear program .
 I wondered if there might not be some sort of ""Red Chinese Connection"" to the Mossad's role in the JFK assassination conspiracy . The Mossad is believed to have been involved in the assassination .
 "I did find such a connection. Then, after only brief research—in the right places," I did find a connection, he says .
 I think readers will also be intrigued and will agree that what is outlined here points further toward a Mossad role in the JFK assassination conspiracy . I think the readers will be intrigued by the findings .
 Since that time I have yet to see anywhere—other than in the pages of Final Judgment—any mention of the Mossad connection to the ""China card" in the JFK assassination conspiracy . However, since that time, I have . yet . see anywhere . other than in . the
 This doesn't surprise me, of course, but it is a tragedy that even ""truth seekers"" refuse to look the evidence in the face . This is not surprising, but even even "truth seekers" refuse to face the evidence .
 Key points in JFK assassination conspiracy research have been covered in the past . JFK assassination conspirators have been involved in a wide variety of investigations into the assassination .
 The facts are that in 1963 Red China and Israel were secretly engaged in back-channel joint nuclear weapons development . Israel and Red China secretly developed nuclear weapons in secret .
 Key figure in the joint Red ChineseIsraeli dealings was Shaul Eisenberg, longtime business partner of Mossad arms procurement and finance officer, Tibor Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum was driving force behind the Permindex corporation that was central to the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 JFK may have been assassinated because he was standing in the way of Red China's nuclear bomb development program . But it is still considered ""outlandish"" to suggest that JFK's secret war with Israel over Israel's nuclear program played a part in leading to his assassination .
 The facts are there for those who are interested in finding them, as I have done . But the facts are still there, and they are available for those interested in them to find them .
 Let us then take a look at the Peking connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy . The Peking-led group is believed to have been involved in the assassination .
 Like the ""French Connection,"" this ""Chinese Connection"" is, in reality, a guidepost pointing to the Israeli connection . Like the "French Connection"" this "Chinese Connection" is, it is a guide to the Israel connection .
 Paul Scott wrote on February 13, 1970—just over six years after the Kennedy assassination . Scott was a well-connected ""conservative"" columnist Paul Scott . Scott: JFK's plan to attack China was JFK's "Plan to Attack China"
 The contingency planning was authorized by Kennedy approximately 10 weeks before his assassination . It was abruptly called off by President Johnson shortly after he took office .
 He asked if there was any chance for ‘accommodation’ with the Chinese communists . He asked whether there were any chance of ‘compromiation’ between the two countries .
 ‘The thing could be done as a surgical operation, without nuclear weapons, using high explosives,’ the official said . ‘It's possible to do the same without using nuclear weapons,' he said .
 Kennedy pointed at him meaningfully and said, ‘You do that.’ The official told Alsop that Kennedy pointed . at him . The official said Kennedy told him to do it . Kennedy then pointed at the official and said 'You do it'
 At their first meeting, the group was told that President Kennedy had decided in principle that China must not become a nuclear power .
 White House records show that shortly after Kennedy's death, President Johnson was briefed about the project by Rusk .
 On October 18, 1964, less than a year after JFK's assassination, China exploded its first nuclear bomb .
 CIA Director McCone was also one of the primary forces encouraging JFK to oppose Israel's nuclear proliferation . Hersh: McCone urged the attack on the Chinese nuclear facilities .
 The Kennedy administration conducted its secret surveillance of Israel's nuclear bomb production program . As we saw in Chapter 5, it was out of McCone's office at the CIA that the surveillance was conducted .
 Kennedy trusted longtime Kennedy family friend McCone, but not the CIA as an institution . McCone was a longtime friend of the Kennedy family and a longtime CIA insider .
 JFK was probably aware that Israel's loyalist at the CIA, James Angleton, had been providing Israel with secret nuclear information in the late 1950s well before JFK himself came into office .
 JFK’s ally McCone had been fighting Israel's nuclear bomb program even before he accepted the post of CIA director in the Kennedy administration . JFK fired CIA Director Allen Dulles in 1961 following the Bay of Pigs disaster .
 McCone leaked the story to reporter John Finney that Israel was building a nuclear reactor to produce plutonium . McCone had served on the Atomic Energy Commission during the Eisenhower administration .
 McCone's opposition to Israel's nuclear deal with the U.S. State Department . McCone says he opposes the idea of a deal with Israel in the West .
 McCone also had good reason to be disturbed about China's nuclear success, despite his previous efforts to block China from securing nuclear weapons capability . What's more, McCone said he also had reason to worry about his efforts to stop China from getting nuclear weapons .
 It is at this juncture that we will now turn to ""the Israeli connection"" to Red China . We will discover that there is much more to the picture than we might at first realize .
 Israel worked behind the scenes to enable China to launch its first successful nuclear test . Israel was behind the development of China's first successful nuke test, author says .
 If the truth ever comes out, we will probably discover that China's first nuclear blast was, in reality, a joint Israeli-Red Chinese accomplishment . Ultimately, if the truth is true, it will probably be a joint effort by the two countries .
 Seymour Hersh himself points out that China's first nuclear test caught the West by surprise . Hersh: "China's nuclear tests caught the west by surprise"
 Israel was moving steadily along in its own nuclear development program . This, of course, was at the same time that Israel was developing its own own nuclear program .
 A strange little spy story involving an American nuclear company was evolving . In the decades which followed, it was evolving in the U.S.
 The immediate suspicion—or so the story goes, was that Shapiro had used NUMEC' s resources and diverted the enriched uranium to Israel . Shapiro is accused of using NUMEC resources to divert enriched uranium from Israel .
 NUMEC story became a minor cause celebre among reporters and within the intelligence community, and ultimately the story managed—on numerous occasions—to ""leak"" into the major media in the U.S. and around the globe .
 Seymour Hersh has concluded that there's no firm evidence whatsoever to conclude that Shapiro and NUMEC were, in fact, responsible for diverting the nuclear resources to Israel . Hersh: "There is no evidence whatsoever that Shapiro or NUMEC was responsible" Hersh concludes .
 NUMEC was a primary source for enriched uranium necessary for Israel's nuclear bomb . However, there are those who continue to insist (and who evidently believe) that NUMEC is the source of enriched uranium needed for the bomb . Israel has never been hit by a nuclear bomb.
 There is no real evidence that this conclusion is true, however exciting it may be . Yet, as we've noted, there is no evidence for this conclusion, however .
 In short, the whole NUMEC story appears to have been a carefully crafted diversion that was deliberately leaked to provide a cover for the genuine source of Israel's ultimate nuclear success .
 Some critics of Israel (always eager to find Israeli espionage at work) jumped on the story and gave it further distribution . CIA official staked his reputation on the report .
 Hersh says there was never real basis for the accusations that had been made . Hersh: "There was never—at least according to Hersh, there was no real basis" for the allegations .
 Israel succeeded in its long-time goal of building a nuclear bomb in China . As we shall see, publicly available facts (if assembled and examined in their contextual entirety) do indeed suggest that it was through highly secret cooperation with Red China .
 From a historical standpoint, China was one of the few nations where the Jewish people were able to thrive and prosper . China—perhaps alone among many nations --was one of those places to thrive, prosper .
 Many European Jews sought refuge in China in the aftermath of Hitler's rise to power in Germany and his expansion of German military might throughout Europe . Jewish community has existed in China for centuries, but in more recent years, many European Jews have sought refuge .
 David Ben-Gurion was eager to establish relations with the newly-established communist government in Peking . The communist government was still consolidating its power after the struggles of the post-World War II period . It is thus no wonder that upon the founding of the state of Israel,
 Ben-Gurion had studied Chinese history and Buddhist thought, says Kurzman . He also had studied Buddhist thought .
 China, he was convinced, would inevitably evolve into the greatest power on earth, and its support would be invaluable . He was convinced that the support of China would be crucial to the country's future .
 Ben-Gurion felt the best way to moderate the Chinese leaders was to talk and trade with them, not force them into snarling isolation . The Chinese leaders were militant Communists, yes, but he felt they should be moderate, not isolated .
 In January 1950 Israel was still on speaking terms with the Soviet Union, and nominally nonaligned . Israel was in the 1950s when it was still nominally neutral with Russia .
 As the decade wore on, it was the Chinese who became interested in developing relations with the U.S.
 Israel's Mossad and the Red Chinese intelligence service were engaged in quiet diplomacy at the highest levels . In fact, Mossad was engaged in a quiet diplomacy with the Chinese intelligence .
 Nuclear bomb production has been a major part of the covert relationship between Israel and Red China, writes Deacon . This is a critical point that has otherwise been carefully suppressed .
 This covert nuclear relationship cemented ties between the two nations, so much so that they increasingly began cooperating in other spheres . The two nations gradually began moving toward open acknowledgment of their long-standing behind-the-scenes contacts .
 The Chinese began engaging in intrigue against their former Arab ally, Nasser of Egypt . Israel's role in the conspiracy that removed John F Kennedy from the presidency and saved China's nuclear bomb development facilities from destruction by American forces .
 Richard Deacon said that one of those areas was in a joint effort to thwart Russian influence in the Middle East . The two countries engaged in a wide variety of endeavors even while, publicly, Israel and the Asian communist giant were ostensibly at odds .
 Fearing leaks to the press, they refuse to deal with Israel's foreign ministry . Fears leaks from the foreign ministry, they do not deal with them .
 There is a ""Chinese connection"" (via the Israelis) to the JFK assassination conspiracy . However, when we nail down the precise name of the individual who served as the liaison between the Israelis and the Red Chinese during this critical period, we see indeed that there is a "Chinese connection
 Shaul Eisenberg was Israel's longtime middleman in Mossad's secret dealings with China . Eisenberg died of a sudden heart attack at age 76 on March 27, 1997, in Peking, China .
 Eisenberg was closely and directly connected to the Permindex operation which spun the web of conspiracy in the JFK assassination . Eisenberg—whom we first met in Chapter 7—was closely connected to Eisenberg’s operation .
 Once described by an Israeli writer as ""the richest Jew in the world""'”* Eisenberg was a key figure in Israel's nuclear development programs . He was a partner of Permindex banker Tibor Rosenbaum in the Mossad financial operation known as the Swiss-Israel
 He settled in Japan, where he married a Japanese woman and made his fortune selling war surplus and scrap metal . He settled there in Japan and made a fortune selling scrap and surplus metal .
 He never lost his awareness of being a Jew, however, and his emotional ties led him to set up businesses in Israel and then to move his family there . He moved his family to Israel .
 In the late 1970s, Israel was able to pave a pathway to Beijing for Israeli military exports to China . He kept his interests in the Far East and kept interests in China .
 He controlled the giant Israel Corporation holding company and held a 49 percent share in the national shipping company, Zim, one of the largest shipping and transportation companies in the world .
 Zim, jointly owned by Eisenberg and the Israeli government, hired French General Maurice Challe, one of the leading conspirators in the Permindex-backed OAS . Challe was released from prison for his involvement in plots against Charles DeGaulle .
 Eisenberg was most definitely a ""man in the middle"" in relation to key players and events that have been linked to the intimate circles of conspiracy that led to the JFK assassination . So clearly, Eisenberg .
 The Washington Times says Eisenberg's links to the Israeli secret service, the Mossad . However, despite all of Eisenberg’s vast wealth, his links to Mossad were most interesting .
 It was only well after Eisenberg's secret arrangement of the first arms sales to China was set in motion in 1979 . The major media in the West began reporting at the revelations of Israel's arms deals with Red China . The giant Asian colossus that we had otherwise been told was hostile
 The first notation of an important arms relationship between China and Israel came in the staid and little-read British journal Jane's Defense Weekly, in November of 1980 14_five years after Eisenberg's ""official"" entree into dealings with China on behalf of Israel .
 It was some three months later that the general public heard about Jane's revelations of the Israeli-Red Chinese arms deals . Jane revealed the deals to the media three months after they were revealed .
 Israel has been selling billions of arms to China since the deal was first set in place by Shaul Eisenberg in 1979 . The Mossad and Chinese intelligence service have been involved in covert dealings for decades .
 John F Kennedy's plans for a military attack on Red China's nuclear Final Judgment S11 facilities came to an abrupt end on November 22, 1963 .
 Less than one year later Red China exploded its first nuclear bomb . Red China detonated its first nuke bomb in 1949 .
 Israel had to have tested its nuclear capabilities somewhere . Israel is now an 'open secret' that Israel has nuclear weapons .
 In 1964, it now appears likely, Israel did test its own first nuclear bomb in secret conjunction with its secret ally, the People's Republic of China . Israel tested its own nuclear bomb with China .
 The official story is that Israel may have conducted its first atomic test off the coast of South Africa in 1979 . But there is evidence to suggest otherwise, and there is no evidence otherwise .
 The assassination of John F Kennedy by Red China's secret ally, the Mossad, in league with the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate, made possible the success of the joint Israeli-Red Chinese nuclear bomb project that would have been frustrated had JFK lived .
 Stephen Bryen, a deputy assistant secretary of defense, was formerly president of the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs, an influential lobby for Israel .
 Jewish power brokers in the Reagan administration were known for their devotion to Israel's cause . They were known as heavy-duty advocates of the Israeli-Red Chinese alliance .
 Bryen and Perle were simply endorsing the new policy because that is precisely what Israel wanted . However, it's clear that Bryen, Perle, among others, were just endorsing the policy .
 Richard Perle was a virtual ringmaster in organizing the public relations drumbeat on behalf of war . The U.S. launched a ""preemptive" invasion of Iraq, with strong prodding from pro-Israel partisans, in 2003 .
 This was before the Soviet Union fell and the Cold War was still unofficially underway . The press (during this period) did not make too much of the open dealings between Red China and Israel .
 The Washington Post reported in 1988 that little has been published in the United States about Israel's flourishing arms relationship with China . A rare discussion of the linkage was published in April of 1988 by the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency .
 In June 1991 China and Israel signed a bilateral agreement on scientific cooperation . The agreement was signed by the two countries in 1991 .
 On January 24, 1992 China and Israel established formal diplomatic relations to much fanfare in the world press and with much celebration in the worldwide Jewish media .
 The evidence indicates that unity between Israel and Red China had been forged, in large part, through the Mossad's role in the assassination of John F Kennedy . Taken together and analyzed, the evidence suggests that unity .
 The U.S. and Russia share common interests in building nuclear arsenals . The two countries have shared a common interest in nuclear weapons . Russia and the U.K. joined forces together to build nuclear weapons in the 1980s .
 The possibility that Red China had a hand in the affair was never mentioned . A Red Chinese motive was more logical than any attached to either Cuba or Soviet Russia . The possibility of a Red China motive was not mentioned .
 The full truth about China's secret nuclear arrangements with Israel ever came out would have led some people looking in the direction of Israel . In fact, to point a direction of blame toward Red China could have actually started some people .
 If the subject of JFK's opposition to China's nuclear weapons program had been made an issue, it was entirely possible that someone could have dared point out that JFK was also opposed to Israel's nuclear intentions . JFK also opposed Israel's plans to develop nuclear weapons .
 John F Kennedy began moving to stop the two allied nations from building nuclear weapons . Israel took affirmative measures to counter the U.S. president .
 Shaul Eisenberg arranged the quid pro quo between Red China and Israel that ultimately played a part in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Eisenberg will be largely remembered in the ""official" histories as the legendary figure who ""opened up" Red China for Israel .
 Shaul Eisenberg helped Israel survive a critical period in its history . He helped Israel's Red Chinese allies develop the nuclear clout they needed to become a major player on the world scene .
 The Red Chinese were very clearly doing it in alliance with their allies in Israel's Mossad . For if—in the event that they did, the Red Chinese did it, it would be very clear they were doing it with Mossad.
 In summary, the ""Chinese Connection"" to the JFK assassination is really the Israeli Connection . Like the so-called ""French Connection," the "Chinese Connection" is the "French Connection"
 Many Israelis today believe that Israeli intelligence played a part in the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin . Many Israelis believe that Israel played a role in Rabin's assassination .
 In the closing months of 1997 there was a highly-charged political frenzy underway in Israel . The Israeli government was in full control of the country in the late 1990s .
 The controversy stems from allegations that elements in Israeli intelligence were involved in the 1995 assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin . Rabin was assassinated in November 1995 .
 British newspaper, the Guardian, described the "prevailing tone of bitterness and division" in Israel that followed Rabin's death .
 This debate has been longstanding but Rabin's assassination exacerbated matters considerably . The assassination of the Israeli prime minister has exacerbated it considerably .
 A survey conducted among Israeli Jewish adults was released on the anniversary of the Rabin assassination . However, the popular support for Axelrod's opinions is also borne out by a survey conducted in Israel .
 Israeli conspiracy theories regarding the Rabin assassination are at least as complex as some of those that have come forth in the aftermath of the assassination of President John F Kennedy . What is fascinating is that the Israeli conspiracy theory regarding the assassination is at least more complex than some of the ones that have
 Avishai Raviv was an agent provocateur who overstepped the mandate given him by General Security Service to infiltrate and report on the right-wing extremist groups that spawned Prime Minister Rabin's assassin, Yigar Amir . Raviv is believed to have infiltrated and reported
 Raviv organized paramilitary training for the very circle of right-wing extremists that Mr Raviv was penetrating . Amir Amir, Raviv's partner, was also involved in the training .
 A failed attempt would allow Rabin to crack down on right-wing opponents who believed his concessions to the Palestinians squandered the Biblical inheritance and endangered the state .
 The official was promised a top post in the General Security Service, theory says . According to the theory, he was promised top job in the service .
 To make matters worse for Israel, international attention has been focused on the growing conflict arising from the Rabin assassination and conspiracy theories that have evolved .
 The first major report in the mainstream media in America about the controversy in Israel came from a very interesting source, especially considering what we have explored in the pages of Final Judgment . The report came from an interesting source .
 Geula Amir, mother of Yitzhak Rabin's assassin, alleged that her son, Yigal Amir, was goaded into killing Rabin in 1995 . Avishai Raviv was an undercover agent for Shin Bet, Israel's security agency . Raviv worked for Shin
 JFK Jr.'s friend, business partner and co-publisher, Michael Berman quit George magazine, citing differences with his partner . Not long after, Berman quit the magazine .
 Berman is Jewish and said to be a strong supporter of Israel . Some observers suggested that it was precisely that inflammatory article that offended Berman .
 Later, in the question-and-answer section, we'll discuss the strange death of JFK, Jr. and demonstrate the unusual role that a ""former"" Mossad operative played in the events surrounding that tragedy . We'll also discuss the role of an ex-Mossad operative
 The Mossad was caught in an embarrassing failed assassination attempt against a Palestinian leader in Jordan . Even as all of these charges and counter-charges were being made within Israel, its foreign intelligence service was caught .
 The bungled plot demonstrated that the Mossad does engage in assassination attempts on foreign soil . Mossad has been accused of trying to kill Israelis in the Middle East .
 Most Israelis were not particularly disturbed by the fact that the Mossad was engaged in such activities . Yet, as the international press repeatedly reported, most Israelis weren't disturbed by it .
 Largely, it seems, Israelis were disturbed by the fact that their intelligence agency had bungled the job with the consequence that Israel was subjected to international condemnation .
 Israelis are dissecting every tactical, technical and procedural flaw in the failed assassination attempt in Jordan, the Post reported . The Post reported that Israel is "mortified" over the incident .
 Israelis debating the mechanics of the assassination attempt and the calibration of political risk, according to the Post .
 Pro-Israel lobby in America has reacted hysterically to the allegations made in Final Judgment . Many Israelis believe it's possible that their own domestic intelligence agency played a hand in the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, writes Aaron Miller .
 Israelis, in general, do believe in the use of assassination as a force for political change and as a means whereby which to ensure the survival of their beloved country . Israelis believe in using assassination to ensure their country's survival .
 Millions of Americans are convinced that there was indeed a conspiracy behind the assassination of the thirty-fifth president of the United States . The U.S. government was a willing participant in the cover-up of the assassination .
 Growing demand for release of secret JFK files reached a fever pitch in the wake of Oliver Stone's film, JFK .
 There was indeed a bill passed by Congress calling for the release of the documents . Many documents were released, though not all of them were released .
 As far as the legislation to open the files was concerned, there were more than a few people who believed the legislation itself was suspect . The legislation was passed by the House of Representatives .
 G Robert Blakey, the former director of the House Assassinations Committee, was the architect of the legislation . Blakey was the former head of the committee . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on Thursday .
 In Chapter 10, we reviewed Blakey's spurious findings which essentially suggested that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" and also examined his close relationship with the CIA which led his critics to suspect that perhaps perhaps perhaps the House investigation was being scuttled from within .
 We also explored Blakey's relationship with Morris Dalitz, one of Meyer Lansky's closest long-term associates . Dalitz was a major backer of the Israeli lobby in this country .
 With all of this baggage—little known to the general public at least— Blakey was an unusual choice, unless, of course, Congress didn't really want to get to the truth .
 Blakey drafted legislation that was equally controversial . Blakey's legislation was also controversial . The legislation was drafted by Blakey in the 1980s .
 Blakey's proposal would appoint a five member citizen board to review and decide on the release of the documents . The board would be appointed by the United States District Court of Appeals in Washington .
 The legislation did specify that any persons previously involved in any investigation of the JFK assassination would not be eligible for appointment to the board .
 Congress and Blakey decided upon the federal appeals court in Washington, D.C. as the body which should select the ""blue ribbon"" document review panel . The Establishment is still trying to keep the truth about the assassination hidden and buried forever .
 Under Blakey's legislation, one of the very judges on that appeals court which would select the panel was former Sen. Robert Blakey . The panel would select a panel of judges .
 James L Buckley is the brother of William F Buckley Jr. William F. Buckley, Jr., a CIA protéé and longtime friend of E Howard Hunt, himself implicated in the JFK murder . Buckley was a longtime CIA man and friend of Hunt .
 Novo brothers named by ex-CIA operative Marita Lorenz as among those who traveled in a two-car caravan from Miami to Dallas, Dallas, in 1963 . The brothers were among those traveling in a caravan that arrived in Dallas on November 21, 1963 .
 The CIA hirelings were met by their CIA paymaster, E Howard Hunt . Hunt was Hunt's paymaster in Dallas, Texas . Hunt is Hunt's former CIA Director of Operations in Dallas . Hunt died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 They were also visited in their Dallas quarters by Dallas nightclub keeper Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby visited them in their quarters .
 Congress passed a bill requiring government-wide disclosure of documents relating to the assassination . As it was, the Congress did act, after much debate, and approved a bill .
 The disclosure law set up a five-member review board with the power to obtain assassination records from any government office, the CIA and FBI and committees of Congress . The review board was set up by the law .
 The board, in fact, began releasing many documents—some interesting, of course, but nothing so inflammatory as to require a new investigation . The board has released many documents, some interesting, but not so inflammatory .
 The newly released documents only give the JFK assassination "buffs" something to salivate over . The JFK assassination 'buffs' have nothing to do with the new documents .
 Documents that have been released only seem to have confirmed everything that has already been a part of the JFK lore . The JFK documents have already been released .
 David Marwell, the first head of the review board, is a former historian for the Justice Department's controversial Office of Special Investigations . The review board was created by the Department of Justice . Marwell is the first member of the board to review the controversial review board .
 Marwell's previous association with the OSI creates some concern about his willingness to bring out all of the sensitive information within the JFK files . If indeed the KGB did indeed play a part in the JFK murder, in any way, shape or form .
 The KGB matter, troubling though it may be, is eclipsed even more so by Marwell's inevitable dealings with Israel's Mossad . Now the KGB matter has been eclipsed by the Mossad's ties to Israel . The Mossad is a major intelligence agency in Israel .
 Mossad has had a long-standing close relationship with the OSI, so there's no reason to doubt that the Mossad, like the KGB, has used its talents to compromise this American agency . The Mossad is known to have had a strong relationship with Russia .
 There's a second reason why we might find Marwell's presence at the JFK documents review board troubling . Marwell is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA in the 1970s .
 Posner's book was an account of the efforts by Marwell and the OSI to track down the infamous Auschwitz doctor . Posner: Marwell was the only survivor of the Auschwitz doctor who escaped .
 The very fact that two individuals with close ties to the world of intelligence, and with a special interest and expertise in an area of immense interest to the Mossad should show up as two of the primary players in the current controversy over the JFK assassination is interesting indeed, particularly in light of
 I do not consider Marwell—or his records review board—credible, he says . Obviously, in light of all of this, he does not think Marwell is credible, he adds .
 Those who contend Mossad knew for years that Mengele was dead long before the officially announced ""discovery"" that M.engele had died . Those who say Mossad was aware of the death of the good doctor .
 The Mossad kept this under wraps and allowed Nazi hunters and Jewish fund-raisers to continue churning up memories of Mengele . The German physician was still alive experimenting on Jewish babies in the jungles of South America .
 Incriminating documents buried in the JFK assassination files would have been shredded long ago . Most incriminating materials would never have been committed to paper in the first place . The most incriminating documents would have never been committed .
 Don't count on something truly enlightening to have been uncovered, especially since Posner's friend Marwell, was in charge of the release of the documents . Don't expect something truly enlightened to be uncovered .
 Marwell, and his assistant at the review board, one Douglas Home, have gone on to greener and more lucrative pastures . Marwell and Home, who worked for the board at the time, have since left the job .
 The U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C., is now working with the Israeli government in a variety of ventures of interest to the worldwide Jewish community . They are now working for the United States Holocaust Memorial museum .
 So once again we find Mr Marwell involved in affairs that are intimately linked to the state of Israel . So again, he finds himself involved in the affairs of the Israeli state .
 The activities of the review board provided an interesting distraction and were, in fact, all part and parcel of the continuing cover-up . The review board's activities were, for example, were, an attempt to distract the public from the truth .
 There are many aspects to the continuing cover-up as I learned when first trying to get this book published . There were many aspects of the covering-up when I first tried to get the book published.
 Shapolsky's editorial director Isaac Mozeson sent a handwritten postcard to us . Shortly after, we received a handwritten letter from Isaac .
 "The ferocity and hysteria in Mozeson's response was unlike anything I had ever seen," he said . The ferocity of the reaction to the incident was unlike any other reaction, he added .
 He described the theory outlined in Final Judgment as being ""infantile"" and wrote of the ""powerlessness"" of Israel's Mossad . He also wrote of Mossad's "powerlessness" of Israel .
 Scheim would have us believe that Meyer Lansky was a little fish in a very big pond—hardly an influence at all . Scheim, as we noted in Chapter 10, would have had us believe he was little influence in Lansky's life .
 Clay Shaw was an innocent bystander who was guilty only of restoring lovely old buildings in the French Quarter of New Orleans . He also scoffs at Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw .
 This volume contains much useful information, beyond question, and obviously was written by someone who was privy to much of what was happening in the CIA at the time of the assassination . Morrow's previous work, Betrayal, is an elaboration of his work .
 Morrow portrays the CIA's Mossad liaison, James J Angleton, as somehow being out of the loop as far as the assassination and the cover-up was concerned . However, what is notable about the volume is that Morrow specifically portrays Angleton as being out-of-the-
 Morrow even suggested elsewhere that Angleton and Robert F Kennedy were famous friends, without documenting this unlikely scenario . Morrow also suggested that the two men were friends at the time .
 Morrow's contention is that Shaw headed a ""rogue" element based in New Orleans operating outside the control of the CIA headquarters at Langley where Angleton's influence was then supreme . Shaw was a key CIA operative in the 1960s .
 When Morrow was arrested for his participation in a CIA-orchestrated plan to counterfeit Cuban currency, the lawyer who handled his defense, Fred Weisgal, immigrated to Israel within a year after the JFK assassination and quickly became Israel's Deputy Minister of Justice, a high honor
 Perhaps Morrow hasn't told us everything he really knows . Perhaps Weisgal's high post was a reward for assisting in some fashion in the JFK assassination cover-up . Perhaps Morrow isn't telling us everything .
 The response of the Israeli lobby to the release of the first edition of Final Judgment was quite interesting, to say the least . The Israeli lobby responded positively to the film .
 Washington Jewish Week published a vituperative broadside blast at Final Judgment in a prominently placed full-page attack in its April 28, 1994 issue .
 WJW said that the thesis presented in Final Judgment is "speculative ""bizarre,""'°°**" but, of course, never showed how or why it was. WJ said that .
 Among those who read the book prior to publication were Jewish authors, attorney Mark Lane, and Dr. Dr. Martin Luther Luther .
 In seeking to discredit the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy, WJW slipped up and, effectively, confirmed the explosive nature of the facts about the Israel connection to JFK murder .
 Stone's film ""never claims to be factual,"" '° thus suggesting that Clay Shaw's Permindex connection was one of the instances of artistic license utilized by Stone in the making of the film . WJW also suggested that Stone used Shaw's connection to the website .
 In short, WJW critiqued the film by a combination of name-calling, innuendo and playing fast and loose with the facts . Final Judgment hits perhaps too close to home .
 In 1995, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, the American intelligence and propaganda conduit for the Mossad, smeared Final Judgment with false and defamatory smears of Final Judgment .
 ADL: "A View from the 'Defense' Agencies" was the work of the ADL's national director, Abe Foxman .
 Liberty Lobby's chief counsel, Mark Lane, had already written a JFK conspiracy book titled Plausible Denial . The organization's mania for conspiracies appears to be inclusive enough to assimilate both theses .
 The ADL's spokesman calls the American interest in the JFK assassination a ""craze,"" reflecting the lack of appreciation for the concerns of many Americans about a possible conspiracy behind the assassination of an American president .
 It's not in the interests of the ADL to accurately report the specific details that appear in either of the volumes . Obviously, however, the books do not actually present two different theses at all .
 The ADL dismisses these ""outlandish ideas"" but it is interesting that the ADL felt compelled to take a slam at Final Judgment in the pages of this .
 Two years after the release of the first edition of Final Judgment, the book was making its impact felt . The ADL knew it. Clearly, two years after its release, Final Judgment is still resonating .
 ADL felt it necessary to respond to people taking the book seriously . There were enough people beginning to take it seriously, so much so the ADL responded .
 If the suit had reached trial, it might have brought forth some interesting revelations . E Howard Hunt's libel suit against The Spotlight, relating to the JFK assassination (described in Chapter 16) may have led to interesting revelations.
 "All Hell broke loose" at a community college seminar in Orange County, California, in the fall of 1997 . "I was invited to address the topic of the book at a college seminar"
 Final Judgment is the latest edition of Final Judgement, the fourth edition of the series . Final Judgment will be released in November 2015 . The series is the first of its four editions .
 The ADL has not heard the last of Final Judgment . But needless to say, as I said earlier, it's not the end of Final Judgement .
 The ADL says the thesis presented in Final Judgment is ""nonsense,"" The big problem for the ADL and for Israel is that a lot of people don't agree with the thesis .
 ADL ally, super-lawyer Alan Dershowitz, came to the defense of another controversial researcher who came under fire for his studies of purported alien abductions . In light of all this frenzy, I cannot help but echo the words of the ADL in its attempt to
 The fact that no one, thus far, has been able to refute Final Judgment is very telling indeed . And the fact that . no one has ever been able . to refute that claim is telling .
 The allegations made in Final Judgment don't seem to be anything new to people in the Arab world . What is interesting is that, evidently, the allegations made by Final Judgment, are not new to Arab people .
 Oliver Stone's stunning success with the film JFK may have done research into the JFK assassination controversy more harm than good . In retrospect, it may well be that Oliver Stone did more damage than good in researching the assassination .
 Stone's film focused new public interest on the controversy and gave millions of Americans and people worldwide a new perspective on the affair . As we noted in Chapter 17, we noted that Stone's movie focused new interest .
 The impact of the film was probably more significant, in the end, than a dozen best-selling books on the assassination combined . "The impact of this film probably was more significant than any other film," the author says .
 Stone's apparent determination to avoid the socalled ""French connection" is questioned . Stone's corporate backers have ties to the Israeli-Lansky combination on the part of Stone's .
 They are in an unpleasant position in which they will look rather bad if they choose to criticize Stone . "They are in a rather unpleasant position, which they are in," says CNN's John Sutter .
 DiEugenio compiled a compelling vindication of Garrison's case against Clay Shaw and his role in the JFK assassination conspiracy . The book was nothing less than a paean to Garrison .
 DiEugenio was quite circumspect in his dissection of Shaw's Permindex connection . Yet, he said he was circumspect about the connection .
 DiEugenio went so far as to note Clay Shaw's relationship with the powerful Stern family of New Orleans . WDSU played so central a part in portraying Lee Harvey Oswald as a "pro-Castro extremist" DiEgenio was circumspect in his treatment of the
 Lee Harvey Oswald's assignment working for Guy Banister may have been part of an ADL-sponsored ""factfinding"" operation carried out through Banister's detective agency . Oswald's public image as a ""pro-Castro extremist" may have led to his public image being labeled a
 DiEugenio actually had good reason to be so reticent in pulling punches . DiEugeneio actually has a reason to pull punches .
 The prime movers behind Sheridan Square are Ellen Ray and William Schapp, founders of the Institute for Media Analysis . The Institute includes among its financial backers the Stern Family Fund, established by Clay Shaw's friends, the powerful Stern family of New Orleans .
 JFK Assassination Information Center and Committee on Political Assassinations refused to allow me to speak . I requested the opportunity to address the 1994 symposium of the JFK assassination Information Center in Dallas and 1996 conference .
 If my thesis is foolish or misguided or off the beam, one would think that it would be a simple process to discredit this book, he says . But he says it's not a simple way to discredit the book, and that it's possible to discredit it .
 In these areas, Scott has clearly done his research, but one cannot read his book without thinking that Scott has likewise tip-toed up to the Israeli connection, but refused to draw the obvious conclusions for his readers .
 Scott says a lot about many things, but says nothing when it comes to the Israeli links to the JFK assassination that have been thoroughly documented in Final Judgment . Scott says nothing about the Israeli ties to the assassination .
 Scott Scott has nothing to say about Clay Shaw's Permindex connection . Scott has no idea about Shaw's connection to JFK .
 The ADL's long-suspected Mossad link was brought to public light in a broad-ranging investigation by the San Francisco Police Department of covert domestic spying operations aimed at a wide variety of political groups in the United States .
 Michael Lerner is the publisher of Tikkun magazine, a Jewish-oriented journal which has emerged as a major voice for the Israeli lobby . Scott's other source is Michael Lerner, a prominent liberal philosopher .
 Scott's clear and repeated effort to avoid broaching the Israeli connection to the assassination of President Kennedy . That these sources played a part in shaping Scott's final judgment perhaps explains in part .
 "I understand their reasoning, of course, but, at the same time, I am compelled to question their integrity," she says . "I'm compelled to ask their integrity. I understand that, but ... I'm not sure what I'm doing."
 I will not name them here and thereby burden them with the possibility of being tarred as "anti-Semites" But they know who they are and their support has been appreciated .
 One long-time JFK assassination researcher, Philip Ten Brink, reached essentially the same conclusions reached in Final Judgment, even up to and including a number of fine points that some might find somewhat esoteric .
 I am compelled to repeat the old saw that ""great minds think alike,"" but I would be overstating the case in so doing . I would rather say that "great minds" think alike."
 It is simply that the facts are there for those who wish to recognize them for what they are . The facts are simply that they are. They are simply there .
 Ten Brink discovered on his own that pointing the finger in the direction of Israel and the Mossad is not good public relations . Ten Brinks says pointing the fingers at Israel and Mossad isn't good PR for Israel .
 Ten Brink called the shots at he saw it and posted a picture of the scene . Ten Brinks has been in the news for a week .
 After Final Judgment was published, I learned of another JFK researcher, Dave Sharp, who had been active on Internet news groups for some time, making the allegation that Jewish political interests — particularly the Bronfman family of Canada — were behind the JFK assassination .
 Sharp apparently had no idea of the conflict between JFK and Ben-Gurion over Israel's nuclear bomb . Final Judgment fills in a missing piece of the puzzle for Sharp, not having yet read Final Judgment .
 Sharp himself has since been critical of Final Judgment, suggesting that I fell down on the job in failing to discuss the Holocaust and the way it has been used as a political tool by the Israeli lobby .
 Final Judgment is about the JFK assassination, not about the Holocaust . That's Sharp's opinion, of course, but—as I have said time of again, it's about JFK assassination . Sharp: "Final Judgment" is about JFK, not the Holocaust, and it's not about
 Most of those who purport to be seeking the truth about the JFK assassination are only willing to go so far . Unfortunately, most of them are willing to reveal the truth of the assassination .
 JFK's battle to prevent Israel from building the nuclear bomb is a secret . Israel, like its allies in both organized crime and the CIA, did have a strong motive to move against JFK and did . Israel's allies in organized crime, the CIA and organized crime did .
 In the end, it was Israel, not JFK, that had the last word on the matter . Israel had the right to speak to JFK in the wake of his assassination .
 JFK's strenuous efforts to put a stop to nuclear expansion in the Middle East were thwarted . So much, then, for JFK's efforts to stop nuclear expansion .
 Many readers have asked if the Kennedy family has responded to the allegations made in this volume . Many readers of Final Judgment have asked for a response from the family . The family has not responded .
 We can be confident that the Kennedy family—above all, does indeed know the truth about the JFK assassination . The Kennedy family, above all, knows the truth .
 Don't expect the family to ever go public with any knowledge they might have of Mossad involvement in the affair . But don't expect Mossad to go public .
 Someone close to the Kennedy family has purchased five copies of Final Judgment, author says . Final Judgment was published in 2007 .
 I'm sure that the editors had an interesting time reading the book and discussing it among themselves, but I don't frankly expect to see a story about it in George . I do know for a fact that members of the Kennedy family have heard about Final Judgment .
 A friend of mine who lives in Rhode Island met Congressman Patrick Kennedy (son of Sen. Sen. Kennedy) on CNN.com Live . The Kennedy family is proud of the Kennedy family's success .
 Final Judgment implicates Mossad and Lansky Crime Syndicate in the assassination . Final Judgment is a book that implicates the Mossad, the Lansky crime syndicate .
 No politician in America would want to be identified with a conspiracy theory critical of Israel . After what happened to John F Kennedy when he went head-to-head with Israel, he was assassinated .
 If anybody knows who really killed JFK, it's his family, says JFK's family . The book must have come as a surprise to hear that a book had actually been written on the subject .
 John Sutter spoke with a member of the Kennedy family about this book . He spoke with the family for the first time .
 Congressman Joe Kennedy, son of the late Robert Kennedy, walked in his direction at Union Station in Washington, D.C. Rep. Joe Kennedy walked in the direction of Rep. Kennedy .
 He was in the company of an attractive woman whom I later identified as his second wife . The woman he was with was identified as a second wife. He was later found to have been with her .
 "He knew I recognized him and I suspect that he also knew I wanted to speak to him," she says . "I made up my mind that I would," she adds .
 He shook his head in the negative as he was running the title through his mind . The world champion was looking to win his first title in his career .
 I saw that he was uncomfortable with the nature of what I was suggesting, that is Israeli involvement . I didn't want him to think that I was one of those people who would continue to occupy his space, he said .
 Only Congressman Kennedy knows for sure what he meant . In the end, of course, it doesn't really matter .
 "I can now state with certainty that the Kennedy family does indeed know about Final Judgment. However, the fact is that . However, I can now . state that I can . now state . that I . can now say that . The Kennedy family knows about Final Judgement .
 I have no doubt that one way or another both of these young congressmen will someday discuss the allegations made in Final Judgment with their family . I'm sure they'll talk about the allegations with their families, but not with them .
 If anything, the Kennedy family has been firmly co-opted by the Mossad itself . The Mossad has been in touch with the CIA, the CIA and Mossad .
 The key to understanding this is Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis’ ten year relationship with the enigmatic Belgian-born Jewish diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman . The key is to understanding the relationship .
 Tempelsman reportedly doubled Jacqueline Kennedy's already substantial fortune . He was a permanent fixture in the center of Jacqueline's life .
 Israel's Mossad was represented in the most intimate circles of the Kennedy family . Jacqueline Kennedy's last days were Jacqueline's final days in Israel .
 Edward Klein says JFK Jr. ordered Templesman out of the apartment he shared with Jacqueline Kennedy Jr. after Jacqueline's death . The Kennedy Curse is published by Edward Klein, a new book on the Kennedy family .
 Young John was not so enamored of the international intriguer who, it is said, had warned ""John John"" about the dangers of flying .
 Two family members died violently and tragically, whoever is responsible . Whoever is responsible for the deaths of the two family members .
 The family's loss was all too personal, far beyond any other international geopolitical ramifications that were very much of interest to the conspirators responsible for the two assassinations . The family was killed by the assassination of President George W. Bush .
 Edward M Kennedy never achieved his dream of reclaiming the White House for the Kennedy dynasty . The Kennedy family is still lucky to still be alive, but never achieved their dream .
 The likelihood that any other future family member will once again occupy the Oval Office is scant, at best . The likelihood of any other family member taking office is scant .
 Congressman Joe Kennedy's plan to run for governor of Massachusetts was scuttled early on following a heavy-handed media campaign against him . Congressman Kennedy's plans for governor were scuttling early on after a harsh media campaign .
 His personal problems stemmed from a conflict with his ex-wife who wrote a much-publicized book about their marriage . Allegations of his younger brother having had extra-marital relations with a teen-aged girl were bandied about by the media .
 The Kennedy family has, in its own fashion, benefited immensely from the double tragedy, securing a place in history and legend that might otherwise have been lost had JFK lived out his term .
 The media has increasingly been coming down hard and hard on the heirs to the Kennedy legacy . But, as we have seen, the media has come down hard on JFK's legacy .
 Robert Samuelson wrote in the Washington Post on November 25, 1993 . The famed economist deviated from his area of expertise and delved into the Kennedy legacy .
 His prominently placed column, appearing on the right-hand of the op-ed page was a full-tilt assault on the memory of John F Kennedy, coming in the wake of the 30th anniversary of what may well have been the most stunning public event in our history .
 Harry Truman's life and his assassination have been over dramatized, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Truman's assassination has transformed him from a political figure into an entertainment phenomenon . He says Truman's place in pop culture is closer to Elvis than Harry Truman .
 All the subsequent speculation about whether Johnson would or wouldn't have increased that commitment is irrelevant . Johnson did, and it's irrelevant whether he would have increased his commitment .
 President Obama made a major military commitment to a country whose survival was not a vital national interest . He did not want to engage in a conflict that politically we could not sustain, he says .
 The Washington Post, America's political newspaper of record, said not a single word in commemoration of that tragic day . November 22, 1994, is the 31st anniversary of the JFK assassination .
 The new media thrust is to say that John F Kennedy wasn't really such a great guy after all and that maybe, as Malcolm X said at the time of the JFK assassination, the chickens had come home to roost .
 I sent copies of the second edition to a number of individuals inviting them to debate the thesis of Final Judgment with me—on radio or in any public forum or in writing . Just prior to the release of the third edition, I asked for a debate with me .
 "I gave them the opportunity to refute the book in the manner they wished," he says of the book . "They were able to refute it in the way they wished"
 Robert Dornan was a GOP congressman from Orange County, California, and a shrieking devotee of Israel . He later joined his arch foe, Rep. Rep. Michael Cantor, in a bid to defeat him .
 Anti-Israel partisans in the U.S. intelligence community have sought to sabotage the state of Israel . John Loftus is author of new book The Secret War Against the Jews .
 Roland Pritikin is a retired Brigadier General and internationally-known physician . He founded the Center for Global Security, an ad hoc pro-Israel lobby group .
 Rush Limbaugh known for being an outrageous and audacious critic of everything but Israel's misdeeds . Rush Limbaugh is the biggest name in ""conservative"" talk radio known for his outrageous views .
 Chuck Harder refuses to mention the role of Israel in international misdeeds . Harder is quick to find conspiracy and corruption under almost every rock .
 The former CIA and FBI operative was brave enough to stand up to a federal judge and go to prison for refusing to rat on his friends . G Gordon Liddy is a former FBI and CIA operative who went to prison .
 Liddy was frequently accused of being a Nazi sympathizer, but never a critic of Israel . Liddy is now a popular radio broadcaster . He is a popular broadcaster .
 Author of Contract on America, which claims that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" ignores the integral role of Israeli loyalist and CIA collaborator Meyer Lansky in the international crime syndicate . Author David Scheim claims that the Mafia killed JFK .
 Issuing a call for a debate was not a search for publicity for Final Judgment . Any publicity would have been welcome and actually quite remarkable . Issuing the call for debate wasn't seeking publicity, but any publicity would be welcome .
 Only General Pritikin had responded as of January 1, 1998 . Of this vast array of individuals invited to debate, only Pritkin responded to the request .
 Former Undersecretary of State George Ball is guilty of the same crime . Ball is a former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s former secretary of state . Ball has been charged with the crime .
 A cynic might suggest that the memorial was nothing more than a tribute by the Israelis to one of their own more outrageous public executions and the skill with which it was conducted .
 Lest that some pro-Israel zealot claim that this is my contention, for the record I will say that it is not . Lest, however, that some . some . say this is not true, but it is true .
 Perhaps the average man in the street in Tel Aviv did indeed admire John F Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in the wake of the assassination .
 The refusal by these ""big names"" to either debate me publicly or to attempt to repudiate my work in any way, shape or form is precisely because they cannot . Be all of this as it may, I can only conclude that the refusal to debate me is because of the refusal
 Final Judgment is thus, in my view, for all intents and purposes, the final judgment on what really happened in Dallas, Texas . Final Judgment will be the final judgement on what happened in the Dallas shooting .
 "I have indeed secured, as I've said, a default judgment simply because no one has stepped forth to answer my charges," she says . She says she has secured the default judgment because "no one ... has stepped forward to answer her charges"
 Chomsky has described the unending flow of letters he's received on the subject . Chomsky says he's been forced to resort to a form letter outlining the reasons why he will not discuss the topic .
 Chomsky recognizes how public debate over controversial issues has been impacted by the media and academic community . Chomsky, as a critic of Israel, has been critical of the state of Israel .
 History, particularly recent history, is characteristically presented to the general public within the framework of a doctrinal system based on certain fundamental dogmas . Recent history is presented in a framework of an ideological system, such as a doctrine .
 In the case of totalitarian societies, the point is too obvious to require comment . The point of the totalitarian societies is that they are totalitarian societies . In the U.S.
 The situation is more intriguing in societies that lack cruder forms of repression and ideological control, such as Russia . The situation in Russia is more interesting in societies with cruder, ideological control .
 The United States, for example, is surely one of the least repressive societies of past or present history with respect to freedom of inquiry and expression . The U.S. is surely a well-regarded society of past and present .
 That is precisely the argument put forth in the ""mainstream"" media following that tragedy . The argument was put forth by the "mainstream" media following the tragedy .
 Don't believe in conspiracy theories . Don't think there was a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination is the subject of a new documentary .
 If you believe in them, you're the kind of person who might consider blowing up a federal building in Oklahoma City or elsewhere . And if you do, you might be the type of person to blow up a government building .
 The intelligentsia will not submit to critical analysis of the doctrines of the faith, he says . They will prune historical and documentary record so as to insulate these doctrines from examination, he writes .
 The ADL tried to prevent me from speaking at a community college seminar in Orange County . Media reports that did appear were intertwined with the allegation that I was some sort of ""Holocaust denier"" and therefore not credible .
 Professor Roy Bauer at the Irvine Valley College refused to give me the opportunity to present my case . Likewise, so-called ""scholars"" such as Roy Bauer refused to present his case . Professor Bauer also refused to allow me the chance to present myself in court .
 Bauer would not allow the doctrines of the faith to be submitted to critical analysis . Bauer would instead allow a critical analysis of the religious doctrine . Bauer's views on the Christian faith have been criticized by some of the world's leading figures .
 Final Judgment had suddenly had the opportunity to be heard by an academic audience . The defenders of the doctrines of the faith erupted into a frenzy . However, because Final Judgment was available to academic audience, defenders of doctrines erupted into frenzy .
 If you do, they'll call you an ""anti-Semite" -- or maybe even a ""Holocaust denier,"" -- a Holocaust denier . The latest gimmick in an effort to silence those who have dared publicly pinpoint the role of Israel in the crime of the century
 In other words, the real truth about who killed John F Kennedy—and why—be damned, be damned . The real truth is still being told about the killing of JFK .
 Morley: ClA played a central role in the assassination and its cover-up . Morley says he wants to restore the faith of the American people in the very government whose intelligence agency was involved .
 According to Morley, the Kennedy assassination is a factor in the crisis of legitimacy that now undermines the United States government's ability to address a wide variety of public ills . Morley: "The Kennedy assassination  undermines the U.S. government's . ability to . address a
 The inability of the government to present a credible explanation of how Kennedy was killed is not the only nor the most important reason for the decline . The government is failing to provide a credible account of Kennedy's death, the author says .
 Morley says that ""the grounds for consensus are now emerging,"" and that the story of the Kennedy assassination and the mystery that surrounded it is not a saga of an immense and monolithic conspiracy .
 The Cold War is a cautionary tale for the next generations about the perils of secrecy in a democracy . Rather it is a chapter in the history of the Cold War, the story of a Cold War .
 In Morley's skewed perception, it seems that it really doesn't matter in the end why John F Kennedy was assassinated or who was responsible .
 The gravest matter of concern is restoring the faith of Americans in their government, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "The gravest problem is restoring Americans' faith in government"
 I don't agree with Jefferson Morley and the Washington Post, nor do most Americans . I'm not sure what I think of President Obama's Supreme Court justice reform .
 We must ponder the way that the truth about the JFK assassination is treated by the media and about the way the facts will be released to the public . And it is this kind of new approach to the assassination that we must ponder .
 Those who ignore the clear role played by Israel and its Mossad in the assassination are perhaps, in the end, the greatest enemies of the truth . Those who are seeking the truth about the murder of President Kennedy should be careful to be careful .
 "If I am wrong about Mossad involvement, I ask my critics to show me where I'm wrong," he says . He says he's not sure if Mossad is involved in Israel's alleged involvement in the country .
 If even JFK's admirers are unable to face the truth and expose it to the light of day, then America and the world face a very grave crisis indeed .
 "I do find it frustrating—but I understand why—that others have steered clear of that one controversial area of research that is so central to divining the truth about the murder of President Kennedy," he says .
 "I have no regrets whatsoever about having made the decision to write the book," she says of her book .
 A few people have suggested I should have appended a nom de plume upon the volume so I would be protected from the inevitable cries of outrage that followed . The author has been asked to write a book about his experiences .
 "I would not have been able to publicly defend my own work if I chose to hide behind a pen name. However, had I done so, I would not be able to . I chose not to . However, I am happy to share my work with the world for the first
 In the end, I believe that I have put together a volume that does make sense and one that most open-minded people, once they have read the book, will agree puts forth a thesis that makes sense .
 Most of those who have attacked the book have not read it, he says . "Most of those—probably all of those ...who have attacked it have not ... read it," he adds .
 They have preferred to stand on the sidelines and attack the thesis, but not the evidence that backs it up . They have been left out of the debate, but the evidence is there that backs them up .
 It is hoped that Final Judgment will contribute to a full understanding of the events that followed John F Kennedy's death . It is my hope that Final Judgement will, in some way, contribute to an understanding of events that changed history .
 Bernard Ledun, a senior French diplomat, died in Paris on February 1, 1994 . Ledun died in 1994 .
 His sudden death at age 50—ostensibly from a heart attack—may be another of the ""convenient"" deaths that have occurred in the wake of the JFK assassination and its cover-up .
 The much-discussed ""French connection"" to the Kennedy assassination is, in fact, misnamed and is, instead, the Israeli connection . Ledun had been privy to ""inside"" information which confirmed the high-level intelligence status of the French source, he says .
 Just prior to his sudden death, Ledun was scheduled to become Consul General for France in Johannesburg, South Africa . Ledun, a career officer in the French diplomatic corps, died suddenly at age 50 .
 From October 1989 to December 1993 he served as Consul General for his native country in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada .
 Ledun committed a grievous mistake that may have sealed his own fate . Ledun was posted in Vancouver, Canada, while he was in the United States .
 His unwitting action proved the high-level French intelligence status of the source, quoted in Final Judgment . The source was quoted as a French intelligence officer .
 Pierre Neuville: Israel's secret service, the Mossad, utilized connections in French intelligence, in arranging the hiring of an assassin or assassin . The Mossad was involved in the execution of President Kennedy, according to the source .
 In 1976, Ledun released copies of internal French intelligence documents to Pierre confirming that Pierre had indeed been a French intelligence officer privy to explosive state secrets . Ledun was serving in the French consulate in Vancouver, Canada, while serving in 1976 .
 French intelligence had denied for years that Pierre was engaged in intelligence work for his native country . Pierre was privy of the incendiary information to which he had been privy .
 The release of the documents by Ledun, however, provided hard evidence to the contrary . Ledun: "The release of these documents is hard evidence that the U.S. government has been involved in this type of crime .
 Pierre learned details about how French intelligence had been manipulated by the Mossad in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Pierre himself had been brought into a previous assassination conspiracy conducted jointly by Mossad and French intelligence . Pierre: "Not only had learned specific details"
 The Mossad had contracted—through its key contact in French intelligence, Colonel Georges deLannurien—to arrange for Pierre to unwittingly play the role of "patsy" in a Mossad plot to kill Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser . The plot took place
 When Pierre realized he was the intended patsy in the Nasser assassination plot, he surrendered to Egyptian intelligence at Cairo International Airport . Pierre realized that he, in fact, was an intended patty .
 Pierre Neuville became a man without a country for refusing to give up his life in a Mossad-sponsored conspiracy . He was the scion of a distinguished family and son of a renowned French diplomat . He became the son of the Consulate General of France .
 Pierre was tried in absentia by a French military court and convicted of ""treason"" and ""breach of external security of the state"" and condemned to 24 years of forced labor . Pierre fled to South America and then to Canada, where he fled to escape and was found guilty
 In 1976, still in exile, Pierre sought clemency by approaching the French consul general's office in Vancouver, Canada, where he was then living, his request was rejected . Pierre was in exile in 1976, when he was still living in Canada .
 The French Ministry of Defense advised the French Consul General in Vancouver that Pierre's request had been denied . At that time, in a document dated ""5 OCT 1976"" the French Ministry Of Defense said the request was denied .
 It was Bernard Ledun at the French Consul General's office who released the letter of denial to Pierre, not realizing the explosive nature of the document . The letter was released by Ledun, who released it to Pierre .
 French intelligence was "furious with this gaffe of Mr Ledun, an act very treasonable, that of giving to outsiders a letter of the minister of Defense giving credit to my allegations that I had been a diplomat and intelligence officer serving France in Libya and Italy .
 The first public announcement of the allegations appeared in Final Judgment came in a special full-page advertisement published on November 22, 1993 in Dallas .
 Final Judgment relied, in part, upon a French source for information detailing the Israeli Mossad connection to the JFK assassination and the French intelligence role therein . The announcement revealed that Final Judgment had relied on the source of the information .
 Pierre believes that this announcement tipped off the Mossad and French intelligence that he was the source referenced in Final Judgment . Pierre believes this tip-off tipped off Mossad or French intelligence .
 Ledun's murder was an act of retribution against Ledun for his mistake of many years earlier . Pierre had indeed been involved in a sensitive and high-level joint collaborative effort between the Mossad and French intelligence . As a consequence, Ledun was killed as a result .
 Pierre Ledun filled in the missing link in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Had Pierre not spoken out, he might have lived out the rest of his natural life in peace . The truth about the Kennedy assassination might never have been told .
 New Benjamin Franklin House, First edition, 1978; second edition, 1986 . First edition of the New Franklin House was published in 1986 .
 Fensterwald, Bernard, and the Committee to Investigation Assassinations . Committee to investigate Assassinations. Fensterwal, Bernard .
 House Select Committee on Assassinations, The Final Assassinations Report. House Select committee on Assassination . Report. Final Assassination Report. Report.
 A Reconstruction of Certain Clandestine Events from the Bay of Pigs to the Assassination of John F Kennedy . A Reconstruction . of certain Clandestine events from the . Bay of . Pigs to JFK Kennedy . The Bay . of Pigs is a re-imagination of the events that led to
 From the Shah to the Secret Arms Deal—An Insider's Account of U.S. Involvement in Iran . An Insider's account of the United States' involvement in Iran is published on CNN.com .
 The Rise of the Southern Rim and its Challenge to the Eastern Establishment . The rise of the southern Rim is a challenge to the establishment of the Western world .
 Robert N. Winter-Berger, Robert N The Washington Pay-off: An Insider's View of Corruption in Government . Robert N: The D.C. Pay-Off is a Washington Post .
 Entertainment Weekly, January 17, 1992 . The Tie That Binds Binds was released in 1992 .
 Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, February 1992 . Chapter Two Off With His Head is published in 1992 .
 Andrew Cockburn and Leslie Cockburn are the co-authors of the book Thick as Thieves . The book is based on the book, "Thick as Thieves"
 Washington Observer, April 15, 1972. Chapter Nine A Little Unpleasantness. °° Washington Observer .
 Peter Dale Scott. The Murder of Robert F Kennedy. ae Rappleye and Becker, . Becker,  Becker, Becker, Rappleye, Becker, and . Becker . Scott. Scott. a Yipster Times *™ Peter Dale .
 "The Death in Arizona of the Kemper Marley Machine,"" by Brian Downing Quig, appearing on the Internet. "" The death in Arizona was the death of the singer, according to a report .
 Stephen J Rivele, "The CIA, Assassination, and Nixon" published in Nixon: An Oliver Stone Film, edited by Eric Hamburg. Carroll & Graf Publishers, 1992), 785. eee .
 An Account of the Clay Shaw-Jim Garrison Affair in New Orleans, P’ 47. , P' 47. Clay Shaw and Jim Garrison were married at the time of the incident . Clay Shaw was married to Garrison . Garrison was a prominent New Orleans resident .
 My Investigation & Prosecution of the Murder of President Kennedy. My Investigation and Prosecution . of the . Murder of the President Kennedy . , 168. , 168 .
 See also Touchstone's Councilor for 1964, as well as June 1, 1967, Sept.-Oct., 1973, Sept., 1968, Jan., 1974, etc. See also touchstone's councilor from 1964 to 1974 .
 Hopsicker also had a then-unpublished manuscript Barry and the Boys, dealing with the career of Barry Seal, which he made available to Michael Collins Piper in early 2000 .
 The Continuing Cover-Up '076 Wayne Madsen, ""Intelligence Agency Threats to Computer Security,"" International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence,""IJ.076 . "IJ" was published in 2007 .
 In light of outrageous and malicious efforts to refute previous editions of Final Judgment, I feel compelled to make notations such as this . The author of Final Judgement: An agenda-driven clique led by an Israeli, Uri Toch .
 A handful of critics have alleged that my thesis is founded on having relied upon ""biased"" or ""extremist"" sources . In addition, in the question and answer section, I address a number of specific allegations by a handful of . critics .
 There is no way that my critics can contend that Final Judgment is founded on sources ""outside the mainstream,"" claims by my critics notwithstanding . As any honest reader can see, by simply referring to the reference notes and the bibliography, there is absolutely no way they can . .
 Final Judgment: I am eagerly inviting my critics to show where I have misrepresented or misinterpreted or misquoted the writings of others . And as I note in the ""Challenge to the Readers"" that appears in the final pages of Final Judgment, I am eager to invite my
 Critics misquote not just me but also other writers, as well as distort what others had written . However, as you will see, my agenda-driven critics at the Schaumburg Library managed to misquote me and others .
 'Vile trickery such as this, common to most all of my critics, leads me to believe that my thesis is very much on the right track,' he writes .
 When critics resort to lies and misrepresentations, their motives must be questioned . When critics must resort to lying and misrepresentation, they should be questioned, he says .
 "Because of the controversial nature of my thesis, I am probably one of a handful of writers who must be so precise in defending their work," he says .
 A compendium of pertinent questions addressed to Michael Collins Piper, the author of Final Judgment, and Piper's responses thereto . I have no apologies .
 This brave French patriot, who risked his life to expose Israel's scheme to assassinate Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, provided critical information that brought the thesis put forth in Final Judgment full circle .
 The title of this series of questions and answers on the JFK assassination has a double meaning . Michael Pipper's answers on JFK's assassination will be published in the next week at 9/11.
 Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment was the first major work to explode the Warren Commission Report . Final Judgment is a play on the title of Final Judgment, with all due credit to Lane .
 Default judgment is what is issued in one's favor in a court of law when the opposition fails to appear in court to defend itself against your allegations . A default judgment is issued when a defendant fails to defend himself in court . Default judgments are issued in the defendant's favor when a party
 "I believe that I have essentially won a default judgment in the JFK assassination conspiracy case," says author of JFK assassination theory . I believe that he has essentially won an essentially default judgment .
 In Final Judgment 1 I believe that I painted a complete picture which essentially tied all of the most commonly accepted JFK assassination conspiracy theories together in a tightly knit format . In Final Judgement 1, I explained how and why the conspiracy to kill John F Kennedy evolved .
 More than 25,000 copies of Final Judgment are now in circulation throughout the United States . Not one person has yet come forward to refute any fact relating to my theory as it appears in Final Judgment .
 "I do feel that I've won an un-contested ""default judgment"" in the JFK case," he says . He says the basic thesis of the book has been confirmed, not only because no one has been able to refute it, but, more importantly, because the several
 I'm trying to answer many of the questions and comments and a few criticisms that have come to me from many, many readers . Now I'm here to answer some of those questions and answers .
 He didn't have any substantive criticism of the contents of the book itself . But he didn't say what he said about the book .
 Final Judgment contained what he called ""much valuable information,"" that he still believed that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the JFK assassination . One other individual, the very well known newspaper columnist Sam Francis, told somebody that although Final Judgment contains much valuable information .
 "All in all, I was pleased by the number of intriguing and thought-provoking questions that were addressed to me by my readers," says author .
 "They had very pointed questions, asking why I didn't make reference to some matter or another or why I passed by some subject that deserved further discussion"
 Default Judgment is now being published in an updated and revised format as a supplement to Final Judgment . In Default Judgment, many of the questions addressed are just as they came directly from readers of Final Judgement .
 Many people had precisely the same interests addressed in their questions . And it's interesting to point out that many, many people, had the same questions addressed . It's interesting that many of these people had exactly the same interest addressed .
 There is no particular order in which the questions and answers appear in these pages . We've tried to categorize the questions in a free-flowing fashion that leads logically from one subject to another .
 The questions cover a broad range of subject matter and are arranged in such a fashion that even someone who has not actually read Final Judgment will be able to understand the subject matter without having first read the book .
 "I think that people will find the material enlightening and that it gives the readers new insights into various aspects of the JFK assassination controversy," author says .
 I hope people will feel free to write me and ask me to address those questions that they might have. If I've missed anything, I hope you'll write me .
 Final Judgment does stand on its own as, at least for now, as, the last word on the JFK assassination . I believe that Default Judgment helps bring into focus some of the gray areas that people may have questions about . But I also believe it also helps bring some of those questions
 The questions focus on both a wide variety of matters discussed or subjects otherwise not mentioned—in the pages of Final Judgment . Final Judgment.com will feature the answers to these questions .
 "That's a highly controversial allegation considering all of the other theories that have been presented," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not the first time I've seen a person in the U.S. that has been accused of being a terrorist."
 The JFK assassination was the subject of a new book about the assassination of JFK . The book was written in the late 1960s and early '60s .
 I've touched on various aspects of the answer to this question in the pages of Final Judgment . Since so many people have still asked this question, I will elaborate further and perhaps provide some new insights .
 As anyone who is even vaguely familiar with the subject is well aware of the subject, there have been literally thousands of books written on the subject . As well as anyone who's familiar with it, there are literally thousands more books written about it .
 CNN's John Sutter has an extensive personal library on the subject of Middle East policy . He says he's read JFK books many, many times over the years and absorbed the primary details .
 The Spotlight, the newspaper by which I had been employed for a decade, had been involved in the E Howard Hunt libel trial . It was essentially around the time of 1992 that my interest in the assassination was beginning to develop more extensively, largely because of the fact that The Spotlight had been
 In 1991 Mark Lane's book, Plausible Denial, had been released and that was the book that outlined the circumstances of the Hunt libel case . This was also the time that Oliver Stone's film, JFK, was in the process of being made and released .
 There was a newly revived and reinvigorated interest in the JFK assassination . Consequently there was a new interest in JFK assassination.
 Angleton was the number three man in the CIA and one of its veterans . He was, more importantly, in our context, was very close to the Israeli Mossad as a consequence of his role as the very jealous guardian of the CIA's Mossad desk .
 He is mentioned in some of the books on the subject, but generally only in passing . He is also mentioned in other books about the subject .
 Lane showed in Plausible Denial and as 1 think I firmly amplified upon in Final Judgment, these CIA figures were working institutionally. However, as Lane showed, Lane showed that Lane showed the CIA figures worked institutionally . Lane: "Lane showed that the CIA was working institution
 They weren't ""rogue elements"" but were working on behalf of the CIA itself, the author says . The CIA was working in collaboration with the Israeli Mossad and organized crime, to both of which they had long been tied .
 The Mossad has been accused of being involved in the murder of Israelis in the 1980s and '90s . Mossad is believed to have been involved in a number of terrorist attacks in Israel .
 The Lyndon LaRouche organization's journal, Executive Intelligence Review, had issued a thoroughly documented book entitled Dope, Inc. in the mid-1980's . In that volume they did focus on the role of the Permindex corporation on whose board of directors Clay Shaw served .
 Shaw was the New Orleans trade executive whom New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison charged with involvement in the assassination conspiracy . Shaw was accused of involvement with the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 The Shaw-Garrison trial was the focus of Oliver Stone's JFK film . The Shaw trial was a major focus of the film .
 In Dope, Inc., the editors highlighted the fact that two of the prime movers behind Permindex were Major Louis M Bloomfield and Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum .
 I don't agree with this assessment, but this is not to suggest that the LaRouche organization is not a reliable source, he says . This is not the case, but it's not to say that the organization isn't reliable .
 Many people have acknowledged the outstanding and extensive research done by the LaRouche people, even if the critics don't necessarily agree with the organization's particular conclusions . In fact many different people have . acknowledged the research .
 As far as the material relating to Permindex is concerned, the LaRouche organization relied largely on materials already published in the European press . The material was not anything out of the ordinary by any means .
 Dope, Inc. never examines JFK's Middle East policy which, of course, would be the primary interest of the Israelis in their national context, and which would explain the interest of Bloomfield and Rosenbaum .
 Coleman claimed in his report that, as he put it, ""Zionism"" was behind the JFK assassination . Coleman's report essentially echoed the Permindex connections between Bloomfield, Shaw, etc that had already been documented . Coleman claimed that Zionists were behind the assassination .
 Coleman was incorrect in some of his 'facts' regarding the JFK assassination . Coleman was actually incorrect in his "facts" regarding the assassination of JFK .
 He never explained why, as he puts it, ""Zionism,"" would have reason to remove JFK from the White House . So I was familiar with his work, but I hasten to point out that he never explained it .
 There has been some literary basis for the allegations that I put forth in Final Judgment . But these allegations have been buried in a hodge-podge of other material . So, you see, there has been a literary basis .
 "I am surprised that no one prior to myself had picked up on this other research. Frankly, I am surprised," says author of the book, "I’m surprised"
 There was another item I came across that intrigued me for a long time. There was also another item that fascinated me a lot of people .
 Jim Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw is a fascinating account of his investigation . It appeared in Paris Flammonde's The Kennedy Conspiracy, a highly sympathetic and thoroughly fascinating account .
 Flammonde points out that the primary individual involved in the liquidation of Permindex and its relocation from Rome, Italy to South Africa was Dr. Dr. John Defterios . Dr. defterios was the primary person involved in liquidation and relocation .
 Israeli intelligence chief says he was a key figure in the Permindex operation . He says he is a key member of the Israeli intelligence network . He was also a key part of the operation in Israel .
 Ex-CIA officer Philip Agee has described the National Committee for Labor Israel as some sort of CIA proprietary . They point out that former CIA officer has described it as 'proprietary'
 In reference to Weberman and Canfield, it's probably worth noting (as I point out in Final Judgment) that they were the source of perhaps the thing that I found the most intriguing of all—and indeed, the first real reference to any suggestion that somehow there was a ""
 This was the first time ever that I had seen anything suggesting that ""the Jews"" were involved in the JFK assassination . This was first time I had ever seen anything suggested that the Jews were involved . This is the first suggestion that "the Jews" were involved.
 I read this particular book and this quotation for the first time in 1978 (well before I ever heard of the research appearing in Dope, Inc. or any of the allegations by Dr. John Sutter's research) I read the book and quote in 1978 . Dr. Sutter
 The meaning and impact of Coup d'etat in America began to come into focus as I explored all of the different facets of the JFK assassination . Then, time and again, over the subsequent years, as I leafed through and re-read the book, the meaning of Coup
 Obviously it wasn't a ""Jewish plot"" to assassinate JFK, but there was indeed an Israeli connection to the murder . "Highly-placed individuals who happened to be Jewish" were interested in furthering the conspiracy to advance the Jewish state .
 John Coleman's charge that ""Zionism"" was behind the JFK assassination never found any motive put forth . John Coleman never found a motive for the assassination, he said .
 "I've always been told that any murder investigation must inquire into possible motives. I've always told that . Any murder investigation should inquire into . possible motives," she says .
 Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination was a mystery, author says . "I did indeed begin to find motives for Israeli involvement," he says .
 Andrew and Leslie Cockburn's Dangerous Liaison: The Inside Story of the U.S.-Israeli Covert Relationship . Cockburn: The inside story is the inside story of an Israeli-U.S. covert operation in Washington .
 This book explores the conflict between JFK and Israel in similar detail . "I began to see how it all did tie directly to some of the forces that had an interest in his assassination"
 There might indeed be a connection between Israel and Organized Crime, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Organized crime's involvement in the JFK assassination is a mystery, he says .
 "I started looking at the connections between organized crime and the CIA and the Israeli Mossad. I started looking into the connections," he says . The CIA and Mossad are connected to organized crime, he adds .
 Meyer Lansky settled in Israel but never realized, until he began research, how intimately connected he was to the Jewish state . Lansky was a major figure in organized crime and organized crime figure in Israel .
 The term ""the Mafia"" really is when describing the Organized Crime syndicate . Nor did I realize how inaccurate the term ""The Mafia" really is .
 Meyer Lansky played a key role in the rise of organized crime in New York City . Lansky was a key figure in the organization's rise in organized crime . He says Lansky's role is critical to understanding the role he played in crime .
 When one turns over Lansky's tombstone you find the worms of the CIA and the Israeli Mossad crawling around there, perhaps even feeding upon one another . It is critical because of the fact that when one . turns over the tombstone, it is critical .
 CIA, Mossad and organized crime had close ties to each other, author says . CIA and Mossad worked together in spheres of influence over a long period of time, he says . "All three had a distinct motive in wanting to remove JFK from the American presidency"
 Many of those who suggested that the CIA had some sort of role in the assassination are fearful of suggesting that it was an institutional role, and instead say that they were CIA elements . As it is, of course, over the years, many of those . say they are afraid of suggesting
 Mark Lane was the only author to say that the CIA had an institutional role in the affair . Mark Lane wrote in Plausible Denial .
 Gary Wean's book, There's a Fish in the Courthouse, provided valuable nuggets of information suggesting Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination . Wean is a former Los Angeles police detective and author of the book .
 Gary has since suggested that Final Judgment is off the mark because my book focuses on the Mossad and does not blame the Jewish community in general for the JFK assassination . Ironically, however, Gary has suggested that his book is off-the- mark because it focuses on Mossad .
 At that juncture I began pulling a number of books off the shelf and began researching, then and there, the suspicions that were evolving no longer in the back of my mind but right there up front at long last . At that point, I pulled out of the books and started researching
 America's Secret Relations With a Militant Israel off the shelf and discovered what a goldmine it was . America's secret relations with a militant Israel are a gold mine of secrets .
 "This hit me like a sledgehammer since I hadn't even turned to Green's book until after my basic thesis for Final Judgment had begun to evolve," says author . "I hadn't had the chance to read Green's work until after I got the idea for the novel .
 This set me on a road of research that, frankly, as I moved forward, I was amazed by the amount of factual detail pointing toward an Israeli connection that I was uncovering in so-called ""mainstream"" sources .
 Final Judgment is based on many JFK assassination-related books, but not all of the details that ultimately appeared in Final Judgment . "I found also, quite ironically, that in my course of research I was not relying heavily on JFK assassination books," author says .
 Green's book is published by Simon Cowan in New York City, New York, USA .
 There's all this literature about the Mafia being behind the JFK assassination, etc etc, but as we'll see further (and as I've pointed out in Final Judgment), you can't stop your research into Organized Crime involvement when you come to Carlos Marcello, the Mafia boss
 Looking at Lansky brings you back to both U.S. and Israeli intelligence . Lansky is a former CIA operative who worked for both sides .
 The actual writing of the book involved setting up various sections which ultimately became chapters in the book . "I organized the research material into those chapters," says author .
 Much of the material I found in my own extensive personal library. During that time I realized that there was indeed a great deal of material available . Much of it was found in the personal library .
 "It was very much like putting a jigsaw puzzle together and it was falling into place," she says of her new role . "It's a very exciting time for the world," she adds .
 The initial research time and the assembly of the material for inclusion in the book probably took roughly two months . The book's author says the initial research took about two months to complete .
 The actual writing was another process altogether, but I have to say that as I was writing I was continually researching . I was constantly looking into other areas of the story, I said .
 "Never once did I actually find anything that did. I kept thinking until the very end of the writing process that I was going to find some fact or detail that would contradict my thesis," says author .
 There were times when I thought perhaps I might be overstating the case, but I never found anything contradictory whatsoever . I double and triplechecked facts or details as much as I possibly could, he said . There were often times when he thought perhaps he might overstate the case
 Findley: "It is interesting—but not surprising—to note that in all the words written and uttered about the Kennedy assassination, Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, has never been mentioned"
 Findley had taken the effort to write such a controversial column, but it certainly received no publicity outside the pages of that limited-circulation magazine .
 While Findley presented no firm evidence, I got the impression that perhaps somebody had been talking to Findley and that there were some people ""in the know"" who were talking about the possibility of Mossad involvement and I found this quite heartening .
 I told very few people that I was writing the book, to be honest, because I realized that the thesis was quite sensational . The book is published by Simon Cowan in New York City .
 "I became absolutely convinced as I was writing the book that I was truly digging into an area of JFK assassination that had never been seriously mined before," author says .
 "In a sense, I suppose, it was a gold mine that had never yet been discovered," says the author . "I suppose it was the gold mine of the world," she says .
 People were relying upon others' research and re-writing, re-hashing the information to the point that no real new ground was being broken . People are relying upon other research and . re-wrote and rehashing information to . the point of being broken.
 After Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment, most of the books on JFK assassination have essentially rehashed the initial material that Mark Lane uncovered .
 Rush to Judgment laid the groundwork for all future efforts . Suffice it to say that Rush To Judgment laid . The film was released in 2007 .
 The project had to land in my lap. As it stands, that wasn't the case and the whole controversial project had been in the works .
 Most of the material that I used in the preparation of Final Judgment was essentially in the public domain insofar as it was all published . All material had appeared in popular magazines, books distributed by eminent publishing houses that are household names .
 The fourth edition of this book has been expanded and more thoroughly documented . Now, this fourth edition is substantially expanded and even more thorough documented .
 The only ""non-Establishment"" source used in the writing of Final Judgment was the material put together by the LaRouche organization's Executive Intelligence Review .
 Even those critical of Israel could hardly be called ""anti-Semitic,"" particularly the works by Stephen Green and Seymour Hersh who do happen themselves to be Jewish . Even those critics of Israel were critical of the country .
 All the primary material on all the key points in Final Judgment came from ""respectable"" and ""mainstream"" sources . The primary material for the film came from "respectable" and "responsible" sources .
 The one ""secret source"" that I did rely upon was a former French intelligence officer, Pierre Neuville, whose name I had kept under wraps until this, the fifth edition of Final Judgment .
 "I had exhausted all resources available. And when Pierre came along I was ultimately satisfied that the thesis put forth in Final Judgment was complete and on the mark," he says .
 Pierre Neuville finally came along with a very intriguing surprise . I was in for a very interesting surprise, however, when I was finally able to watch .
 The circumstances as to how I came across this source are interesting in themselves . The circumstances in which I was able to find the source is interesting in itself .
 Former Congressman Paul Findley was a longtime Congressman who had been critical of Israel and of its lobby in the U.S. Former Congressman Findley is a well known as a ""liberal" who had criticized Israel .
 The book was written by a retired diplomat from a western European nation whose family has had disastrous experiences with Israel and the Mossad . The author says he was surprised when he acknowledged receipt of the book by saying that .
 A retired diplomat had been urging him to write a book that contained the thesis put forth in Final Judgment . As you can imagine I'd spent all this time writing the book and trying to get it published . Here was a former congressman of great repute (and certainly no ""extrem
 Findley wrote that while he thought it was a good book that it was inconclusive and that I had not proved my thesis . Findley said he was surprised when he got a letter from Findley saying he was disappointed with the book .
 He simply doesn't want to be accused of being a ""conspiracy theorist"" on top of the frequent accusation that he is somehow an ""anti-Semite"" for being critical of Israel . He simply wants to avoid being labeled a conspiracy theorist .
 "I must say, in retrospect, knowing what was in that first draft that the final draft—what was ultimately published—was far superior and far more complete," he says .
 I did also receive a letter from the intelligence officer who was now living in Canada . Nonetheless, I did receive a . letter from an intelligence officer .
 The Frenchman suggested that I was aiming in the right direction, but he was emphatic in pointing out that he was using the wrong ammunition . I suppose he was, I suppose, using the . wrong ammunition.
 "I was trying to bring down an elephant with a cap gun or using a shotgun when a rifle would be better," he says . "A cap gun is better than a rifle," he adds .
 Frenchman supplied me what I needed to bring my theory on target . In any event, the Frenchman supplied himself what he needed .
 James J Angleton, Israel's man at the Mossad desk at the CIA, had been directly involved in the assassination plot . He specifically stated to me that information to which he was privy did confirm my contention in the first draft of the book that James J. Angleton had
 He also named Colonel Georges deLannurien, a highranking figure of the French intelligence service, the SDECE, as having been involved in the conspiracy .
 He also singled out Yitzhak Shamir as a conspirator . In his own first draft of Final Judgment I had pointed out that Shamir had been the Mossad's European station chief, based in Paris, and, more importantly, had been head of the special assassinations team
 Shamir arranged, through the assistance of deLannurien, a French assassination team that had been involved in the JFK murder . The Frenchman told me that Shamir had arranged to arrange the assassination of JFK JFK .
 This material pointed toward a new angle, so to speak, in the JFK assassination conspiracy conspiracy . This material was pointed toward new angle in the assassination conspiracy, the author says .
 "It added an additional element of the conspiracy that, frankly, I didn't at the time fully understand myself," he says . "I didn't think it was a conspiracy," he adds .
 The 'French Connection' is most definitely the Israeli connection . That is, to reiterate, the ‘French Connection,"" which one might also call the ""Algerian Connection"
 France, its long-time colony, Arab Algeria, Israel and the U.S. are key players in the relationship between the two countries . France and Algeria have been at odds for decades over the years .
 For those who are not immediately familiar with this aspect, I would refer them to the famous novel by Frederick Forsyth and the film based on the novel, The Day of the Jackal . The film is based on Forsyth's novel, which he wrote about, is also based on
 This is a novel, based on fact, explaining the story of a conspiracy by former high-ranking French military officials and diplomats to kill French President Charles DeGaulle . The novel is based on the fact that former French military and diplomats were involved in a plot to kill DeG
 Algeria was a major Arab state in North Africa, a major French colony in the region . France was upset with him because of his decision to grant independence to the long-time French colony .
 French nationalists viewed DeGaulle's surrender of Algeria to the native Algerian nationalist rebels as a betrayal of France . These French nationalists considered Algeria as a distinct part of France itself .
 The OAS was operating in opposition to DeGaulle both in France and in Algeria, indeed worldwide . The French government was in opposition in Algeria and France .
 Algerian independence was not something that the Israelis wanted since it would create a giant new Arab state in opposition to Israel . DeGaulle supplied the Jewish state vital material used in its nuclear development, not to mention other support .
 The Israelis began to develop a strong alliance with elements in the French military and in French intelligence who were opposed to Degaulle's decision to grant independence to Algeria . As a consequence the Israelis developed a strong and distinct alliance .
 Corsicans are found in a strange triangle . This is interesting in itself because you find the Corsicans in a triangle . Corsicans have been known to live in the triangle for centuries .
 Corsicans were tied up with the Lansky Crime Syndicate, which, in turn, was close to Israel's Mossad . The Corsicans had ties to the Mossad, which Mossad was also close to the Corsican .
 The OAS was working with the Israeli Mossad and, interestingly, a Jewish anti-communist group known as the Jewish AntiCommunist League . DeGaulle was fighting with Mossad over the issue of Algeria . In turn, however, the OAS worked with the Jewish
 French elements were working both for and against Israel's interests . So, in short, what you had were diverse French elements interacting with those who were working against Israeli interests . The French government has been accused of being anti-Israel .
 It was the same OAS group working to bring down DeGaulle that also happened to be tied to Guy Banister in New Orleans . Banister was also tied to the same group .
 Banister, a former FBI agent, had gone to work as a CIA contract agent financing and supplying anti-Castro Cuban exiles during the period prior to the JFK assassination .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was in New Orleans at the time of Oswald's time there . Oswald had a very peculiar relationship with Lee Banister . Banister had a close relationship with Oswald during the time he was there .
 The bottom line is that this ""French Connection"" or ""Algerian Connection"" is really the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination, any way you cut it . "French Connection" is really an Israeli connection .
 It required an immense amount of additional research to understand the history of French Algeria, DeGaulle's conflicts with the OAS and the Corsican Mafia who fought the French government on his behalf, to understand .
 Henry Hurt, writing in Reasonable Doubt and Dick Russell, had written about the French angle, but neither of them attempted to analyze the dynamics at work in the French Connection .
 If anyone wants to try to pin the JFK assassination on the OAS, they cannot honestly do that without fingering the Israeli connection .
 The Israeli and OAS connection ties back to Clay Shaw in New Orleans and Guy Banister as well . The Israeli-OAS connection goes back to the original story .
 You cannot ignore the Israeli connection to Permindex vis-a-vis the JFK assassination any more than you can ignore the critical Israeli connection .
 Charles DeGaulle's policies on Algeria were inimical to the interests of Israel, writes David Frum . JFK's policies in turn, as was those of Israel . Frum says, "Permindex was an Israeli front and it was interested in assassinating DeG
 Anyone who prefers to be ignore all of this is being disingenuous, at the very least . Therefore anyone who wants to ignore it is likely to be disingenuous . Anyone who doesn't like to be ignored is being 'd disingenuous'
 Final Judgment's first draft has been substantially revised . "This proved somewhat startling to me inasmuch as I had not expected that I would have to do this," he says .
 French Connection was ultimately the Israeli connection, says CNN's John Sutter .
 JFK would have been proud of me. Upon publication of Final Judgment, I sent Final Judgment to a French diplomat who wrote me back saying ""good work""
 "I believe that my French source is not only sincere, but totally reliable," CNN's John Sutter says . "Everything that I know about him (based upon the information that he provided about himself, plus the endorsement he received from exCongressman Paul Findley who put me in
 In other words, what appear to be ""friendly"" sources from the ""suspicion business"" might, in fact, by enemies providing you disinformation and misinformation . In other cases, what appears to be "friendly" sources might provide you with misinformation .
 The bottom line is that Final Judgment can stand or fall on its own merits, without the specific input of this French source . At any rate, the bottom line remains the same as Final Judgment .
 I could have easily published the book without delving into the French Connection . I believe the book provided a very strong case for Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination .
 Final Judgment is to draw a very fine and significant line between the French Connection to the JFK assassination and the New Orleans Connection . It involves the two CIA assets, Guy Banister and Clay Shaw, right to the Israel Connection, author says .
 There has not been anything that I have received, other than the communications from my French source who ultimately identified himself by name and gave me his complete history .
 In the postscript to Final Judgment I've provided background on Pierre's own experiences with the Mossad . Pierre's experiences with Mossad include his own experience with the Israeli government .
 Since the book was published, no one has come forward with any new information which is of an ""inside"" nature . No new information has been released since the book's publication .
 I myself have discovered further published information confirming other details that appeared in the original edition of Final Judgment and in the revised editions, including this most recent edition .
 From the time the idea began to formulate in my mind when I began the serious research to the . time the first draft was completed was roughly seven months . From the start of the . idea, the idea actually began to . formulate in his mind when he began the . serious research,
 It took an additional three months to fine tune my manuscript and add the new findings that I'd uncovered . After researching the French Connection, my French source read the first draft and pointed me in that direction .
 One day before the book was scheduled to go to the printer for the first time, I was flipping through a bound volume of a nowdefunct newsletter . I cannot help but recall that literally one day before . I felt that I had put everything that I could possibly put in the pages
 "I had discovered something else that unquestionably had to be added to the manuscript," she said . "It was a mistake," she later said .
 A gentleman who had come to visit New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison when he was still in the earliest stages of his investigation into the assassination . What I discovered were details about a gentleman who came to visit District Attorney Garrison in the .
 Garrison had not yet come across the name of Clay Shaw . Bear in mind that at this point Garrison hadn't yet found out who Shaw was .
 Garrison received a visit from a businessman named John King . Garrison was visited by King at the time of his visit to Garrison .
 Garrison: King had very close connections to Clay Shaw, the Permindex board member, whom Garrison hadn't even yet identified as a suspect in the conspiracy . King had close ties to Shaw, Garrison says . Garrison: "Shaw's connections to King were very close"
 I was surprised myself to learn of King's Israeli connection, inasmuch as I already knew about King . King's connection to Israel surprised me, but I'm not surprised by it .
 I didn't know about his ties to Permindex until just a day before I was getting ready to send Final Judgment to the printer . But, as I say, I didn’t know about this until just before I sent Final Judgment .
 This is just one example, but a significant one, of the un-ending process of researching into the JFK assassination conspiracy . The JFK assassination is one of the most significant unsolved mysteries in American history .
 Perhaps some day in the distant future there will indeed be a final judgment, the title of my own book notwithstanding, if someone has before them everything that I've written and everything else that will be written and which can all be compiled together into the final judgment . The title of his own
 Involvement by the Mossad in the JFK assassination was ordered at the highest levels . The Mossad is accused of involvement in the assassination of JFK JFK .
 David Ben-Gurion ordered Mossad collaboration in the assassination conspiracy, author says . It was probably his last act before resigning his post in disgust with JFK's stand toward Israel, he says .
 In the case of the involvement of the French SDECE's Colonel Georges deLannurien—as I point out in Final Judgment—this was a classic case of a ""rogue"" operator . However, in the case, the involvement was a "rogue"
 French President Charles DeGaulle was assisting Mossad ally Yitzhak Shamir and CIA ally, James Angleton, in November 1963 . DeLannurien spent the day at CIA headquarters in Langley on November 22, 1963 . This French conspirator was most definitely not
 deLannurien and Angleton were not together for the purpose of discussing the weather . And you can bet the family silver that they weren't together on that particular day .
 "I did not indicate to Mark during the writing of Final Judgment that I was writing the book," he says . "I didn't indicate that Mark was writing this book," says author .
 "I didn't want Mark—or anybody else, to judge the book prior to its completion based on a sketchy overview," says author . "I'm not going to judge Mark or anybody else," he says .
 He said that the book did make a ""strong case" for Mossad involvement . He did not believe the book conflicted in any way with his own book, Plausible Denial, which pinpointed the CIA's role in the assassination .
 The CIA and the Mossad were essentially two sides of one coin in the JFK assassination . So in JFK assassination the CIA and Mossad are essentially two side-by-side .
 As far as Mark Lane's opinion of Final Judgment is concerned, it was suggested to me prior to publication that I ask him to write an introduction to the book . Mark Lane has been asked to write a book's introduction .
 "It wouldn't have been an honor and a privilege to have Mark write the introduction. Not that it wouldn't be an honor," he says .
 Mark has stirred up a hornet's nest with his own books on the JFK assassination and on other subjects for that matter . However, the fact is that Mark is stirring up a . hornet nest .
 Mark had not researched the Mossad aspect as I had, so I didn't feel it would be appropriate to expect him to put his name in defense or endorsement of a thesis that he himself had not originated, he says .
 Mark had been involved in the Middle East controversy and had been a critic of Israel . Final Judgment tied Israel to the JFK assassination . I did not think it would be appropriate for Mark to have his name on an introduction to the book .
 "I recognized that the thesis of Final Judgment was inflammatory on its own and I didn't want to put Mark in the position of having to defend my work," he says . "I didn't think Mark would be able to defend his work. I wanted him to defend himself," he
 He's been busy enough fighting off the efforts of the CIA and the FBI and the media to ignore or suppress or distort his own efforts . The president has been busy fighting off efforts to cover up his efforts .
 Plausible Denial is first and foremost an account of Mark Lane's defense of The Spotlight newspaper against E Howard Hunt's libel suit . Mark Lane defends the Spotlight newspaper in the libel suit against Hunt .
 Final Judgment, in my view, amplifies many of the findings in Plausible Denial and further confirms that the CIA was involved in the assassination . Final Judgment adds further details that prove that CIA was indeed involved in assassination .
 The greatest strength of Mark's book, I believe, is that it demolishes the myth that there were ""rogue elements"" of the CIA involved in the president's murder . The book's strength is to demolish the myth, says author .
 You can't make a serious study of the JFK assassination without having read Plausible Denial . But you can't read it without having had read the book .
 The first review appeared in my own national weekly newspaper, The Spotlight . It probably won't surprise anyone to learn that the review was quite laudatory .
 The second review of Final Judgment appeared in the Washington Jewish Week on April 28, 1994 and is discussed in Final Judgment in the afterword .
 The third review appeared in the aforementioned Steamshovel Press in its undated issue Number 11. The review was published in undated Issue Number 11 .
 Steamshovel has been remarkably reticent about mentioning the book or providing the opportunity in its pages to debate, for example, one Dave Emory, who actually contends that there is a ""Nazi"" connection to the JFK assassination . Other than this cautious commentary, SteamshOvel
 I personally presented Michael Isikoff of Newsweek a copy of the book, but I've yet to hear even a whimper from him . The book is available now on Amazon .
 Following the release of earlier editions of Final Judgment, there were several attempts to suggest that the book relied upon less-than-reliable sources . The book was published in 2004 .
 Sources include Seymour Hersh, Stephen Green and Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, none of whom can be described as extremists in any way . JFK's primary sources on JFK's struggle with Israel come from sources such as Seymour Hersch, Stephen .
 The Rockwell book was referenced in the bibliography only for the record and is not provided as ""proof or ""evidence"" of Israel's involvement in the JFK assassination . It was referenced only as a reference to the book .
 "By so doing you will only demonstrate how determined you are to try to discredit my theory," he said . "I'm not giving up on my theory. By so doing it, I'm trying to discredit it any way possible"
 "One effort to discredit my research falls flat if you look at the facts," he says . One effort "falling flat" if it's true, he says, but the facts are true .
 Eight of the 30 notes citing LaRouche publications were passing references to the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith and its connections to a number of bankers with ties to Lansky syndicate .
 Four of the LaRouche citation footnotes appeared in two appendices . The appendices were supplemental in nature and not central to the basic thesis of the book . The book was written by David Botnick, a former member of the Socialist Party .
 In fact, this is the only LaRouche citation on the subject of the JFK assassination per se . This is one of the only citations on the topic of JFK assassination .
 Much of the material taken from LaRouche sources also appears in other works on the JFK assassination and the history of organized crime, among other places .
 When I contacted the aforementioned Morrock, he told me that he wouldn't believe anything that I had to say . Morrock admitted that he considered himself ""a Zionist" and considered himself a Zionist .
 He also admitted that he had never done any substantive investigation of the JFK assassination . The real motivation in trying to discredit me was stimulated largely by the fact that I had dared to bring Israel into the picture .
 Morrow also made the outlandish claim that my employer, Willis Carto, was essentially the real author of the book and that Carto had ""dictated"" the book, which, of course, is just simply not true . Morrow also claimed that Willis' employer, Willard Carto
 As I mentioned earlier, I relied on many, many sources, even among those in the lore of the JFK assassination conspiracy . The overwhelming majority of those sources are ""mainstream"" sources, including those in conspiracy theories .
 "Not on any major point in any area of the book did I find anything that didn't seem to be backed up by other sources," author says . "Not" on any of the major points in the book, he says .
 I did make a serious effort to try to continually have (especially where I had any doubts) a number of sources that confirmed the basic facts of the particular area that I happened to be writing about .
 Marrs is the author of the mammoth volume, Crossfire, examining virtually all of the JFK assassination conspiracies . Marrs: "Crossfire" is an examination of virtually every aspect of JFK assassination conspiracy theory .
 This book came out before Final Judgment and Marrs' book does, to its credit, get into the Permindex connection . The LaRouche organization's Executive Intelligence Review in regard to Perm index .
 Marrs only mentions the possibility that Permindex had ties to the international drug trade . However, Marrs never acknowledges it as fact . Marrs says he doesn't necessarily acknowledge that .
 Executive Intelligence Review focuses on Mossad figure Tibor Rosenbaum's role in Permindex .
 I sent Marrs a copy of Final Judgment after it was first released . Be all of this as it may, I sent it to Marrs for a copy .
 Oliver Stone's motives for bringing JF‘K to the screen in the style he did, he says . However, I do have to admit that in my letter to Marrs I did point out some things about Oliver Stone that led me to be suspicious of his motives .
 I pointed out to Marrs that Stone was a major contributor to AIPAC, the registered lobby for Israel . I've never actually confirmed it, to be completely honest, that Stone has never been confirmed it .
 Oliver Stone paid some $200,000 or more to Jim Marrs at the time Stone was putting JFK together . Stone paid Marrs $100,000 to make JFK movie .
 Marrs would be hesitant to criticize or to acknowledge criticism of a man who had obviously made him rich overnight . So I understand why Marrs is hesitant to criticise or acknowledge criticism .
 Marrs has said some friendly things about Final Judgment, although he has not endorsed it altogether . However, more recently, he has spoken out against Final Judgment . Final Judgment is due to be released in October .
 CIA-Organized Crime plots against Fidel Castro seem to intersect with the JFK assassination conspiracy . Author of Deadly Secrets, William Turner, has been an assassination investigator and co-author .
 Final Judgment has been sent to Gaeton Fonzi, author of The Last Investigation, who was an investigator for the House Assassinations Committee inquiry into JFK .
 I pointed out to Fonzi that he and I had at least one mutual acquaintance . I even pointed out that he had a mutual acquaintance with him, he said .
 Turner and Fonzi never received an acknowledgment from Turner or Turner . "I never received any acknowledgment from either Turner or Fonzie," he says .
 Newfield's most recent claim to fame is his story that Teamsters Union boss Jimmy Hoffa was behind the JFK murder . Newfield says Hoffa's union boss was behind JFK's murder .
 Newfield's ""Hoffa Killed JFK"" story stemmed from his relationship with Frank Ragano, a former lawyer for Hoffa and Santo Trafficante, the Tampa Mafia boss . Newfield wrote the story about Hoffa killing JFK JFK JFK .
 I even challenged Newfield to debate me on the subject on a national radio talk show, Radio Free America, hosted by my colleague at The Spotlight, Tom Valentine . Newfield has been accused of being racist and sexist .
 Scheim's book is an enriched, expanded re-write of the book The Plot to Kill the President by G Robert Blakey . Blakey was director of the House Assassinations Committee investigation . Scheim was determined not to find any CIA or FBI involvement in the murder of the president
 As I pointed out in Final Judgment, Scheim tended to portray Meyer Lansky as an insignificant figure who was a low-level mob figure, a flunky to the Mafia, when, in fact, he was much bigger than that . As I said in Final Judgement, Sc
 Scheim— dare I say it?—is Jewish and it could well be that this may have been some element in his bias . Scheim is Jewish and this may well be some element of his bias.
 Scheim does have some credibility in some circles . Nonetheless, whatever his bias, Scheim has some credibility .
 He has never acknowledged receipt of the book nor has agreed to debate me as I asked . Still, he has never accepted receipt of a book nor accepted debate me .
 Scheim would relish the opportunity to demolish the theory, not only because he believes that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" but because, as a Jewish American, he would have the chance to refute the claim that the Jewish state had a hand in the assassination .
 "I would think that he would take this golden opportunity to demolish me publicly. I would think ... he would ... take this opportunity," she said .
 A good friend of mine, Donald L Kimball, has written three books on the JFK assassination .
 He's a prolific writer and a dedicated American, but to the best of my knowledge he has never even read Final Judgment . He has never read the book .
 Anybody who denies that there is a strong pro-Israel bias in the U.S. media is either a liar or a fool or both, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The authors of books on the JFK assassination don't want to cross the media. So I understand why the authors of these books don't . The author of one of the best-selling books on JFK assassination.
 There was a lot of hostility toward my particular approach, but I was pleasantly surprised to find more than a few people who were willing to give me friendly input . "To be sure, there was a little hostility toward me," he says .
 Even some of the most able critics of my theory were, in fact, unable to refute my theory . That was actually a relief to me, for I was frankly concerned that perhaps I had missed some detail somewhere that would bring the thesis of Final Judgment come crashing down .
 Until the center recently went out of business, JFK "buffs" and "fanatics" came to Dallas to talk about their favorite subject . The center recently held an annual confab in which JFK ""buffs"" and ""fanatics"" came to discuss the subject .
 Final Judgment had already sold 8,000 copies all over America . However, when I asked to come to Dallas to speak about Final Judgment, I never even received an acknowledgment from these people who are ostensibly dedicated to finding out the truth .
 Either either I am a total crank or I am right on the mark and they don't want to discuss it . Now either I'm a total crank or I'm right on my mark and I'm not talking about it .
 I leave it up to the readers of Final Judgment to make their own determination . Final Judgment will be released on Friday, October 31 .
 "I don't believe that anybody who has read Final Judgment with an open, honest approach considers me a crank," he says . "I'm not a crank. I don't think anybody who reads Final Judgment will be a crank."
 They wouldn't get good publicity if they started talking about possible Israeli involvement in the assassination, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Minor errors of fact that appeared in previous editions have been corrected . Other than those corrections, I have not revised the original thesis as it was put forth in the first edition .
 "I have tightened up the book here and there but I have not deleted any substantive material relative to the thesis itself," he says . "I'm not going to delete anything that's not true to my thesis"
 The book stands essentially as it was first written but is now much stronger and far more comprehensive than ever . It covers areas related to the assassination and the cover-up that were not discussed in the previous editions .
 Stone's defenders have pointed out that Stone had a very complicated subject to deal with in the film and that he couldn't include everything and that's absolutely true . Stone's defense has said he had to include everything .
 The film has done, and it has done it in a fashion such that the ""solution"" is far from anything but that . That is, in effect, what the film does, what it does .
 Mark Lane was one of the prime movers behind this film . Lane was unhappy with the final version of the film in that it did not, in his view, adequately address the role of the CIA in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Executive Action is a good film and very well constructed . Stone relied heavily on the foundation laid by Executive Action in structuring his own film . All in all, however, it's a very well-made film .
 Stone's film, Executive Action, does not name any high-level conspirators per se . Like Stone's, it doesn't name any of those involved in the plot .
 The film, like Stone's film, does betray a certain ""liberal"" bias, if you will . The film is a classic classic of American cinema .
 The film outlines a theory, in a very concise fashion, of how a small group of conspirators could have carried off the JFK assassination .
 Executive Action offers a capsule overview of the basic JFK assassination conspiracy . Executive Action provides a detailed look at the JFK assassination .
 There have been Arab-Americans who have read the book and have said it's a great book . "Arab-Americans have read it," says author of the book .
 "The book hasn't been subsidized by the Arabs and it isn't Arab propaganda," he says . "But the book isn't subsidized by Arabs," he adds. "It's not Arab propaganda. But the book is a good book."
 It wasn't until after the publication of the fourth edition that a single Arab publishing house finally decided to publish an Arabic translation of the book .
 Arabic-language publisher of the book has not provided the kind of distribution that I would have expected . So Arab money was never a factor behind the publication and distribution of the initial publication of the .
 Restrictions against travel to Libya were imposed by the Israeli lobby . I was unable to attend because of travel restrictions .
 The organizers asked me to submit a written statement which was read aloud to the participants who had come from all corners of the globe . However, the organizers asked him to submit it to read aloud, he said .
 People as far away as Malta, Ghana, Guyana and New Zealand have raised questions about the U.S. relationship with Israel . Israel is a major ally in the Middle East .
 I am grateful to those people from the so-called ""Third World" who took the time to write . I am thankful that there are a few places where freedom of speech still exists .
 Final Judgment was published in the pages of an ""Arabist"" publication, The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs . The editors rejected the advertisement . Final Judgment is published in Final Judgment, Final Judgment .
 The influence of the ADL is felt even among those who are inclined to the ""Arabist"" point of view .
 The Washington Report is not going to lend themselves to publicizing Final Judgment, despite the fact that many of their readers have obviously read Final Judgment or otherwise heard about the book .
 In March of 2003 I did have the unique opportunity to lecture at a leading Arab think tank in the Middle East, the Zayed International Centre for Coordination and Follow-Up . The subject of Final Judgment was only mentioned in passing in the course of my lecture about U.S.
 Chamish has helped stir a tempest in Israel recently by documenting to the satisfaction of many that Israeli intelligence was involved in the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin . Chamish is a self-described ""Zionist"" who says he is ""committed to the
 In his review of Final Judgment, he says that he accepts my contention that the Permindex corporation was indeed a Mossad front for covert operations . He says he accepts his contention that PermIndex was indeed Mossad .
 Chamish did have several criticisms, but none of which were damaging to the basic thesis which Chamish endorsed . Chamish has essentially endorsed the idea of the philosopher's view .
 "It doesn't take much of what he gets right to make a case for Israeli involvement"" in the JFK assassination," he said .
 David Ben-Gurion may have been angry at JFK for trying to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb, says Chamish . Chamish concur that my suggestion is reasonable speculation . However, Chamish does concur with Chamish's suggestion that Israeli Prime Minister may have decided to
 Chamish says that Piper doesn't sound like an anti-Semite and I can spot one . Chamish points out that about half of Piper's sources are Jewish .
 Chamish has also gone so far as to make a connection between Final Judgment and the death of JFK, Jr., son of the late president . Chamish: Final Judgment is a connection to JFK Jr. and JFK's death .
 "From an Israeli, needless to say, this is a very powerful endorsement and an honest one," says an Israeli-born Israeli .
 Shamir has been hotly critical of Israel's continuing violence and international intrigue against its enemies . Shamir is not the same name of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir .
 In Final Judgment you charge that long-time Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was directly involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Shamir is accused of being directly involved with the assassination of JFK JFK .
 Shamir headed the Mossad's official hit team at the time of the JFK assassination . He is not very likely to want to bring attention to that fact by bringing a libel suit against me, he says .
 Israelis would simply prefer to keep sealed. It would open up an unpleasant can of worms that they would rather rather keep sealed . Israel would be keen to keep the situation under wraps.
 You never actually say whom you believe the actual assassins were who killed President Kennedy in Dallas . You never say who you believe are the assassins who killed JFK .
 There have been several names put forth as the possible ""French"" assassin in Dallas . Michael Mertz is one of those names mentioned in the book .
 There is strong evidence that anti-Castro Cuban exiles were involved in some way in the events in Dealey Plaza . Cuban ex-Cuban exiles may have been involved in events in the U.S.
 Former CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz says she was accompanied by the Novo brothers . Lorenz: The brothers arrived in Dallas the day before the assassination of JFK .
 Frank Sturgis was the "handler" for Miss Lorenz and the Novos, who later told Lorenz that his team was involved in the assassination, although he never said that they were the shooters, per se . Sturgi worked for years for both the CIA and the
 Miss Lorenz testified that she had been told by Sturgis that she would be acting as a ""decoy"" in the operation . It wasn't until after after the assassination that she realized her activities had brought her into the sphere of the assassination conspiracy .
 There were probably many people brought to Dallas as part of potential or possible assassination teams and who were never in fact utilized or who may have played some part in the crime .
 Mark Lane proved in Rush to Judgment that there was much more to the story . Josiah Thompson's Six Seconds in Dallas analyzed the forensic aspects in a convincing fashion .
 The question of conspiracy and cover-up was no longer in doubt after such volumes appeared . However, the question was still in doubt when such volumes were published .
 We've known for 30 years that there was a conspiracy, that multiple assassins were involved . Therefore we have known for thirty years that . there was . multiple assassins involved. Therefore we've known . that there were multiple assassins .
 It doesn't matter how they carried out the crime, in the end, since the crime was a success, since it's a success . The crime was not carried out, it was carried out by the police, police say .
 The weapons used in the crime have never been found and much of the autopsy and ballistic evidence that does exist may itself be forgeries . Much of the autopsies and evidence that do exist may be fake .
 We are not likely to ever find a ""smoking gun" that was bought by a known Mossad assassin either . We are likely to never find a 'smoking gun' that is bought by Mossad assassins either .
 Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, Guy Banister, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante and many others . Clay Shaw was one of the French assassins .
 When we look into the connections of these well-known names, as I did in Final Judgment, you cannot help but keep tripping over the Israeli Connection . The Israeli Connection is a big part of the story here .
 Most people wouldn't even know to look in the Israeli direction in the first place . So most people would be surprised to see Israel in Israel .
 Liberal author Richard Reeves appeared on Pat Buchanan radio program touting his new history of the Kennedy administration . I phoned in and asked about JFK's Middle East policy in the context of possible Israeli involvement in the assassination .
 Buchanan's co-host, Ben Wattenberg, a devotee of Israel, switched the discussion to the subject of JFK's health . Reeves briefly acknowledged that JFK was engaged in a lessthan-friendly state of affairs with Ben-Gurion .
 Garrison himself was evidently not initially cognizant of the Israeli connection here, nor did he actually have any reason to suspect Israeli involvement, inasmuch as—at that time in the late 1960' s—JFK' s conflict with Israel was truly a deep, dark secret .
 Garrison himself later did come to the conclusion that there was a Mossad connection evidenced by his circulation of a manuscript for a novel in which he pinpointed the Mossad as the driving force behind the assassination conspiracy . Weberman, Garrison said, "I believe there was no doubt"
 As I have pointed out in Final Judgment, Garrison did not (at least at first) actually consider Shaw's ties to Permindex to be central to the events in Dallas . Garrison: "I'm not sure what happened to Shaw, but I'm sure he was involved in the
 Garrison had stumbled on the key to Clay Shaw's intelligence connections and evidently didn't understand them . Garrison missed the boat in a very big way . Garrison says he didn't know Shaw's connections to the CIA .
 One of my biggest regrets is that Jim Garrison didn't live long enough to read Final Judgment . One of Garrison's biggest regrets was that he didn't read final Judgment .
 As I mentioned earlier, those who did pinpoint the Permindex Connection such as Dr. Dr. John Sutter pinpointed the connection . Dr. Sutter said the connection was a "permindex connection"
 They did not examine JFK's Middle East policy and how that policy was reversed upon JFK's death . JFK was trying to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb .
 The Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate were involved in the conspiracy, author says . Mossad was a key figure in the assassination of President George W. Bush .
 I had to give credit where credit was due to James Warner of the Christian Defense League . I asked Warner about this and told him that he had to do so .
 This short article covered the subject quite well . But it's interesting that this short article covers the subject very well .
 I also have to give credit to the late Ned Touchstone, also of Louisiana, who was the publisher of a journal called The Councilor .
 Touchstone had actually done some investigating into JFK assassination . Touchstone was one of the first people to stumble across CIA contract operative David Ferrie . This is discussed in some detail in Appendix Three .
 Touchstone pointed out the high-level Israeli lobby connections of the powerful Stern family of New Orleans . The Stern family were the owners of WDSU radio and television in New Orleans and close friends of Clay Shaw .
 Touchstone suggested that somehow the Sterns might have been a key to the JFK assassination puzzle, but, obviously, he didn't have any firm evidence, perhaps again because no one actually knew how much of a problem had developed between JFK and the Israelis prior to the assassination .
 Touchstone first discovered the picture of Clay Shaw at a party sponsored by the Stern family's WDSU network in New Orleans . Touchstone found the picture at a New Orleans party hosted by Stern's family .
 Serious doubts have been raised as to whether Ferrie is actually the person shown in the photo with Shaw . There have been other sources who have said that Shaw and Ferrie did know each other .
 Whether Ferrie was in the picture or not is largely irrelevant at this point in time . So whether it was Ferrie in the photo is irrelevant now, it's not clear whether he was .
 It wasn't until 1995 that the State Department released a massive volume of previously-unpublished documents relating to U.S. relations with Israel during the Kennedy administration .
 Documents show JFK and Ben-Gurion were engaged in bitter behind-the-scenes conflict over Israel's drive to build a nuclear weapon . JFK and Israeli Prime Minister Ben Gurion engaged in very bitter behind the scenes conflict over the nuclear program .
 Avner Cohen's new book, Israel and the Bomb, has provided a wealth of new information about JFK's behind-the-scenes war with Israel .
 Cohen has told people that he rejects my theory of Israeli involvement in the JFK conspiracy, there is no question but that his book gives credibility to my thesis . Whether Cohen likes it or not, there's no question about his book's credibility .
 In many instances you told us what you would be telling us about in later chapters or referred to in previous chapters . In many of these chapters, you referred to previous chapters of this chapter .
 Of acquaintances who read the book, the repetition is something that they have almost all commented upon when asked what they did like—or not like—about the book .
 Seven out of ten said that they liked the repetition saying that it tied all of the complex subject matter together .
 In the process of writing the book I made the conscious decision to try to tie all of these things together as often as possible . So in the process, I made a conscious decision, to try and tie them together .
 It would shorten the book if these repetitive references were edited, but for someone who was not familiar with a lot of the details of the JFK assassination, it may have been more difficult for them to understand the whole thesis were it not tied together in the way .
 I do appreciate the critical comments from readers because it's always interesting to see how others view my work. In any case, I do . In any . case, he does appreciate .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "I believe my judgment in this matter was correct. Still, despite some criticism from a number of people I know well," he says .
 In Final Judgment you never precisely state whether it was the CIA or Mossad that was the prime mover behind the JFK assassination . In Final Judgement you never say whether it's Mossad or CIA that was behind the assassination .
 I don't know whether it was the CIA or the Mossad which was the prime mover behind the conspiracy . The CIA or Mossad may have been behind the plot to kill the Israeli president .
 CIA and Mossad were "virtually two sides of the same coin" in the Middle East, says CNN's John Sutter . CIA, Mossad have been key to U.S. policy in Mideast .
 James J Angleton, the Mossad's ally at the CIA, turned many CIA agents essentially into Mossad agents . Angleton worked on behalf of Israel's interests, not only in the Middle East but throughout the world .
 I do think the assassination conspiracy was largely a cooperative effort, but I do believe that the Mossad connection was central to the conspiracy . Angleton's prodding at the CIA in Washington in Washington was part of the plan, says author . The CIA was actively involved in the assassination,
 The assassination most likely would never have been carried out without the active collaboration of the CIA . Those in the CIA who were actively involved in the assassination conspiracy were close to the Mossad or functioning in its sphere of influence in a number of areas .
 CIA man E Howard Hunt was working closely with anti-Castro Cubans and Guy Banister in New Orleans . Hunt was also a CIA liaison to the French OAS which, in turn, was working with the Israelis .
 Frank Sturgis, who worked for both the CIA and the Mossad, admitted to involvement in the assassination . The CIA, Mossad and the CIA worked together in the killing .
 CIA asset Clay Shaw was connected to the Israelis through the Mossad-sponsored Permindex operation . Not to mention long-time CIA assets Clay Shaw .
 In this particular realm of intelligence intrigue -- the JFK assassination -- you are also looking at the Mossad . The CIA and Mossad are both involved in the assassination of JFK JFK .
 If LBJ comes into office, he's going to begin a major highly profitable process of arming Israel, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This is highly simplistic, of course, but nonetheless instructive, way of looking at how the assassination conspiracy began developing . This is an instructive way of thinking, but still instructive .
 All in all you had a very tightly knit group of people—both outright conspirators and powerful sympathizers, all dealing with one another on a regular and intimate and highly secretive basis . "All in all," he says, "you had to be very secretive"
 JFK assassination conspiracy appears on its face to be many different circles intersecting with one another, author says . "A more appropriate way of looking at the conspiracy would be to view it as a very wide circle that continues spiraling inward to a very tight vortex"
 You don't have ""one big happy family"" but, instead, ""one very small happy family" collaborating in the JFK conspiracy . You don’t have ""big happy family."" but, as a result, a very small family collaborated in the conspiracy .
 "With just a few contacts, these people were capable of setting in motion, financing and orchestrating this conspiracy that obviously crossed several continents," the author says .
 It would be presumptuous for me to try to make any comment on that and obviously no records on this conspiracy were kept, he said . "Obviously no records were kept," he said of the conspiracy .
 Everybody in the loop knew what was going to happen when JFK was assassinated . Yet everybody in the . loop knew . that JFK was . going to be assassinated. Yet everybody knew .
 According to Pierre Neuville, Yitzhak Shamir, the Mossad's assassination chief, did contract out at least one assassin or an assassination team through Colonel Georges deLannurien in French intelligence . Shamir was the chief of Mossad, according to Neu
 deLannurien was with Angleton at CIA headquarters at Langley the day of the assassination . It seems likely he knew exactly who those contract assassins were gunning for .
 There was an affirmative move on the part of the Mossad toward the goal of killing John F Kennedy . So, in my judgment, there was a move . The Mossad was in the right direction to kill Kennedy .
 There's no doubt that it was JFK's strained relationship with Israel that was one of the prime motivations behind the ultimate conspiracy in light of the role of Israel's CIA collaborator, James Angleton, in the conspiracy .
 Angleton was Israel's chief and devoted advocate at the CIA in Washington . Angleton had several motivations in launching CIA participation in the conspiracy . One of the primary motivations certainly was his position as Israel's top and dedicated advocate .
 "You absolutely cannot look at the JFK assassination conspiracy without factoring in the role of the Mossad," author says . "All other factors, no matter how important, notwithstanding. notwithstanding," he says .
 In Final Judgment you say very little about the role of the militaryindustrial complex and its allies in the Pentagon in the JFK assassination conspiracy . In Final Judgement, you say nothing about the military industrial complex .
 When you blame the military-industrial complex you are blaming faceless industrialists, military men, faceless financiers, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "When you blame military, it's not just faceless people, but faceless financial men, and fac
 The 'military-industrial complex' still does encompass quite an expanse of various power groups but they are all inter-related . However, if you wish to resort to the terminology of talking about the ""military .industrial complex"" that still does .
 The Israeli lobby is a key component of the military-industrial complex, today in particular . The fact is that the lobby is key to the Israeli lobby, the Israeli government says . The lobby is also key to Israel's success in the Middle East .
 The military-industrial complex did not only benefit immensely from the war in Vietnam . But it also benefited from the success of the Vietnam War .
 These faceless industrialists also had a great stake in the arming of Israel, any way you cut it . Israel has been accused of being complicit in the arms deal .
 Those who want to point the finger of blame at ""the military-industrial complex"" for the death of JFK had better start pointing out that Israel and its American lobby are very much a part of that very popular bogeyman in the lore of the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 I don't think that the terms ""right wing"" and ""left wing"" have very much meaning anymore . J. Don't think you can use this terminology in reference to the JFK assassination whatsoever . I don’t think that you can . use it in reference . to the
 Right-wingers in the CIA working with the left-wing in Israel, says John Avlon . "So you found the right wingers in ... Israel," he says . Avlon says . "Right-wing" wingers were working together with left wingers, he says
 Lansky-dominated ""Mafia"" elements helped finance the anti-Castro Cuban exiles on a variety of fronts . Lansky was concerned about the Kennedy administration's war on organized crime . The "Mafia" elements were also helping finance the exiles against Castro .
 Even ""the Mafia"" financed Castro himself in the beginning, hoping to be in his good graces if and when he came to power . And as many people know even "the Mafia" financed Castro .
 A lot of veterans of the anti-Castro wars of the early 1960's even perceived ""right winger"" E Howard Hunt to be sympathetic to the left wing elements among the anti/Castro Cubans .
 The liberal-oriented among those in the JFK assassination research community do not understand this, but it is definitely a factor to be considered .
 CIA "can't even really pinpoint the CIA itself as being ""right wing"" or ""left wing"" when you really begin analyzing the situation," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There are many old CIA hands who are bitter even today about the influence of the ""liberals" in the CIA's factional squabbles involving the war against Fidel Castro .
 Let's get away from these terms such as ""left wing" and ""right wing"" and view the JFK assassination conspiracy as an alliance among diverse interests but all of whom stood to benefit from the assassination of President Kennedy .
 It's highly unlikely that LBJ would have preferred LBJ over his predecessor . LBJ was the president of Texas, Texas and Texas .
 "I've never seen anyone put forth anything even bearing a semblance of credibility that would prove this," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure what I've done to prove this"
 It's possible that there may have been somebody somewhere in the midst of the JFK assassination conspiracy who was somehow a KGB double agent . But obviously there was so much over-lapping of the various intelligence agencies in this conspiracy that it's possible there was even an Irish secret agent mixed up
 The effort to blame the KGB on the KGB was one of the many cover stories laid down by the real conspirators . As Mark Lane pointed out in Plausible Denial, it was a cover story for the KGB .
 James Angleton was the CIA official who was the loudest advocate of the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was, at the very least, a ""pro-Castro agitator"" who was busy meeting in Mexico with a KGB assassinations expert . And you will recall that .
 Dick Russell paints a plausible case that a long-time U.S. intelligence operative, Richard Case Nagell, may have been under the direction of the KGB in an attempt to infiltrate the assassination conspiracy . Russell: The Man Who Knew Too Much is a very plausible case .
 Nagell does appear to have been enmeshed in various aspects of the conspiracy, but that doesn't mean that the KGB was manipulating the conspiracy . The KGB may not have even initially known that it was an assassination conspiracy .
 Castro himself would have realized what a drastic, drastic mistake it would have been for himself to even be implicated in any aspect of any conspiracy even vaguely associated with the assassination or attempted assassination of John F Kennedy . Castro would have known what a mistake he would have made for him to be implicated
 Were it ever pinned on Castro, there undoubtedly would have been a national and international demand for Castro's head . Castro's death would have led to a demand for his head .
 Castro obviously had no interest in driving a stake through John F Kennedy's heart . Castro had no intention of killing Kennedy, but he had no desire to do so .
 JFK was moving toward a form of detente with Castro, but at the same time, it seems, he was no doubt keeping his options open . We know now, many years later, that JFK was . But it seems he was keeping options open with Castro .
 If Castro were behind the conspiracy, he certainly wouldn't have manipulated Oswald in such a fashion . Oswald would have been manipulated by Castro, the author says . Oswald was the only person to manipulate Oswald .
 If Castro had any inkling that there had been an assassination conspiracy afoot, it would have been in Castro's interests to call it to JFK's attention . Castro had no inkling of a possible assassination plot, but would have called JFK .
 No, it is not possible that the JFK assassination was orchestrated by ""rogue elements"" of the CIA and the Mossad . The CIA and Mossad may have been involved in the assassination, says author .
 Hunt was a long-time CIA figure who had played a major role in the CIA's clandestine affairs . Hunt was certainly lower on the CIA totem pole than Phillips or Angleton, he was still very much a CIA figure .
 There is no evidence that John McCone, JFK's appointee as CIA director (replacing Allen Dulles, who had been fired by JFK), had anything to do with the conspiracy .
 In fact, McCone himself was a bitter critic of Israel's nuclear bomb program . He was a member of the Atomic Energy Commission during the Eisenhower administration .
 Kennedy administration ordered the CIA to begin spying on Israel's secret nuclear development program . The spying was being done out of McCone's office .
 JFK did not trust the spying operation to be conducted by Angleton, whom everyone knew was a co-opted agent of Israel in the CIA . But JFK did trust McCone, and McCone did trust Angleton .
 McCone had nothing to do with JFK's assassination, but those who surrounded him at the highest levels certainly did . McCone was assassinated by JFK's assassin .
 Many of the people in the CIA at the time of the JFK murder remained loyal to long-time director Allen Dulles who had been sacked by Kennedy .
 The CIA's involvement in the assassination was very much an institutional response to JFK's assassination . JFK had threatened to splinter the CIA and cast it to the winds, the CIA said .
 Angleton announced, "We're going to kill the president," during a staff meeting at the CIA one day when John McCone was out with a head cold, he says . Angleton is not the first person to say that .
 The actual conspirators in the loop were a tightly-knit group with vast resources at their command, including not just the CIA bureaucracy and its infamous black budget, but also the skills of the Mossad network on call .
 CIA's inter-action with groups such as anti-Castro Cuban exiles, organized crime contacts in organized crime, author says . "There were enough people who could be manipulated in enough ways that they wouldn't even know that they were being manipulated"
 "Once those people were implicated, it was in their interests to not only shut up, but help cover up," she said . "They were in the interests of shutting up, and covering up" she added .
 Mossad operatives could not have acted without the direct orders of Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and Mossad assassinations chief Yitzhak Shamir, says Israel's Mossad . Mossad is concerned that operatives acted without direct orders from Prime Minister .
 The Mossad is actually a very small organization institutionally, as former Mossad operative Victor Ostrovsky has pointed out . Mossad was founded by Mossad operatives in the 1970s .
 Israel's position was highly precarious in 1963 and for the Mossad to attempt the assassination of the American president without the assurance that it had the support of the CIA, for example, would have been a rash move .
 At this juncture, I suppose, it's appropriate to comment further on James Jesus Angleton . Angleton has been accused of being a paedophile in the past .
 Angleton used all resources at his command to influence CIA decision-making on Israel's behalf . Angleton was a devout friend of Zionism and the state of Israel, writes David Frum .
 He was a powerful, secretive man who was also a key player in much of the CIA's worldwide intrigue . He dealt with figures tied, in turn, to the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate .
 CIA's most influential and controversial spymaster was one of the most remarkable characters in the bizarre and fascinating history of that agency . He was the most controversial and controversial figure in the agency's history .
 He was one of those individuals most directly responsible for initiating and orchestrating the assassination of President John F Kennedy . And he was also one of the individuals responsible for the assassination .
 Former CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz says she was told by her CIA handler in Dallas that she was supposed to function as a "decoy" and it seems likely to me that many of the Cubans who were enmeshed in the assassination scenario were acting as such .
 As I point out in Final Judgment, long-time CIA contract operative Jerry Patrick Hemming who was close to the anti-Castro Cubans has said that the Cubans were being manipulated themselves and that they have come to realize that .
 French intelligence was intimately involved in the Cuban situation during that period, although this is not well known . It's worth noting, also, that French intelligence involved in that period .
 Mossad was also using its allies in French intelligence to manipulate the Cuban underground during this time frame . So it's conceivable that the Mossad also used its allies to manipulate Cuban underground .
 This is a subject that some JFK assassination researcher might wish to explore further . This is the subject of JFK assassination research .
 "If somebody came up with such ""evidence"" I would say that it was forged. If somebody came ... forged," he would say, I would say . I would be surprised to find out what happened .
 Be that as it may, however, no one will ever come up with such evidence . No one will be able to find such evidence, however .
 "I would not, by any means, discount my basic theory," he says . However, granting the argument that Oswald, for example, was the only gunman that would not discount my theory, he adds .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was associating with people who had links to both the CIA and the Mossad . There is no question that there is no doubt that Oswald was associated with people with ties to the CIA .
 Even if Oswald had been the ""lone gunman"" and managed to have carried off the assassination on his own, the fact is that Oswald was then a lone gunman who was successfully utilized by his manipulators at a higher level who were acting on behalf of the CIA and the Mossad
 This is not an area that I have explored in any real detail, nor is it any area I expect to pursue . This is the first time I've been asked to write about the subject of a new book .
 I think it is ultimately vital to resolving the mystery of who killed JFK and why, but I don't think it's vital to solving the mystery . Nor do I think that it's ultimately vital .
 Oswald was ultimately the ""patsy" as he himself described his situation when in police custody . Oswald was the "pats" of the situation, according to Oswald . The bottom line is that, however it came about, Oswald is ultimately the "pathetic"
 CIA's mind control programs were under the direct control of James J Angleton's counterintelligence division at the time of JFK assassination . Angleton was in charge of the CIA's counter intelligence division .
 Sidney Gottlieb, who was the chief technician in the CIA's mind control programs, has gotten all the public exposure . Gottliebe himself was working directly under Angleton, working under him .
 If Oswald was a Manchurian Candidate, he was Angleton's Manchuria Candidate . Angleton was the man who Angleton wanted to kill Oswald in the war .
 There were probably other people in Dallas on November 22, 1963 who had already been "sheep-dipped" as had been done with Oswald . It's always been my opinion, however, that there were probably others in Dallas who were possible patsies .
 The people responsible for setting up these other patsies may have been those who had set up Oswald—or perhaps not . The people who set up these others may have had set them up, or not .
 I don't believe that Oswald fired a loaded round at either John F Kennedy or John Connally, if indeed he fired any weapon that day . I don’t believe that he fired at either Kennedy or Connally . I believe Oswald shot at either of the two men .
 Oswald may have been roped into the conspiracy by being told that it was a ""dummy"" assassination attempt to scare the American people into thinking that action was needed against Fidel Castro . Oswald may be told that the assassination attempt was a 'dummy' assassination attempt .
 Whether it was his own rifle or another rifle or whether that weapon was actually used to fire any of the shots we will probably never know .
 Oswald knew that there was something going on in Dealey Plaza that day that may have involved the firing of rifles . Oswald knew something was going on that day, and it's likely he knew it was firing rifles .
 Oswald thought that the rifles would be trained on either JFK or John Connally . I doubt that Oswald actually thought that JFK or Connally would be on target .
 Oswald "was a little bit surprised" when he learned that the president had been hit by gunfire . Oswald was surprised, to put it lightly, by the president's death, says historian John Sutter .
 As I've already suggested, I don't think that he was aware of such a conspiracy . As I have already suggested that he may not have been aware of the conspiracy .
 He probably believed he was part of some ""set up"" that had been orchestrated by JFK himself . Instead, he probably believed it was some "set up"
 JFK may have thought it was being arranged by the CIA to make JFK have second thoughts about Castro . Or, as I suggested, he may think it was an attempt to get JFK to think of Castro again . The CIA may have been behind JFK's decision to kill Castro .
 A new book by Professor John Newman, Oswald and the CIA, tells us very much about Oswald . Newman cites many intelligence documents, but it also tells us little about the CIA . Newman's book is based on intelligence documents .
 All it really tells us is that the CIA and other government agencies had an interest in Lee Harvey Oswald for some time . The CIA and others had been interested in Oswald for a long time .
 Angleton's division at the CIA was ever-present, it seems, when the CIA assembled information on Oswald . Newman does make very clear, as it does, that Angleton was ever present in the CIA .
 Angleton knew who Lee Harvey Oswald was, long before the assassination, before Oswald's assassination . Angleton was a CIA operative who knew who Oswald was .
 The CIA would have had an interest in Oswald, whether he was a genuine defector at the time or not . So obviously the CIA had a stake in Oswald's life, whether it was a defector .
 If Oswald's defection was genuine, it is conceivable that he did a turn-about and then went to work for the CIA rather than against it . Oswald was not a CIA agent, but a CIA insider, according to the CIA .
 I don't think that John Newman has contributed anything substantial in his new book. So as much as I am sorry to say, I don’t think that he has contributed to this book. John Newman’s new book is not substantial .
 There are some who say that he was not actually recruited as a phony ""defector"" by the CIA but instead by the Office of Naval Intelligence .
 Oswald's profile as a ""defector" is no surprise that the FBI would have an interest in Oswald . Oswald's profiles as a 'defector' are no surprise why the FBI has interest in him .
 If Oswald was a CIAsponsored ""defector"" the FBI might not necessarily have known that . The FBI may have believed that Oswald was the real thing, so to speak .
 If Oswald had been a genuine defector who ultimately recanted upon his return to the U.S. It is possible that he volunteered his services to the FBI or was actually recruited by the bureau .
 Oswald may have been on the FBI's payroll as an informant, but there's a good deal of evidence to suggest that this story simply isn't true . Shortly after the assassination, a story circulated that Oswald may be on FBI payroll .
 If the story isn't true it has still taken on a life of its own and frequently pops up in literature about the JFK assassination . However, if the story is true it still pops up on literature about JFK .
 Oswald was working for Guy Banister in New Orleans . Banister was a long-time high-ranking FBI official . Oswald was in the FBI's sphere of influence, inasmuch .
 Oswald may have been working as an informant for the Treasury Department . There have been suggestions he was working as a Treasury Department informant . Oswald is believed to have been involved in interstate gun sales .
 There have been some who have devoted a great deal of research to this topic . There have also been some dedicated to the subject of research .
 The CIA connection is the area that we need to focus on and I will discuss that further in a moment . My own inclination is that the CIA connection should be investigated .
 Oswald's work for Banister was being coordinated by the CIA, but he probably didn't know it . Oswald himself didn't even know if he was working for the CIA at the time .
 Oswald was operating in many spheres of influence and for that reason alone he was an ideal patsy . Oswald could be pinned to any or all of the different groups which then, in turn, would have reason to want to cover-up their association with an alleged presidential assassin .
 It seems unlikely imposters knew that they were doing so for the purpose of furthering an aspect of the assassination conspiracy . However, it seems unlikely that they knew that .
 The assassination conspiracy would be far too compartmentalized for every participant in some aspect of the conspiracy to know precisely how he was being manipulated or utilized in the framing of Oswald .
 Some imposters probably never laid their eyes on Oswald and probably didn't know who he was until after the real Oswald was picked up by the Dallas police . Some of those imposterers never saw Oswald before he was arrested .
 Banister's use of Oswald may have been arranged by the ADL . ADL frequently contracted out ""fact finding" work through private detective agencies such as that of Mr. Banister .
 Botnick was an "anti-communist extremist" with a known hostility toward the Black civil rights movement . The ADL's public posturing as a ""civil rights" group notwithstanding. Botnick had a history of hostility to the Black Civil Rights movement .
 Banister's ADL associates were looking into left-wing groups such as the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . They could have deployed Oswald into the pro-Castro movement, part of a deliberate attempt to portray Oswald as a Castroite .
 Banister may have been told that the ADL wanted ""facts"" about the pro-Castro movement . Oswald was the man for the job, according to Banister . Banister himself may have told Banister that Oswald would be the man to the job .
 Banister may not have even known Oswald was being sheep-dipped for his ultimate role in the Kennedy assassination . Banister himself may not even know that Oswald's ultimate role was in the assassination .
 Oswald was named as the assassin in the wake of the assassination . Banister was a member of the cabinet at the time of the time .
 In retrospect I don't think that Banister himself was as central to the actual assassination conspiracy, in this regard, as many have believed over the years .
 Banister himself was, in that sense, a ""useful idiot" in the employ of the ADL and the Mossad and its CIA allies . Banister was a "useful idiot" who was employed by ADL, Mossad, and the CIA .
 Even Banister's friends at the ADL had no idea that Oswald was being slated for the role of patsy in the assassination . I would even go so far as to say that it seems likely that even Banisters' friends at ADL didn't know Oswald was a p
 Scott acknowledges that this whole interplay between these interest groups through the Banister connection is part of a ""gray"" area representing the underbelly of finance and politics and international intrigue in New Orleans at the time . Scott himself acknowledges that the interplay .
 The bottom line is that Lee Harvey Oswald probably didn't know who he was working for and that is the way the assassination planners wanted it . Oswald probably did not know exactly who he worked for . The assassination planners want it to be the focus of the story .
 Oswald is probably one of the most-discussed and most-analyzed individuals in history . We will never know who he really was or what his motivations were . Oswald is one of America's most-documented individuals .
 It is conceivable that Oswald thought he was playing a double or triple game and fooling everybody and was even more of a patsy than we realize . Oswald may have been playing a triple game in order to fool everyone .
 There is an interesting parallel, in this context, that should be noted as an aside . There is a parallel to this story, but it's not important .
 Bullock was infiltrating both ""left wing"" and ""right wing"" groups over the years . Bullock himself would have been an ideal patsy .
 In The Man Who Knew Too Much, Dick Russell exposed the possibility that there were a number of people who were being groomed as possible JFK assassination patsies due to their association with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald was ostensibly the New Orleans chapter head of the committee .
 This is interesting, too, in that Brown himself has long-time connections to Israeli intelligence . This is not the first time Brown has been linked to Israel .
 This matter of ""defectors"" and ""infiltrators" and ""undercover agents"" is very complex and one can't always determine the motivations of someone operating in this unusual netherworld . This matter is complex and can't be determined by the motivations .
 It's a combination of personal psychology coupled with the ability of the handlers to manipulate a person's activities without letting them know who they are working for or why .
 The colorful DeMohrenschildt is probably one of the most interesting characters to cross the stage in the JFK assassination controversy .
 "I'm not convinced that DeMohrenschildt was a conscious player in any assassination conspiracy," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't think he was conscious" of any involvement in the assassination .
 DeMohrenschildt spoke with a CIA official who asked him to keep an eye on Oswald when the latter came to Dallas after returning from the Soviet Union . The CIA official asked him for help keeping Oswald in Dallas when he came to see him .
 In this particular instance, however, it could have been a routine matter of no great consequence that, in the end, had absolutely nothing to do with the assassination itself .
 Oswald's ""defector"" status was an obvious interest in the intelligence agencies . Oswald's "defector" status was obvious, whether genuine or not . The intelligence agencies had obvious interest .
 I have seen no evidence to suggest that DeMohrenschildt had any foreknowledge of any conspiracy to ""sheep dip"" Lee Harvey Oswald .
 It is probable that DeMohrenschildt did indeed function in some capacity as one of those who were part of the conspiracy to manipulate Oswald into the role of patsy . However, it is likely that De Mohrenschildts was a member of the conspirators .
 Oswald was "baby-sitting" Oswald, but there were others who also had that same responsibility . So in that sense, he was ""baby-sat"" Oswald, says the president .
 Oswald had left Dallas for New Orleans in the summer of 1963 . DeMohrenschildt left the country, ostensibly for business in Haiti . Oswald had already left Dallas in 1963 .
 Some have suggested that DeMohrenschildt's activities in Haiti may have had something to do with the JFK assassination . But I have yet to see any firm evidence of that, says historian .
 When DeMohrenschildt went to Haiti his immediate control and/or supervision of Oswald came to an end . Obviously, however, when DeMohranschildt left Haiti, his control of Oswald ended . Oswald's immediate control ended when he left Haiti .
 In light of the French Connection that I document in Final Judgment, this, in fact, could have brought DeMohrenschildt into the Mossad sphere of influence . So in light of this, the French connection, this could have been a Mossad influence, he says .
 Some JFK officials portray DeMohrenschildt as some sort of anti-communist extremist because of his Russian background .
 Despite his background, DeMohrenschildt was evidently not much interested in communism or anti-communism one way or another . He was actually a bit of an outcast in the White Russian community .
 So those who want to make him part of some ""right wing anticommunist conspiracy"" are actually way off the mark. So those . want to . make him . part of a "right wing anti-communist conspiracy"
 DeMohrenschildt wore many hats, but there's no real evidence of any complicity in JFK assassination . There is no evidence that he was in any way involved in JFK's assassination .
 He may have known something, or perhaps discovered it by accident, before or after the assassination . He may know something he wasn't supposed to know, but perhaps realized it by chance .
 After the assassination DeMohrenschildt realized that he, too, had been used in some fashion to ""control"" or ""handle"" Oswald . It is apparent, based upon the historical record .
 Last person supposed to have seen DeMohrenschildt before his death was Edward Jay Epstein, a student-turned-journalist who was close to the Mossad's man at the CIA, James Jesus Angleton .
 Epstein is not suggesting Epstein pulled the trigger on DeMohrenschildt . Rest assured that I'm not saying Epstein pulled a trigger . Epstein is accused of being a serial killer .
 DeMohrenschildt was the last person who has publicly admitted to having seen him . But I do find it interesting that he was the first person to publicly admit to seeing him, he says .
 An author of spy fiction could spin a fascinating yarn out of that scenario . The author of a spy novel could spin the tale out of a fascinating scenario .
 I tend to think that the Paine story is a story that does need further exploration . I would encourage some energetic young researcher to follow through on it. Paine's story needs further exploration.
 Priscilla Johnson McMillan has documented Mrs. Paine's life in her book Marina and Lee .
 Mrs. Paine's involvement at one time in the activities of a Jewish community center . Paine was a Quaker woman .
 The Warren Report claimed that Oswald had taken a shot at Walker shortly before the assassination . The report claimed that this was evidence of Oswald's felonious tendencies . Walker's ""role"" in the affair stems from the fact that the Warren Report said that Oswald shot Walker . Oswald's actions were
 Dick Russell has traced some strange activities to people surrounding General Walker . Russell says these people may have had some connection to Oswald . Russell: "The Man Who Knew Too Much"
 General Walker may have been being set up as some sort of "right wing patsy" in the JFK assassination conspiracy . It appears as though General Walker himself may be being set . up as a . sort of ""right wing patsy"" General Walker .
 Five Jewish boys who came out of the U.S. Army in Europe were some five Jewish boys . Walker was part of a clique of young military men who placed themselves around Walker . "Conservativism USA"
 This is according to Dick Russell, writing in his mammoth study, The Man Who Knew Too Much . Russell wrote that Russell knew too much . Russell's study is based on Russell's book The Man who Knew too Much .
 As I've noted, there were probably a number of patsies being set up in Dallas . The people setting them up probably didn't know the JFK assassination was in the offing .
 It appears, at least based upon what Dick Russell has written, that this clique around Walker may have been manipulating Oswald in some way . It appears to be based on what Russell has said, it appears that Walker was manipulating Oswald .
 So here's another ""Jewish connection"" that seems to have been lost in the shuffle . Sohere's another "Jewish connection" that seems like it's been lost .
 Leave it to me to bring up this fact in the context of what I've uncovered, I'm sure . The president of the United States should be allowed to speak freely .
 Only those who want to portray the crime as being a ""right wing conspiracy"" believe that Walker had a hand in the assassination . Oswald himself was evidently moving in circles that were connected to Walker .
 Milteer was not one of the masterminds of the JFK assassination conspiracy nor was a player in the actual plot to kill JFK that ultimately succeeded . He was not a member of the plot but a key figure in the plot .
 Milteer did have some knowledge about an alleged plot to kill JFK in Miami, Florida . It is conceivable he did have knowledge about the alleged plot .
 Information may have been leaked to Milteer by one of the low-level conspirators . He may have wanted to think, being a Kennedy hater, that he was ""on the inside"" of some conspiracy, but you can be certain he was not .
 Milteer bragged of his ""knowledge"" to a police informant and that ""knowledge" actually, may have been disinformation leaked to him . The information was leaked in order to distract attention from the real conspiracy .
 Milteer may have been brought to Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination for some other reason under some other pretense, for example, thinking that he was part of some ""dummy"" assassination attempt to provoke a backlash against Fidel Castro . Milteeer may be brought
 Photos purport to show Milteer in Dallas on November 22 actually are photographs of the singer . The photos were taken in Dallas .
 One long-time government informant in the Minutemen and other ""right wing"" groups was Roy Frankhauser who himself claims to have come in contact with Oswald when he was infiltrating a left wing group that Oswald was purportedly associated with .
 Burros’ name appeared in Oswald's address book . Burros was a long-time undercover informant for the federal intelligence agencies . Not one single JFK assassination researcher has delved into this unusual connection between Oswald and Burros .
 If indeed there was some ""right wing"" connection to JFK assassination it is always a very distinct possibility that these right wingers were actually ""patsies"" being manipulated by Mossad's ADL network . Mossad has very definitely had a hand in manipulating the right wing in America
 Hunt had nothing to do with the JFK assassination conspiracy, nor is there any evidence that Hunt put up any money to help further the conspiracy . Hunt was not involved in any of the conspirators' efforts . Hunt had no connection to the conspiracy, and there is no evidence he put up
 Hunt was a critic of JFK but Hunt is simply a convenient bogeyman . Hunt is a convenient boogeyman for many, like many others, who were critical of JFK . Hunt has been accused of being a convenient scapegoat .
 Those who point to Hunt as being behind the JFK conspiracy fail to point out that even with Hunt there is a very significant Israeli connection to Hunt which is analyzed in Appendix Two of Final Judgment .
 Hunt did put up money for pay-offs that were involved in some aspect of the JFK assassination . Hunt didn't know what the real purpose of the money was for . Hunt did not know what he was doing .
 He may have been deliberately and unwittingly dragged into the conspiracy in that fashion precisely for the reason that it would give the real conspirators an edge over Hunt . Hunt was influential in Dallas and who could be relied upon to help in the cover-up or use his influence to assist .
 There is a very strong Israeli connection to the Hunt empire in the very realm, nuclear development, that was so critical a factor in the conflict between JFK and Israel . Hunt was involved in any aspect of the JFK assassination—knowingly or not .
 Whether he knew it was going to take place or actually played a part in setting up the assassination is another matter of fact .
 The fact he was the beneficiary of the assassination, however, is not enough evidence to convict him . He was not convicted of murder, but he was a beneficiary of assassination .
 Craig Zirbel's book The Texas Connection pinned the JFK assassination solely on LBJ was off base . Craig's book was wrong to pin the assassination to LBJ, but he was wrong .
 Barr McClellan's 2003 book, Blood, Money & Power, has received far more attention than Zirbel's, but has received much more attention . Barr McCallan's book is published in 2003 .
 McClellan's book is no more than an extended hodgepodge of LBJ's Texas antics with a highly speculative—that's putting it lightly—scenario involving a plot to kill JFK entirely Texas-based .
 In truth, the Mossad and the CIA would have been smart to implicate one of Johnson's Texas hands in the assassination including either Wallace or Clark in order to ensure a cover-up by LBJ after the fact .
 I seem to be the only McClellan critic who has bothered to mention that possibility . But I'm not the only one who has ever mentioned that possibility.
 McClellan even creates alleged conversations between LBJ and the conspirators . The conversations are designed to ""prove"" his theory .
 Littered with amazing qualifiers, noting that conversations and events ""undoubtedly"" or ""almost certainly"" took place, the book is pretty bad, despite all the friendly publicity it has received in the ""mainstream"" media .
 The idea a vice-president would be behind the killing of a president is the one theory that satisfies everybody . Evidently the controllers of the media have concluded that ""the lowest common denominator" is the best theory .
 Final Judgment seems to hinge largely on the fact that Clay Shaw had ties to the Mossad through the Permindex company . Shaw was prosecuted by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison for involvement in the JFK assassination .
 Final Judgment could stand entirely on its own with the thesis intact even if Clay Shaw had never lived . In fact, the thesis could stand with the film even if he'd never lived.
 "I don't believe that the book does hinge on the Shaw connection, although it is certainly significant," he says . And I don't think the book hinges on that connection .
 Garrison was potentially going to unearth the Israeli connection it was necessary that Garrison's inquiry be quashed . Because of the fact that Garrison . was potentially . going to . unearth an Israeli connection, Garrison was . necessary to quash the inquiry .
 Garrison was stopped before he had even come across Shaw . Garrison's attempts to stop him actually began before Shaw came across Garrison . Garrison is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 The man who tried to bribe Garrison into stopping the investigation, John King, was intimately tied to the Mossad and the Permindex network . The oilman tried to get Garrison to stop the investigation .
 The Permindex Connection is important, though, but I don't pretend to know precisely what role Shaw actually played in the conspiracy . Shaw's role was important, but he's not sure what role he played in conspiracy .
 Garrison investigation was flawed in many ways, and perhaps that's partly Garrison's own fault . Garrison's probe was flawed, but perhaps that is even partly his own fault, he says . Garrison: "The whole Garrison investigation is flawed"
 Garrison was a man with a mission and he may have gone astray in some of his assumptions and allegations . Garrison may have been misjudged by some of the allegations .
 Shaw knew CIA contract operative David Ferrie and lied on the stand during the trial, claiming that he didn't know Ferrie . Shaw knew contract operative Ferrie, and lied to the stand saying he wasn't aware he knew him .
 Some have come to Shaw's defense, saying he may have lied because he didn't want to be associated with a known and rather flamboyant homosexual such as Ferrie . But this is a limp-wristed excuse, no pun intended . Shaw's lawyer says he may
 Garrison was never able to prove Shaw's connection to the CIA at the time . Shaw did have a long-time association with the CIA as we know now, but Garrison never found that connection . Garrison was able to find Shaw's link to CIA .
 A jury concluded that there wasn't enough evidence to tie Shaw to any conspiracy . Shaw was charged with murder, but the jury found no evidence linking him to conspiracy .
 New Orleans attorney Dean Andrews was asked to represent Oswald after he was arrested in Dallas . This was significant in that it was a ""Clay Bertrand"" who had called Andrews and asked him to represent him .
 Andrews said that he had dealt with ""Clay Bertrand"" in the past so when he received the call after the assassination, the name of Clay Bertrand was not unfamiliar . Andrews said he was not familiar with Bertrand so he dealt with him personally .
 Had the testimony by the police officer, it would have sealed Shaw's fate during the trial in New Orleans . Had the jury heard the testimony, Shaw would have probably sealed his fate in court .
 Final Judgment would stand without or without the matter of the Clay Shaw investigation . So I believe very firmly that the thesis in Final Judgment .
 Shaw investigation might be the icing on a very big cake, so to speak . Shaw investigation could be the "icing on a big cake," he says .
 "I realize that's going out on a limb, but I have never completely discounted this," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not going to give up on this. I realize that I'm going to go with it."
 Shaw was selected to serve on the board of the Mossad-dominated Permindex company based in Europe . After all, Shaw was not exactly a household name in America yet .
 G Robert Blakey, the former director of the House Assassinations Committee, and David Scheim, author of Contract on America, both say that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" and suggest that New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello was the mastermind of the assassination .
 Marcello was an Organized Crime protééé and underling of Meyer Lansky . He existed as Mafia boss of New Orleans precisely because Lansky put him there . He was the boss of the New Orleans Mafia in New Orleans .
 Marcello, on his own, was one of the most powerful ""Mafia bosses"" in the country . He owed his status to Lansky's patronage, and his rackets in New Orleans and extending apparently into Texas were among the most lucrative .
 Marcello would not have single-handedly orchestrated the murder of the President of the United States without the approval of Meyer Lansky . So would not be able to do so without approval from Lansky?
 Marcellos' own international business connections were quite far flung on their own . It's inevitable that he would have actually had Mossad connections of his own .
 Carlos Marcello was not the mastermind and prime mover behind the JFK assassination . He was not behind the assassination, but he was behind it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Marcello is a colorful figure and an easy target for students of the JFK assassination conspiracy . The conspiracy was far too broad-ranging for it to have simply been a product of the organization . Despite the fact that Marcella was a very powerful figure on his own, the conspiracy
 The theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK" is enticing, but factually way off the mark . The theory is enticing but fact that the Mafia killed JFK is way off-the- mark .
 Marcello was a protééé of Lansky, writes CNN.com's John Avlon . Avlon: "One cannot seriously look at the role of Marcella in the assassination without acknowledging that he was a pro-Lansky protégé" Av
 Scheim's concerns about stirring up anti-Semitism by revealing Lansky's role in Organized Crime . If he is a serious researcher as he purports to be he would be willing to face the facts and not shade them .
 There's no doubt in my mind that Ruby did know Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination . Ruby knew Oswald well enough to know him prior to his assassination, author says .
 There are too many stories of likely personal connections between the two to discount that the two knew one another and were working together in some way .
 There are convincing stories that Ruby had some contacts with the CIA through his activities in running guns to Fidel Castro . Ruby ran guns to both Fidel Castro (prior to Castro's seizure of power) and, later, to anti-Castro exiles .
 Former CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz testified that Ruby showed up the day before the assassination at the motel where she and a group of Cuban exiles were staying . Lorenz and Frank Sturgis were staying at a motel in Dallas .
 Her story is one of many of many that tie Ruby in some form or another to the CIA . Ruby was involved in the CIA, but in events leading up to the assassination .
 Ruby was instead a part of the Lansky/Jewish element in the crime syndicate . Ruby was not a member of the syndicate, but a Jewish element in it .
 The big problem here is that these so-called ""Mafia"" figures that Ruby was in touch with were largely Jewish . Ruby was talking to the 'Mafia' figures he met with in the 1980s .
 In Final Judgment 1 have firmly pinpointed a Ruby connection to Israel and the Mossad through attorney Luis Kutner (Ruby's long-time friend from Chicago) and also outlined other previously ignored Ruby connections to arms smuggling to Israel . Ruby's involvement with so-called "reporters
 The Israeli connections are there for those who wish to find them, and those who don't . The Israeli connection is there for both Israelis and Israelis, and there are plenty of them .
 As far as Ruby's killing of Oswald, it appears to be something that Ruby ""had"" to do, it was something he was ordered to do . Oswald's killing was ordered by the U.S. government, author says .
 In Final Judgment you suggest that Jack Ruby did not actually die when he was reported to have died and that he actually later went to Israel . In Final Judgement you suggest he actually went to the country to visit Israel .
 This story seems outlandish and puts the overall credibility of the book in doubt, says CNN.com.com .
 The story was told by a woman who knew Jack Ruby and worked with him many years ago in San Francisco . Ruby worked with Ruby in the 1970s and '80s . Ruby was a big name in the San Francisco area .
 Grace Pratt was so afraid of what she thought she knew, that Ruby was still alive, that she asked that the story never be repeated while she was alive . The woman who told the story, Grace Pratt, was a reliable woman not known to making up such stories .
 I was frankly hesitant to publish this story, recognizing how sensational the story is, and I went back and forth before biting the bullet and deciding to put the story in the book . The story will be published in the next edition of this week's edition of The Washington Post .
 Pratt's story should be told since it definitely brought in yet another possible Israeli connection that brought in the thesis of Final Judgment full circle . Pratt should be remembered for his role in the final Judgment of Final Judgement .
 The very fact that the story has never been reported anywhere else— despite many other bizarre JFK assassination legends that have been given widespread circulation— actually gives Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy Kennedy a chance to find out what happened .
 Jack Ruby may have been secreted out of the U.S. if only for humanitarian reasons . If I am entirely wrong and Israel had nothing to do with the JFK assassination, it is entirely possible that Ruby was secreted .
 Jews in the U.S. and Israel may have been sympathetic to Ruby and said that he had committed a ""patriotic"" act . Ruby was given the opportunity to start a new life in the United States .
 Jonathan Pollard, who spied for Israel, has been convicted of spying for the country . Pollard was convicted of espionage for Israel . He has been sentenced to life in prison in Israel .
 I do know that Grace Pratt did believe that she saw Jack Ruby photographed boarding a plane for Israel . Pratt never told the story publicly or sought recognition. Pratt never sought recognition for her story .
 Her story is that ""Ruby"" claimed to have been subjected to surgical masking and some form of hypnosis . She presents this story as though she gives it credibility . Her story was that she claims to have undergone surgical mask-ing .
 Grace Pratt's story sounds as possibly outlandish as some people, but I don't discount this possibility, nor do I think it actually conflicts with Mrs. Pratt's . Now this story .
 Ruby could have gone to Israel and undergone plastic surgery, he could have had plastic surgery . Ruby could also have undergone surgery in Israel . Ruby has a history of having plastic surgery in the past .
 There is another story out there circulating that suggests there was more to Ruby's death than meets the eye . Ruby was found dead at the age of 12 in August 2012 .
 I would strongly urge some JFK assassination researcher to tackle this controversy and get to the bottom of it . I would urge some of the JFK assassination researchers to tackle the controversy .
 Whether Jack Ruby died at the time he is supposed to have died—or not— is immaterial to the thesis of Final Judgment . In any case I will conclude by pointing out that .
 Anyone seeking to discredit Final Judgment by citing the Grace Pratt story is being dishonest, says author . Anyone who seeks to discredit the book is dishonest .
 Anybody could have actually killed JFK, even including as the Warren Commission claimed, one lone nut . Warren Commission: "Anybody who could have killed JFK could have been a nut"
 The Mafia didn't have that power, despite its wide-ranging connections nationally and internationally . The Mafia had that power. The Mafia was not that powerful, despite their wide-reaching connections nationally .
 And it was not the Mafia that convened the Warren Commission and dictated its actions from top to bottom . The Mafia was not behind the decision to convene the commission .
 The Mafia did not have the power to be manipulating the CIA's strange activities in Mexico City that were designed to link Lee Harvey Oswald to a purported Soviet KGB assassinations expert . The Mafia was not in power to manipulate the CIA, but the Mafia had the power .
 In the pages of Final Judgment, I think I firmly demolish any suggestion that the Mafia was ultimately responsible for the JFK assassination . I think, I . firmly demolishes any suggestion . that the mafia was ultimately . responsible for JFK assassination.
 Mossad-connected Hyman Lamer was the real ""boss"" of Sam Giancana, the famed ""Mafia"" chief in Chicago . The old legend that ""the Mafia Killed JFK"" finds itself entangled with a very significant Mossad connection .
 I would add that he probably allowed the assassination to take place and did nothing to interfere with the conspiracy's progress . I would also say that he likely allowed .
 I find it highly unlikely that Hoover had any part in planning the assassination and no one has ever been able to find any evidence that he did . Hoover had never been found to be involved in any of the events .
 Hoover's actual participation was not, of course, critical to actually carrying out the deed . Hoover: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to have done it"
 Frankly, it would have been better (from the standpoint of the conspirators) that Hoover not have any advance knowledge or actually be given any such knowledge . Hoover would not have been given such knowledge or even been given any of it .
 That would have only given Hoover more leverage and the less people who were in the know, the better . Hoover would have given him more leverage, and the least people who knew better .
 I've heard that Hoover was supposedly at a party in Dallas at the ranch of his good friend Clint Murchison, the Texas oil baron, the night before the assassination, reveling in the company of LBJ and even reportedly Richard Nixon . This appears to be just another one
 Even if Hoover was in Dallas that day before the assassination, it doesn't mean he had anything to do with the assassination . Hoover was never confirmed that he was, and frankly I doubt it, that's not the case .
 The question of whether Hoover was involved in the cover-up is another story, inasmuch as it was the FBI that was providing information to the Warren Commission .
 Hoover is an outstanding villain but his sole crime vis-a-vis the JFK assassination, I suppose, is that he was J Edgar Hoover . Hoover is a outstanding villain, but he was the FBI director who killed JFK JFK .
 Richard Nixon has become another bogeyman among JFK assassination theorists . There is no more evidence to link Nixon to the assassination any more than there is any evidence that links Hoover to it .
 It's an exciting theory, but that's all it is and let's keep that in mind . Let's keep it in mind. It's a theory but that is all it's .
 George Bush's name is also linked time and again to the assassination . It seems highly unlikely that Bush was part of any assassination planning . But apparently as part of his work for the ClA, he did have ties to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles .
 The full story of George Bush and his record of CIA intrigue has yet to be told, but it would be appropriate to explore Bush's possible ties to the assassination in the pages of Final Judgment . George Bush's record will probably never be told .
 Bush's connection to the JFK affair is a mystery, says CNN's John Sutter . Bush: "I'd like to throw out my own little theory about Bush's connections to JFK"
 This is sure to be controversial and I don't have any evidence to prove it, but I'll put it on the table for others to think about . I'm not sure if it's true, but it's a good idea, and I'm putting it to the table . This
 Bush and Phillips appear to have a similar appearance in photos . The two have been photographed together .
 This is all pure speculation and I'm not suggesting that there is any evidence to prove it . As I say, this is all speculation and there is no evidence that there's any evidence that proves it .
 There was a lot of speculation that Hunt was involved in the JFK assassination . Hunt may have been one of the famous ''tramps" photographed in Dealey Plaza shortly after the president's murder . Hunt was sued for libel by Hunt for libel .
 E Howard Hunt was one of those tramps, but not one of the tramps . Hunt was not a tramp, but he was a hero of the day, he says . Hunt is not convinced that Hunt was a real tramp .
 Photo purports to show Hunt picking up a bullet in Dealey Plaza immediately after the assassination . Hunt was shot in the head by the White House in 1963 . Hunt died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 Hunt is a suspicious character and he was mixed up in the intrigue surrounding the assassination as Plausible Denial and Final Judgment together prove . Hunt is the main character of the series .
 Hunt was one of the tramps, but, as I say, I don't believe it . Weberman and Michael Canfield allege Hunt was a tramp, but Hunt was not one .
 Chauncey Holt claims to have been the 'tramp' that everybody says is E Howard Hunt . Holt is not one of the tramps whose names appear in the Dallas police records .
 If these men were somehow involved in the assassination, it's not likely they were the actual triggermen . The men were not likely to be the real triggermen, however .
 JFK assassination researcher Robert Groden has published enhanced photographs of what is likely a gunman firing from the grassy knoll . The assassin seems to be wearing a policeman's uniform .
 "I really don't think the so-called tramps are of any real consequence in the end, but it's a nice diversion," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think the tramps will be of no real consequence"
 The men who were photographed in Dealey Plaza probably were just what they appeared to be . The men in the photo were probably not what they were looking for .
 I addressed this subject in Chapter 16 of Final Judgment but I'd like to comment further here . I addressed it in Chapter 17 of Final Judgement but I'm not sure if it's true .
 We don't know exactly where Hunt was at the time of the JFK assassination . Hunt was in the late 1960s and early '60s . Hunt is believed to have been at the center of the assassination .
 Hunt's answers during the libel trial were inconclusive at best . This is something that was never firmly established even during the Hunt libel trial . Hunt's questions under sharp cross-examination by Mark Lane were not firmly established . This was not the case during the trial .
 Hunt insisted that he was in the Washington, D.C. area (whether at home in the suburbs or at the office or downtown shopping at one or more points during the day) on November 22, the day of the assassination . Hunt insisted he was at one point in the D
 Former CIA associate Marita Lorenz says Hunt met with Cuban exiles the day before the assassination . Hunt never did address the allegation made under oath during the second trial .
 Jack Ruby, who killed Lee Harvey Oswald several days later, also visited them at that motel . Miss Lorenz said that Jack Ruby also visited her at the motel . Ruby killed Oswald in the hotel .
 Hunt in Dallas tied to intrigue involving CIA-connected individuals that were linked in some way to the assassination conspiracy . Hunt was in Dallas at the time of the Dallas assassination . Hunt had been involved in the CIA's most successful assassination of George Kennedy III .
 I'm not suggesting Hunt fired a gun at John F Kennedy or even in his general direction on November 22 . Mark Lane, for that matter, has never been charged with firing a gun .
 Hunt was in Dallas at least just prior to the assassination, Hunt says . Hunt was there at the time of the assassination . Hunt is believed to have been in Dallas, Texas, at least before the shooting .
 What he was doing there is the interesting story about which we know so very little . The story is so little, it's not quite clear what he did there .
 Joe Trento says Hunt was indeed in Dallas and Angleton likely sent him there . Trento is a sworn enemy of The Spotlight newspaper, once having to settle a libel suit against him by The Spotlight's publisher .
 Hunt was "a facilitator, so to speak, in the JFK assassination conspiracy," he says . Hunt was working as a facilitator in the assassination conspiracy, he says. Hunt was engaged in Dallas with some of the other people who were circling around Lee Harvey Oswald .
 It's very conceivable that Hunt had no idea that his mission in Dallas involved an actual assassination plot . Perhaps he was only involved in a ""dummy"" assassination plot that was manipulated and overtaken by outside forces and turned into the real thing .
 Frank Sturgis later told Lorenz that his team had been involved in killing the president . This doesn't necessarily indicate Hunt knew an actual assassination was in the offing, but it does .
 He put himself in the position where, after the fact, he looked guilty as Hell, considering the later testimony by Lorenz Lorenz . However, he put himself . into the position .
 Hunt later teamed up with Frank Sturgis during the Watergate fiasco that led to the ""assassination"" of another president . Angleton also teamed up in Watergate fiasco, and in Watergate, too, there was a distinct Israeli connection .
 Frank Sturgis was not only a CIA asset, but had also long been involved in Mossad intrigue . Crank into that the fact—as we now know—that Frank Strugis was also a CIA agent, and we find a very interesting set of wheels within wheels,
 Hunt was—and is a loyal CIA man and he's not admitting to anything one way or another . Hunt was a CIA operative, Hunt says . Hunt says he's "not sure" if he's admitting to any wrongdoing .
 Angleton's long-time deputy, Newton ""Scotty"" Miler, came to Hunt's rescue . Hunt needed a witness from the CIA in his libel trial, it was Miler .
 The CIA was initially planning to throw Hunt to the wolves and frame him for involvement in the assassination . Hunt was painted as a ""rogue operative" by his former CIA superiors . By the time his libel trial against The Spotlight came to pass that he and the CIA reached an accord and
 It appears that The Spotlight article unveiled the intended ""limited hangout"" aimed against Hunt that the operation was shelved . It appears because of the article that revealed the intended 'limited hangouts' were shelved, it appears .
 Recall that a ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter, ostensibly from Lee Harvey Oswald, popped up at the time that this operation was in its opening stages as the House Assassinations Committee was beginning its inquiry .
 If there's anybody who's alive today who knows what really happened in Dallas, it's undoubtedly Hunt . Hunt is undoubtedly the only person who knows the truth about what happened in the Dallas shooting .
 If Hunt should ever find the need or a reason to ""go public"" with ""what he knows,"" I do believe we might want to take what he says with a grain of salt .
 Hunt is a very skilled spy novelist and a prolific one at that, and if some publisher offered him a few million dollars to ""tell all,"" it's conceivable that Hunt—in collaboration with the CIA, or maybe just on his own, will come up with some fantastic story that
 I'm afraid too many people will be ready to believe anything Hunt says simply because he is who he is . I'm not sure Hunt will be able to be trusted because he's who he's . Hunt has been accused of being a racist .
 This could be the final linchpin for a last-ditch attack on Castro . Since the Soviet Union has gone out of business, it won't really matter very much whether Hunt blames them or not .
 Crossfire provides a comprehensive overview of all of the JFK assassination lore that was available at the time it went to press . Crossfire is a wonderful book and provides a wonderful overview of the assassination lore .
 I am hopeful that if Marrs re-issues Crossfire in an up-dated edition that he will mention the theory that appears in Final Judgment, if only to try to tear it apart . I am also hopeful that Marrs will mention that theory in a new edition .
 I hope that he will attempt to do it in a responsible fashion . If he is capable of so doing, he should be responsible for his actions . I hope he will be able to make a responsible decision .
 All in all, I don't think that Marrs comes to any real conclusions one way or another . All in the end, I think that is not a real conclusion .
 He hints that perhaps LBJ may have been responsible for the assassination . He also points a finger at the ""military-industrial complex"" but that's about it . He points out LBJ's involvement in the assassination, but also points out the military industrial complex .
 I would suggest that people read Crossfire before they even read Final Judgment because it is an outstanding compendium of the basic theories and findings regarding the assassination . Once you understand the gist of those theories, Final Judgment does indeed tie them together in a relatively simple theory .
 Many people have told me that they had read virtually all of the other books on the assassination but that mine was the one that truly did tie it all together and which provided the most comprehensive explanation of what really happened . "Many people have said they had . read virtually . all the other
 "I don't believe that the theory presented in Final Judgment essentially conflicts with the basic thesis that it was a combination of CIA and Mafia elements who were behind the president's murder," he says .
 The basic thesis there fits neatly into the scenario presented in Final Judgment . On the contrary, the main thesis there is not a doubt in the case, it's not the case .
 The so-called ""French Connection"" that others have sought to show was somehow evidence of CIA or even ""Mafia"" involvement points more distinctly to the Israeli Connection . My book, however, draws in an Israeli Connection that no one has ever addressed before, explains .
 It's clear to me that the other theorists don't frankly understand the meaning of the French Connection—that it is the Israeli Connection . "It's very clear to be clear that the others don't ... understand the ... the Israeli connection," she says .
 The French Connection relates directly to both the CIA and the Mafia and even directly to the office of CIA contract operative Guy Banister in New Orleans .
 Final Judgment is quite unique in that it explains how all of these seemingly diverse elements are tied together by the Israeli Connection . So Final Judgment was quite unique, it explains .
 Anyone who has read any book suggesting that it was some sort of CIA-Mafia conspiracy can now read Final Judgment and realize that there is nothing in Final Judgment that conflicts with that basic thesis . Anyone who reads Final Judgment can now accept that thesis .
 Final Judgment presents a more accurate view of the reality of the true nature of the Organized Crime Syndicate and the primary role Meyer Lansky played in the underworld . Final Judgment is also instructive in that it presents more accurate views of Lansky .
 Final Judgment, in that sense, is the first book ever to explore Lansky's connection to the crime of the century . Final Judgment is first book to explore the connection between Lansky and Lansky .
 Final Judgment presents an argument that no one who believes in the basic ""CIA-Mafia" conspiracy can reject out of hand . I firmly believe that Final Judgment .
 Those who reject it, I tend to suspect, are those who are afraid of the big picture . Those who do reject it are those with the 'biggest picture'
 The book shows that Israel had not only the means and the motive, but also the opportunity . Israel had all the components a good lawyer will need to win a successful murder conviction, the author says . Israel's murder conviction was the result of a murder conviction .
 One reader suggested that Final Judgment read like nothing less than a legal indictment . One reader, in fact, suggested it read like an indictment of the author .
 Israeli Mossad figure Yitzhak Shamir and French SDECE officer Georges deLannurien were involved in the conspiracy . After all, thanks to my French source I was able to pin down the secret roles of Mossad figures .
 Final Judgment presents a conspiracy that actually only involves a small number of people, author says . "I've said many, many times in answer to inquiries is that what I believe is unique is that Final Judgment is that it does present a conspiracy"
 Only a handful of people would have actually known that the president was going to be killed . That is, only a few people involved would have known that .
 All of the other people who somehow were brought into the conspiracy would not have even known the parts that they were playing in furthering such a conspiracy . The other people involved in the conspiracy wouldn't even know the parts of the conspiracy .
 Final Judgment is an important aspect of the theory that I present in Final Judgment . That, I think, is one of the theories that I presented in Final Judgement .
 The number of those involved in the conspiracy who actually knew that JFK was going to be assassinated was probably very limited indeed . Yet those who were ""in the know"" had vast resources at their command to influence substantially larger numbers of people who would never necessarily know that they were indeed participating in
 Israeli Mossad and the top levels of the CIA may have been involved in the conspiracy . The CIA's own reaction to JFK's policies was a reaction to their own policies, according to author .
 CIA and Mossad interaction with other power groups that were under the gun during the Kennedy administration . Not to mention, of course, organized crime .
 James Angleton of the CIA and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion may have been on the inside of the conspiracy . Others may also be on ""the inside"" as well as the CIA .
 Someone had to be responsible for recruiting the assassins, for laying the overall groundwork, determining where the assassination would take place and how it would be financed . Someone also had to lay the groundwork for the assassination .
 This, I tend to believe, was probably carried out by Yitzhak Shamir who was head of the Mossad's assassinations team . This is probably the case of Yitzak Shamir, who was the head of Israel's assassination team .
 Angleton contracted out assassins through his ally in French intelligence, Colonel Georges deLannurien . He, of course, would have worked closely with Angleton . We do know that he contracted out one assassin or team of assassins .
 The financing for all of this could have come from a wide variety of sources, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 An easily accessible source of quick, big, untraceable cash would certainly be the CIA and Mossad allies in the Lansky Crime Syndicate . The Lansky crime syndicate would be an easy source of easy, big money . The syndicate is believed to be a major source of
 Lansky himself, his mob associates, along with Mossad's Permindex front, all kept bank accounts at Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum's Banque de Credit Internationale in Geneva .
 It's possible Rosenbaum transferred money through Permindex board member Clay Shaw . Shaw was a paymaster of sorts in New Orleans, handing out money to Guy Banister and even Lee Harvey Oswald .
 The ADL actually uses middle-men to pay their ""fact finders,"" such as Banister and company, to disguise the source of the funds, court documents show .
 This illustrates how a wide variety of seemingly separate entities could have been used to finance the operation with no trace back directly to the CIA or the Mossad .
 The ADL does report to the Mossad, but it is unlikely that any Mossad money has even been transferred into the ADL's bank account .
 Funds for some or another part of the assassination set-up could have come from other sources . Funds could have been used to pay for the assassination of President Obama .
 Hunt did put up money that was used by Ruby in whatever function Ruby was carrying out prior to the assassination . Hunt did not give Hunt the money . Hunt may have put up the money to help Ruby carry out his function .
 Hunt may have been assured that the money was for an ""anticommunist"" demonstration the day of the assassination . Hunt may be assured that he received the money for an anti-communist demonstration . Hunt was killed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Ruby may have told Hunt that a group of anti-Castro Cubans, disguised as pro-Cubans, were going to stage some sort of "incident" to discredit Castro while JFK was in Dallas . Hunt may have even told Hunt of the plan .
 "I don't think it's far off the mark. Now all of this is pure speculation, of course, but it's not far off," he says .
 We've talked about initiation and coordination and about financing. We've also talked about planning and coordination, and financing, for the project .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was being set up and/or was inadvertently setting himself up as the case may be . That would specifically be those areas such as New Orleans and Dallas where Oswald was set up . Oswald's activities in Dallas and New Orleans may have been set up by Oswald .
 There were anti-Castro Cuban exiles being utilized at this level . There were also, of course, anti- Castro exiles .
 It's also likely that a number of potential patsies were being set up in various cities around the country . It's likely, as I've pointed out, that a possible patsy was set up .
 The facilitators, in these cities, would have no idea that they were being utilized in an assassination plot setting up the patsy . The facilitator, in cities such as New York City, would not have known that they would be used in the assassination plot .
 It seems unlikely that the conspirators were prepared to transport Lee Harvey Oswald back and forth around the country trailing JFK waiting for the right moment to strike .
 No, instead, there were other ""Oswalds" -- other patsies in place in those cities . No, there was other ""Osbergs" in place . Instead, instead of "Osberg" they were "other patsy"
 The assassination did not take place in those locations, the facilitators would not necessarily realize the real motivation behind the things that they had been instructed to do . And since the assassination did .
 For all of this, it's also possible, as I said, that there were even several other patsies being set up in Dallas or other places in Texas .
 There were not just "facilitators" operating around Lee Harvey Oswald and at his level . However, there were also those operating around Oswald . Oswald was not just 'facilitator'
 There were facilitators working around the impending victim of the assassination plot . There were also facilitators worked around the death of the victim .
 In circles around John F Kennedy there were those who were reporting back, most definitely to the CIA, about what JFK's plans were . Both in regard to critical high-level international matters immediately affecting the CIA and the Mossad, as well as where JFK was planning to visit .
 This would have been routine, since the CIA has long had its operatives planted throughout the executive branch . They have co-opted people not directly on the CIA payroll . This would be routine, of course, since they have long had operatives planted in the executive .
 These people reporting back to the CIA, obviously, would have no idea that they were being used to further the assassination conspiracy .
 Ultimately, I'm certain, it was Angleton at the CIA who was getting the ""need to know"" intelligence on JFK's activities .
 I use this just as a simple example of really how simple the process would be. I use it just as an example of how simple it would be .
 The person or persons who were utilized would never necessarily know they were being manipulated, nor even in retrospect would even realize that they had been manipulated . And the person or person who was utilized would not necessarily know it was being manipulated .
 We might add that there was another critical element at the facilitation level. We might also say that there were another critical elements at thefacilitation level . We are happy to clarify that this is not the same case.
 The month prior to the assassination, David Atlee Phillips, head of the CIA's Western Hemisphere desk, was responsible for laying the 'evidence' that Lee Harvey Oswald was meeting with a Soviet assassinations expert in Mexico City .
 The framing of the patsy at a particularly high level is an important part of the conspiracy . This was another important brick in the foundation of the . conspiracy .
 All of their actions could have been carried out without people even suspecting what was in the works .
 These assassins may not have even known the location of the other gunmen, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "These assassins may even know the locations of other gunmen," he says .
 The assassination coordination may have been so totally compartmentalized that the operations of the various teams may be conducted strictly on a need-to-know basis . The assassinations may also have been carried out on a 'need to know basis'
 There may have been other assassination teams brought to Dallas and set in place in the event that the strike in Dealey Plaza had to be called off .
 The fact that Frank Sturgis later told Marita Lorenz that his team was involved in the assassination is also of interest . The CIA man later told her that he had been involved with the assassination . Lorenz was killed by a plane crash in 1973 .
 Cuban intelligence says he was involved in arranging communications between hit teams . Sturgis never claimed to have been one of the actual shooters, but Cuban intelligence has said he helped coordinate communications .
 The people at the facilitation level could also have been utilized in helping the actual assassins escape . The people who assisted in the escape escape could have been used in helping them escape .
 Jack Ruby would have been an ideal facilitator used in manipulating members of the Dallas police force . Ruby would be a perfect facilitator to manipulate Dallas police officers . Ruby was killed by a Dallas police officer in 2008 .
 Tippit was killed when he refused to do his job, says author . He says he was probably one of the people involved in the killing .
 Perhaps Tippit was actually slated for execution for the purpose of pinning the crime on Oswald . And then, again, perhaps perhaps Tippits was actually pegged for execution . Perhaps the execution was intended to pin Oswald's murder .
 This certainly involved people in both the CIA and the FBI, not to mention other government agencies including even the Dallas police . This is not the first time this has happened in Dallas, Texas .
 Most of those involved might not even have even realized that they were engaged in actions designed to cover-up the truth . Most of the people involved might even have been unaware of their actions .
 We do know that James Angleton had an interesting guest in his office at Langley on the day of the assassination . Angleton's office was filled with interesting guests .
 It's obvious that they were together for hands-on, face-to-face damage control .
 This was a major operation and it was vital that these two key high-level conspirators be together in the event anything went awry . This was the first time the two key conspirators had been seen together in a major event .
 At this critical time communication by telephone or carrier pigeon was not ideal . "Communication by telephone and carrier pigeon is not ideal"
 In the end, had it not been for the powerful corrupt (and corrupting) force of the American media, the U.S. media, it would not have been so pervasive and lasted so long as it did . The pro-Israel lobby and the CIA are heavily influenced by
 The media reaction to Warren Commission critics is a telltale sign that Israel did have a hand in the assassination conspiracy . I truly do believe that the way the media reacted to the media reaction is a sign of Israel's involvement .
 Nobody ever mentions the influence of the Israeli lobby on the American media . Yet, nobody ever mentions it on the Internet .
 You can't look at the JFK assassination without seriously examining the role of the media in the cover-up . The media's role in the assassination is key to understanding the truth behind the assassination .
 Israeli connection to Israel is paramount, CNN's John Sutter says . "It does point to the Israeli connection, whether people want to admit it or not," he says .
 "I believe that I have found the solution," Dallas mayor says . "It incorporates all of the major thinking about what really happened in Dallas," he says .
 I have brought in the un-mentioned Israeli Connection, but that is indeed what ties all of the other theories together . The Israeli Connection is what is said to be the reason for the theory .
 There are so many people with so many pet areas of interest and expertise they inevitably end up in conflict with one another . However, the fact is that because there is so many experts, they inevitably conflict with each other .
 "The mystery has been solved as far as it is ever going to be solved," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Several JFK assassination study groups operate as "rivals" to one another, feuding and bickering with each other . It's ironic but there are several JFK assassination groups .
 I do have a wide-ranging background in a number of areas but I would not tout myself as an expert in any of that subject matter . I would rather rather be a broadcaster than a broadcaster . I do not think I'm an expert on any subject matter, but I'm
 "I have a good working knowledge of not only the history of the CIA and the Israeli Mossad," he says . "Organized Crime" is the subject of many questions, including the CIA, Mossad and Mossad .
 I am familiar with U.S. Middle East policy and of the foreign policy conflicts of the JFK administration . I'm familiar with United States Mideast policy . I am also familiar with JFK administration conflicts .
 The French conflict over Algeria played a critical role in the evolution of the JFK assassination conspiracy . And in the course of writing Final Judgment 1 availed myself of the available published research .
 "It's a sure bet that you will not find even another writer in the arena of the JFK assassination who has studied all of these areas as I have. Frankly, I would say that it's a certain bet that . You will not be able to find another writer who has
 Final Judgment will be released this week on Blu-Ray and Blu-ray . The film is the latest in a long line of films to be released worldwide .
 They have focused, instead, on Vietnam and on the Cuban conflict and, as a consequence, missed the big picture . They have . focused instead of focusing on the Vietnam and Cuban conflict, they have focused on the . big picture, they say .
 "It would be ideal if everybody could work together, but it will never happen. It would never happen," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Support for the state of Israel and its demands on the American taxpayers was not something that JFK was promoting during his presidency . However, the irony of the situation is that one of the pet liberal causes is that support for Israel is not something he was promoting .
 The JFK assassination has spawned a thriving mini-industry . Authors and publishers are at war with each other in the struggle for recognition and respectability .
 Film-maker Oliver Stone now plays a major role in this mini-industry, as I've pointed out . Oliver Stone plays a key role in the film industry .
 Stone is not about to promote anything that would even dare hint at Israeli involvement in the JFK book . Stone is known for his connections to Israel and his associates .
 Shapolsky Publishers was an affiliate of an Israeli publishing company . Shapolky Publishers has issued several JFK assassination books . The company was affiliated with an Israeli company .
 People hoping to get their books published don't want to express any opinions that might prevent their works from being shelved . They want to keep their opinions from being taken down .
 There was one firm, Carroll & Graf, that I twice attempted to interest in Final Judgment, both before the initial publication and after the publication of the second edition of the book . There was also an interest in the book by Carroll and Graf .
 The second time I wrote them I did get a letter back from Mr Carroll himself after I pointed out that I had not even gotten a formal letter of rejection . Mr Carroll said he was not even getting a formal rejection .
 His note was very curt saying, ""We can't use your manuscript at this time,” although since then he has issued a number of JFK assassination books . His note said, "We can’t use your book at this point"
 Harrison Livingstone's books have been bestsellers for JFK fans . They've also issued books by one rather unusual JFK writer named Harrison livingstone .
 "I'm certain that it wasn't because the book was an illiterate piece of trash. And I'm sure that it was, not because of the book, it was illiterate," she said . The book is now available on Amazon.com .
 There are personality conflicts, political conflicts and financial concerns that prevent JFK assassination theorists from either working together or exploring the thesis laid forth in Final Judgment . So, in the end, there are 1) personality conflicts .
 JFK's affair with Marilyn Monroe is a myth, many people believe . JFK had an affair with actress Marilyn Monroe, but it's not a myth .
 The chapter on the Cohen-Monroe-JFK connection was not critical to the thesis expressed in Final Judgment . The chapter is not critical of the thesis .
 The book could have been published without this chapter and it would not have detracted in any way from the overall thesis . The book was published without the chapter .
 Cohen did have a long-standing connection with Marilyn Monroe and it's interesting that his memoirs never once mention her .
 Cohen and Jack Ruby were very close and did have many mutual associates, including one Al Gruber . Cohen and Ruby were close friends and had mutual associates .
 It was Gruber whom Ruby was in contact with for the first time in about ten years just after the JFK assassination . Ruby met Gruber again just after JFK assassination just after that .
 Gary Wean believes that Gruber is the one who gave Ruby the order to "hit" Oswald . Wean says Gruber gave Ruby an order to kill Oswald . Gruber has been accused of ordering Ruby to hit Oswald .
 "I was frankly surprised by the number of people who did tell me that they didn't believe the stories about Marilyn Monroe and John Kennedy, inasmuch as I always believed the stories myself," she says .
 "I do know Gary Wean and I consider him a reliable source and felt it would be appropriate to include his information in the book"
 Jim Marrs, the author of Crossfire, has disputed the reliability of Gary Wean's allegations . He has suggested that his allegations are not credible, according to Marrs .
 Gary himself has pulled no punches in suggesting that there was Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination . Marrs is hesitant to give credence to Gary's allegations because Gary has no punches .
 It's interesting that the media has continually used the Monroe affair and other alleged affairs to downgrade JFK's reputation . JFK's alleged affairs have been used to downgrade his reputation .
 Even Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was trashed by the media in the wake of her husband's death and her re-marriage to Aristotle Onassis .
 Jacqueline had a ten-year live-in adulterous relationship with a married man, Belgian-born Jewish diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman, that was quietly kept under wraps during that decade .
 Tempelsman was painted as nothing less than a saint . Only after her death was it generally mentioned that the two had been living together . The two were painted as living together in the early 1900s .
 Tempelsman had long-standing ties to the CIA and the Mossad as a result of his ventures in Africa where both intelligence agencies have played a major role in recent years . This might have something to do with his ties to both agencies .
 Widow's affair with Tempelsman raised too many eyebrows about the affair . Widow's infidelity with Tempelman was not the first time she had an affair .
 Some, notably Michael A Hoffman II, have demonstrated quite a bit of Masonic imagery in events surrounding the assassination . However, some, notably . Michael Hoffman II have demonstrated some of the Masonic imagery .
 It's likely there was high-level Masonic support for the assassination, particularly since JFK was a Catholic . JFK was Catholic .
 Zionism and Freemasonry are both heartily anti-Catholic and do overlap in many areas of intrigue . Freemasonry and Zionism are also heartily pro-Catholic .
 The loudest advocate of the proposition that I should blame the Masons was a character who viciously attacked one of my sources, Gary Wean . Wean later launched an Internet campaign to defame me as well .
 This character, among other things, says that my ""real"" name is ""Bernard"" Piper—not true—and that JFK never had any extramarital affairs . This character also says that JFK had any affairs, not true, and that he never had an extram
 A character revealed to me in a letter that he was related to Ferenc Nagy, the Hungarian who was involved in Israel's Permindex operation which was most definitively an element in the JFK conspiracy . Well, considering all of this, it's interesting to note that this character
 This perhaps explains, at least in part, this character's ventilations . So this perhaps explains why this character is angry .
 Report: Why the British Kill U.S. Presidents and in that work, along with Dope, Inc. (which I did cite in Final Judgment) They outline the British intelligence connections of people such as, for example, Colonel Louis M Bloomfield, the chief executive officer of
 LaRouche has not pursued the Israeli connection far enough, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: 'I do not believe that they have pursued the Israel connection far too far'
 The LaRouche group suggests that the Mossad is an arm of the British Crown . Mossad has been accused of being a spy agency by the British government .
 "I don't buy that argument, but I don't feel I have enough information to dispute it," he says . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to dispute that," he adds .
 The Mossad, on its own, as an arm of the Israeli government, had good reason to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy . It was because of JFK's behind-the-scenes conflict with Israel .
 If the British did indeed want JFK out of the White House and if they did utilize elements in the CIA and the Mossad and Organized Crime to carry out the crime, they certainly had willing participants who had reason on their own to participate, whether or not the order came from Queen
 I don't always agree with the interpretations of the LaRouche organization, but their research is always worth examining on a wide variety of matters . I don’t always agree on the interpretations, but I think the research is worth examining .
 Oliver Stone's JFK script cites the LaRouche organization for some of the material relating to Permindex . Oliver Stone himself cites the organization in his published script of the film JFK . James DiEugenio cites them in Destiny Betrayed .
 There's no doubt about the fact that the CFR is an important arm of the Establishment . The CFR is a key part of the American Establishment, writes John Avlon .
 It's financed largely by the Rockefeller interests and their corporate allies . The Rockefeller interests are behind the creation of the Rockefeller Foundation .
 Foreign policy pressure group has staffed virtually every key post in every presidential administration since Herbert Hoover . It's an exclusive foreign policy group that has staffed nearly all key posts in every administration since Hoover .
 I have written extensively about the CFR over the years in other contexts . I have also written extensively on the CFR . The CFR is an important body of American culture in Washington .
 David Rockefeller, head of the Rockefeller empire and a leading CFR figure, was not aware that Kennedy was slated for assassination . For example, I seriously doubt that David Rockefeller was aware of Kennedy's assassination .
 The plot to kill JFK was an Establishment plot and Rockefeller is a part of that Establishment . Rockefeller is part of the Establishment, and Rockefeller should be proud of that, he says . Rockefeller was a major Rockefeller donor to the CIA . Rockefeller has a long history of conspiracy theories .
 I myself have ever referred to the CIA as ""the enforcement arm"" of the Rockefeller empire . I have ever called the CIA the enforcement arm" of the empire . The CIA was once called the "enormous enforcement arm"' of Rockefeller .
 The CFR is tied very closely to the European family Rothschild which has been a prime force behind the state of Israel . The high level financial forces that are behind the CFR are tied to the Rothschild family .
 The Bronfman family was an outgrowth of the Lansky Crime Syndicate . Likewise with the Canadian Bronfman Family . The family was also a part of a syndicate of crime syndicates .
 The Bronfman family is expanding its influence in the American media . Rockefeller's Rockefeller empire approved of Bronfman's efforts to expand his influence .
 Those who have suggested that the Rockefeller family considered the potential Kennedy Dynasty a rival to their influence and that is another factor to be considered .
 There is no doubt that the Rockefellers and their associates in the CFR would not stand in the way of a scheme to assassinate John F Kennedy .
 Mossad and the CIA are nothing more than the enforcement arms of powerful financial interests that also stand behind the Council on Foreign Relations . In the end the Mossad is nothing more . than the CIA, if truth is told, it is nothing less .
 CIA and Mossad ties to the intimate players involved in the conspiracy . However I don't find the suggestion that the CFR was behind the JFK assassination to be as precisely provable in the way that you can document CIA .
 Why don't you ever report on the findings of former British intelligence operative Dr. Dr. David Cameron? Dr. Cameron is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA .
 Coleman says that Permindex was the assassinations arm of the Committee of 300 . Coleman says PermIndex was the assassination arm of Committee . Coleman: "Permindex, which you talk about in Final Judgment, was an assassination arm"
 All references to Coleman's writings have been in books written by those who have reported on his work on the Committee of 300 . After that, all references I have seen have been written in books .
 Coleman is essentially Coleman is the only primary source on the existence of this group . Coleman is also a historian and author of a book about the group .
 "I don't dispute the possibility that there is such a committee in existence," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he doesn't doubt the possibility of there being a committee .
 I've written extensively on both groups, including a widely circulated report on the Trilateral Commission . John Sutter has written extensively about both groups .
 Coleman discusses a secret committee that Coleman discusses does exist . So it's conceivable that this secret committee does exist, Coleman says .
 Coleman has never exhibited any documentation that such a committee exists, although there is documentation about the Bilderberg Group . Coleman has also never exhibited no documentation that the committee exists . Coleman says the committee is not a committee .
 These are all interests that are apparent, that can be documented, and which people do readily understand . These interests are apparent—that can't be documented—and which can be easily understood .
 Coleman made some misstatements of fact that detract from his credibility, CNN's John Sutter says . Coleman's report on the JFK assassination, which I acknowledged earlier, was inaccurate, he says . Sutter: Coleman's credibility is at risk .
 If one of New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison's key witnesses against Clay Shaw, one Perry Raymond Russo, had been permitted to testify before the grand jury that this would have blown the JFK case wide open . For example, he states that if one of Garrison's . key . witnesses against
 Russo did testify and it was his testimony that led to Shaw's indictment . Russo testified against Shaw, and it led to his indictment . Shaw was charged with murder in the death of Russo .
 Coleman suggests Garrison's prosecution of Shaw was halted before it ever reached a grand jury indictment . Coleman suggests the prosecution was halted by Garrison before it reached an indictment . The prosecution was never charged with Shaw's crimes .
 This just is not true and this is an error that could cause people to doubt his credibility, considering that this is a basic fact that is very well known,’s not true . This is a very well-known fact that it is very common to say. This is not
 Coleman says Russo left for California before his testimony was ever heard . Coleman also says Russo's testimony was never heard . Russo left California before he was heard .
 Final Judgment never mentions evidence that on the Zapruder film of the assassination there is visible proof that Secret Service chauffer William Greer turned around and fired the fatal head shot at JFK using a pistol . Final Judgment does not mention evidence that in the film of JFK's assassination, Gre
 The pistol is clearly visible on the Zapruder film and has been widely shown around the world . This pistol is seen on the film and is widely shown in the U.S.
 Greer blamed himself for not getting the president's limousine out of line in time to prevent JFK from being killed . Greer was devastated by JFK's assassination and blamed himself. Greer is believed to have been devastated .
 In fact, Greer was probably somewhat to blame for the death of the president since his reaction time was slow, to say the very least . There would have been enough time to get the car out of the line of fire .
 Zapruder film is not showing William Greer or Roy Kellerman firing a pistol at the president . Greer was riding in the right-front passenger seat of the Kennedy limousine . Kellerman was in the passenger seat .
 Greer was being photographed by more than a handful of people at the time of the incident . Greer is believed to have been killed in a car crash in 2011 .
 It's inevitable that at least one of the witnesses on the scene would have indeed witnessed Greer doing this . Greer is accused of stabbing a woman to death .
 If Greer had done this, he would also have been witnessed so doing by Governor and Mrs. Greer . Greer would have been seen doing so doing in front of the governor and first lady .
 John Connally who were less than two feet from him and literally looking into his face . Connally was literally two feet away from him when he was killed .
 Greer would have been in the line of fire if Greer had fired the fatal head shot . Greer fired the shot at the scene of the shooting . The victims were in the middle of the firefight .
 The president was not looking at the president at the time his head exploded, CNN's John Sutter says . He says the president was looking at himself when the explosion occurred .
 I have seen the rendition of the Zapruder film by the promoter of this theory . I have also seen the original version of this film .
 I have seen the flash of light that appears to be a pistol and I can understand how somebody viewing the film would believe that they are seeing what they are told they're seeing . I have also seen a flash of . light that appeared to be . a pistol . I can see the
 It is evident that Mr Greer is turning and looking at the president just before the fatal shot, but you are most definitely not seeing him shoot the president .
 The Zapruder film is not a good quality film to begin with . Bear in mind that the Zapruders film isn't a great quality film . The film was released in 1945 .
 "It's shot at an oblique angle; it's shot hurriedly with a very shaky hand and there's a lot of motion on the film itself" "The film itself is shot at a very oblicty angle," director says .
 I saw the film years ago and I've seen substantially enhanced versions, both with and without the narration and graphics that have been added by the person promoting this theory . I saw it years ago .
 "What you really see is a flash of light. And it's very clear that what you are really seeing is light," says CNN.com.com .
 The sun reflects on the crewcut hair of the Secret Service agent, Mr Kellerman, in the sun .
 "I am amazed that the rumor has such currency. Both before Final Judgment was published—and after, I received a surprising number of inquiries about this matter . Both before and after the publication of Final Judgment, I had a surprising amount of inquiries .
 Lars Hansen initially believed the story to be true . Lars Hansen was one of the people who initially promoted the theory . Hansen had initially believed it was true .
 He repudiated his own previous stand on this matter and said he didn't believe it after investigating further . But he himself publicly repudiated himself .
 Hansen, who has disappeared, is angry at William Cooper, who continues to promote the theory . Cooper has distributed a copy of the Zapruder film without advising people that Hansen had repudiated the theory himself .
 William Cooper is promoting this theory that Hansen has repudiated . So it is indeed William Cooper who is promoting it . Hansen repudiated this theory .
 Cooper says he was privy to inside information about the assassination . Cooper says that he is a former intelligence officer and that he has inside information . Cooper: "I'm a former Intelligence Officer. I'm not afraid to say anything"
 If Greer fired the fatal shot, then that's misinformation and disinformation supplied by somebody else, perhaps even the real conspirators . That may well be true, but if his ""inside information" is the story that William Greer shot, it's not true .
 For people to get distracted and bogged down in this matter and researching it is a waste of time. For people who want to know more about it, it's a good thing to say. For us, research is a good idea. We need to know how to get around the
 I've devoted a great deal of time to discussing this ridiculous story if only for the reason that there are still many people who believe it, much to my surprise . I've dedicated time to the story, but I'm surprised that many people still believe it .
 The story would not discount the basic theory in Final Judgment for it could have been that Greer was part of the conspiracy that I outlined . I might add that even if the story were true, even if it were true .
 All of this is not to suggest that there wasn't some sort of Secret Service complicity or that some Secret Service agents were compromised, either before or after the assassination . It's not to say that some of the Secret Service officers were compromised .
 Even JFK himself said that if somebody really wanted to kill him, they could . I have no firm evidence one way or the other, but I do know that the president's public exposure was such that as even JFK said that .
 All in all, the conspirators really didn't need Secret Service complicity to accomplish their goal . "All in all," says the author of the book, "It's not a secret"
 There's a great deal of evidence that the government has been keeping this a secret for years . JFK was going to blow the lid off this high-level coverup, resulting in his assassination .
 I hasten to add that I have never disputed that there is much more to be learned about UFOs and other strange phenomenon that is not of our world or of this earth . "There is more to learn about UFOs," he says .
 There has been government research in this field. What's more, I've done a great deal of reading in this area. What is more? I do know that there has been Government research .
 JFK was about to reveal the existence of alien visits from other worlds, the claim says . It is the basis of the claim that JFK was due to reveal that he had been shot in the head .
 Many sincere people have never learned that the hoax story has been generally repudiated as a hoax . Despite this, many sincere people continue to give it credibility . Many people still give the story credibility .
 I think there are more down-to-earth reasons which sparked the JFK assassination conspiracy . Obviously, as I've suggested, I think it was more down to the truth .
 JFK may have had access to secret government information on this subject . JFK may also have had the intention of revealing it to the American people, he says .
 There was enough trouble convincing people that JFK had been a victim of a conspiracy . There's been enough trouble trying to determine who was behind the conspiracy . It's not easy to convince people to believe JFK was a victim .
 William Cooper has been a prime force behind promoting the theory that JFK was killed because he was about to reveal the existence of alien life forces visiting this planet . Cooper is the primary promoter of the theory "The Chauffer Killed JFK"
 Cooper has said that his ""inside"" sources from his years as an intelligence officer say that this is the reason that JFK was killed . The Secret Service chauffer, William Greer, was recruited by the conspirators, who wanted to keep JFK quiet about the alien visitors .
 I frankly regret that Mr Cooper has received such widespread publicity . Mr Cooper was the subject of much of the media coverage of the incident .
 After Cooper was gunned down following a confrontation with police officers in his home town, a lot of people took this as ""proof"" that Cooper was right all along, but it was anything but that . Cooper was shot dead by police officers after a confrontation .
 Cooper added confusion to the lore of the JFK assassination . Cooper's only thing he accomplished was adding confusion to JFK assassination lore .
 I have seen this quote appear in dozens of newsletters over the last 20 years . I have also seen it appear in hundreds of newsletters .
 If JFK did intend to reveal any such plot and inform the citizens of their plight, it seems logical to me that JFK would have waited until he got into his second term . Frankly, this type of rhetoric doesn't even sound like JFK .
 If JFK did indeed say this, it seems unlikely that the conspirators would have been able to rush into action within ten days to dispatch JFK to the great beyond simply because he made this ambiguous remark . What's more likely is that JFK didn't say this .
 No one ever quotes anything else other than that particular sentence from that purported speech . No one has ever quoted anything else from that particular phrase .
 The bottom line is that I don't believe that the statement was ever made in any public speech by President Kennedy . President Kennedy was president of the White House in 1961 .
 "This quote does nothing— absolutely nothing -- to advance research into the JFK assassination," she said . "I wish people would drop it altogether," she added .
 There are probably more people aware of this quote than there are who are aware of the allegations I make in the pages of Final Judgment . There is probably more than a million people who know this quote .
 Roscoe White, a now-deceased former Dallas policeman, was one of the assassins on the grassy knoll . White's son has come up with evidence suggesting that his father was a member of the assassin .
 If Mr White's father was involved in the assassination conspiracy, it has no immediate bearing on the thesis in Final Judgment . Final Judgment is based on the theory that Mr White was involved .
 Roscoe White could very well have been a CIA operative, as his son contends . He could have been one of the assassins, and he could have also been an assassin . White's son says he has no evidence contradicting either claim .
 If White was working for the CIA, it would indeed suggest CIA complicity . White is accused of being a CIA operative .
 CIA operative could have been recruited by Icelandic intelligence to carry out the crime, he says . After all, the CIA could be recruited by Iceland's intelligence .
 The Roscoe White puzzle is only a very small piece of the bigger puzzle . In the long run, however, it's only a small part of the larger puzzle, says White . White is not the only person in the world to solve the mystery .
 In your analysis of the JFK assassination, you contend that there was a French assassin involved in the crime . CNN's John Sutter says there was no doubt that the French assassin was involved .
 The French Connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy is very complex indeed, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says it's a very complex story .
 As I pointed out earlier, I did not fully understand the French Connection until after I had actually finished the first draft of the book in which I had made passing reference to the allegations of such a connection .
 It's important to analyze what the French Connection really is . To analyze the facts that are important, in order to clear away any confusion, analyze what it really is. The French Connection is important to understand .
 In the early 1960s French President Charles DeGaulle decided to grant independence to the French colony across the Mediterranean in Arab Algeria .
 Many French colonials in Algeria objected to DeGaulle's decision and considered it a betrayal . Many French colonists in Algeria (not the Frenchmen at home) objected to it .
 French Algerians considered DeGaulle's measure a blow to French national dignity . They were fearful that the indigenous Moslem Arab population would oppress the French Algerian population . The measure was passed by the French government .
 DeGaulle was head of the French government, but his own intelligence agency was divided over Algeria . The SDECE was heavily divided over the issue of Algeria .
 In the ranks of the SDECE there were many who had close ties to Israel's Mossad . DeGaulle’s own early close relationship with Israel stems from his early close ties with Israel . In light of the long-standing close relationship between the . SDEC
 Corsicans were heavily tied up in the international drug racket out of Southeast Asia . Corsican mob figures were key players in cementing the drug network set up by Meyer Lansky .
 French Corsicans were then later used by DeGaulle’s intelligence forces to fight against the OAS rebels . These Corsican were later later used in the fight against those rebels .
 French Corsicans were also used by the CIA to fight French communist influence in the post-war era in Europe in Europe .
 James Angleton was Mossad's man at the CIA, whose Mossad desk was responsible for coordinating the CIA's relations with these Corsican Mafia figures .
 The OAS was composed of loyal Frenchmen who were, however, disloyal to Charles DeGaulle . OAS members of the French were loyal to the French, but were disloyal . The French was a major ally of the British Empire .
 This inevitably ties back to James Angleton who maintained close ties in French intelligence . Angleton himself maintained long-standing close ties with French intelligence in the 1950s .
 Israel had ties to both the anti-DeGaulle OAS and to the Corsican Mafia . Corsican mafia was working to fight the OAS on behalf of Degaulle . So you had an unusual configuration .
 Both the OAS and the Corsicans engaged in business deals with CIA-and Mossad-connected drug smugglers in the Lansky syndicate . So you had both the . OAS . Corsicans . engaged in . business deals .
 DeGaulle's own intelligence agency arranged work in international covert action for OAS men who were then in exile . In the end there was a truce between the OAS and the French government .
 Some of them were even deployed into the CIA's operations in the Caribbean involving the Cuban anti-Castro efforts . Some of the CIA operatives were deployed to Cuba .
 CIA fingerprints are found in the activities of the OAS and the Corsican Mafia . Mossad, Mossad and Lansky syndicate were involved in OAS's activities . The CIA and Mossad are also involved in Corsican mafia .
 It's an inter-connecting series of events and personalities that stem directly from the internal French conflict over Algeria . It's a series of interconnected events that stem from the French conflict in Algeria .
 It's anybody's guess as to whether it was an OAS assassin or a French Corsican assassin who was ultimately deployed into Dallas . It's not known if it was a French assassin or an assassin deployed in Dallas .
 There are so many French connections that go to Dallas, including an American gun-runner . Thomas Eli Davis I1I had ties to the OAS, but also to Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby was also a gun runner .
 Final Judgment offers a more complete overview of what the French intrigue was truly all about and how it was indeed linked to the JFK assassination .
 No other JFK researcher has examined the French Connection in the detail I have . We will probably never know the exact specifics, but absolutely no other JFK researchers have examined the details .
 To fully examine the French Connection is to divine the Israeli Connection . But to fully examine it is to find out what is the French connection to Israel .
 At one point during the writing of Final Judgment I was so frustrated by trying to make all of this complex material understandable that I pondered the possibility of not mentioning it at all . "I pondered whether I should not mention it all," says author .
 I realized that I would be doing a disservice not only to the readers, but also to myself . However, he realized that he would be wrong to do so . He said he would not be doing any harm to readers or myself .
 The detailing of the ""French Connection"" is the icing on the cake, readers have suggested .
 It is ""The Skeleton Key"" most people have seen and which most talk about—not the files themselves . It is most people talk about the files, not the files; it is the key .
 The so-called "Skeleton Key" is a fanciful compendium of a wide variety of inter-related conspiracy theories centered around the JFK assassination . It is rife with things that are either so obviously in error or so outlandish that they are not worth commenting upon .
 There may be grains of truth in ""The Skeleton Key’ but they are nothing so highly significant that they even deserve the attention I am giving them here . There may have been a grain of truth, but it is nothing so significant that it deserves the attention .
 One version of the Skeleton Key made mention of a Mossad connection to the JFK assassination . One version I obtained actually mentioned Mossad connections to JFK .
 Who put it there—or laundered other to delete the Mossad references is a good question . Who put the references there? Who put them there?
 Some panty-waist ""conspiracy theorists"" feared mentioning the Mossad for fear of accusations of anti-Semitism may have been responsible for deleting the reference . The reference was removed from the site .
 I first became aware of "The Skeleton Key" when I saw a xerox of it when it appeared in my office many years ago . I became aware when I first saw it in a xxerox  when it was in the office .
 It's a single-spaced document of about twenty pages that suggests that the real head of the world-wide crime syndicate was Aristotle Onassis . The Kennedy family worked with the Kennedy family, the document says .
 ""The Skeleton Key"" has been subsequently reprinted in a number of editions containing extensive ""documentation,"" supplementary newspaper articles making reference to material in the Skelton Key .
 One volume takes the Skeleton Key apart line by line and provides reprints of magazine and newspaper articles that refer to the material in the Key . One such volume has been published several years ago .
 For example if there is a reference to one of Aristotle Onassis’ business dealings, there may be an article relating to that subject . For example, there is an article about the business dealings of Onassis .
 It proves nothing other than to reprint a raft of old news articles, it proves nothing more than to print old ones . And it proves that it proves absolutely nothing else than that .
 There is an incredible infatuation with the Skeleton Key, says the author . Yet, as I say, there is still an incredible .
 Final Judgment.com challenges those who spent such time devoted to this subject to do likewise with Final Judgment . I would challenge those who have spent such a lot of time dedicated to the subject .
 Conspiracy theorists debate Gemstone material virtually ad nauseum in the pages of conspiracy-oriented publications . I've seen theorists debating the Gemstones material virtually . I'm not convinced of Gemstone theory .
 The much-touted Grande Dame of Conspiracy Theorists, Mae Brussell, helped popularize the Skeleton Key . She had a type of cult following .
 Brussell seemed to find a Nazi under every rock and that has an appeal in some circles . Brussell seems to have found a Nazi in every rock .
 This false claim about Lane (since withdrawn and repudiated by the publisher) was based on disinformation (much of it generated by the CIA) that has been deliberately circulated over the years to muddy the waters into JFK assassination research further .
 Many reasonably intelligent people have put so much time and energy into the matter (and even made a little money in the process), it has indeed taken on a life of its own . But, additionally, because so many people have spent so much money on the matter, it has taken on
 The document is said to have been written by a Texas attorney with connections to high-level political figures . The document has indeed been read by many people .
 It's an informative document that does touch on Clay Shaw's connections to Permindex . But it never mentions the Israeli connection even once .
 The document contains just enough untruthful information to lead me to believe it was prepared as deliberate disinformation . However, I have to say that the document contains too much of the information, or otherwise leaves out pertinent information .
 It has been said that the document came into the hands of Jim Garrison at the time of his investigation of Clay Shaw . It may have indeed have been part of the reason why at times the Garrison investigation seemed to go off in many different directions .
 Document also suggests Permindex may have been a ""Nazi"" operation, but nothing could be further from the truth . Document also suggested PermIndex was a 'Nazi' operation .
 Jack Ruby was of White Russian descent, hinting that the anti-communist White Russians were behind the assassination and the killing of Lee Harvey Oswald . The contention that Ruby was a White Russian is off-base at least .
 There is another even more significant error in the document that essentially has the effect of whitewashing the Israeli connection .
 Ed Reid's book does not refer to "Credit Suisse" at all, it says . Ed Reid did not write about Credit Suisse .
 Reid never suggests that Reid was a subsidiary of the other, nor does Reid ever suggest as much . Neither was the subsidiary of either, nor did Reid suggest it .
 'Underground' documents have a greater credibility among some people than things that are more aboveboard . The documents are one of these ""underground" documents .
 In his book, Called to Serve, Colonel Bo Gritz relies on this document . Many of those who have read the book or heard Gritz speak have had their views shaped by this document of unknown origin .
 "The fact that the document has such widespread devotion continues to amaze and puzzle me at the same time," she says . The fact that . the document . continues to be amazed and puzzle, she adds .
 "I never once referenced it in the pages of Final Judgment. That's one reason why I didn't once reference it," he says . "That's one of the reasons I never referenced it"
 King's accused assassin, James Earl Ray, in several of his legal battles and Gregory, like Mark, has investigated both the JFK and King assassinations . 2) Orders To Kill by William Pepper, an attorney who has been representing Ray in recent years .
 "I had some correspondence with Ray over the years and once had the opportunity to speak with him over a radio show," he says . He says he had a chance to speak to him over radio show .
 "It's one of the most dramatic books I've ever read, because it's written in Ray's own words," says author . "Ray's story is written in his own words. It's a very dramatic book," he says .
 There are connections between people tied to Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans Mafia boss, to the King assassination . King was killed in the assassination of JFK in 1968 .
 There are indications of American intelligence involvement on many, many levels . And needless to say there are also indications of U.S. intelligence involvement .
 Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith spied extensively on Dr. Dr. Avlon . Mossad's U.S. conduit, the Anti-defamation League, spied on him, he says . The Mossad was responsible for spying extensively
 There was intense hostility to Dr. King, one cannot help but think that there were intense hostility toward him .
 Dr. King's life was turned over to the FBI in the 1960s and '60s . Dr. Martin was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi, in 1968 . The FBI was involved in the death of King, but the FBI has never been involved .
 We should not discount the idea that the Israelis likewise had a hand in King's assassination in light of the ADL's complicity in waging war against the Black leader . The ADL has been complicit in the assassination of King . We should also consider the possibility that the Israeli government had a
 King was most assuredly not a victim of a Ku Klux Klan or ""hate group"" conspiracy . King was not a member of the KKK or a hate group group .
 He was a victim of an Establishment conspiracy and probably for the very reason that he was rocking the Establishment's boat . He was the victim of a conspiracy against him, says the author .
 King threatened to bring the Black community out from under the heel of powerful forces within the Establishment who preferred to keep Blacks under control . King (along with another Black leader, Malcolm X) also slain, like King, under mysterious circumstances .
 There are more than a few who suspect that organized crime, too, may have played a role in the King assassination conspiracy . The criminal underworld was making billions off the Black community through drugs, gambling, prostitution, prostitution and labor racketeering .
 King's push for Black self-assertion was a threat to Lansky and his cronies, as well as their partners-in-crime in the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency . Both entities have been rife with mob-influenced corruption .
 King's growing respect among Third World leaders was a distinct threat to the CIA's international intrigues . King's respect for the Third World was a threat to CIA, author says .
 Those who take a negative view of Martin Luther King need to be reminded of King's legacy . King was assassinated in 1968 .
 William Pepper's books suggest there is some sort of Israeli connection, perhaps, that there are some leads that haven't been followed through, Pepper says . Pepper: "I have, though, discovered some interesting items in [Pepper's] books that do suggest some interesting things in William
 "I will say, up front, that I realize that this statement is going to cause a lot of people to say, ""Oh come on now. I will say this statement," says CNN.com .
 Piper's not satisfied with finding an Israeli connection to the JFK assassination . Piper: "I'm not satisfied" with finding Israel's involvement in JFK's assassination .
 Jack Ruby and James Earl Ray's ubiquitous handler, ""Raul,"" was Mossad-linked arms smuggling operation . The operation was active at the time of the JFK assassination .
 In his first book Orders to Kill, on page 435, William Pepper describes his inquiries into the background of Canadian Eric S Galt whose identity James Earl Ray adopted during part of his wide-ranging travels . Galt was Galt's identity .
 The warehouse he ran housed an extremely top secret munitions project funded by the CIA, the U.S. Naval Surface Weapons Center, and the Army Electronics Research and Development Command .
 Russell: FBI later determined that Oswald's signature was not Oswald's . Russell: The FBI determined that this was not the signature of Oswald . Russell says the FBI determined Oswald had not signed Oswald .
 James Earl Ray was steered into the use of the identity of a real life individual who did indeed have ties to Israel and its ""scientific and technical"" research . The research points in the direction of nuclear development, Ray says .
 Real-life Galt was linked to the ""scientific and technical division"" in Israel . Note, likewise, that the real-life Galt was linked to the ""scientific and technical division"
 Galt's company was indeed linked to Union Carbide's nuclear division . Note that Galt was linked to the nuclear division of his company .
 The King assassination is linked to Israel's involvement in the King assassination . King was assassinated in 1968 . King's assassination was linked to the Israeli assassination . The assassination was the first assassination of the King in Israel .
 JFK's conflict with Israel over nuclear weapons development is very interesting in light of what we know about the conflict . And that, of course, was very interesting .
 Pepper says there's even a ""French connection" that Pepper describes . Pepper says the story has a French connection, also involving Israelis .
 Pepper met with Pierre Marion, the former head of the French SDECE to seek out French assistance in uncovering information about the King assassination . Pepper reports that he met with Marion to seek French assistance to uncover any information .
 Pepper concluded that the French officer had concluded that some part of the U.S. intelligence community had been involved in the King assassination . Pepper apparently never considered the possibility, instead, that perhaps French and Israeli intelligence, in fact, had some connection .
 Pepper: "Sometime afterward France went through a turbulent change of government. In any event, according to Pepper, it was a turbulent period . Pepper: The French president was assassinated in 1968 .
 Marion's inside sources became very nervous about discussing anything sensitive . Marion's sources became nervous about talking about anything sensitive. Marion's friends and family members were very nervous .
 Pepper might have gotten more information about the King assassination if he would have asked his friends in French intelligence to ask their friends in Israeli intelligence to turn over their files on Dr. Martin Luther King .
 Ray addresses his suspicion that his mysterious handler ""Raul"" may have been traveling in the company of a figure that Ray believes may be financier David Graiver . Ray believes that Graiver may be in the presence of a mysterious figure in his travels .
 Ray knew that the looting of ABT by Graiver was determined to have been a classic mob-style ""bust out" in which the funds stolen from ABT were used to finance Israel's secret nuclear arms program .
 Many savings and loans debacles of the 1980s were, in fact, covert operations designed to provide funds to Israel's nuclear and national defense programs . In fact, according to sources such as J Orlin Grabbe and others, many of the savings and loan debacles were covert operations
 Ray Ray has linked David Graiver to the Martin Luther King assassination conspiracy . Ray's comments are interesting in light of Ray's link to the King assassination .
 Ray definitely remembered to end with the numbers ""8757"" and vaguely remembered to begin with ""866,"" but he wasn't certain . One of the numbers, in New Orleans, ended with the number "8757," but Ray wasn't quite certain . Ray definitely remembers to end
 Ray was obviously talking about King taking a stand that would upset the ADL, although he was talking around the subject without stating it directly .
 Weberman himself went to efforts to discredit Ray's findings, saying that he determined that another ""3757"" number in the New Orleans area, beginning with ""833" was traced to a motel where New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello maintained an office . Weberman said that he
 The motel number had been called by David Ferrie, linked to the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination, so that does indeed make, at the very least, an unusual connection between the two assassinations that seems to have gone un-noticed .
 David Ferrie, Guy Banister and Clay Shaw were involved in the assassination of Martin Luther King in New Orleans . Mossad connections to the JFK assassination did swirl around the activities of David . Ferrie and David . Banister .
 The King family has been under heavy media attack for having dared to come to the defense of James Earl Ray . This in itself is unusual, considering the previous favorable coverage of that family .
 Media attacks on the King family may relate to possible Israeli connections to the King assassination . We need not rehash the extensive influence of the Israeli lobby on the American media, but in the context of the information outlined here, we might logically conclude that these media attacks may relate .
 The death of John F Kennedy Jr. in a plane crash in 1999 added fuel to the fire started by Final Judgment in the death of Kennedy's father . Final Judgment was the result of an investigation into Kennedy's death .
 A real Mossad connection to the JFK Jr. tragedy emerged quite openly in the press . For my own part, I was quite frankly surprised when I was surprised when a very real ""Mossad connection"" to the . JFK Jr.'s tragedy emerged .
 Some conspiracy theorists thought Mossad had ordered Kennedy's assassination in order to stop the article from being published . But not me, I might add, but not me .
 Many publications (even in the mainstream media) have published critical articles about the Mossad . The Mossad has been accused of spying on Israel .
 In fact, there's another aspect to the Mossad angle that's far more provocative and one which most have missed . Most have missed, however, that's not the case, but it's the case of Israel . Mossad has been accused of being behind the murder of Americans in
 Kennedy approached Heymann about doing a story for George on the Mossad, Heymann says . Heymann: Kennedy had asked Heymann to do a story on Mossad . Kennedy had approached Heyman about doing the story, he says .
 Kennedy's death was either his fault or, effectively, that of his wife Carolyn's . Mossad claims of this Mossad figure were the primary media foundation for the insistence that his death was an accident .
 Heymann's own detailed transcription of his conversation with Heymann included Heymann . Heymann: "I Feared Flying Into Vineyard" Heymann also included a detailed transcript of the conversation between Heymann and Heyman .
 Heymann claimed he took extensive notes on Kennedy for use in possible future books . Heymann said he took notes of Kennedy's conversations with him for possible future work .
 JFK Jr. didn't feel secure about Martha's Vineyard airport; he didn't want to fly there; and he felt he had to do it because his wife insisted he drop off her sister there before going to Hyannis airport .
 Kennedy hadn't even finalized his flight plans at the time that Heymann claims he spoke to Kennedy . Heymann says Kennedy had not yet decided on his flight from New York to Washington .
 The bottom line is that Heymann's story was disinformation in the first place, says CNN.com.com . Heymann: "I'm not sure what happened to Heymann, but I'm sure it was disinformation."
 Adams and Goldman dared to suggest that Heymann's claims may have been Mossad-sponsored disinformation . Neither, Adams nor Goldman, however, dared to say that Mossad's claims were Mossad .
 Israeli chauffeur's version of events dovetails quite nicely with Mossad man David Heymann's tale . In fact, the Israeli chauffur's account of events doesvetails nicely with that of Heymann .
 Chamish has suggested that John Jr. may indeed have heard about Final Judgment and that this is what stimulated his interest in the Mossad . Chamish: John Jr.'s interest in Mossad may have been sparked by his knowledge of Final Judgment .
 Chamish himself has written a highly complimentary review of Final Judgment . We'll probably never know for certain, although, as we've seen, Chamish has himself himself .
 Forward, one of the most influential Jewish newspapers in America, was on the stands when JFK Jr. died . Forward was featuring an item bellyaching about the activities of young Kennedy's grandfather, the late U.S. Ambassador to Britain, Joseph P Kennedy . In the meantime, perhaps
 Heymann also alleged that RFK's wife, Ethel, now the reigning matriarch of the surviving Kennedy clan, once told a Jewish publicist that "it's your people who are giving us all the trouble" when her husband was running for the Senate .
 On July 21, 1999 John (587) Questions & Answers Podhoretz's essay, which is very hard to find, was pulled in response to public outrage . The essay was pulled out of print after it was published in 1999 . It is interesting to note that on July 21
 Podhoretz penned a column entitled ""A Conversation in Hell,"" putting forth think about the Kennedy family . This essay does indeed say what many defenders of Israel really do the first place)
 The eighth circle is for the fraudulent and the ninth for the treacherous . After all, the eighth circle was for the dishonest and the treacherous, the ninth circle is .
 You were pretty treacherous most of your life, what with your compulsive philandering and double-dealing . And you've been pretty treacherous in your own life .
 I can’t tell you how it filled me with pride just to know you back when you were America’s ambassador to England, saying all those nice things about Hitler, doing everything you could to prevent Jewish emigration from Nazi Germany .
 "It did my ancient heart a bit of good to hear just how ruthless you could be," she says of her friend .
 You were such a tough negotiator it was fun doing business with you. And you were such an tough negotiator, it would have been fun to do business with him. It was fun to work with you, he says .
 You wanted access to power and for you that meant marrying the daughter of the mayor of Boston . You wanted to marry the mayor's daughter of Boston.
 You wanted to remain attractive and alluring to the world’s most glamorous women . You also wanted to be alluring and attractive .
 You had affairs with Gloria Swanson, Gloria Swanson and many other stars and starlets . Done; you became a motion picture executive and had affairs .
 You wanted wealth beyond the wildest dreams of any other Irish Bostonian . You wanted to be rich beyond any other Bostonian. That's not true .
 Done; you were a millionaire many times over, and lost none of it when the Great Depression hit . Done; . You were never lost any of your money when the Depression hit. Done .
 Ambassador to the Court of St. St. Louis was the most glamorous job in government at the time . He was given the title of ambassador to the court in St.Louis .
 You dotted the “1’s, you crossed the ‘t’” You did everything in your power to maximize your part of the deal and minimize mine. Done as well .
 You believed your soul was so valuable that it was worth the exchange . Like all mortals whose most distinictive quality is their unbounded sense of self, you believed yourself .
 When aI make a deal for a soul like yours — so unyielding in it sense of entitlement, so sure that the world should bow before it, so damned tough — its raw to me, like uncooked meat . But when a person like yours is willing to make a
 I need to season it, to pound on it a bit so that it becomes tender . Brown it on the fire before I am ready to put it in the infernal oven .
 You said so little about your daughters in contract that I felt free to toy with them a little. You said little about them in contract . You said . I felt like I was playing a game with your daughters, I said .
 You seemed to be getting over young Joe’s death so well that I felt I needed to remind you of it by sending your daughter Kathleen down in another plane crash a few years later . Kathleen was killed in a plane crash in 1981 .
 "I reminded you there was Jack, beautiful Jack, the one you rode so hard," she said . "Beautiful Jack" was Jack's "beautiful Jack," she added .
 You were so triumphant with Jack’s victory and all that I tried to let you know that things weren’t going to work out like you planned again . I told you that things were going to go out like they planned again. You were .
 You didn't listen, you just wouldn't listen to the idea that Teddy might do it — Teddy, the least of your boys . And you didn’t listen, just wouldn’ve listened, she said. Teddy, Teddy, was the least .
 Every time you think your family is on it s way back to glory, I just have to do something . So every time . think the deal is done, every time you . think your . family is going to be back in glory, he says . 'Every time . you think
 This book began with an extended essay about the controversy over Final Judgment . It is perhaps fitting that it should conclude with this essay on the same topic .
 This ""final word"" is admittedly more about what has happened to Michael Collins Piper as a result of writing Final Judgment than it is about what happened to John F Kennedy .
 There are limitations on what one may—or may not—say in the debate over controversial issues such as the JFK assassination . Still, though, I think the readers will find it enlightening, for it all really does demonstrate that there are limitations in what can be said .
 Final Judgment is not going to go away, but it's not going away . The bottom line, though, is that Final Judgment will not go away .
 As much as the Israeli lobby may hate to admit it, the genie is out of the bottle . Israeli lobby hates admitting it, but it's good news for Israel . Israel has a long history of anti-gay laws .
 The future of Final Judgment will largely be a series of efforts to repudiate its thesis, but based on the efforts thus far, it doesn't seem likely that there is anybody out there who will be able to do it . The reason may well be because the book is so very much
 Final Judgment is, by no means, a demolition of the Warren Commission Report . Final Judgment will not be a demolition on the Warren Report, but it will be a re-reading of it .
 Final Judgment is simply filling in the missing pieces of the puzzle—providing the missing link in the chain—demonstrating what's hidden on the other side of the jigsaw puzzle . Final Judgment will be released on October 26 .
 We've known for a long time now that there was a conspiracy in the JFK assassination, and that it reached some very high levels . The JFK assassination was a big one, and it was a very high level conspiracy .
 "Salandria may be right. And, frankly, in looking at the big picture, I'm afraid Salandria might be right"
 There is indeed strong evidence that Israel and its intelligence service, utilizing its own resources, and collaborating with its allies in the CIA, played a major role in the crime of the century . They just simply refuse to address the cold, hard fact that there is indeed .
 The author of the censored article (a reader of Final Judgment) responded to his editor with a very interesting letter, which I am sharing with the readers of Final Judgement . The writer of the letter shared it with me. However, the author of this article has not been allowed to
 Oswald did not do it; there are Jewish fingerprints all over the crime; and the Jews involved could not and did not act alone, but were part of a much broader conspiracy involving elements of the Secret service, CIA, FBI, Justice Department, Dallas Police, Texas establishment, and Cuban
 The result has been a widespread and continuing denial of Jewish involvement in the assassination . It has grown now to include vicious attacks on the Kennedy family, including attacks on Kennedy family .
 There is also a hidden terrain beneath the Kennedy assassinations that no one is talking about . The secret terrain, the obscure terrain, is the obscure, unacknowledged landscape underlying the JFK assassinations .
 The myopic fear of mentioning Ruby's Jewishness has divided the research community from the beginning . Ruby's connections to Israel and international business and criminal syndicates, and inward to the Dallas Police and to judges and politicians, have bedeviled and divided the community . Ruby was murdered in
 The letter puts the matter in perhaps even better perspective than Final Judgment itself . And, if anything, this letter probably puts it in perhaps better perspective .
 On September 7, 1997, she posted a message on a JFK discussion group on the Internet bragging of her efforts to stop me from speaking . She posted the message to a group of JFK discussion groups on the Web .
 I wrote a letter to the editor of the Times, with copies to the college president and board, but it was not published . I wrote it to the editors, but the Times did not publish it .
 I live in Orange County, California, and I have also pledged to picket with the college professors and the Anti-Jewish Defense League against the seminar . The seminar will be held at the Orange County College of California .
 There are many groups, countries, and persons who could be blamed for President Kennedy's assassination . Knowing that President Kennedy lead us in such turbulent times, there are many who could have been blamed for his assassination .
 Final Judgment put all of the data together that people actually started thinking that Israeli involvement was a real possibility . Final Judgment: It wasn't until Final Judgment realized that people started thinking about Israeli involvement in the bombing .
 Conway admits, in a way, that there could indeed be an Israeli motive in the sense that there were ""many groups, countries and persons"" who could be blamed .
 Conway's JFK-Lancer operation gave her Hell for taking this stand . Conway says she's grateful Conway's followers contacted her and gave her hell for taking her stand .
 Debra Conway's meanspirited demagoguing notwithstanding. Conway's demagogues notwithstanding. In the end, there were some heartening aspects of that otherwise ugly controversy in Orange County .
 "Many good citizens stood up in our defense. During the midst of the ADL's effort to silence me and to destroy Steve Frogue," Frogue says . Frogue: "During the middle of the campaign, people stood up to defend us"
 A certain couple, ""Joe"" and Ethel Hunt, had been forceful critics of the ADL's antics, appearing at the college board's open meetings to speak out in defense of the First Amendment .
 The ADL is more than welcome to have the likes of Debra Conway on their side . Conway is a longtime supporter of the ADL .
 Americans owe a lot to people like Joe Hunt and his lovely wife who really do fight for freedom . Hunt and Hunt are a real family man, Hunt says . Hunt's wife is also a hero, Hunt said .
 Debra Conway was just the tip of the iceberg as far as efforts by self-styled JFK assassination ""truth seekers"" to discredit me . In any case, the efforts by Debra . Conway were just the . tip of . the iceberg .
 Robert Harris operates his own JFK assassination web site on the Internet . Perhaps my most dedicated critic was one dedicated critic of the assassination .
 Harris had a reputation for being "hard-headed,"" even his critics would agree that, by and large, Harris was quite sincere in his dedication to finding out the truth about the president's murder .
 Harris lost all objectivity on the subject of possible Mossad involvement . But when it came to the subject, Harris lost his objectivity .
 Harris repeatedly made the false and malicious accusation that Final Judgment blamed ""the Jews"" for the Kennedy assassination . The book actually rejects that thesis altogether, as any reader knows full well, .
 At one point he even asked ""I wonder exactly how many black and Jewish friends Mr Piper has in total"" and actually expressed outrage that I refused to list them by name .
 "I got so frustrated that I broke down and told Harris that one of my two godsons just happens to be an African-American child," he said .
 At one point, Harris tried to link me to the Columbine shooting, not knowing at that point that the one shooter happened to be Jewish . Harris: Harris suggested the two disturbed young men had been inspired by evil ""anti-Semites"" like me .
 The constant and frenzied name-calling by Harris reached that point that even one Jewish news group participant, Dave Reitzes, even challenged Harris by pointing out that criticism of Israel is not anti-Semitism . Even one of Harris' critics said criticism of Israeli government is anti-
 Another news group participant, Keith Bruner, came to my defense in defiance of Harris saying, ""Piper does not claim to have indisputable proof that the Mossad was involved,"" rather than by reckless name-calling .
 In another posting, Bruner said, "Read his book, then attack him about his conclusions and evidence he presents"
 The fact is that I sent Harris a complimentary copy of the book, despite all his attacks on me, he still never once posted any item attempting to refute anything that I said in the book . Harris never once tried to refute any of the things he wrote about .
 Even if Israel had wanted JFK dead, there was no need for them to take the risk of actively participating . If there was a slip-up and their participation was exposed, Israel would have been virtually doomed . Even if they had wanted to kill JFK, they would be virtually doomed,
 "It is not out of the question that we could have even declared war against them," says President Obama . "We could have declared war on them," he says .
 Clearly, this argument against Mossad involvement in the conspiracy simply does not wash . Clearly, the argument does not seem to wash .
 The Mossad was insulated from exposure through its widespread contacts in the media, and through its collaboration with the CIA . The Johnson administration and the Warren Commission tried to keep the truth under wraps, he says .
 Under LBJ, LBJ had a dedicated long-time ally in the White House, one who had benefited directly from JFK's assassination . What's more important is that Israel benefited from the assassination of JFK .
 "There was never any question that—if I am correct that the Mossad was involved, as I believe it was -- the truth about Mossad complicity would never be exposed by any official U.S. investigation," he says .
 Harris ended up making history by getting sued for his attacks on other targets of his wrath . Harris was sued for all his trouble, but not for all .
 Final Judgment is a new edition of Final Judgement . Final Judgment will be released on December 17, 2015 .
 Clint Bradford, who operates what is actually a very good web site of JFK-related material, declared that "it is my personal opinion that your book is ‘anti-Jewish hate prose’ on a posting on March 16, 1999 . Another of my critics, Clint Bradford—
 Bradford preferred to call me a bigot rather than to address any of the specific allegations made in Final Judgment . Bradford prefers to call him a bigot . Bradford preferred not to address specific allegations against him .
 The last I heard was that the world was told that one lone nut—and a pro-Castro communist to boot—was responsible for the crime . The last thing I heard of the crime was that a lone nut was responsible for it .
 The fact is that if Morris was indeed ""Maurice Bishop"" this would point to a possible Mossad role in the JFK assassination . During his career Morris was viewed by many in ""conservative"" circles as a water-carrier for Israeli interests .
 Morris’ primary patrons were well-known characters known for their affinity for the interests of Israel . Roy Cohn, Alfred Kohlberg, George Sokolsky and Marvin Liebman were prominent figures in the pro-Israel lobby .
 Bevilaqua probably just doesn't get it, but maybe there's something there after all .
 The Italian newspaper that surfaced some of the first data about Permindex was indeed a communist journal, but that alone, of course, does not preclude the truthfulness of the details . In any case, while it is true that the Italian newspaper .
 The origins of Permindex were actually connected to Clay Shaw himself and went as far back as 1948 . Yet, McAdams posted a factually incorrect statement that the origins of the company were actually linked to Shaw .
 Despite this, McAdams and his cheerleaders promoted this article to be the ultimate refutation of the theory that Permindex was engaged in international intelligence intrigue, whether connected to JFK assassination or not .
 Evica makes a good point that there has been quite a bit of disinformation relating to the JFK assassination in circulation over the years . But he is obviously unwilling to concede the possibility that those wonderful intelligence operatives at the Mossad had anything to do with it .
 Evica: Mossad is the only intelligence agency in the world that kept its hands clean as far as the JFK assassination is concerned . Evica says Mossad was the only spy agency to keep its hands out of JFK assassination . She says the Mossad has been the only agency to
 McCullough has yet to refute anything that appears in Final Judgment . McCullough says he has no plans to refute any of the material .
 President Kennedy's assassination exemplifies many of the uncomfortable facts about Israel that continually emerge in a study of the administration of President Kennedy, his relations with Israel, and the circumstances surrounding his assassination . That's an uncomfortable little fact of history, to say the very least, especially for Israel and
 Final Judgment makes it all quite clear and I think that most readers would agree . If anything, I believe that Final Judgement makes it quite clear .
 The one critic whom I felt was probably best poised and best capable of refuting Final Judgment failed to do it . Perhaps my biggest disappointment, was when the one critic who I thought was best poised, failed to refute Final Judgment .
 Dave Reitzes is by far the most intelligent and articulate person I've encountered, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is no question in my mind that Dave Reitses is the most smart and articulate" Sutter says of those who have been killed in
 Garrison's allegations that a New Orleans trade executive was involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Garrison: The president of the nation's largest private company was involved . Garrison says the president was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1968 .
 There are those who have called Reitzes a mouthpiece for the CIA, but whether he is or not, the fact is that he is . More so than anyone else has been a thoughtful critic of Garrison .
 I've commented myself that Garrison's investigation was flawed in many ways, and I will be the first to admit it . I will admit it, but I'm not the first person to admit that . Garrison's probe was flawed, he says .
 Reitzes raised questions in his own mind about his own thesis . So I felt from his first encounter with Reitze on an Internet news group that if anybody could raise questions about my own thesis it would be Reitzen .
 I sent Reitzes a copy of Final Judgment and eagerly (if not a bit nervously) awaited his public review of the book . Final Judgment is the latest in a series of books by the author .
 Dave had previously defended me from allegations of anti-Semitism . He reserved a ""final judgment"" until he had actually read the book .
 Reitzes reviewed the book, and I breathed a sigh of relief that he had not been able to give me reason to reconsider my conclusions in Final Judgment . However, the one person I thought might be able to change my conclusions had failed to .
 Reitzes surprised me when he took issue with my contention that what I called ""the controlled media"" had played a major part in covering up the truth about the JFK assassination conspiracy . Calling the book ""a morass of irrelevance," he called it a "morass of
 He said that was ""sheer fantasy"" —evidently dismissing the very thought that the media had played a part in promoting the ""lone assassin"" theory and defending the Warren Commission Report .
 Reitzes would even repeat Shaw's claim that he ""never had any connection with the CIA"" is remarkable, if only because of the fact that it is thoroughly documented in de-classified CIA files that Shaw did indeed provide some thirty reports to the CIA over at least an eight year
 The facts about Shaw's CIA connection didn't come out until some years after Shaw's death . Shaw was obviously lying to Penthouse, although, of course, the facts about his CIA connection .
 Reitzes clearly has taken the position that anything Shaw said has to be believed . In any case, the evidence notwithstanding the evidence, it's not clear .
 Shaw told Penthouse that he knew nothing about Permindex's activities and Reitzes believes him, but as I sarcastically told him, "Sure. Shaw." Shaw said that he knows nothing about the company's activities . Shaw said, "I don't know anything about Per
 Reitzes then proceeded to engage in a remarkable exercise in prevarication in which he then blinded his readers with a detailed exposition . He summarized a number of varying reports about international financial transactions involving Permindex. Reitzs then proceeded .
 Reitzes failed to refute the fact that Permindex was indeed part of the global arms and money laundering operations of the Mossad .
 The Bank Hapoalim (referenced in Final Judgment) was associated with Israel's labor bund, the Histadrut . Dave actually got a little desperate at one point when he took issue with my suggestion that it was ""well known"" that the Bank Hapalim
 Reitzes knows full well that anyone with even a modicum of research skills can easily document that quite innocent fact . The fact loses its innocence when one starts examining the multiple Israeli Mossad connections to the circles surrounding Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans the summer prior to the assassination of John
 Reitzes is adamant in defending not only Clay Shaw, but also Guy Banister and David Ferrie of any role whatsoever in the JFK affair . This is despite a wealth of information that these three were indeed connected not only to each other but to the web of intrigue surrounding Lee Harvey
 The big payoff came when Reitzes really dropped the ball, in the same fashion that the aforementioned Robert Harris had done earlier . It was the same way that Harris did earlier .
 At another juncture Reitzes said, ""This is complete and utter nonsense. At another . reitzes: "This . is complete . utter nonsense"
 You don't kill the progressive leader of a world superpower that is one of your greatest political allies . You also kill the president of a nation that's one of its most powerful allies .
 Prior to that Reitzes had not actually attempted to refute Israeli involvement in the shooting, he had said .
 Clay Shaw's association with Permindex had nothing to do with the JFK assassination of any kind of intelligence intrigue . Shaw had been vindicated by the book's author . Shaw was not involved in any intelligence intrigue, he said .
 Reitzes even made the assertion that Angleton, meanwhile, could hardly be less relevant to Piper's scenario . Remarkably, he even said Angleton's role in the case was less relevant than Piper's .
 In Final Judgment, Reitzes refuted four theories of Marilyn Monroe's death . In the case of her death, he only reported the allegation that Israeli-linked L.A. gangster Mickey Cohen had orchestrated her death .
 In the end, although he had managed to restrain himself quite admirably, Dave finally couldn't resist himself . He said: 'Dave finally couldn’t resist himself'
 "After having engaged in some serious debate—at first, he finally started posting a variety of material attacking the political views of my employer, rather than addressing the specifics in my book"
 Clark Wilkins' review of Final Judgment is posted in several parts on the Internet . Final Judgment has been reviewed extensively by Clark Wilkin .
 Wilkins apparently views the JFK assassination conspiracy as a scenario dictated more by money than politics, evidenced by his comment that "this powerful movement is not powered by politics" Wilkins .
 Piper has grabbed the tiger by the tail and I can see why he's been bit . Piper was bitten by the tiger, but it's not a surprise that he was bit .
 In terms of our understanding he's like Benjamin Franklin when Franklin went to France in search of military support against the British . "In terms of [Benjamin] Franklin," he was 'like Benjamin Franklin'
 The moment the subject of his book came up, charges of anti-Semitism followed along with the argument/claim/whatever that he is some kind of Holocaust revisionist. He is accused of being anti-Semitic, but he is not .
 Clark Wilkins never came around to endorsing my thesis of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Wilkins acknowledged that the ever-controversial Permindex entity was indeed linked to the operations of the Mossad and Israel's international intrigue .
 Wilkins: "You'll find Piper has it right. In that context, addressing one of my critics, James Olmstead, who has said that Final Judgment was based solely on what he described as my ""hate for the state of Israel,"" Wilkins commented ""You'll
 Clark Wilkins for an honest, sincere effort to find out the truth, wherever it may lead . Thanks to Clark .
 Final Judgment is not to suggest that the reviews of the film have been uniformly suspicious or hostile . The reviews of Final Judgment have not been uniformly hostile .
 Israeli journalist Barry Chamish reviewed the film in Israel . We've already noted the very positive review from Barry .
 Several friendly reviews have appeared in a number of places, and they're worth noting . In fact, there have been several friendly reviews that have appeared .
 Michael Piper's thesis is that Israel—specifically its intelligence agency, the Mossad—orchestrated Kennedy's assassination . Piper: Israel's intelligence agency is responsible for Kennedy's murder . Piper says Mossad was behind the assassination .
 Piper is a longtime employee of the Liberty Lobby, a very conservative, populist organization which publishes the weekly newspaper, The Spotlight . Piper is an employee of Liberty Lobby and publishes The Spotlight.
 Critics say Liberty Lobby is anti-Semitic, but it says it is simply critical of Israel . Liberty Lobby says that it is not anti-Semitism, it is highly critical of the country .
 I mention this as background information, not to take sides on the issue . I mention it as background . Not to be taken sides, but it's important to know more about the situation .
 Daniel Brandt is a veteran and well-known figure of the so-called ""New Left"" movement of the 1960s . Brandt was a veteran of the 'New Left' movement in Germany . He was a member of the New Left movement .
 Just as our two-year subscription to Liberty Lobby's Spotlight newspaper was winding down, along comes this book by Spotlight writer Michael Collins Piper . The book is published by Liberty Lobby and is available on Amazon.com, Kindle and Kindle .
 NameBase clipped a fair number of their investigative articles for NameBase during that period . NameBase no longer felt defensive when our leftist critics condemned Spotlight as anti-Semitic .
 The rare instances of excessive anti-Zionist zeal in Spotlight are more than offset by their consistently credible reporting on other issues . Spotlight is based in New York City, New York, and Washington, DC .
 Final Judgment claims to offer 'astounding proof' that Mossad had a hand in JFK assassination . Final Judgment is based on a book written by David Frum . Frum: "We were a bit nervous about Final Judgment"
 Piper's Mossad links are circumstantial rather than conclusive, but definitely worth considering . As it turns out, the Mossad link is not conclusive . Piper says Mossad's links to Israel are "circumstantial" rather than definitive .
 Piper discusses the Mafia-CIA-Israeli connection (starring Meyer Lansky and James Angleton) Other aspects of the JFK morass that Piper discusses are rarely treated in other JFK literature . Piper discusses Charles DeGaulle's problems with the OAS and his problems .
 NameBase is happy to include this book in NameBase, particularly since it doesn't have an index of its own .
 This book offers even the most grizzled devotees of mayhem and mystery more than enough meat to chew on . This book is available on Amazon.com.com .
 The author walks the reader straight into the domain of Meyer Lansky, Mickey Cohen, and the Mossad, maintaining that Israel and its secret service had a reason to be opposed to JFK . Israel's allies in the mob and the CIA were, in turn, interacting with one another and
 There are a few brave souls out there who are willing to say that the book has more merits than some of my critics might be willing to admit, he says .
 Since the release of Oliver Stone's JFK, there has been a renewed effort to discredit all JFK assassination conspiracies which point toward involvement by the CIA . Jim Garrison's investigation in particular .
 The most notable book-length effort to discredit Garrison came with the publication of Patricia Lambert's False Witness in 1998 . Lambert's book is largely dedicated to the proposition that Garrison was a reckless madman and that Clay Shaw was just an innocent socialite .
 It would take another book to deal with many of Miss Lambert's prevarications, but her most memorable is worth citing here . Lambert's most memorable interview with the late singer is worth quoting here .
 The CIA apparently approved Shaw (perhaps without his knowledge) for this project, which, by one unofficial account, was nothing more than a program for routine debriefing of individuals involved in international trade . One unofficial account: The program was just a routine program .
 At this point, what QK/ENCHANT actually was, whether or not it ever came to fruition, and what, if anything, Shaw knew about it, remain unknown .
 Lambert tells us that Garrison failed to connect Shaw to the assassination . He says Shaw's CIA link meant nothing anyway anyway . Lambert says Garrison didn't connect Shaw with the assassination, and Shaw's link to the CIA is irrelevant .
 Lambert unwittingly reveals that Shaw wasn't just another American businessman who had a brief association with the CIA as part of his international travels . Lambert herself unwittingly reveals the connection with Shaw .
 Lambert expects us to assume that all of the CIA documents that she cites are the only CIA documents relative to the work that Shaw performed for the agency . Shaw's work for the CIA was the subject of numerous CIA documents, Lambert says . Lambert is a leap of faith .
 Miss Lambert does not address the possibility that Shaw was also working in concert with Israel's Mossad .
 Miss Lambert cites no Mossad documents one way or the other in that regard . Miss Lambert says Mossad is not Mossad, but she says it is a Mossad agent .
 Shaw was closely associated with the Mossad through Permindex.com . Shaw was a close ally of the Israeli government, according to the report . Shaw is believed to have been close to Mossad .
 Shaw knew in 1962 that Permindex would play a part in the JFK assassination in 1963 . This, of course, presupposes, first of all, that Shaw . Shaw knew that in 1962, PermIndex would play part in that crime in 1963 and that, in fact,
 Lambert also goes to extraordinary efforts to refute the idea that Lee Harvey Oswald had any association with CIA contract operative David Ferrie . Not surprisingly, Lambert also refutes the idea of any association .
 On page 61 of her book she describes a photo of Oswald and Ferrie together at a Civil Air Patrol cookout as something that ""established only an overlap of association with that organization" on page 61 . Another remarkable linguistic prevarication indeed indeed .
 Oswald and Ferrie were closely associated with each other in the early 1930s . Oswald was the subject of a number of long-standing research by independent film producer Daniel Hopsicker . The two men were involved in a series of murders in the 1930s and early 1940s .
 Lambert also claims that there is no "credible" testimony placing Oswald in association with CIA contract agent Guy Banister . Lambert claims there are no 'credible' evidence linking Oswald to Banister, a contract agent . Lambert also says there is also no "evidence" of Oswald's
 Her use of the term ""credible"" is just another way of saying those who did testify to Oswald's association with Banister just simply can't be believed .
 A new book purported to ""prove"" that it was the Soviet KGB that concocted the story that the CIA was behind the assassination of John F Kennedy . All new information, CIA-MOSSAD STYLE, is all new and all new .
 The Sword and the Shield purported to be the inside history of the KGB's secret intelligence operations in the U.S. and Europe . Based on extensive notes and transcriptions (secretly compiled over a 12 year period) of files from the KGB archives .
 The notes themselves were supposedly smuggled out of KGB headquarters and then to Britain . The notes were allegedly smuggled out from the KGB headquarters to the UK .
 Andrew's book is an annotated and supplemented summary of the files provided by former KGB archivist Vasili Mitrokhin who retired from the KGB in 1984 and who defected to Britain in 1992 .
 Mitrokhin reportedly smuggled his notes from the KGB files from the files out of the KGB office in his shoes and pockets . He then buried them under the floorboards of his country home in Russia .
 While the book is skillfully written in such a way that it appears to present the information presented as having come from the KGB's supposedly purloined file, that is not always necessarily the case . In that sense, then, while the book appears to have been written in a way
 Andrew's book is effectively an attempt to counter allegations of high-level Zionist intrigue that has been documented by the official post-KGB Russian intelligence services . The book was published by Andrew's publisher at the request of the publisher of the book's publisher .
 There are only two references to CIA counterintelligence chief James Jesus Angleton . Angleton was the CIA's longtime counter intelligence chief .
 Angleton spent decades looking for a ""KGB mole" in the upper echelons of the CIA and for KGB moles in allied Western intelligence agencies . Angleton was also a devoted Israeli loyalist who jealously guarded his role as CIA's liaison to the Mossad .
 Andrew's passing references to Angleton refer to subject matter that has appeared in dozens of other books on the subject of intelligence intrigue . Yet, despite all this, Andrew's references to the subject matter have appeared in numerous other books .
 Andrew's book claims the KGB was behind the theory that the CIA was involved in the president's murder . In fact, when the news of the book was first announced in the major media, most reports focused on the theory .
 Most people who read news accounts of the release of the book would probably have gleaned little more than that, based on the nature of the news reports in question .
 Andrew's book claimed that KGB data purloined by Mitrokhin revealed that a letter written by JFK's accused assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, was actually a KGB forgery .
 Andrew spends a great deal of energy spinning a web around the charge that JFK assassination investigator Mark Lane was either a witting or unwitting tool of the KGB in Rush to Judgment . Lane's ground-breaking critique of the Warren Commission Report on the assassination of President Kennedy . Andrew spends great energy
 Andrew Andrew connects Lane to the theory that ""the CIA killed JFK" but fails to advise his readers that Lane never alleges that the CIA was involved in the president's assassination . Andrew also notes that Lane was never charged with the CIA's involvement .
 Lane's thesis about CIA involvement was outlined in his much later-written 1993 book, Plausible Denial, based in part on the information that came out during Lane's defense in 1985 of The Spotlight newspaper against a libel suit filed by E Howard Hunt .
 In Plausible Denial, Lane develops solid evidence that the CIA fabricated a scenario linking Oswald to a KGB officer in Mexico . Lane also develops evidence that CIA fabricated the scenario . Lane says the CIA itself fabricated the CIA's scenario .
 CIA operation took place more than a month before President Kennedy was killed . CIA was involved not just in the postassassination cover-up, but in the planning of the crime itself and the framing of the patsy .
 In fact, the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter was indeed most likely a forgery . But the question remains as to ""who"" concocted the forgery, Christopher Andrew's claims notwithstanding .
 Mark Lane did so much to bring out the truth about the CIA's complicity . Andrew is so determined to suppress the facts by targeting Lane, who singularly brought out the facts .
 Andrew actually makes the flat-out allegation that Lane received funding from the KGB at the time he was writing Rush to Judgment . He says Lane's own work was essentially part of a KGB disinformation effort .
 In fact, Lane never once received any substantial contribution of this size from anyone at any time in relation to his work on the JFK assassination . Lane says he was never once given any substantial contributions from anyone else .
 His largest contribution at the time was a one-time donation of $50 from famed comic Woody Allen .
 Andrew claims that ""the same intermediary"" paid $500 for a trip that Lane made to Europe in 1964 . Lane claims that the same intermediary paid for the trip in 1964 to Europe .
 Andrew claims Lane made an attempt to visit Moscow to discuss his JFK findings . Lane claims Lane also attempted to make a visit to Moscow to talk about his findings .
 Lane took an outspoken stand against Soviet censorship and human rights violations during a visit to Bulgaria . Lane was invited to speak at an international conference of attorneys in Bulgaria .
 Not a single one of Lane's books was ever translated and published under Soviet sponsorship . Lane's book was never translated under Soviet sponsored by the Soviet Union .
 Dozens of American authors have received vast profits from Soviet-sponsored publications of their books behind the former Iron Curtain . Lane is not the only American author to have received profits from such publications . Lane's book was published in the Soviet Union, but Lane says he has no such profits .
 If the Soviets had genuinely been interested in advancing Lane's efforts they could have openly published any of Lane's seven books just as they have published other books, without even an eyebrow raised .
 The allegations are a deliberate attempt to sully Lane's reputation and refute evidence of CIA complicity in the assassination of President Kennedy . Lane is accused of being a CIA agent in the Kennedy assassination . Lane says the allegations are an attempt to deny evidence of the CIA complicity .
 Andrew's own teaching and lecturing has, in fact, been subsidized in part by the CIA, a fact that Andrew's biography on his book's dust jacket fails to note, but which is mentioned in glowing terms in promotional materials .
 The motivations of Andrew (and his ties to the intelligence community) must certainly raise eyebrows considering just the items that we've considered here . Andrew's ties to intelligence community must raise eyebrows .
 The CCC won national headlines because several Republican members of Congress had addressed the group as well . Shortly thereafter, the group was called ""racist"" by its critics .
 The truth is that the CCC, in my estimation, is obsessed with racial issues, but that wasn't the topic of my speech . The ADL used that issue to scuttle my proposed speaking engagement in California in the fall of 1997 .
 Michael Collins Piper says Israel was behind the Kennedy assassination . He explains that Israel was actually behind the assassination . Next up is a correspondent for the anti-Semitic Spotlight tabloid Spotlight .
 Piper is accompanied by a black bodyguard, a member of the black supremacist Nation of Islam, who sits quietly in the back of the car . Piper's identity is shielded by dark sunglasses and his bodyguard is a black supremacist .
 Piper instructs his audience that he is not anti-black, gesturing towards his bodyguard, who obligingly smiles and nods at the appropriate moment . Piper tells his audience he's not anti black and that he doesn't mean to black .
 Piper ends with a comment on how sick he is of hearing about the Holocaust and how he just doesn't care how many Jews died . Piper ends up saying he doesn't want to hear how many people died in Holocaust .
 "I was not and never was a member of the Nation of Islam and neither I nor he ever said he was. Neither I nor my African-American friend was ever said to be. He was not, nor was ever a member, of Islam."
 In fact, his bodyguard was the father of a little boy who just happens to be his godson . The actor's bodyguard also has a godson, according to the author .
 Although my bodyguard did wear sunglasses, it was because he happens to have a chronic sleep which has made his eyes vulnerable to bright lights . Secondly, although his bodyguard wore sunglasses, he was not wearing them because he has a chronic sleeping condition .
 In fact, it was another person at the meeting who used those words and gestured to my bodyguard . "I'm not sure what happened to me," she said .
 The SPLC led its readers to believe my bodyguard was some sort of ""StepN-Fetchit" who leered to the audience like a simple-minded Uncle Tom . However, the SPLC said its readers were led to believe his bodyguard had leered like a
 A member of the audience did make a comment about Jewish influence in Hollywood, I passed by the comment, remarking with a laugh, "You said that. However, when a member of a crowd did make such a comment, I pass by it .
 The SPLC report was later posted on the Internet, for the entire world to see . "Not only by the SPLC, but also by other parties who had an interest in defaming me," he says .
 "Once I dared to challenge the SPLC with the facts they quickly amended their allegations. What is interesting is that once I . dared to . challenge the facts, they quickly changed their allegations," he said .
 The SPLC feared what would have been the obvious circus that would have erupted had my bodyguard taken them to court in Washington, D.C. where this self-styled ""anti-racist"" group would be forced to explain to what would almost certainly be a majority Black jury
 One of the CCC's national leaders, Jared Taylor, boycotted the event, apparently offended by my suggestions that Israel and the CIA had done something unpleasant . The SPLC has falsely memorialized the event .
 The average CCC member should wonder why Taylor was receiving calls at his home from the ADL, which otherwise trashes the average member of the CCC .
 ADL also opposes affirmative action, just like the CCC . Perhaps the ADL has a bigger agenda at work, perhaps because of its own .
 FBI allowed Ku Klux Klan informants to engage in anti-Black behavior, but also allowed them to criticize Jews or Israel . FBI also allowed informants to criticize Israel, Jews or Jews, as well .
 The CCC's newspaper never once mentioned the fact that the book links the Mossad to the JFK assassination . The book only hinting darkly about ""other agencies"" aside from the Lansky syndicate that may have been involved .
 I've since learned that the CCC organizer who set up the meeting where I spoke was almost certainly some sort of intelligence operative . That raises questions about why I was invited to speak in the first place . The organizer is probably working for British intelligence .
 The way the media has reported on the JFK case in recent years is illustrated well by two similar reports published in the Washington Times on June 5, 1998 and the next day in the nation's capital, the Washington Post .
 The Times article was written by longtime Warren Commission enthusiast Hugh Aynesworth, now working for the Times . The story, entitled "Garrison idea on accomplice was rejected by Oswald widow"
 Oswald accepted the Warren Commission's claim that her husband was indeed JFK's assassin and that he acted alone . Oswald accepted that his wife had accepted that he was the assassin .
 Of the two newspaper accounts, the Post report was technically the more honest . The Post report is technically more honest than the other .
 Parade magazine piped in with the old saw that organized crime was responsible for the JFK assassination .
 Parade cited longtime RFK associate Jack Newfield as the source of the story . Parade said Bobby Kennedy Believed the Mob Killed JFK .
 An inquiry into the assassination of Bobby Kennedy was curiously sidetracked by the Newhouse empire . The inquiry into Bobby Kennedy's assassination was also a Newhouse inquiry . Newhouse was the company behind the Kennedy assassination .
 In The Assassination of Robert F Kennedy, the authors present convincing evidence of a conspiracy . Authors present convincing . evidence of the conspiracy . The assassination of Kennedy is published by The Kennedy Foundation .
 Random House's Case Closed supports the Warren Commission's theory that Oswald acted alone . Random House published Case Closed, which supports the theory . More recently, Random House .
 Some have suggested that Case Closed is typical CIA-friendly propaganda . Author Gerald Posner's reliance on ""confidential intelligence sources'' has been questioned .
 Roy Cohn was the man who initially introduced Mailer to Newhouse and Random House . Newhouse biographer Thomas Maier says Cohn introduced the publisher to Mailer .
 In fact, Newhouse's lifelong friendship with Roy Cohn may have been stimulated by his friendship with Cohn . Newhouse was a corporate investor in the Mossad's Permindex operation .
 Jack Newfield’s latest spin on the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" suggests that this was Robert Kennedy's view, is no surprise . The Newhouse press rushed to put forth the latest spin .
 Newfield has also emerged as one of the voices promoting the idea that the Kennedy brothers were enamored with Israel . Newfield is also a proponent of the idea of the brothers' interest in Israel .
 Self-described former Mossad operative David Heymann, in his critical biography of RFK, had a different spin, reporting that a number of people accused RFK of using terminology when privately discussing Jews . Heymann said RFK used terminology to refer to Jews .
 There is now a concerted media effort to portray the Kennedy brothers as devout Zionists, when nothing could be further from the truth . The Kennedy brothers' relationship between JFK and Israel was difficult .
 It is clear that the facts about the Kennedy family and Israel are most uncomfortable for Israel indeed . One is tempted to laugh at the chutzpah and the revisionist history at work here .
 Jack and Bobby Kennedy were basically responsible for their own assassinations for having dared to engage in CIA intrigue against Castro and others during the JFK administration . At the same time, the media is promoting a new twist on the Kennedy assassination itself .
 The cover-up, Posner says, was of the misdeeds of the Kennedy brothers prior to JFK's assassination . Posner: The cover up was of JFK's misdeed prior to his assassination . He says the cover-ups were of Kennedy brothers' actions prior to
 Gus Russo's 1998 volume, Live by The Sword, was published in 1998 . Russo's theory that the Kennedy brothers manipulated the CIA was ultimately responsible for the JFK assassination tragedy appeared in 1998 volume .
 Russo: Jack Kennedy lived by the sword and therefore died by the swords . The title of Russo's tangled fantasy is the title of his book, "Jack Kennedy"
 JFK got precisely what he deserved, Russo says . Russo: JFK got exactly what he got .
 The "mainstream media" relishes the misdeeds of the Kennedy family, writes John Avlon . Avlon: "Mainstream media is so fond of the family that we are now being treated in the same way"
 Russo seems to have dredge up long-secret ""witnesses"" that somehow seem to have never been reached by any author before . Russo's book is telling, though, about Russo's ability to reach out to long-hidden 'witness'
 Gerald Posner is a former Warren Commission defender . Posner was a member of the Warren Commission . He was a staunch critic of the commission .
 Russo's book isn't really some carefully crafted CIA disinformation of the grandest sort . So we do have to wonder if it's really CIA disinformation . Russo: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure it's a good book"
 The one thing Russo never addressed is the possibility that Bobby Kennedy may have orchestrated a provocation against Castro in the form of a 'dummy' assassination attempt . Lee Harvey Oswald may have been using CIA assets that Russo says were working for Bobby .
 Considering everything that we have uncovered in the pages of Final Judgment that frightening scenario is not so very far out of the realm of possibility . Considering everything we've uncovered, it's not so far from a frightening scenario .
 Bobby Kennedy may have had a real surprise on November 22, 1963 . So, in that sense, Bobby Kennedy had a very surprise on that day .
 In any event, the war to defend the Warren Commission Report has not yet come to an end . The official line is that the war against the Warren Report is not over .
 The Washington Post published a glowing review of The Warren Commission Report on November 22, 1964 . It was published alongside negative reviews of several books critical of the report . The opening gun in defense of this fraud was fired by The Post .
 It has the high polish of legal writing at its best, carefully composed, terse, restrained and meticulous . It has been carefully composed and terse-restrained .
 Rostow's pivotal role in the creation of the Warren Commission was not detailed in any substance until many years after the JFK assassination . Rostow and the Post were able to get away with this fraud at the time, at least, for Rostow .
 Rostow's high-level role in the Israeli lobby in America has such considerable influence on the American media . But it does say a lot about the way the press does promote the ""official"" line on the JFK assassination .
 There has been a concerted effort by the Israeli lobby to suppress Final Judgment at the same time the major media in America have been determined—as far as is possible—not to give the thesis of this book any more airing than necessary . This is relevant here, for as we've pointed
 A recent controversy surrounding Final Judgment brought the book's thesis back into the mainstream . It also bared a strenuous effort to refute the book itself .
 Chicago suburb of Schaumburg was wracked by a stormy debate over censorship and freedom of speech in 2000 . The row raged for over a year after I was invited to speak about my book at a college seminar on the JFK assassination .
 Bollyn's late mother was one of the library's founders, his wife was a volunteer at the library, and Bollyn himself had actually worked for the library as a young man . Still, the library rejected he donation, saying it could find no ""professional"" reviews of the book
 Library librarians should have checked for a review of the Warren Commission Report, they would have found the one by Eugene Rostow in the Washington Post . I daresay, however, that if they had checked for the report, it would have been published .
 "My book hasn't gotten those kind of favorable reviews—nor that any real surprise. But my book isn't getting that kind of reviews," he says . "It's not a real surprise," he adds .
 At a hearing of the library board of directors, a furor erupted when Bollyn pointed out that several directors were partisans of Israel . Bollyn suggested the book was rejected because of the Israeli lobby's fervent objections to the book .
 ADL spokesman: "We believe this is a cynical ploy, an attempt to create a First Amendment issue as subterfuge for an effort to exploit the goodwill and fair-mindedness"
 Hirschhaut did not mention to the press that he had a personal axe to grind with me and with my then-employer, The Spotlight . The Spotlight was based in the ADL's San Francisco office, previously based there .
 Hirschhaut had been one of the ADL officials under criminal investigation by the FBI and the San Francisco Police Department in 1993 for illegal domestic spying . He had been under investigation for illegal spying .
 Spotlight article that I had written had set in motion the events that led to the ADL scandal . At the time, top ADL spy Roy Bullock revealed that a June 30, 1986 Spotlight article had set the events in motion .
 Hirschhaut was transferred to Chicago by the ADL when the spy agency was busy trying to clean up the mess caused by the affair . He was transferred from Chicago to Washington, DC, when the scandal was over .
 The resulting brouhaha attracted the attention of the media and no less than five area newspapers and the PBS radio affiliate reported on the controversy .
 Bollyn tried to get the self-styled ""Office of Intellectual Freedom" of the American Library Association to take a stand, but the OIF's director, Judith Krug, refused to condemn the censorship . Bollyn says the censorship is censorship censorship .
 Seven years ago, Krug sided with the ADL when a Chicago librarian sponsored a resolution—endorsed by the ALA national convention—condemning Israeli censorship .
 Chicago Tribune reporter Carri Karuhn refused to return his calls . Smaller local papers contacted me, but smaller papers contacted smaller papers .
 The Tribune refused to publish a letter to the editor from me, responding to its coverage . The Tribune also refused to published a letter from me .
 Toch concocted a highly inflammatory five-page smear of Final Judgment . The smear was based on Toch's 'highly inflammatory' smear of the judge . Toch: "I'm not a judge. I'm a judge"
 This ""review"" was leaked to the press along with the seemingly contradictory announcement the library was still going to put the book on the shelves, despite the negative review . This "review" was leaked to the press .
 Piper quoted sources out of context, critics say he selectively quoted sources that fit his thesis and ignored others that did not . Piper was accused of selectively quoting sources to support his thesis . Piper has been accused of plagiarism in the past .
 The trio endorsed the Warren Commission's ""lone nut thesis" saying only ""buffs"" believe here was a conspiracy in the JFK assassination . The Warren Commission said only 'buffs' believe there was any conspiracy .
 "I compiled a thoroughly documented 88-page response, eviscerating the malicious review. Although I was amused at the allegation the book was “poorly written,"" the other charges were far more serious . In response, I compiled a thorough document .
 In the title of the book, I dubbed the library critique ""The Star Chamber Judgment,"" harking back to the 17th century English tribunals that met in secret, delving out severe aid arbitrary punishments 1p .
 The Israeli language translator and his team had gone to great lengths to try to refute the thesis of the book . What is interesting is that the Israeli language . The book was written by an Israeli translator .
 Pro-Israel partisans on the library board issued a statement saying the librarians had been ""professional"" and ""graceful"" in their malevolent attack on me and on the book . Meanwhile, the pro-Israel partisan on the board said they were "professional."" and ""
 The Israeli translator tried to get Bollyn arrested . Bollyn was arrested after the incident, but was not charged with any crime .
 Bollyn asked Toch were Toch had lived in Israel . Bollyn says Toch lived in the country . Toch says he has never been to Israel .
 Notably absent were the three librarians, but they did have at least one vocal supporter .
 As Christopher Bollyn opened the meeting, there was a minor ruckus . A member of the local Jewish community attempted to disrupt the event . He shouted angrily that "Gerald Posner's Case Closed tells the truth about JFK assassination"
 The ADL contacted the Schaumburg Police Department to ""brief" them about me . It turns out that the police had already contacted the ADL to "brief"" them about him .
 Schaumburg's police chief, Richard Casler, sent out word that one of the top Nazis in America was coming to town . This Nazi bigwig invited ""his followers"" to come to his rally, Casler said .
 Chief Casler ordered five extra police officers on duty to keep Schaumburg quiet . The chief ordered the extra officers to prevent "instigating another Holocaust"
 Casler wouldn't come to the phone when asked to speak to him about his toadying to the ADL . Casler is a tough cop and tough cop, but he's a tough guy .
 Librarians at one of the nation's most prestigious libraries found the book to be ""questionable,"" ""misleading"" and ""distasteful" The ADL will cite this malicious review in the future as ""evidence"" that ""responsible librarians"" at one .
 For the uninitiated, this might sound like quite a damning indictment . For most of those who read the library review, without having read Final Judgment, it might sound quite damning . For many, it's not the first time they've read the book, but the best way to
 The final showdown with JFK over the nuclear bomb was the proverbial ""straw that broke the camel's back"" and, clearly, the ""primary reason"" behind Ben-Gurion's resignation .
 The drive to build a nuclear bomb was not only a major aim of Israel's defense policy but also a particular special interest of Ben-Gurion . As all ""responsible"" and ""mainstream"" accounts of the Israeli nuclear bomb program affirm, the drive to . build a . nuclear
 Seymour Hersh's revelations about JFK and Ben-Gurion have been easily eclipsed by a more recent volume written by an Israeli scholar . The fact is that Seymour HersH's revelations have been eclipsed .
 Cohen privately told an interviewer that he had been shocked to learn about Final Judgment when he was doing an Internet search for information about his own book . Cohen says he was shocked to find Final Judgment on the Internet when doing an online search .
 Cohen talks about Ben-Gurion's relationship with JFK over the issue of Israel's nuclear bomb . Cohen says JFK and Israel's President George W. Bush had a "difficult" relationship with the Israeli leader .
 Cohen writes at length about Ben-Gurion's interest in the construction of an Israeli nuclear bomb and the reasoning behind it . In the opening pages of Cohen's book, Cohen writes about his special interest in building a nuclear bomb .
 What follows are relevant quotations from pages 10 through 14 in Cohen's book . Please note that I have re-arranged the quotes in order that these quotations are more free-flowing in the context of what Cohen has written .
 Ben-Gurion rarely discussed the Holocaust in his public speeches and writings as prime minister . He rarely mentioned the Holocaust during his time in Israel .
 In private conversations and . communications with foreign leaders, however, he returned to the lessons of the Holocaust time . again . In private . conversations with foreign . leaders, he said, "In private conversations, . however, they returned to . the lessons .
 Anxiety about the Holocaust reached beyond BenGurion to infuse Israeli military thinking . Anxiety about Holocaust infused military thinking, says Israeli military .
 The destruction of Israel defined the ultimate horizon of the threat against Israel, says Israel's prime minister . Israel's destruction was defined as the ultimate threat against the country, he says .
 Israeli military planners have always considered a scenario in which a united Arab military coalition launched a war against Israel with the aim of liberating Palestine and destroying the Jewish state . Israel has always considered the scenario in a scenario .
 Few nations have military contingency plans aimed at preventing apocalypse . This kind of planning was unique to Israel, as few nations have such a contingency plan .
 Ben-Gurion's pessimism . . . influenced Israel's foreign and defense policy for years . His pessimism. influenced Israeli foreign policy .
 Ben-Gurion's determination to launch a_ nuclear project was the result of strategic intuition and obsessive fears, not of a well-thought out plan . Ben-gurion's decision to launch the project was result of intuition and fear, not a plan .
 He believed Israel needed nuclear weapons as insurance if it could no longer compete with the Arabs in an arms race, and as a weapon of last resort in case of extreme military emergency .
 Nuclear weapons might also persuade Arabs to accept Israel's existence, leading to peace in the region . Nuclear weapons could also persuade the Arabs to agree with Israel's presence in Israel .
 We must have no illusions that what is declared every day in Cairo, Damascus, Iraq are just words . We must not have illusions that . what we declare every day is just words. We need to be careful of the words .
 The ""nuclear option"" was not only at the very core of Ben-Gurion's personal world view, but the very foundation of Israel's national security policy . The ""Nuclear option" was at the core of the Israeli government's world view .
 The Israelis were essentially willing, if necessary, to ""blow up the world" if they had to do so in order to destroy the Arab neighbors they hate so much . Israel was essentially willing to "blow up" the world, including themselves .
 Seymour Hersh notes Israeli nuclear planners considered the Samson Option . Samson of the Bible, after being captured by the Philistines, brought down Dagon's Temple in Gaza and killed himself along with his enemies .
 STDL librarians wanted to debate whether pressure on Israel over nuclear weapons was a primary reason for Ben-Gurion's resignation .
 They were suggesting that I quoted Hersh out of context (and did so deliberately) because they realized, full well, that all of the evidence, taken together in the big picture, clearly demonstrates that it was indeed JFK's determined effort to defuse ""The Samson Option"" that was
 The issue of JFK's conflict with BenGurion was a secret to both the Israeli public and the American public . It remained so for more than 20 years at least and still largely remains so, despite the release of Hersh's book .
 "Now that the truth is emerging, there are others who are reaching essentially the same interpretation that I have. Now that . I have . I'm not sure how much of this is true, but I'm sure it's true."
 The librarians would have people believe that I am alone in this interpretation of the book's title, "The Librarians"
 The Middle East Review of International Affairs published at Bar-Ilan . Can the Special Relationship Survive the New Strategic Environment? The article was published in the December 1998 issue of the MME .
 Kennedy administration pressed for international inspection of Dimona and abdication of nuclear weapons option . Kennedy administration placed great pressure on BenGurion in effort to press for acceptance of international inspection .
 Ben-Gurion's resignation in 1963 was a contributing factor to his resignation . This pressure apparently did not alter Israeli policy, but it was a factor in his resignation from the government .
 JFK's "great deal of pressure on Ben-Gurion" (Steinberg's words) was not known in general to the public at large (either in Israel or the United States) until the release of Seymour Hersh's book which focused on the conflict extensively .
 Avner Cohen's new book essentially confirmed everything that Hersh had written, in one sense or another, but went even further . We will be reviewing what Cohen has to say later .
 The STDL librarians distort the words of Seymour Hersh . Hersh's words were distorted by the librators, but not by the public .
 Hersh states that domestic factors appeared to be more than enough to convince BenGurion to leave public life . Hersh: Domestic factors were as important as his health .
 The way the librarians structured this sentence in their review—was to put a different twist on what Hersh really did say . Hersh said, "I don't know what I really say. I'm not sure what I say."
 Avner Cohen in Israel and the Bomb, adds to the story of Ben-Gurion's resignation . Here's what Avner . Cohen adds, "A 'THREAT' from JFK to ISRAEL .
 The purpose of the letter was to solidify the terms of the American visits in a way that would accord with these minimum conditions on which the intelligence community insisted . The letter was sent to the U.S. Embassy in Cairo .
 Ben-Gurion announced his resignation on Saturday, 15 June, with instructions to deliver it by hand . The next day he announced it to the U.S. Ambassador to Israel Walworth Barbour . It was cabled to [United States Ambassador] to deliver the next day,
 Ben-Gurion himself never even specified any particular reason, foreign or domestic . This is interesting, in itself, because he never specified any specific reason . Cohen's account is interesting .
 Ben-Gurion's biographer suggested that there was no one specific political reason, but that it was his general mental state . The seventy-six year-old leader resigned after a series of panicky, even paranoid, actions .
 Cohen writes of BenGurion's apparent paranoia in Final Judgment . Cohen writes that Cohen writes, as I did, of the Israeli prime minister's paranoia . Cohen: "The very fact that Cohen wrote that Cohen was paranoid is interesting"
 Avner Cohen made it quite clear that the construction of a nuclear bomb for Israel was, actually, a very personal issue with David Ben-Gurion for many years . We should note that (based upon what we have just considered) Avner .
 Ben-Gurion believed that Israel's access to atomic weapons was critical to Israel's survival . He was the ""Grand Old Man"" of Israel . Ben-gurion was the 'Grand Old man' of Israel.
 Cohen notes that several in Ben-Gurion's inner circle felt that the resignation had nothing to do with the nuclear issue . Cohen: Several in the inner circle believed that the resignations were not related to the issue . The resignation was the resignation of the Israeli prime minister .
 Others believed that Ben-Gurion's decision was, in part, connected to Kennedy's pressure on Dimona . Others, including ministers in BenGurion’s cabinet, believed that . Others believed the decision was made in part because of Kennedy's influence .
 Israel Galili, the leader of Achdut HaAvodah, was convinced that Ben-Gurion's sense of failure and frustration in dealings with Kennedy on the matter of Dimona was among the reasons that led to his resignation from the post .
 This is also the view of [top Israeli nuclear scientist] Yuval Ne'eman, who, in 1963, was involved in the consultations involving the replies to Kennedy's demands .
 Ambassador Barbour hints that Kennedy's letters and Ben-Gurion's resignation might have been linked . Ambassador Barbours hints that the resignation might be linked to Kennedy .
 STDL librarian friends were not finished on this point just yet . However, unfortunately, our STDL friends not finished with this story yet .
 Hersh also points out that Kennedy's persistent pressure on Israel stemmed from his belief that Israel had not yet developed any nuclear weapons . Hersh says Kennedy's pressure stemmed from belief that Israeli nuclear weapons had not been developed .
 The STDL librarians were quoting one brief passage of Hersh's book out of context . The librators were engaging in some historical interpretation of their own .
 There is no question, based on all of the material, that JFK was determined to stop Israel, in particular, from building a nuclear bomb . There is also no question that JFK wanted Israel to build a bomb .
 STDL librarians were trying to predict what JFK would have done if he'd lived . JFK was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 JFK had adopted a new policy toward the French drive for nuclear weapons that was being outlined in a then-""top secret"" memo dated November 22, 1963 . In Final Judgment 1 pointed out that JFK's new policy was outlined in the memo .
 Librarians say JFK changed his policy toward France and Israel's nuclear ambitions . But there is no way that the librarians can suggest that just because JFK changed . that he would also change his . policy toward Israel's . nuclear ambitions.
 JFK would have been "pragmatic" but that doesn't mean that he was not trying to stop Israel from building a nuclear bomb . That's what his trouble with Ben-Gurion and Israel was all about in the first place .
 JFK had dealings with France over the nuclear issue were insignificant compared to the bitterness between JFK and Israel over the same issue . The fact is that any dealings that JFK had with France was insignificant . Israel and France were bitter rivals over the issue .
 By bringing in this matter of the French, the STDL librarians were trying to cloud the issue . The French is a major French language in France .
 The fact is that Israel was a special target of JFK insofar as nuclear proliferation was concerned . Israel was the focus of JFK's efforts to stop nuclear proliferation, he says .
 No American president was more concerned with the danger of nuclear proliferation than John Fitzgerald Kennedy . Kennedy was the president of the United States during his presidency .
 He was convinced that the spread of nuclear weapons would make the world more dangerous and undermine U.S. interests . He said he was concerned that nuclear weapons spread would make world dangerous .
 Without an agreement, the arms race would continue and nuclear weapons would proliferate to other countries . Kennedy reminded his advisers that more was at stake than a piece of paper .
 Cohen's book also makes it clear that the French had previously been the primary foreign enablers of Israel's secret nuclear arms program .
 By June DeGaulle had become aware of what he later termed ""the improper military collaboration established between Tel Aviv and Paris after the Suez Expedition" and he was determined to end it .
 It took almost two years to translate DeGaulle's new policy into a new French nuclear policy vis-a-vis Israel .
 DeGaulle learned that French assistance to Israel had continued, despite his orders . Cohen points out, however, that Israel's friend in France, atomic energy minister Jacques Soustelle, resigned, and that he resigned .
 The end of French assistance would put the entire Dimona project at Risk . Dimona will be the first phase of a multi-billion dollar project in the region .
 DeGaulle recognized how unprecedented the deal was, and for this reason refused to go along with it . He was reluctant to provide Israel with a nuclear option .
 DeGaulle allowed the French companies to continue working with the Israelis, but the French government withdrew its direct support . Israel formally announced ""peaceful intentions" (although clearly Israel still intended to build a nuclear bomb)
 DeGaulle's reversal on the issue of what was clearly critical French support for Israel's nuclear ambitions is quite significant indeed, particularly in light of what is documented in Final Judgment regarding the Mossad-sponsored Permindex operation that came to the fore during the JFK assassination inquiry .
 Ben-Gurion's resignation didn't end the conflict between JFK and Israel . However, it didn't stop JFK's visit to Israel . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 JFK and Levi Eshol met in the early days of the Israeli prime minister . JFK was JFK's first prime minister in Israel . JFK's visit to Israel was the first time he had met with the new Israeli PM .
 JFK wrote a letter to the new prime minister that was evidently even more strident than even JFK's previous communications with BenGurion . JFK wrote the letter to Eshkol in response to his appointment .
 Not since Eisenhower's message to Ben-Gurion in the midst of the Suez crisis in November 1956 had an American president been so blunt with an Israeli prime minister .
 Kennedy's demands seemed diplomatically inappropriate; they were inconsistent with national sovereignty . From perspective, Kennedy's requests seemed diplomatic inappropriate . Kennedy's demand for the U.S. to withdraw from the Philippines was inconsistent with sovereignty .
 Kennedy's pressure on Israel did not end with Ben-Gurion's resignation . Kennedy's influence on Israel didn't end with the resignation of Ben-gurion .
 Cohen notes that Dimona itself was never mentioned in those talks . Yet, Cohen notes, on page 173, he says, "Dimona itself is never mentioned" Cohen says the talks were never held on to Dimona .
 The nuclear issue was so sensitive that U.S. and Israeli officials didn't discuss it . The issue of Israel's nuclear bomb was not discussed in secret meetings, officials say . Israel's nuke bomb was the subject of secret meetings between the U.N. and U.K
 It was left on the table, actually never placed on the agenda, for future discussion . It was never discussed, but it was left there for discussion .
 JFK was assassinated eight days later, and the dynamics of the U.S.-Israeli relationship changed dramatically as a consequence . JFK's assassination was eight days after he was assassinated .
 Kennedy and Eshkol stumbled further down the path of nuclear opacity . In late 1963 Israel and the U.S. stumbled further .
 Neither Avner Cohen nor Michael Collins Piper nor the STDL librarians can answer these questions with certainty . The STDL can't provide an answer to these questions .
 Cohen's revelations about JFK's secret war with Israel over the nuclear question were interesting indeed . But the reaction in Israel to the revelations was interesting indeed, says Cohen .
 The murder of American President John F Kennedy brought to an abrupt end the massive pressure being applied by the U.S. administration on the government of Israel to discontinue the nuclear program .
 Cohen demonstrates at length the pressures applied by Kennedy on Ben-Gurion . Cohen demonstrates how Kennedy applied the pressure on the Israeli prime minister . Cohen also demonstrates how the pressure was applied to the Israeli leader .
 The book implied that, had Kennedy remained alive, it is doubtful whether Israel would today have a nuclear option .
 Cohen concludes that BenGurion's decision to resign in 1963 was taken to a large extent against the background of the tremendous pressure that Kennedy was applying on him concerning the nuclear issue . Cohen also concludes that the decision was taken in large part because of the pressure Kennedy was putting on him .
 Israeli journalist Reuven Pedatzur has summarized well the explosive revelations that appear in Avner Cohen's new book .
 President Kennedy's stand against Israeli nuclear weapons was only one of numerous policy positions that were perceived by Israel to be contrary to its interests . This is documented in Final Judgment, Final Judgment .
 There was much more to Kennedy policy on the Middle East than Israel's nuclear bomb program . Final Judgment makes that clear, the STDL reviewers notwithstanding .
 This is also verified by the fact that during the secret meeting in midNovember, described earlier, was not even discussed . The nuclear issue was not discussed during the meeting, according to the Russian President Vladimir Putin's spokesman .
 The reviewers also tried to suggest that Lyndon Johnson put as much pressure on the Israelis to curtail their nuclear bomb program, quoting a reference from Seymour Hersh .
 President Johnson and his advisers would pretend that the American inspections [of the Dimona nuclear arms plant in Israel] amounted to proof that Israel was not building the bomb, leaving unblemished America's newly reaffirmed support for nuclear nonproliferation . Johnson: "The American inspections ...
 Hersh describes how CIA analyst Carl Duckett concluded that Israel had finally constructed a nuclear bomb . Duckett brought this fact to the attention of CIA Director Richard Helms who told Duckett that he would personally deliver the information .
 Helms walked the Duckett information into the Oval Office and gave it to the President . Helms gave the President the information . Duckett was killed in the Vietnam War .
 By 1968, the President had no intention of doing anything to stop the Israeli bomb, as Helms, Duckett, and a few others in the U.S. government came to understand .
 President Johnson knew how inflammatory the subject of Israel's nuclear bomb program was . He didn't want to be forced into taking any action that would put himself in the same position that JFK had placed himself in .
 According to Hersh, Johnson ""exploded"" over the subject and demanded that it be kept secret from even two top cabinet members . Hersh: Johnson "exploded" over the matter and demanded secrecy .
 LBJ was the ultimate political dealmaker, the politician's politician, but he was clearly afraid of confronting Israel over the nuclear bomb . LBJ feared the issue of confronting the Israeli government over the bomb .
 Israel's nuclear bomb program was a major concern (as it should have been) The U.S. administration under Johnson never took any substantive action to block Israel from pursuing its longtime goal of creating a bomb .
 Final Judgment of the U.S. Supreme Court will be held in New York City, New Jersey . Final Judgement of the Supreme Court is expected to be held at the end of this week .
 Maybe the Israeli nuclear issue was --dare I say it --""another factor"" (maybe even the ""primary"" reason) that LBJ decided to step down . LBJ stepped down from the White House in 1964 .
 Maybe "domestic factors" such as unrest over the Vietnam War were just the public issues that we heard about in the press . We certainly never heard about Israel and the bomb. Maybe domestic factors were just domestic factors .
 This is speculation, of course, but quite reasonable speculation indeed . This is not only speculation, it is also speculation about the future of the planet .
 President Johnson was also more flexible than Kennedy on the rules of the Dimona inspections . Johnson was more flexible on Dimona inspection rules .
 The Israelis were able to determine the rules of the visits . The Johnson administration chose not to confront Israel on the issue, fearing that Israel would end it .
 Culler recalls that his assumption at the time was that restrictions were agreed on at the highest level in both countries . Culler says he assumed that the restrictions would have been agreed on by the highest levels of government in both nations .
 As we have seen above, what Hersh said does not conflict with the thesis of Final Judgment . Hersh's comments do not contradict Final Judgment's thesis .
 Other material appearing in Hersh's book certainly coincides with facts unearthed by Israeli historian Avner Cohen . Other material appears in the book does not conflict with what the librarians called my ""conspiracy theories"" in any way .
 JFK was adamantly determined to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb . JFK was adamant that Israel would not be allowed to build the bomb .
 JFK's death did indeed prove beneficial to Israel's nuclear ambitions and the evidence proves it . JFK died in 1968, but his death did not stop Israel from developing nuclear weapons .
 JFK's refusal to countenance Israel's drive for the atomic bomb resulted in Mossad participation in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Librarians were trying to refute what they rightly perceived to be the foundation of the thesis of Final Judgment .
 One of the STDL reviewers, Tom Holmberg, later posted an anonymous vicious smear of this author on amazon.com . Holmberg finally had the guts to put his name on the review . The author's name is on the cover of the book .
 Final Judgment has received favorable reviews from all over the world . Critic says the film is "not perfect" but "great"
 Israeli lobby is determined to suppress Final Judgment . UN-CORRUPTED MINDS WEIGH IN . Final Judgment will be held in Israel .
 The Israeli lobby is concerned that people just might believe that the theory presented in Final Judgment does make sense .
 The fact is that when I have been able to present my thesis unhindered, to those who haven't actually read the book, people do say that the theory makes sense . The fact that when . I have presented my thesis . to those . who haven’t actually read
 A good example came when in the spring of 1999 (a year before the Schaumburg affair) I was invited to speak before an honor course at Thomas Worthington High School in Ohio .
 The teacher who invited me, Tom Molnar, was aware of the previous frenzy that had erupted in Southern California, he says . He was unfazed .
 Despite all of this controversy, Molnar still invited me to speak . Despite all the controversy, he still invited to speak at the event .
 In previous years, the ADL had objected to other speakers Mr Molnar invited .
 Molnar offered the ADL the opportunity to appear in debate with those speakers . The ADL refused to debate with the speakers .
 The students’ written reviews of my presentation were in stark contrast to the anti-intellectual rantings and ravings of the ADL and their shills at the Schaumburg Township Library .
 Mr Piper seems to be a nice person and he does not seem to harbor any ill will toward Jews or foreigners . Mr Piper is a nice man, he says, according to the author .
 Many of his ideas seem to make sense but I think that some of his connections seem too complicated to be true . Some of the connections seem to be too complicated, he says .
 He admits that no truly hard evidence exists, and that we may never know the real truth behind the most famous American conspiracy . He also admits that there may never be any hard evidence .
 Michael was obviously well-educated to create such a thorough, comprehensive and believable compilation of events in his book . Michael's book will be released on Friday at 8.30pm .
 Just the thought that his story may be real left me doubting all other versions I have heard . The thought that he may have been alive left me questioning all the other versions of his story .
 I appreciated his attempt to expose the truth without hurting people's reputations unreasonably . "I appreciated his attempts to expose himself and others without hurting their reputations," he said .
 Mr Piper was very honest and did say that his whole theory is just a theory . He said that we will probably never know the entire truth .
 The Mossad could be blamed for the assassination, since they are so well connected to everyone that apparently had some involvement with the assassination . I actually did feel that there might be a possibility there that the Mossad was blamed, since it is so well .
 CNN's John Sutter says he agrees with JFK's version of the JFK shooting . Sutter: "At first it was hard for me to understand his reasoning"
 "He was very intelligent and his theory was quite possible and understandable," he said . He added: "He's very intelligent. He was very clever. He's quite intelligent."
 It is precisely because of friendly reviews from intelligent students such as this that the ADL has been so determined to silence me, he says . The ADL is determined not to silence him, he writes .
 Mr Molnar says several students did indeed read the book, despite the ADL's objections .
 In the end, this most uncomfortable issue of Israel's nuclear weapons is an issue that just won't go away . Israel has a history of nuclear weapons in the Middle East, including the use of Nukes .
 Egypt and other Arab nations have launched a determined campaign to unmask Israel's secret nuclear program once and for all . On May 2, 2000, the Chicago Tribune's foreign correspondent, Hugh Dellios reported .
 "ultimate Zionist project" is facing the attention of the world, says author . Now, however, "this ultimate Zionist project"" (that played such a clearly critical factor in the JFK assassination conspiracy) is facing attention of world .
 President Bill Clinton dared to incur the wrath of the Israeli lobby in the spring of 1999 by publicly addressing Israel's ""secret"" bomb . JFK's longtime admirer, Bill Clinton, dared to incuriously address Israel's "secret" bomb in 1999 .
 The article pointed out that 35 members of the U.S. Congress had written a letter to Clinton expressing concerns about imprisoned Israeli nuclear engineer Mordechai Vanunu .
 President Clinton expressed concerns about Vanunu's plight in a letter to Sen. Lynn Rivers (DMich. Sen. Rivers) President Clinton also expressed his own concerns about the situation .
 Clinton: "I share your concerns about the Israeli nuclear program" Clinton also said that he also shared his concerns about Israel's nuclear program .
 For taking a similar private stand, Clinton's hero, John F Kennedy, paid with his life . Kennedy was killed for taking a stand against President Clinton . Kennedy's life was the result of his actions .
 Bill Clinton may have been victim of Mossad intrigue during the vaunted Lewinsky affair that led to his impeachment . Bill Clinton himself may have found himself a victim in the affair .
 Newsweek enlisted longtime Clinton confidant George Stephanapolous to write of Clinton's ""betrayal"" and even went on the air to bring up the possibilities of resignation and impeachment .
 Nobody had ever accused any of those major media voices of being a voice for the ""right wing" in America, at least . And nobody had ever been accused of being an advocate for the "right wing," in the media .
 The first lady may have put her finger on something when she claimed that a ""right wing conspiracy"" was energizing the then-ongoing ""Monaco-gate"" scandal .
 The First Lady didn't dare to raise the suspicion that it was more than just certain elements in the American right wing who have helped bring the scandal to the public eye . But the First Lady doesn't dare raise the . suspicion .
 Some basic facts that somehow got buried in the midst of the frenzy over the allegations that were bandied about .
 It apparently wasn't until after this that lawyers for Paula Jones contacted Miss Lewinsky, tipping off the president that his relationship with Lewinsky had been exposed . Paula Jones' lawyers for Lewinsky contacted the president, tipping him off .
 We may assume that neither Tripp nor Goldberg were the sources . Tripp and Goldberg had other interests to exploit in the Clinton-Lewinsky caper .
 Tripp instead went directly to Special Prosecutor Kenneth Starr . In fact, Tripp went to Starr's office to testify against Starr .
 Monica Lewinsky was a Clinton loyalist and it was evidently not Miss Lewinsky who leaked the story to the lawyers . She was a loyalist to the president, but it was obviously not her .
 Someone close to or spying on the president's inner circle had to have leaked the word to Jones's attorneys . The president's relationship with Miss Lewinsky had to be revealed to the attorney .
 William Kristol, editor of the conservative Weekly Standard, was one of the first to "publicly mention” the allegations, the Washington Post reports . The Weekly Standard is published by the MeyerGraham empire, which owns the Post, which also owns the Washington Washington Post .
 Kristol's role as being one of the ""first"" to float the story publicly, you see, is critical to understanding the big picture . Kristol: "It's important to understand the bigger picture"
 Young Kristol is, like his parents, a ""Likudnik"" and has been a harsh critic of President Clinton's decision to ""turn his back"" on Israel .
 Kristol, like Clinton, has been initiated into the Bilderberg Group, the high-level elite foreign policy conclave dominated by the Rockefeller and Rothschild families . Kristol is identified with the ""Republican"" wing of the group, but is identified as a Republican .
 Murdoch's Fox television was essentially who is leading the charge in the Establishment media forcing the other networks to compete . Then, in light of the Kristol-Murdoch connection, it is interesting to note that Fox television is essentially leading the lead in the establishment media .
 Fox News Channel carried the story almost non-stop around the clock . The Fox News channel carried out the story around the world .
 Even when other features were telecast, they were subject to interruption for breaking developments in the Clinton scandal, regardless of how mundane they might have been .
 It wasn't just the socalled ""tabloid press" that was putting on the heat . But the fact is that it wasn't only the 'tabloids' putting on heat . It was the fact that it was putting the heat on the media .
 The first lady named television preacher Jerry Falwell and his friend, Sen. Sen. John McCain, a friend of Sen. McCain . Falwell: "She's trying to stand by her man"
 Jesse Helms as among those who were part of the ""right wing conspiracy" that was out to get her president . Jesse Helm was also accused of being part of a "conspiracy" that wanted her to succeed .
 Clinton was not a backer of Likud's Binjamin Netanyahu in the Israeli elections . Netanyahu won by defeating the liberals led by the ostensibly more moderate Shimon Peres . Clinton was embarrassed politically by Netanyahu's victory .
 Israeli prime minister had already met with (and appeared at a pro-Likud rally in the company of) Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson .
 In fact, the scandal forced the president into retreat as far as pushing Israel was concerned . The scandal forced President Obama into retreat .
 On January 27, 1998 the Washington Post again let the cat out of the bag when it reported that Clinton demonstrated he could not compel the Israelis to meet their responsibilities for a further military pullback .
 The story claimed that the Mossad had gained access to tape-recorded phone sex sessions between the president and Miss Lewinsky . Thomas' book claimed the information forced Clinton to call off a high-priority FBI investigation of a Mossad mole .
 Clinton's critics used the publication of the story to justify the allegation that Clinton's personal peccadilloes were a potential threat to national security . True or not, the story was used as a reason for Clinton's impeachment .
 It was almost as if Hillary was flipping out a switchblade in a very ugly alley fight . Hillary Clinton was caught up in an ugly alley alley fight in 2008 .
 In the end, of course, Bill Clinton survived the impeachment trial, but there was no question whatsoever that there was very clearly the fine hand of Israeli intrigue behind the circumstances leading up to the impeachment . The end of the trial, however, was the end of Clinton's impeachment .
 Bill Clinton facing yet another form of ""assassination"" at the hands of Israel . So we have indeed seen yet another American president, in this case Bill Clinton, facing .
 This is by no means a defense of Clinton, but it is a summary of relevant facts that do lend an interesting insight into the way of power politics in Washington where the influence of Israel is concerned .
 J William Fulbright of Arkansas was the president of Arkansas . Fulbright is a former Secretary of State of the State of Arkansas. Fulbright was elected to the White House in 1945 . Clinton was the first president of the United States to hold office in Washington .
 "The Senate is subservient, much too much," says Sen. John McCain . "We should be more concerned about U.S. interests, rather than doing the bidding of Israel"
 The great majority of the Senate of the U.S. is completely in support of Israel . Anything Israel wants, Israel gets, Israel will get, says Sen. John McCain . McCain: "I'm not surprised that Israel has a right to Israel in the world"
 "This has been demonstrated time and again, and this has made difficult for our government," says minister . This has been proved time and often, says Mr Osborne .
 Fulbright was defeated for renomination after a major media hulabaloo over the senator's remarks .
 Top Jewish fundraisers helped finance Hillary Clinton's Republican opponent in her 2000 Senate race . Hillary just barely won the Jewish vote at the same time her Democratic ticket mate, Al Gore, was carrying an overwhelming 80% over George W Bush . And it's probably no coincidence that top Jewish fundra
 Growing realization of the power of Israel by grass roots Americans who are not afraid to discuss the subject is a reality that Israel and its American lobby must face . Yet, at the same time, growing realization of Israel's power must face the reality .
 The fact that Final Judgment is now ""out there"" and reaching growing numbers of such Americans is an additional ingredient in the mix . Final Judgment will be "out there"
 The rabbi demanded that the Syrians provide official clarification as to whether or not these views expressed by one of Syria's most powerful figures reflect Syria's official view of American history . The Syrians have yet to apologize .
 Syrian friend of Bashar Tlas told him that he had read Final Judgment and concurred with its conclusions . In any case, a Syrian friend has advised him that General Tlas .
 Rabbi Cooper attacked those who had come to my defense when I was under attack by the Anti-Defamation League in Southern California . Earlier, Rabbi Cooper had attacked Rabbi Cooper's defense of me . Rabbi Cooper has been accused of attacking those who defended me .
 Final Judgment has planted the seed of suspicion, but only because of the facts assembled in this book paint a plausible scenario that is just as believable as other theses put forth about this most controversial subject . Final Judgment: Final Judgment is a true account of the events that occurred in the U
 Rabbi Cooper and the ADL and others are so uncomfortable. So that's why they're so uncomfortable, they're uncomfortable .
 The fifth edition of Final Judgment was being readied for the printer . Final Judgment's fifth edition was being made ready for print .
 Sen. Ted Cruz died in June 2000 . Cruz says he was working on the final draft of a book when he died .
 Edward M Kennedy and a group of people were "cutting up" at the outside tables at the Hawk & Dove, a popular nightspot near my office on Capitol Hill in Washington .
 I inscribed the book to Senator Kennedy and handed it to my friend who then proceeded to gingerly approach the senator . I inscribed it to Kennedy and gave it to a friend who approached him .
 Kennedy handed Kennedy the book saying, ""A friend of mine asked me to give you this book. My friend handed me the book," he said . Kennedy said, "A friend told me, 'A friend asked me, give you the book'
 Kennedy: "Thank you, but no thank you. After a moment, handing the book back to my friend, Kennedy said, "Thank You, Kennedy" Kennedy said .
 My friend accepted the book, saying, ""God bless you, to,"" and departed . The book was signed by a friend of the book's author .
 I feel somewhat guilty that I subjected the senator to that experience, for—after all—it was the murder of his own big brother we're talking about here . That sad little story says so very much .
 If there's anyone who knows how plausible the scenario is, that's certainly Ted Kennedy . Ted Kennedy. Ted Kennedy is certainly certainly not a stranger to the world .
 He simply can't tell us he was unaware of his brother's efforts to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb or that he didn't know the bitterness that arose .
 No matter how hard Ted Kennedy proclaims that he and his family have been devout supporters of Israel, the facts demonstrate otherwise . Ted Kennedy's family has a long history of supporting Israel, but facts show otherwise .
 We understand why Senator Kennedy feels compelled to say and do these things, but we also hope the senator understands why we really don't believe that he is sincere when he says the things he does .
 My own particular hope is that Final Judgment will receive recognition that I believe it deserves and that there will be more efforts to explore the allegations made .
 I hope that people will be able to provide documents or other information that will confirm things that I could only speculate upon . I hope people will provide documents and other information to confirm things, I said .
 Perhaps, in the end, the release of Final Judgment will bring forth new witnesses who can tell us things that we never knew before . Perhaps, perhaps, the end of the film's release, will bring forward new witnesses .
 I don't pretend to set myself up as the final arbiter on the JFK assassination, but I do believe that it comes closer than anything yet written in summarizing the entirety of the conspiracy .
 I do look forward to seeing how future efforts at inquiry into inquiry into the subject will be affected by what I have outlined in Final Judgment . I hope to see how future inquiries into the matter will be impacted by the findings .
 On the puzzle you see before you all of the various groups and individuals that have been implicated in the JFK assassination conspiracy—an immensely confusing picture . The puzzle is a confusing picture, with many people involved in the assassination conspiracy .
 Final Judgment encapsulates a thesis that they can't discredit . But, more importantly, in the end, it encapsulates the thesis that can't be discredited . "Final Judgment" will be released on Blu-Ray in September .
 The page numbers below from the soft cover version correspond to page numbers listed inside brackets in this e-book . Page numbers below are the page numbers from soft cover versions of this soft cover .
 An explosive new book charges Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, collaborated with the CIA and the mob in the assassination of John F Kennedy . JFK stood in the way of Israel's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal .
 New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison charged Clay Shaw with participation in the JFK assassination conspiracy . Garrison stumbled upon the Mossad connection to the murder of President Kennedy .
 In ""Final Judgment"" the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination is exposed in frightening—and fully documented-detail . The Israeli connection is revealed in frightening-and-frightening detail .
 Stone's film was funded by longtime Mossad figure, Arnon Milchan, Israel's biggest arms dealer . Milchan is the chief financial backer of Stone's movie .
 Piper methodically builds up his damning case against showing the depth of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination . At the same time the book is very easy to follow and understand as Piper builds up the damning case .
 Modern media has severely suppressed this book making it almost a taboo for mainstream booksellers to stock it . I thoroughly recommend this book as a way to expand one's mind beyond the confines of the modern day media .
 This book is especially topical today as the search for peace in the Middle East continues . It is especially relevant today as a book about peace continues to be published .
 As Israelis as well international Jews who care about our country, I believe it right and proper to engage in an informed and vigorous debate about the undoubted wrongdoings of our government .
 This is the only way in which the worst excesses of Zionism can be curbed, writes David Frum . Frum says. This is a way to curb the excesses .
 Conspiracy-minded believed that the shots directed at JFK occurred too quickly together to have been fired by one person . The conspiracy-minded believe the shots were fired by multiple shots fired at JFK .
 ADL is dismissing 40 years of hard work by perhaps hundreds—maybe thousands —who have dared to take issue with the Warren Commission-ADL line regarding the JFK affair .
 The ADL's misrepresentation of the very real evidence in the JFK assassination could be quite misleading indeed . However, for the average person exposed to the lies, the ADL lies could be misleading .
 The ADL is so determined to lend its support to the JFK assassination cover-up in the first place . And that, of course, raises the question as to why the ADL supports such a conspiracy conspiracy .
 Jack Ruby's rabbi, Hillel Silverman, was the key ""source"" for the Warren Commission's final judgment that Jack Ruby was a nightclub keeper who killed Lee Oswald out of sympathy for JFK's family . Ruby's Rabbi was a key "source" for the final judgment .
 We now know why the Warren Commission took Silverman's assurances to heart . And we now know that Silverman was right .
 The story of the Silverman-Warren Commission connection is told by Dave Reitzes who was hailed by the prestigious Jewish Forward, on Nov. 28, 2003, for helping put down what Forward called ""zany" theories on the JFK assassination .
 Rabbi Silverman was one of Ruby's closet confidantes following his arrest . He first met with him on November 25, then met again in Los Angeles in July 1964 .
 Silverman happened also to be friendly with Warren Commission junior counsel David W Belin . Silverman and Belin were also friends with the Warren Commission .
 The two met during the summer of 1963, during a study mission to Israel . The two had met in 1963, when they were in Israel .
 On one of Belin's first trips to Dallas on behalf of the commission, he asked Silverman his opinion as to whether Ruby was part of a conspiracy . Silverman says Ruby was not part of the conspiracy .
 Critics will say that raising this question is ""anti-Semitic,"" but the fact is that nobody has ever even dared to point out the obvious conflict of interest for David Belin due to his pre-assassination religious relationship with the personal religious counselor of one of the key figures
 Chesterton provided a means of understanding the Mossad role in the JFK conspiracy in the story of his fictional detective, Father Brown, thwarting a crime during a dinner party at an elegant hotel . Chesterton's fictional detective thwarted a crime in the fictional story .
 In The Queer Feet, the villain infiltrated the party and made off with the silverware in the presence of a small handful of waiters and distinguished guests .
 The thief dressed as both the waiters and the diners were in evening clothes . He dressed as if they were wearing evening clothes, the thief dressed like others .
 His ability to act and posture accordingly, despite his singular costume, made his crime possible . His actions and posture made him possible, even though he was wearing a costume .
 In the dining room, the criminal assumed the pose of a skilled waiter, moving swiftly, with precision . He kept his distance, his eyes averted, keeping his distance from the restaurant .
 The thief adopted the easy gestures, casual manners of a society plutocrat, ignoring the hired help as he moved among them . He adopted the ""absent-minded insolence" of the society .
 Every work of art, divine or diabolic, has one indispensable mark: the center of it is simple, however much the fulfillment may be complicated . The center of the work is simple: the fulfillment is simple and simple .
 Every clever crime is founded ultimately on some one quite simple fact, some fact that is not itself mysterious . "Every clever crime" is founded on one simple fact: "Some fact that's not itself itself mysterious"
 The Mossad assumed a protective coloration, operating behind the other conspirators and yet effectively acted in the open, hiding . Because of its ability to infiltrate and/or manipulate or otherwise collaborate with such diverse groups as the CIA, organized crime, certain American ""right wing"" persons and
 The role of Mossad and its motive in moving against JEK, his effort to block Israel from building nuclear weapons, was lost in the multiple, seemingly disconnected and seemingly competing conspiracy theories that emerged in the wake of the assassination .
 In the JFK assassination, the Mossad connection is inescapable . Call it the ""missing link" or the one ""indispensable mark" pointing to the perpetrator of the crime .
 Sierra said ""Las Vegas and Cleveland gambling interests"" were financing him . A ""considerable" amount of money was funneled through Sierra's Chicago employer, the Union Tank Car Company . Union disavowed knowledge of the actual source of the funds .
 FBI showed little interest in the well-funded Sierra . CIA noted two days before JFK assassination that Sierra ""remains somewhat of a mystery man in terms of his means of support, and indeed, his long range objectives"
 Sierra and his ""mysterious backers"" funded the New Orleans-based Cuban exile training camp where JFK assassination figures Guy Banister, David Ferrie and Lee Oswald and/or his ""double"" were seen in 1963 .
 Most JFK writers have carefully deleted the phrase ""the Jews"" when describing this incident, and/or change the word ""they"" to ""we" or fudge . The totality of the mysteries surrounding Sierra points again to a likely Mossad role in the JFK conspiracy .
 Since Sierra was funded by ""Las Vegas and Cleveland gambling interests,"" that unquestionably points toward Meyer Lansky's chief Las Vegas point man, Morris Dalitz . Dalitz was a shareholder in Mossad operative Tibor Rosenbaum's Permindex entity which, as we have seen
 Sierra's short-lived organization was a Mossad ""front"" designed to finance and manipulate the New Orleans-based operations used to orchestrate the JFK assassination . The money was provided by the Lansky syndicate's gambling ventures, which, as noted, were intertwined with the Mossad
 Peter Dale Scott seems concerned about the circumstances surrounding the ""our new backers are the Jews"" story . Scott claims that this was concocted as part of a scheme by the real conspirators behind the assassination to launch a public relations campaign blaming ""the Jews"" for the JFK assassination .
 The theory that ""the Jews"" were behind the assassination had no public relevance at all . The theory of "the Jews" was not relevant at all to the public .
 Scott and others who make this claim ignore that quite relevant fact . Needless to say, Scott— and others . -- ignore that fact .
 Scott contends the story suggesting Sierra's group was involved in the assassination was part of a more subtle plot by the real conspirators to force Robert Kennedy into blocking any serious inquiries into his brother's murder . Scott contends that the story suggests Sierra was funded by ""Jews"
 Scott asserts that Sierra was actually a facilitator of anti-Castro operations being carried out by Robert Kennedy on a ""second track"" even as JFK was making other quiet, friendly overtures to Castro .
 One Enrique Ruiz Williams allegedly was the contact point between RFK and Sierra . Sierra's operation may have been part of the effort .
 Scott's scenario is that the possibility of involvement by Sierra's group in the assassination forced RFK into backing off from investigating JFK's murder because it could backfire, exposing Kennedy family plots against Castro . The bottom line is that RFK backed down from investigating the assassination because of the possibility
 Sierra met with former CIA Director Allen Dulles, Lucius Clay, senior partner of Lehman Brothers, the famed Jewish ""Our Crowd"" banking firm, in April of 1963 .
 Liebman was a major player in several high-level intelligence-connected institutions . He was integral to what is known today as the ""neo-conservative"" network known for its determination to place Israel's security as the central concern of all U.S. foreign policy making .
 Scott strenuously wishes to avoid is the likelihood that either the Mossad was Sierra's actual handler or that Mossad co-opted lower-level operatives in a covert Kennedy-sponsored assassination plot against Castro .
 Mossad would certainly have seen the brilliance in using a top-secret (and potentially scandalous) Kennedy family venture as the ""cover" for its own scheme to remove JFK from the White House .
 Peter Dale Scott has reportedly been fiercely hostile to those who have dared mention Final Judgment in his presence . Scott is said to be fiercely hostile towards those who mention Final Judgement .
 Final Judgment fills in the missing pieces of the JFK puzzle . Scott (and others like him) prefer to avoid or to suppress those aspects of the film .
 O'Sullivan's testimony and statements to the FBI and the Warren Commission and subsequent investigators for the House Assassinations Committee seem to somewhat vague in some respects . Ferrie and Oswald were involved in the assassination of President Kennedy in Dallas, Texas, in August 1963 .
 The likelihood of a Mossad connection to the JFK assassination and its cover-up is not quite clear . Now here's where it all gets interesting—at least as far as it gets interesting .
 Fred O'Sullivan went to work for Israel's Mossad in New Orleans . The former New Orleans intelligence squad chief worked for Mossad . He was arrested in 2007 for allegedly working for Israel .
 The son of a trusted U.S. Catholic cop who converted to Judaism and moved to Israel is now the military correspondent for the nation's most prestigious newspaper .
 The question is how far back O'Sullivan was sympathetic to and/or recruited by the Mossad and what he did as a high-ranking police intelligence officer to hinder investigations .
 Oswald recruited by David Ferric, who recruited Lee Harvey Oswald into the Civil Air Patrol, went to work for Israeli intelligence . Oswald met Ferric in the civil air patrol, where he met his first major contact in the intelligence community . The fact that the very individual who recruited Oswald to
 This is something those who admire Jones will find difficult to acknowledge, for it may suggest after all, that Final Judgment may be on target . It may suggest that the Mossad may be behind the JFK assassination .
 Jack Ruby was a close intimate of the members of the Dallas Police force and other U.S. law enforcement agencies, as well as the Israeli counter intelligence organization . Ruby was an intimate with the Dallas police force and members of Israeli counter-intelligence .
 His onetime employee, Nancy Zeigman Perrin Rich, was also close to these same forces . Rich was also a former employee of Rich's onetime employer . Rich died at the age of 92 .
 Identifying Ruby and Nancy as_ being involved with the Israeli intelligence opens up a completely overlooked area concerning the assassination of President Kennedy . Ruby's involvement in the assassination opens up an overlooked area of the assassination .
 There are indications in the Warren Hearings that Ruby, and ""Honest Joe"" Goldstein were intelligence operatives in a small way for someone . Ruby and "Honest Joe" Goldstein may have been intelligence operatives .
 Abe Weinstein's Colony Club seems to have been used at times as a ""safe house"" for operatives . Abe Weinstein used the club as a "safe house" for operatives during his presidency .
 Three Jewish entrepreneurs may indeed have been working for the Mossad, says Jones . Jones suggested that Ruby was working for Mossad . And considering what we now know of multiple Israeli connections in Dallas and in Texas .
 We owe a great deal to the late Penn Jones for—fearless researcher that he was, not hesitating to dare to dare . mention ""Israel"" in a less-than-flattering context, in this case, in . this case . The late Penn was a fearless
 Even New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison stumbled on the Mossad connection . Even Garrison's admirers don't like to acknowledge that .
 If it seems that we are "harping" on the Israeli connection, it's because we are, it is because of Israel . If you think you're 'harped' on the Israel connection, that's because you are .
 It's because nobody else will do it, despite all of the evidence that's there, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . It's not just because it's there that nobody else is going to do it .
 Ellery Queen mystery novels would issue ""a challenge to the reader"" to come up with the solution to the crime . After all the clues had been scattered in front of the readers, the detective gathered all of the suspects together in the drawing room to unveil the murderer .
 I'm challenging readers to show me any factual errors or twisted reasoning or quotes taken out of context or any misrepresentations which would disprove the theory laid forth in this volume .
 As of this time, I am aware of the fifteen following factual errors or misstatements that appeared in previous editions of Final Judgment and which have been corrected . The errors include the following facts and facts that appear to be incorrect .
 This error was corrected in the third edition of this week's edition . The error was brought to my attention by a friend whose aunt was visiting Paris at the time of the Mossad crime .
 The lady's companion did go into the deli and died in the bombing, her friend's aunt went elsewhere and thus survived . Although the woman's companion died, the lady's aunt survived, her aunt survived .
 The error had nothing to do with the thesis of Final Judgment or even with the JFK assassination itself . So that error was corrected, although it had no bearing on the thesis or even JFK assassination .
 In fact, Dalitz did not die in the colorful way Roemer's book described . Dalitz was not killed in the way the book describes .
 It appears that although Roemer has written some ""non-fiction"" relating to the history of organized crime, he also includes some literary license on his part .
 I apologize for my reliance on Roemer's reputation as an authority on the mob . I'm sorry for relying on his reputation as a authority on mob .
 Final Judgment is the fourth edition of Final Judgment . Final Judgment will be released in November 2014 .
 I hasten to add, however, that this error had nothing to do with the thesis of Final Judgment or with the JFK assassination itself . I nonetheless hastn't to say, but this error was not related to the thesis .
 The reference to ""Oswald"" in Davis's possession was a letter of introduction to Madrid-based arms dealer Victor Oswald . In fact, according to new research published in 1996 in Oswald Talked by Ray and Mary LaFontaine, it turns out .
 It also appears that Davis was held in a Moroccan jail, rather than an Algerian jail, as I stated . Davis was reportedly held in Morocco, not Algeria, according to reports .
 My source for the incorrect data regarding Davis's travails was Jim Marrs, writing in Crossfire . My source was Jim Mrs, who wrote Crossfire, writing about Davis .
 Davis was connected with Jack Ruby and was indeed involved in the Israeli-connected affairs of the French OAS in North Africa . The two errors notwithstanding, the fact is that Davis was involved in Jack Ruby .
 Allen Dulles was the CIA director in question . He was the brother of Dulles, who later became the CIA chief . He says he knew, of course, it was his brother .
 In the first printing of the fourth edition I said that John Connally, the former governor of Texas, died in 1995 . In the original edition of this edition, we said that Connally's death was in 1995.
 In both printings of the fourth edition I said that a scandal forced Sen. Barack Obama to resign from office .
 Gary Hart to withdraw from the race for the 1984 Democratic presidential nomination . Hart ran for the Democratic nomination for president in 1984 . Hart was the Democratic presidential candidate for the first time .
 Botnick was unaware Botnick had left New Orleans to take a position in the ADL's Atlanta office . He did not return to New Orleans ADL office until 1964 . Botnick of the New Orleans office of the Anti-Defamation League .
 "Shaw, in fact, was one of Angleton's operatives. However, I over-stated the matter when I went on to assert that," he said . The former secretary of state said Shaw was an operative for Angleton .
 JFK researcher Clark Wilkins brought this over-statement to my attention . I am pleased to make this clarification, after I was criticized for saying JFK was shot .
 In the 4th edition I referred to a photograph (widely discussed in JFK research) that purported to show Clay Shaw with David Ferrie . Clay Shaw was killed in the Vietnam War . He was killed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The accused gentleman has unquestionably proved his innocence, but this does not disprove Morrow's basic thesis that the Iranian SAVAK (a creation of the CIA and the Mossad) carried out the RFK assassination, he says .
 Final Judgment is based on the basic thesis of Final Judgment . Final Judgment will be released on Friday at 8pm on BBC One .
 Final Judgment has nothing whatsoever to do with the thesis of Final Judgment itself . However, this error—again—has nothing whatsoever . The error has nothing to do to the thesis itself, but it has nothing .
 Dallas was, in 1963, a major outpost of Jewish power . Dallas was a critical point firming up the thesis of Final Judgment and diminishing other theories surrounding the JFK assassination . Dallas is now a major Jewish power outpost, not a Jewish enclave .
 Others call it ""outrageous"" and one woman—Marcia Milchiker—went so far as to say that my theory was ""scientifically unprovable"" as though I had suggested it was scientifically provable in the first place .
 Order extra copies of Final Judgment and distribute them among friends and family . Help spread the word about who really killed JFK and why e .
 Final Judgment is $25 each; 3 copies for $60; 5 copies for 5 copies . Additional copies of Final Judgment are available for $75 .
 Extra-reduced bulk rate prices for a carton of 16 copies are available . Additional extra-reduction bulk rate rates are available for 16 copies .
 Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Follow us on Twitter @dailymail.com .
 Take advantage of the special introductory price of 16 weeks of American Free Press for only $17.76 .
 The word about Final Judgment is getting out there, much to the dismay of the Israeli lobby . PIPERM@LYCOS.com: Final Judgment will be a reality TV show .
 Worldwide attention is now focused on Israel's nuclear weapons, and Final Judgment has played a part in helping make that happen . Final Judgment will be released on Friday .
 "Rest assured my enemies have also worked quite maliciously and skillfully against me behind the scenes," he says . "I'm not afraid to give up," he said .
 "I cannot help but conclude I have accomplished something important with Final Judgment," says author . "Such corrupt, perverse and evil forces have been so determined to hurt me," he says .
 "I appreciate the continuing expressions of support from good people. So you can understand why I appreciate ... good people," he says .
 I always look forward to letters and constructive criticism from my readers . I always welcome your views .
 Michael Collins Piper, author of Final Judgment, is one of the Israeli lobby's primary targets today . The Israeli lobby is targeting the author of the book .
 Piper is undaunted, despite the fact his life was publicly threatened by Irv Rubin, the violent leader of the terrorist Jewish Defense League . Piper has been repeatedly attacked by propagandists for Israel .
 Great-great-grandfather of Andrew Carnegie was Andrew Carnegie's early business partner . Author's great-great grandfather, Colonel John Piper, is a famous bridge builder and business partner of Carnegie .
 In recent years, he has lectured across the globe in places as diverse as Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, Moscow, Russia and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia .
 Police-state-minded advocates of war and imperialism disturbed at Piper's efforts to forge links of common understanding among peoples of all creeds and colors . Piper's energetic efforts were also disturbed by the 'police-state' reaction to his efforts .
 Piper considers the labels of ""liberal"" and ""conservative"" archaic, artificial and divisive, manipulative media buzzwords designed to suppress popular dissent and free inquiry . Piper is an unapologetic old-style American progressive in the LaFollette-Wheeler tradition . Piper considers labels of
 Twenty years before the major media discovered the ""neo-conservative"" cabal that pushed America into the Iraq war, Piper was reporting on their intrigues . Piper reported on the group's intrigues before major media found them .
 In 2004, The High Priests of War was the first book ever published on the subject . He assembled a fascinating overview of their insidious record .
 Piper confronted the controversial issue of Zionist power in America in his 2005 work, The New Jerusalem . Piper's detailed exposition is unlike any ever assembled by any modern author . Piper: "The New Jerusalem" is Piper's most provocative work .
 Piper's lecture to the Zayed Centre, the Arab League think tank, on the topic of American media bias, has been distributed worldwide . Piper's authoritative lecture was given to the think tank .
 Piper writes for American Free Press, the Washington-based national weekly, and in the historical journal, The Barnes Review . Sourcing much of his work from his own massive library of some 10,000 volumes .
 One media critic hails Piper as one of the top 25 best writers on the Internet today . Piper has been a prolific writer for years . Piper is also known for his work on social media platforms .
 In 1987 he exposed the Justice Department frame-up of Pennsylvania State Treasurer Budd Dwyer that led to Dwyer's shocking public suicide . In 1987, he was the first to expose the Justice Dept. frame-ups of Dwyer .
 The ADL will never forgive Piper Piper Piper for her role in unmasking Bullock . Piper Piper was a pivotal front-line member of the ADL's anti-bullock campaign .
 Piper was the only journalist to assert-—based-based-hard evidence- that the Oklahoma bombing was a Mossad ""false flag"" operation designed to implicate Saddam Hussein . The scheme was derailed by United States investigators who rejected Israel's machinations, opting for a ""lone
 Piper's pioneering work on Israeli links to the 9-11 tragedy is echoed by truth seekers and, predictably, damned by defenders of Israel for its accuracy . Today, Piper's work has been widely criticized for its inaccuracy .
 Michael Collins Piper was scheduled to speak at a small California college on August 21, 1997 . The author of Final Judgment, Piper, was the subject of an uproar at the college . Piper is the author of the book Final Judgment .
 Pro-Israel pressure groups were working overtime to prevent Piper from being heard . Pro-Israeli pressure groups worked overtime to keep Piper from hearing .
 They feared college students would be ‘too impressionable’ and might actually take Piper’s thesis seriously . They feared it would be too much to take seriously . Piper's thesis was published at the University of North Carolina .
 Piper was being attacked for daring to speak the truth . JFK was embroiled in a bitter conflict with Israel over its drive to build a nuclear arsenal, weapons of mass destruction .
 Final Judgment Piper had documented that there were multiple connections of Israel’s intelligence service, the Mossad, to many key players often linked to the JFK conspiracy . Piper: The point was missed by others who had studied the assassination over the years .
 Piper demonstrates that the Mossad connection is there . Whether the CIA or the Mafia or ‘the Mafia’ or “the right wing” -- you name it, Piper demonstrates .
 If you initially have any doubts about the thesis, the author suggests you first take a look at the comprehensive photo section which summarizes the book... and then, if you dare .
 In recent years, word about the explosive revelations appearing in Final Judgment began to circulate worldwide . Demand for the book became so immense that second-hand copies were selling on the Internet for as much as $185 per copy .
 While the major media continues to ignore Final Judgment, a number of individuals whose expertise cannot be ignored have begun to publicly lend their support to the thesis . This is particularly significant in light of growing global concern about the proliferations of weapons of mass destruction in Middle East .
 The author continues to ask other JFK assassination theorists to debate him publicly . He begs for his critics to demonstrate where he has misinterpreted facts or distorted the writings of others who have delved into the subject .
 The following reflects minor spelling, “typo,” and punctuation changes in this ebook compared to the 6"" edition soft cover version .
 Soft cover pages are in brackets, and the soft cover edition “typo” that has undergone revision is in quotation marks . Soft cover editions that have undergone revision are in quotations marks . The soft cover "typo" is in brackets .
 The ebook revision is enclosed in parentheses, and ebook pages are reflected as plain numbers . The ebook is published in the U.S. and UK editions .
 "ADDS A NEW DIMENSION to the question of just WHO DUNNIT?"" —Robert Cutler Veteran JFK assassination researcher “VICIOUS intellectual licentiousness” —George F Will Vetesatvek, Sep. 25, 1996 .
 It would have been casy for Michacl Collins Piper to ignore the complete story, as others have done, and be rewarded .
 As a French citizen and as a Jew, | found the French-Isracii connection fascinating and a logical conclusion . Asa French citizen .