 The Presidency of John F Kennedy spanned the period in U.S. history that encompasses the events of the Cold War Era and the age of the Space Race . The Space Race and Cold War Arms Race were part of the era .
 The Women’s Rights Movement and Feminism emerges and the 1963 Equal Pay Act was passed . The Women's Rights Movement was formed in the early 1960s . The 1963 equal pay Act passed .
 The Civil Rights Movement gains momentum with the Freedom Riders and the March on Washington . assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, aged 46 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was apprehended in connection with the John F Kennedy Assassination but was killed two days later by Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby killed Oswald two days after he was apprehended by Oswald .
 The meaning of the nickname ""King of Camelot"" refers to the old Arthurian legend and the chivalric King Arthur's, who lived in his castle at Camelot .
 JFK shared King Arthur's idealistic view of the future which was illustrated in the popular 1960 Broadway production of the musical Camelot . Camelot was a popular musical based on the King Arthur story .
 Character and Personality Type of John F Kennedy can be described as outgoing, charming, gallant, sensitive, controlling, witty and gregarious . Character traits of President Kennedy include charm, charm, charming and gallant . President Kennedy is described as witty and charming .
 Myers-Briggs personality type for John F Kennedy is an ESFP with the temperament of an idealist . It has been speculated that the Myers Briggs personality type is an idealistic .
 An outgoing, fun, unconventional and attentive character who excels in interpersonal interactions . An outgoing and unconventional character .
 The crisis began when an American U-2 spy plane captured photographs indicating that the Soviet Union began was installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.2 plane captured photos that indicated that the U.S. was installing the missiles .
 John F Kennedy launched a naval blockade, effectively placing Cuba under ""quarantine"" which Khrushchev warned would be viewed as an act of war . Kennedy launched the naval blockade of Cuba in response to the threat .
 The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom took place in Washington, D.C. on August 28, 1963 . The march was held in honor of the civil rights movement .
 The rally attracted 250,000 people who listened to speakers such as Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The rally was held in New York City, New York .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was interrogated in connection with the JFK Assassination but was shot and killed by Jack Ruby whilst being led through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters on November 24, 1963 . Jack Ruby shot Oswald in the head in the face of Dallas police .
 Lyndon B Johnson was sworn in as the thirty-sixth President of the United States, 98 minutes after the assassination of John F Kennedy . The article provides an overview and summary of some of the most important events during his presidency .