 A reasonable stance might be to try to look at the human species from the outside . A reasonable view might be that it's possible to try and look at humans from the inside .
 "For the first time in the history of the human species, we have clearly developed the capacity to destroy ourselves," says the author of the book .
 It's now being recognized that there are more long-term processes like environmental destruction leading in the same direction, maybe not to total destruction, but at least to the destruction of the capacity for a decent existence .
 There are other dangers like pandemics, which have to do with globalization and interaction . And there are also other dangers, which are related to globalization, interaction .
 There are processes underway and institutions right in place, like nuclear weapons systems . Nuclear weapons systems could lead to a serious blow to, or maybe the termination of, an organized existence . So there is a process underway, and institutions are already in place .
 There are those who are trying hard to do something about these threats, and others who are acting to escalate them . There are some who want to escalate the threats .
 If you look at who they are, this future historian or extraterrestrial observer would see something strange indeed . This future historian would see them as strange .
 Trying to mitigate or overcome these threats are the least developed societies, the indigenous populations, or the remnants of them, tribal societies and first nations in Canada . The most developed societies in Canada are at risk of terrorism and terrorism .
 "They're not talking about nuclear war but environmental disaster, and they're really trying to do something about it," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 All over the world – Australia, India, South America – there are battles going on, sometimes wars, sometimes even wars . In fact, all over Australia and India, there is a battle going on every day .
 Tribal societies are trying to resist resource extraction operations that are extremely harmful locally, but also in their general consequences . In India, it's a major war over direct environmental destruction, with tribal societies trying to .
 In societies where indigenous populations have an influence, many are taking a strong stand . Many are taking strong stand against the idea of indigenous people .
 Hugo Chavez died recently and was the object of mockery, insult, and hatred throughout the Western world . Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez was the subject of ridicule for calling George W Bush a devil . Chavez died in August .
 In that speech, he warned of the dangers of the overuse of fossil fuels . He urged producer and consumer countries to get together and work out ways to reduce fossil fuel use .
 Unlike the funny things he did, this aspect of his actions at the U.N. was never even reported . Unlike other things, it was never reported .
 At one extreme you have indigenous, tribal societies trying to stem the race to disaster . So, at one extreme, tribal society is trying to stop the 'race to disaster' in Australia .
 At the other extreme, the richest, most powerful societies in world history, are racing full-speed ahead to destroy the environment as quickly as possible . The U.S. and Canada are among the richest countries in the world, but not the least .
 Unlike Ecuador, indigenous societies throughout the world, they want to extract every drop of hydrocarbons from the ground with all possible speed . Unlike Ecuador and other nations, indigenous society wants to extract all of the hydrocarbon .
 Both political parties, President Obama, the media, and the international press seem to be looking forward with great enthusiasm to what they call ""a century of energy independence"" for the U.S.
 Energy independence is an almost meaningless concept, but put that aside. Energy independence can be a meaningless concept . Energy independence will be an important part of America's future .
 Admittedly, when it comes to alternative energy development, Europe is doing something . Europe is not alone, but it's doing something here, it says .
 Americans are pretty close to the international norm in their concern about global warming . Americans are more concerned about climate change than many other countries .
 Business interests don't want it and they're overwhelmingly powerful in determining policy . You get a big gap between opinion and policy on lots of issues, including this one . Business interests are overwhelmingly powerful, so you get a gap in opinion .
 "Just about every one you open has a more dire prediction than the last," says the author of the book .
 It's been known for a long time that if there were to be a first strike by a major power, even with no retaliation, it would probably destroy civilization just because of the nuclear-winter consequences that would follow .
 In some ways, however, the worst aspect of these grim events is that the lessons haven't been learned . The worst part of the grim events remains that they have not been learned, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 What happened in the missile crisis in October 1962 has been prettified to make it look as if acts of courage and thoughtfulness abounded . What happened was prettified in 1962, it has been made to look more like a real thing .
 Nikita Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy offering to settle the crisis by withdrawing Russian missiles from Cuba and U.S. missiles from Turkey . Kennedy: "There was a point, as the missile crisis was reaching its peak, when Soviet Premier Nikita .
 Kennedy hadn't even known that the U.S. had 2 missiles in Turkey at the time . Kennedy didn't even know that the missiles were in Turkey .
 They were being withdrawn anyway, because they were being replaced by more lethal Polaris nuclear submarines, which are invulnerable . Polaris submarines are being replaced with more lethal, invulnerable submarines .
 At the time, Kennedy was estimating the likelihood of nuclear war at a third to a half . Kennedy himself was estimating a third-to-a-half chance of a nuclear war .
 Kennedy was willing to accept a very high risk of massive destruction in order to establish the principle that we – and only we – have the right to offensive missiles beyond our borders . No matter what risk to others – and to ourselves – if matters fall out of control .
 Kennedy did accept a secret agreement to withdraw the missiles the U.S. was already withdrawing, as long as it was never made public . Kennedy did, however, accept the agreement . Kennedy accepted the secret agreement, but did not make it public .
 Khrushchev had to openly withdraw Russian missiles while the U.S. secretly withdrew its obsolete ones . Kennedy had to maintain his macho image. Khrushchev had to be humiliated .
 The horror of his decisions is not mentioned – try to find it on the record . The horror is not even mentioned . Try to find out what happened to him in the past .
 The U.S. had sent missiles with nuclear warheads to Okinawa a couple of months before the crisis blew up . The United States had sent missile missiles with nukes to Okinawa .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger called a high-level nuclear alert in 1973 . Ten years after that, in 1973, Henry Kissinger was on a high level nuclear alert . Kissinger called the alert 10 years later .
 President Obama warned Russia not to interfere in ongoing Israel-Arab war . U.S. and Russia had agreed a ceasefire had just been agreed upon by the United States .
 The Air Force is penetrating Russian air space to try to elicit information about Russian warning systems . Operation Able Archer was launched after President Obama entered the White House .
 The Russians were uncertain, some high-level officials fearing that this was a step towards a real first strike . The Russians feared that this could be a first strike, some feared that it was a strike .
 The nuclear issue is regularly on front pages in the cases of North Korea and Iran . At the moment, the nuclear issue has been regularly on the front pages .
 Iran is considered in the West – not in the Arab world, not in Asia – the gravest threat to world peace . The West is considered the most powerful in the Middle East, not Asia, the most dangerous .
 It's a Western obsession, and it's interesting to look into the reasons for it, but I'll put that aside here . It's an interesting way to look at the reasons why it's an obsession .
 One way, a pretty sensible one, was proposed a couple of months ago at a meeting of the non-aligned countries in Tehran, Iran . The proposal was proposed at the meeting in Tehran .
 A proposal that has been around for decades, pressed particularly by Egypt, has been approved by the U.N. General Assembly . Egypt's proposal was just reiterating a proposal that's been around decades, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The proposal is to move toward establishing a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the region . The proposal would be to establish a nuclear weapon free zone .
 That wouldn't be the answer to everything, but it would be a pretty significant step forward . It would be the first step forward in a long line of progress in the world .
 Under U.N. auspices, there was to be an international conference in Finland last December to try to implement plans to move toward this. Under United Nations auspices .
 You won't read about it in the newspapers because it wasn't reported – only in specialist journals . The story will only be reported by specialist journals, not the newspapers .
 A couple of days later Obama cancelled the 3 meeting, saying the time wasn't the right .
 The European Parliament issued a statement calling for it to continue, as did the Arab states . The Arab states have also called for the European Parliament to step down .
 So we'll move toward ever-harsher sanctions against the Iranian population – it doesn't hurt the regime – and maybe war . So we will move toward even more sanctions against Iran, maybe war, and maybe even war .
 "It does make sense to try to figure out what's in the minds of people when they're acting in crazy ways," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Imagine what it meant in the Korean War years of the early 1950s for your country to be totally leveled, everything destroyed by a huge superpower, which was gloating about what it was doing . The Korean War .
 North Korean leadership is likely to have read the public military journals of this superpower at that time explaining that, since everything else in North Korea had been destroyed, the air force was sent to destroy North Korea's dams . The dams that controlled the water supply – a war crime, by the
 Official journals were talking excitedly about how wonderful it was to see the water pouring down, digging out the valleys, and the Asians scurrying around trying to survive .
 The journals were exulting in what this meant to those ""Asians,"" horrors beyond our imagination," they wrote . The journals exulted in what they called the "horrors beyond our imaginations"
 It meant the destruction of their rice crop, which in turn meant starvation and death . The destruction of the rice crop led to the death of many in the region .
 In 1993, Israel and North Korea were moving towards an agreement in which North Korea would stop sending any missiles or military technology to the Middle East . Israel would recognize North Korea as a country that sent missiles to the region . North Korea stopped sending missiles and technology to Israel in 1993 .
 North Korea carried out a minor missile test in retaliation for the test . Shortly after that, in retaliation, the North Korean government carried out its own missile test .
 The U.S. and North Korea did then reach a framework agreement in 1994 that halted its nuclear work and was more or less honored by both sides . Both sides agreed to halt their nuclear work in 1994 .
 When George W Bush came into office, North Korea had maybe one nuclear weapon and verifiably wasn't producing any more . North Korea now has one nuclear bomb and isn't producing more .
 Bush immediately launched his aggressive militarism, threatening North Korea – ""axis of evil"" and all that – so North Korea got back to work on its nuclear program . North Korea's nuclear program began in 2003 .
 By the time Bush left office, they had eight to 10 nuclear weapons and a missile system, another great neocon achievement . The U.S. now has eight or more nuclear weapons than any other nation .
 In 2005, the U.S. and North Korea reached an agreement in which North Korea was to end all nuclear weapons and missile development . The United States and N. Korea actually reached a deal in 2005 to end nuclear weapons development .
 West was to provide light-water reactor for its medical needs and end aggressive statements . In return, the West, but mainly the United States, was to . provide a light water reactor for the West's medical needs .
 The pair would then form a nonaggression pact and move toward accommodation . They would then be able to form an accommodation pact . The pact would then move toward an accommodation .
 He withdrew the offer of the light-water reactor and initiated programs to compel banks to stop handling any North Korean transactions, even perfectly legal ones . The North Korean leader has also withdrawn offer of a light water reactor .
 You make a hostile gesture and we'll respond with some crazy gesture of our own. We'll respond to it with our own . We're not afraid of it, we're going to do it, it's just a game of war .
 U.S. military exercises on the Korean peninsula have got to look threatening to the North . South Korean military exercises have been seen as a threat to North Korea .
 "We'd think they were threatening if they were going on in Canada and aimed at us," says Peter MacIntosh . "They were threatening," he says of the Canadian government .
 Stealth B-2s and B-52s are carrying out simulated nuclear bombing attacks right on North Korea's borders . The most advanced bombers in history, Stealth bombers in . history, are . carrying out . simulated nuclear . bombing attacks .
 "They remember that past, so they're reacting in a very aggressive, extreme way," she says . "They're reacting to that past," she adds .
 North Korean leaders are 'crazy and how awful' North Korea leaders are, says CNN's John Defterios . North Korea leader Kim Jong-won is 'crazy' and 'awful' says Defterio .
 This is hardly the whole story, and this is the way the world is going. But that's hardly the entire story, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If you ask what the world is going to look like, it's not a pretty picture . So if you ask if the world will look like it, it won't be a pretty thing .