 Anatoly Karpov: "If the opponent offers keen play I don’t object" "I get less satisfaction, even if I win, than from a game conducted according to all the rules of strategy with its ruthless logic"
 The trajectories of our lives can often be traced back to our decisions made at key watershed moments . Though chance and opportunity are wild cards in the ultimate outcomes, the paths of our life can often trace back to key decisions .
 The most important decisions often follow information gathering and extended reflection . Though many of these choices are made on a spur-of-the-moment impulse, the most important ones often follow .
 In chapters 2, 3, and 4, we examine the interplay of the cognitive processes involved in strategic decision-making . The process is the process of translating our goals into a course of action, the authors say .
 If chess models a game of ‘ruthless logic,’ then poker, poker, is a game with both visceral and rational components . Poker involves bluffing, reading body language, and intimidation . Poker, in its form, is an arena for bluffing and body language
 Social sciences in the second half of the 20th century sought to add rigor and predictive power to their subjects by incorporating mathematical models . The social sciences were inspired by the early triumphs of the hard sciences, the social sciences .
 Research papers in a variety of subjects including economics, psychology, education and business were increasingly populated with equations and mathematical formalism .
 With this evolution, fluency in mathematics was becoming an increasingly important component of the new literacy . Fluency in math was becoming increasingly important part of the education system .
 In 1944, John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern published their Theory of Games and Economic Behavior in which they sought to mathematize strategic decision–making . The Theory of Economic Behavior was published in 1944 .
 By listing options available to two adversaries and exploring the payoffs and penalties of each option, the researchers sought to find an optimal solution for each combatant . They found the best way to find a solution for two adversaries .
 As one of the fathers of the computer, von Neumann may have been anticipating a future use of computer-based decision-making .
 Human judgements in the decision-making process would be replaced by algorithmic procedures that would yield optimal results . Today’s computer chess programs scan the available options and choose the most promising move .
 What emerged from this publication was an entirely new branch of economics that is known today as game theory . Game theory is today known as game theories .
 In fewer than ten years after its creation, this theory would be tested on the world stage in a dramatic political struggle that would threaten the existence of the human species, and be remembered as the most important period of decision making in history .
 For six tension-filled days, Kennedy and his executive committee debated the pros and cons of four possible responses to the Soviet-backed threat . Kennedy's executive committee, known as ExComm, debated the options of responding to the threat .
 In the end, it was decided to issue a naval blockade of Cuba, preventing any shipments of military equipment to that island . Cuba's military equipment was not allowed to be sent to Cuba .
 In the days following the announcement of that quarantine, the future of our species hung precariously on the decisions of the two most powerful men in the world and on the visceral reactions of a third man–a passionate patriot .
 JFK Library buildup on the island of Cuba . JFK Library has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military . Cuba has maintained a close relationship with the Soviet Union .
 Scientists had warned of the devastation that would result from a war between two nuclear powers . For almost two decades since the development of the nuclear bomb, scientists had warned .
 Kennedy’s proclamation, the scientists’ greatest fears teetered on the brink of a horrible reality . Kennedy: ‘With Kennedy's proclamation, scientists' greatest fears are on the verge of a terrifying reality.’
 The two world superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, were on a collision course with potentially catastrophic consequences . U.S. and Soviet Union were on the collision course .
 If Chairman Khrushchev of the Soviet Union were to challenge the blockade, it could trigger the first war in history with the potential to eradicate life on this planet .
 Tuesday, October 23, 1962, was the day after Kennedy’s strident ultimatum . It was the same day as the day he issued the order to leave the U.S.
 With the specter of annihilation lurking in our collective unconscious, we shuffled around the circular table of the Arbor Room, claiming our personal territories .
 Eldon, the supernerd who often took leadership in our weekly meetings, was the last to arrive . Eldon was the first to arrive at the end of his weekly meetings .
 He raised his voice above the ambient din with his briefcase on the floor and teapot on the table . Placing his brief case on the ground, he raised his hand to speak . He then placed his teacup on the teacot and placed it on his coffee
 David, a nerd of gentler temperament, had an understated presence . He was seldom aggressive, but deeply reflective, playing devil’s advocate .
 In this supposed test of courage, two adversaries race stolen cars along parallel tracks towards a cliff . The race is supposed to be a race between stolen cars .
 Eldon’s intense eyes ignited and he sat erect, as I had observed on those 35 Intelligence occasions when he relished the chance to showcase his knowledge . Eldon: “I had observed that he sat upright and sat erect. He sat erect’. Eldon
 The other two members of our motley gathering muttered that they had heard the term ‘game theory,” but claimed no formal knowledge of its content . The other members of the motley group muttered that he had heard of the term "game theory"
 Eldon’s range of knowledge was surprisingly broad; every branch of knowledge seemed to be grist for his intellectual mill and he ground down deeply into the content–he would never be chaff . Eldon: ‘Every branch of . knowledge was grist . for his
 Game theory is the study of strategic decision making, Eldon Eldon said . Eldon continued to wax eloquently, “Game theory’s study of strategy makes strategic decisions,” he said .
 John von Neumann invented by father of the modern computer . He was a key scientist involved in the creation of the first atomic bomb .
 In this case, the players in this game of Chicken are Kennedy and Khrushchev . Kennedy: "It's not a game of chicken. It's a war of chicken"
 Eldon Eldon sketched this simple table on a sheet of paper torn from his binder . Eldon drew it on a binder torn from the binder and used it to illustrate his work .
 Chicken has the two players driving toward each other on the same track . In game theory, Chicken has to be on the track at the same time as the other player .
 Eldon continued, “The most desirable outcome for each player is to drive straight while the opponent swerves.”
 This left Kennedy with only two options, accept the missiles,e.e., capitulate, or take action against the missiles . Kennedy had two options: accept missiles, or escalate, i.e. take action .
 One player signals his intention not to swerve by yanking out the steering wheel and throwing it out the window . The wheel is thrown out of the window of the car .
 When Kennedy announced the blockade, and asserted, ‘The greatest danger of all would be to do nothing’ he indicated that he would not capitulate . Kennedy said he would 'not capitulate' when he announced that the blockade .
 This declaration was equivalent to throwing the steering wheel out of the window, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This declaration was like throwing the wheel out the window. It's not the first time I've seen this type of declaration."
 Eldon didn’t draw another table, but his description brought this table to mind . Eldon’s description of the table brought this scene to mind.
 David, who boasted an IQ in excess of 170, seemed to derive special pleasure in playing devil’s advocate . David's IQ was over 170 .
 Once Khrushchev reverses his field, and submits to the blockade, he's done and it’s game over . The blockade is the only way to get around the world's most powerful blockade .
 “It’s Kennedy 1, Khrushchev 0,” retorted Eldon with a gesture of closure . Eldon: ‘It was Kennedy 1. It’�. It was Kennedy’
 Kennedy's refusal to capitulate is not equivalent to throwing the steering wheel out of the window . Kennedy’s refusal to concede is not the same as throwing the wheel out the window, he says .
 Khrushchev knows that the newly-elected president doesn’t want war and that he would be open to negotiation . The newly elected president doesn't want war .
 Sean, who had been watching inOh, East is East and West is West, devoured a chocolate donut as and never the twain shall meet, if it were his last meal .
 Wiping his chocoat God’s great Judgment Seat; late-covered fingers methodically with But there is neither East nor West, a tissue .
 It was a joke he’d heard before and he wasn’t amused by the dismissal of what was offered as a serious contribution to the discussion . He said: “I'm not sure what's going on here. It's a joke I've heard before."
 The animated discussion continued for an hour or so, without consensus, though I could see my three companions beginning to converge in their perspectives . It was the first time the three men had been together for more than an hour .
 He had assumed that the adversaries were plotting their strategies in a purely cerebral way, as in chess match, where all options are considered and the move with the greatest perceived promise is chosen .
 Sean and David had assumed that the crisis was a power struggle between two strong males in a turf war . Sean had assumed it was a battle between the two men in their respective turf wars . David and Sean initially thought it was the result of a battle of intimidation and concession .
 They felt that the decisions were significantly influenced by visceral responses to confrontation . They said they felt that they were influenced by the visceral responses of confrontation .
 The Missile Crisis Escalation & Climax . We didn’t have to wait long for events to unfold . The missile crisis escalated quickly .
 Establishing a blockade in international waters, was traditionally regarded as an act of war, so Kennedy had called it a quarantine . Establishment a blockade of international waters was traditionally seen as a war-era act .
 The tension between the two superpowers seemed to be building to a calamitous climax . The tension was building to be build to a climatic climax .
 Director of the Central Intelligence Agency John McCone reported that Soviet ships in Bertrand Russell the face of the blockade had turned around .
 It would soon be apparent that this was merely the calm before the storm . However, it would soon become apparent that it would be obvious that this would be a mistake .
 The Soviet Union continued to deny that there were missiles in Cuba and Kennedy began to consider further escalation . Kennedy considered further escalation after the Soviet Union denied the existence of missiles .
 Kennedy’s Executive Committee continued discussing in secret the removal of the missiles by force . On Thursday, October 25, the committee continued discussing the removal in secret .
 The United States prepared for a possible invasion of Cuba to remove the missiles with “surgical” air strikes . In the greatest mobilization of troops since World War II, the U.S. prepared for the possible invasion .
 Fidel Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev calling for a nuclear response in the event of an invasion of Cuba . Not more than 24 hours later, Fidel Castro called for a response to an invasion .
 I believe the imperialists’ aggressiveness is extremely dangerous and if they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through an act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would
 Major Rudolf Anderson flying an American U-2 spy plane was shot down and killed by a surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba . Anderson was killed in the attack .
 The United States had suffered its first casualty in what appeared to be an imminent nuclear exchange . The U.S. was killed in the attack on North Korea .
 Later that afternoon, a Soviet submarine armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo approached the blockade line . The Soviet submarine was armed with an anti-Soviet submarine .
 The U.S. Navy dropped a series of warning depth charges unaware that the three officers on board the submarine had orders to launch the torpedo if engaged in battle . The three officers were unaware that they had orders that they would launch a torpedo if they engaged in a battle .
 One of the three Soviet officers, Vasili Arkhipov, prevailed over the other two officers who were urging the launch of the deadly torpedo in retaliation . The torpedo was launched in the Soviet Union's first retaliatory strike in 1941 .
 Many decades later the world would learn the details of what happened on that fateful day and how close the human race had come to a nuclear holocaust .
 Khrushchev announced over Radio Moscow that he had sent a letter to President Kennedy . President Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from Cuba . The letter was made public on October 28 .
 In exchange for this, Kennedy had agreed that the United States would not invade or support any invasion of Cuba . In exchange, Kennedy agreed to this, the U.S. would not be involved in any Cuban invasion .
 It appeared to the world that Khrushchev had capitulated and that Kennedy had stared down the Soviet Chairman in a battle of nerves . Kennedy had appeared to have capitulated .
 Fidel Castro accused Khrushchev of cowardice in the face of U.S. might . Fidel Castro felt betrayed by the Soviet leader and accused him of being cowardice . Castro said he felt betrayed and accused the leader of being cowardly .
 A series of conferences9 between 1987 and 1992 featured interviews with Fidel Castro’s former aides, Soviet insiders, and Cuban veterans, including Fidel Castro, that revealed the motives of the key decision makers in the US, the USSR (Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics), and Cuba
 Documents provide insights into Khrushchev’s leadership style, personality, and inner workings of the Kremlin . Documents provided insights into the Kremlin prior to and during those 13 critical days .
 New sources of information revealed a substantial gap between the public perception of the Crisis throughout the 1960s and the reality of what happened .
 In the next chapter, we explore the secret files that reveal how Kennedy and Khrushchev made decisions in the high-stakes game of super-power dominance . The next chapter will explore the secrets of the secret documents .
 As some of their ‘unknowns’ became ‘knowns, they saw their options and the consequences through a different lens . The children’s decision to leave the country for the U.S. was made in a bid to save their lives .
 These changing perceptions profoundly modified their decisions as events unfolded . The decision was made to make a decision in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina .
 These insights have widespread implications that extend well beyond political confrontation, into areas as comparatively innocuous as marketing and lifestyle . The insights have wide implications for marketers and consumers .
 We were relatively confident, albeit to different individual degrees, that decision making was predominantly rational . We were confident that decision-making is predominantly rational, we said . We are relatively confident that the decision making is rational .
 This would enable us to predict the outcome of the decision making in any confrontation . This would allow us to mathematize the process sufficiently to predict a confrontation .
 We continued to believe that game theory, in particular, and mathematics in general, would enable us to solve many of the important problems facing our species .
 The austere and dispassionate allure of mathematical reasoning was so seductive that we embraced this vision with the bold confidence of youth . We embraced the austere, dispassioned allure, mathematical reasoning as a young boy .
 In the process, one of them became a billionaire, another became a world-renowned physicist, and the third … well, we’ll discover that in time . We'll find out what happened in the next few days .
 In spite of the gloomy skies and drizzle on this late October day, all four of us were basking in a mood of muted jubilance . All four of the four had a low-key moment of celebration .
 We had come from an animated lecture in applied mathematics in which Professor Ross demonstrated how the equations of the orbits of the planets could be derived from Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation .
 Using the calculus and the polar coordinates that Newton had developed, we were able to solve these differential equations and predict the locations of the planets at any time in the future . We are able to use the calculus to solve the differential equations to predict the planets' locations .
 With calculus and the techniques for solving differential equations, we would be able to describe and predict natural events with almost any degree of precision . With calculus, we could predict and predict events with nearly any precision .
 It was a heady time for anyone equipped with some basic mathematical skills and elevated aspirations . It was the heady period for anyone with a basic mathematical skill .
 In the decades that followed, I would never recapture that euphoric intellectual optimism . In the 1990s, I was able to find a way to express myself in the art of art and design .
 Eldon: "It looks like Kennedy won the game of Chicken" Eldon says, "I don’t want to gloat, but ... Kennedy won"
 Khrushchev 43 Intelligence had to turn tail and remove his missiles from Cuba . Kennedy merely had to promise not to invade Cuba .
 David was small in stature and mild mannered, but had a mind that pursued a line of argument with the passion of a dog after a bone . David was a small mannered but had the passion for a bone, he said .
 He wasn’t going to let Eldon get away with a simplistic analysis of the events, he said . He said: “I'm not going to give Eldon an easy look at the events. It's not an easy thing to do,” he said.
 Neither nation in this Cold War can appear to be weak, so Khrushchev must have received some concessions somewhere . Neither country in the Cold War could appear to appear weak . Neither nation appears to want to appear to have been weak .
 The old Chinese proverb, ‘build golden bridges behind your enemy’, recognizes the importance of leaving your adversary a smooth path for retreat .
 Some of his ships had to turn tail and flee the blockade and others had to submit to a search . Some of the ships were turned tail and had to surrender to the search .
 After denying at the U.N. that the Soviet Union had placed offensive weapons in Cuba, he had to admit that he had lied . There were, indeed, Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev lost credibility with the world . He alienated his allies, Cuba and China . He lost credibility . He also alienated his Cuba allies .
 The more we debated the issue, the more we realized that we did not have enough information to draw any reliable conclusions . We are not sure how much information is needed to draw a reliable conclusion .
 We would have to live with our impressions of what had happened and wait for the other shoe to drop . The other shoe would drop. We would live with what happened. We'd have to wait for it .
 New information that emerged in the final two decades of the 20th century told a different story . However, new information emerged in a different way . New information emerged from the last two decades .
 Decision makers toggled back and forth between cerebral and visceral modes . Decision makers revise their estimates of the efficacy of each option and the payoff of each outcome .
 A few days later, he was informed of a secret plan, initiated by the Eisenhower administration, to sponsor an invasion of Cuba . The plan had been initiated the previous year by the previous administration .
 The United States Secret Service had been recruiting anticommunist exiles from Cuba with the intention of overthrowing the Castro regime . The U.S. Secret Service recruited exiles to overthrow Castro's regime .
 The invasion was to be launched from Guatemala and all U.S. involvement would be secret . All United States involvement in the invasion would be kept secret . The invasion would take place from Guatemala .
 The plan required that the incoming President make the final decision on whether to proceed . The incoming President would have to make the decision on the issue .
 The youngest person elected to the US Presidency convened a groupthink meeting at the White House in which he sought advice from the CIA, the military, and members of his administration about the viability of the invasion invasion .
 John F Kennedy signed the order on April 4, 1961 to proceed with a preemptive attack on the beaches of the Bay of Pigs on April 15 . The order was based on the advice of his military advisors .
 What later became known as the “Bay of Pigs fiasco” was a disaster for the invading forces . The invasion was subsequently regarded as one of the greatest blunders in American foreign policy .
 Castro’s military decimated the invaders within 3 days, and the U.S. prestige on the world stage suffered a devastating blow . The American prestige in the world was suffered by the loss .
 Understanding Khrushchev's great gamble in Cuba requires an insight into the Soviet leader’s personality and political style . Understanding the gamble requires insight into his personality and style, says historian .
 The secret archives in Moscow reveal that Khrushchev seldom sought advice from the KGB during this tense period . The secret archive in Moscow also reveals that he rarely sought advice . The archives also reveal that he never sought the advice of the KGB .
 Chess master's style was more akin to a high-stakes poker player than a methodical chess master . In this way, he was more like a poker player rather than a chess player .
 He would bluff, bully, and gamble to gain advantage, even when his hand was significantly weaker than his opponent’s . The poker chip-and-cheek hustler would bluff and gamble, even if his hand had a weaker hand .
 On one occasion, he convened a meeting of his top nuclear scientists in the Kremlin’s Oval Room . He announced his decision to resume nuclear testing of the Soviet bombs .
 You can be a good scientist without understanding 45 Intelligence a thing about politics, says President Obama . You can't be a scientist without knowing politics, he says . He says .
 The angry outbursts and emotional tirades of Nikita Khrushchev belied his shrewd political instincts . The angry outburst belied the shrewdness of his political instincts, he said . The Russian prime minister was known for his emotional outburst .
 He used emotional displays to test his adversaries and plan his strategies . He used these displays to plan his plans for the future .
 He was able to reach the pinnacle of power in a regime dominated by intrigue and secret alliances . It was no accident that he reached the top of the country's political hierarchy .
 Kennedy had only come into power in January 1961 . Khrushchev had a limited basis for anticipating how the young president might react to political pressure .
 "In characteristic style, he sought to test him and exploit any weaknesses he might find," he said in characteristic style .
 His brief encounters with JFK had convinced him that the inexperienced president was an intellectual who could be bullied . He had convinced himself that JFK was not an intellectual and could be easily bullied .
 Nikita Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba was a key assumption that underpinned his decision to do so . This assumption was key to the decision to move missiles to Cuba, says the author .
 Khrushchev met with Castro in the spring of 1962 and by the summer, Soviet ships were transporting missiles, nuclear warheads and tens of thousands of Soviet troops to Cuba under secret cover .
 By September 1962, the Soviet Union was rushing to complete its missile installations in Cuba . The Soviet Union had already completed its missile installation in Cuba.
 Khrushchev needed to test his assumption about Kennedy’s response when he would eventually discover the missiles, he says . The missile test was a test of his belief that Kennedy would respond to the discovery .
 The Soviet leader decided to investigate by inviting JFK’s close friend and famous poet, Robert Frost, to meet with him, ostensibly to initiate a ‘noble rivalry” between the superpowers in the creation of literary works .
 He hoped to tap into Khrushchev’s openness and persuade him to take a road not taken by previous Soviet administrations . He had hoped to take the road not been taken by other Soviet administrations.
 Robert Frost visited Khrushchev at the end of the Cold War . Frost's visit to the Soviet Union was one of his last days in the U.S.
 We realized later that he was us because he was obsessed with President Kennedy’s forthcoming response to his nuclear lunge . We were obsessed with Kennedy's response to the threat of a nuclear strike .
 Kennedy's initial interpretation of Khrushchev’s intentions would be decisive . The condition of Kennedy's nerve, and his initial interpretation, will be decisive, he says . Kennedy's reaction to the situation would be crucial .
 When I look back now with the benefit of hindsight, Khrushchev’s conduct was both conservative and cunning, writes David Gergen . Gergen: 'When I look . back now I look forward to the benefit . of hindsight'
 The Cerebral Component to keep Washington guessing, to present a peaceful face one day and a tough stance the next . Cerebral component aims to present peaceful face and tough stance one day .
 He mentioned Cuba to me only once, and it involved a typical Khrushchevian anecdote . "He mentioned Cuba only once," he said, "but it was a very interesting story"
 He noted that “some Senators” were demanding that Kennedy invade Cuba . To show him he was abreast of Washington politics, he noted that some Senators’ were demanding Kennedy invade .
 Maxim Gorki once had a conversation with the elderly Tolstoy . He said it reminded him of a conversation he once had with the young Maxim . Gorki said the conversation was like a conversation between Gorki and the elderly .
 The United States missiles in Turkey and Italy on the borders of the USSR represented a potential threat to Soviet security, while the United States was an ocean away from a reciprocal Soviet threat . The U.S. missiles in Italy and Turkey were not a threat to the USSR .
 Khrushchev wanted to redress this perceived imbalance in nuclear strike capability . Khruschev wanted this imbalance to redress the perceived imbalance .
 The ill-fated Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 convinced Khrushchev that the U.S. was planning to invade Cuba . Furthermore, the ill-inflicted Bay of Pigeas Invasion convinced the Soviets that the United States was planning an invasion of Cuba .
 Soviet missiles with nuclear warheads that targeted the entire U.S. mainland would enable Cuba, an ally of the USSR, to provide a powerful deterrent against such an attack . The Soviet missiles would be able to target the entire United States mainland .
 It was also possible, in the long term, that Cuba could provide a beachhead for the eventual spread of Communism into the Western Hemisphere . Cuba could also provide a behead for Communism in the Western hemisphere, says historian .
 Khrushchev bet on his instincts and shipped missiles and nuclear warheads to Cuba . He bet that Kennedy would acquiesce once their existence was known . The missile sites in Cuba were a fait accompli by the time they were discovered .
 Kennedy saw the photos of missile sites in Cuba on October 16, he cursed and dismissed acquiescence as an option . The Cerebral component of Kennedy’s decision-making is the reason for his decision to attack Cuba .
 Having a Soviet missile base with nuclear potential situated 90 miles off the U.S. mainland was unacceptable . The base was located 90 miles from the American mainland .
 Further delays would enable the completion of the missile site installations, he initially dismissed further negotiation as an option . Realizing that further delays would allow the site to be completed, he realized further delays were necessary .
 He and his ExComm identified four possible responses to Khrushchev’s preemptive move . Then he and his ex-Commitees identified four potential responses to the move .
 In figure 3.1, Kennedy’s original preferences are numbered from 1 to 4 47 Intelligence with 1 denoting his favored option . Figure 3.2 is a ranking of Kennedy's original options .
 His eagerness to remove the missiles before they became operational, prompted him to favor an immediate ‘surgical” air strike . The move might be less likely than a general air strike to precipitate an all-out conflict .
 As the ExComm discussions continued, all the options were explored and explored . Each option had its group of supporters .
 When military contingent indicated that a surgical air strike would probably not remove all the missiles, Kennedy began to move toward his second choice, a general air strike . Kennedy's second choice was to strike a general strike .
 An invasion of Cuba was taken off the table because it violated international law in the way that the Japanese invasion of Pearl Harbor had in 1941 . Though the fourth option was supported by some of the Hawks, it was taken from the table .
 When the meeting ended, Kennedy was committed to the general air strike . The date for this attack was set at October 20 .
 U-2 plane photographs of missile installations in Cuba revealed that there were intermediate-range ballistic missile sites . U.2 plane photos show intermediate range missile sites in Cuba .
 These missiles could reach most of the continental U.S. excluding the Pacific Northwest . They would be able to obliterate the United States missile sites in a preemptive strike .
 General Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommends reinstatement of option 4–a full invasion of Cuba . Anything less would not be enough to remove these offensive weapons, he says .
 Llewellyn Thompson, a special advisor on Soviet affairs was urging the consideration of a naval blockade, but this was dismissed by the generals because it wouldn’t address the missiles that were already in Cuba .
 JFK’s memory of the bad advice, received from the Chiefs of Staff during the Bay of Pigs invasion, prompted him to assign greater credibility to the advice from Thompson and McNamara .
 Khrushchev would have a respectable path for retreat, writes Peter Bergen . A blockade would provide more negotiation, he says . Bergen: The blockade would also provide a path for more negotiation and more negotiation .
 John Kennedy held a 45-minute meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff to inform them of his inclination to institute a blockade . Kennedy told them that he was considering a blockade of Syria .
 He wanted to present a united front to the American public and wanted to ensure that the Chiefs were on board . The Chiefs were also on board for the trip .
 It was clear to the President that he was squeezed between a hostile foreign power and his military Chiefs who saw preemptive strike as the only viable option . The President was squeezed by the foreign policy and the military Chiefs, he said .
 He said to his political advisor, Kenneth O’Donnell, “These brass hats have one great advantage in their favor.” He said. “The brass hats are one of the brass hats,” he said .
 Any dissension among members of the ExComm could lead to political problems if the blockade were to fail . The blockade would be the first time the blockade has been allowed to pass .
 The preferred options ran through the entire spectrum of choices from invasion to blockade, and concluded with a majority of support for an invasion . Throughout the day, the preferred options included invasion, blockade and blockade .
 Robert Kennedy called the President who was in Chicago, and urged him to come back to Washington immediately to lead the ExComm deliberations . Robert Kennedy was the President of the U.S. Senate in 1968 .
 Intelligence reports reveal at least eight medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba were operational . New intelligence reports revealed that at least 8 medium range ballistic missiles were operational in Cuba .
 Any attack by the U.S. was unlikely to remove all the Cuban offensive weapons, leaving some nuclear sites capable of retaliation . This meant that any attack on Cuba would leave some of its nuclear sites .
 A nuclear response by Cuba to an air strike therefore seemed highly probable . A nuclear reaction by Cuba was highly likely to be possible .
 This information suggested that the cost of any military strike in human lives was much greater than originally estimated . This information suggests that any strike in a military strike would cost more lives than originally thought .
 After two hours of discussion, a vote was taken and the blockade option became the official ExComm choice . The blockade option is now the official choice .
 It was agreed that the President would deliver a nation-wide address informing the American public about the missiles in Cuba and his intent to institute a “quarantine” to prevent the transport of additional missiles to that island .
 A copy of Kennedy’s speech along with a covering letter would be sent to the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . The letter was sent to Khrushchchev, who was the prime minister of the USSR .
 The order of the preferred options had changed dramatically. As the flow of new information emerged from the discussion reduced the gap between the . perceptions of the decision-makers and the reality, the . reality .
 The fear of precipitating a nuclear war had trumped the immediate impulse to remove the missiles by force . The fear had led to the removal of the missiles from the U.S. arsenal .
 President Kennedy wrapped up his meeting with the ExComm and left to deliver his speech announcing the blockade . President Kennedy left the scene to announce the blockade of Cuba .
 "If we go into Cuba, we have to all realize that we have taken the chance that these missiles, which are ready to fire, won’t be fired," says President Obama .
 The USSR had secretly installed in Cuba offensive missiles with nuclear capability . At 7:00m. that evening, Kennedy delivered his address to the nation . The Soviet Union had installed the missiles in Cuba .
 He stressed that this Soviet missile base threatened the entire Western Hemisphere . The United States will set up a naval quarantine to search ships that might be carrying offensive weapons to that island .
 The address contained this appeal to the Premier of the USSR:10 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless and provocative threat to world peace .
 He has an opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction…–by refraining from any action which will widen or deepen the present crisis–and then by participating in a search for peaceful and permanent solutions .
 Khrushchev’s opponent in this game had neither folded nor called the bet . The Cerebral component of the decision-making was not folded or called . It was a game of chess .
 By announcing the blockade as a “quarantine,” he sidestepped the charge that his actions were an act of war . The blockade was announced as a "quarantine" by President Obama .
 He chose the option that provided his adversary with a face-saving exit strategy . Most importantly, he chose to give his opponent an opportunity to save his life .
 The Cerebral Component Ranking of Khrushchev’s Options & Initial Preferences Fig..3 refuses to remove refuse to remove agree to remove misacquiesce by agreeing to missiles from Cuba missiles . negotiate a remove missiles and not submit to but submit to the quid pro quo the
 The Soviet premier felt that the American missiles in Turkey and Italy that threatened Soviet borders entitled the USSR to station its missiles in Cuba . The USSR felt the U.S. missile threat in Cuba was a threat to the Soviet Union .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin decided to install missile sites in spite of the embargo .
 He put the entire military on high alert, suspended all leave, and prepared for war . The president suspended leave, suspended leave and prepared to prepare for war.
 President Obama's response to the threat of force implicit in Kennedy’s blockade was ‘Option 1’: ‘I’m going to use force,’ he says. Option 1 was his visceral response to a threat to force . Option 1 is his visceral
 In his strident reply to the American president, on October 24, he threatened to run the blockade and apply force if necessary11.11.
 Khrushchev was extending an olive branch to Washington in his open letter to Russell . Washington did not respond to the letter, but Washington did .
 Khrushchev received a strong letter from Kennedy admonishing him for his deception and his precipitation of the crisis . In fact, on the morning of October 25, Kennedy admonished him for deception .
 Kennedy 51 Intelligence would accept nothing less than the removal of all the missiles from Cuba . It was clear that Kennedy 51 intelligence would accept a compromise .
 The Soviets in the embassy in Washington had informed Khrushchev that the U.S. was preparing for some military action . Previously that morning, the Soviets in Washington said the United States was prepared for some sort of military action.
 Khrushchev convened a meeting of the Presidium to formalize a new Soviet response to the US blockade . Realizing that events were spiraling out of control, he convened a new meeting of Presidium .
 It has been conjectured that Khrushchev’s change of heart came from a recognition that the U.S. had a superior nuclear force .
 The 68-year-old Premier wished to investigate whether Washington would be amenable to an agreement whereby the Soviet Union would remove the missiles from Cuba, conditional on a U.S. promise not to invade that island .
 Khrushchev’s plan was approved by the Presidium, but the details would depend on the negotiation process . The details of the negotiations process would depend upon the outcome of the talks .
 Khrushchev's discovery of Kennedy’s refusal to accept the missiles in Cuba transformed his preferred options in accordance with figure 3.4 . In a period of one day, the decision was made in favor of the missiles .
 Khrushchev’s Options & Final Decision Fig..4 refuse to remove . agree to remove misacquiesce by agreeing to missiles from Cuba . negotiate a remove the missiles and negotiate a removal the missiles . Not submit to but submit to the compromise the blockade blockade 1 2 taken
 President Kennedy pledged that the U.S. would agree not to invade Cuba without direct provocation . Kennedy pledged not to attack without provocation .
 The U.S. would remove Jupiter missiles it had stationed in Turkey and Italy, in exchange for Soviet agreement to remove its missiles from Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union under United Nations supervision . The United States would also remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 An important part of this agreement was that while the United States pledge not to invade Cuba should be made public, the removal of the missiles from Turkey and Italy must remain secret .
 Kennedy feared that publicly announcing the removal of the missiles from Turkey might alarm American allies in NATO and also make the U.S. appear to be submitting to the Soviet Union’s aggressive action . Kennedy feared the removal would alarm allies and make the United States appear .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev approached the Known Unknowns . In pure games there is no gap between reality and perception . The Cerebral component is the cerebral component .
 A computer can identify from a series of options the optimal choice . Properly programmed, a computer can choose from a number of options to make the best choice .
 When we attempt to apply game theory to human decision making in real-life situations, we face the problem that our knowledge of the viable options is imperfect . We must make assumptions to fill the gap between reality and perception, i.e. what we know and what we don’
 Facts that we know are called known knowns and facts that we don't know we don’t know are known unknowns . Facts that are not known are called 'known unknowns'
 Kennedy learned of the existence of the missiles on October 16, 1962, when he learned of their existence . Kennedy learned about the missiles in 1962 .
 The tables below display some of the known unknowns and the gaps between their assumptions and the corresponding reality .
 Kennedy told Kennedy that there were fully-armed, battle-ready about 6000 to 8000 Soviet Soviet troops in Cuba . Kennedy said there were 'fully-armed' and 'battle ready' about 6000- to 8000 troops .
 As he reduced this gap, the viability of each option changed dramatically, he changed his decisions . He said: "As he reduced the gap, each option ... that changed dramatically"
 The President may be the best-known person in the world, but there’s still much that he doesn’t know about .
 The beginning of wisdom for any president–certainly including JFK–is understanding that you are groping about in the dark, says JFK . "You can't be a president, but you can be a very good person," he says .
 Kennedy learned from the failed Bay of Pigs operation that his generals had not collected enough information to support competent decisionmaking . Kennedy had learned from his generals that he needed more information to make competent decisions .
 They had assumed that once the invaders established a beachhead on the Bay of Pigs, they could advance northward to the Escambray Mountains . Not only had they underestimated the capability of Cuba’s air force, but they had underestimated their ability to intercept the enemy .
 Khrushchev attempted to close the gap between his perceptions and reality by interviewing Americans who knew Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Both leaders sought to make more informed decisions by converting known unknowns into known knowns . President Barack Obama and other world leaders seek to make better decisions .
 As they gained more information, the priority order of their options changed . The priority order was changed as they got more information .
 Kennedy moved away from a surgical air strike, that would likely have triggered a nuclear response, and chose instead a quarantine . Kennedy opted for a quarantine, not a surgical strike .
 In his ability to gather evidence to inform his decision-making, Kennedy was exhibiting one of the defining characteristics of higher intelligence . Kennedy's intelligence is a defining characteristic of intelligence, he says .
 An important indicator of high intelligence is the ability to change your opinion in the face of compelling evidence . Hypothesis 3.1 is that high intelligence can change its mind in the way it does so .
 Khrushchev retreated from his initial effort at intimidation and moved toward conciliation . Khrushvic retreated from the initial effort to intimidate and moved to conciliation with the Soviets .
 The quest on the part of both leaders to convert their known unknowns into known knowns was the cerebral component of their strategic decision making . The quest for both leaders was part of their cerebral decision making.
 Hidden component was a hidden visceral component that assigned payoffs to the possible outcomes . This became a vital determinant in the ultimate decision of each leader .
 Behind-thescenes details of the confrontation were unveiled . It began with a visceral reaction followed by a frenetic quest to gain information and a scramble to assign potential payoffs .
 The flow chart in figure 3. summarizes the stages through which both leaders reached their final decisions . Figure 3. shows the stages for both leaders to reach the decision-making stages .
 The first two steps in this flow chart represent the “cerebral” part of the decision-making process, as outlined in the previous section . Identify the Gather inAssign a Choose the options and formation to cost and a option that the known convert known benefit
 The flow chart returns to our original question about the efficacy of game theory in modeling decision making . However, it’s the third step in this flow chart that returns to the original question .
 A key assumption of game theory is that all participants make purely rational decisions based on their knowledge of the choices and the probable outcomes . Game theory is based on the assumption of all participants making purely rational choices .
 If an optimum choice of several options exists, then any two participants with the same ‘known knowns” should reach the same decision . If that is true, then an optimal choice of options should be made, says the author .
 "There was substantial disagreement at each stage about the preferred option," the ExComm says .
 The generals perceived an aggressive military strike as the appropriate choice, while Llewellyn Thompson and Robert McNamara preferred negotiation and a less aggressive choice . The U.S. President George H.W. Bush and Secretary of State George W. Bush made the decision .
 It was in the third stage of the flow chart that they must have differed–likely in their perceptions of the probable costs and benefits of each option . Since all these men were in possession of the same facts, it was likely they differed .
 Since all the known knowns were shared, these opinions must have been spawned from instincts at the unconscious level . The opinions must be spawned from instinct at unconscious level, he says .
 These insights reveal the challenges faced by any attempt to reduce all human decision making to an algorithmic process that can be modeled by artificial intelligence .
 T he carefree ambience of early fall faded into the past as the bright October days of colored leaves and football parades with marching bands yielded to the dank and dreary days of early November .
 Their brilliant red poppies revealed that they were rehearsing for Remembrance Day ceremonies . They were commemorating those who died in the two World Wars .
 The parade ended at the Soldiers’ Tower where the names of alumni who had died in battle were inscribed .
 In a flash, I recalled a poem that our grade five class at Roselands Public School had memorized under protest . The poem was a poem from a poem we had memorised under protest at the school .
 My mother, a voracious reader of history, That mark our place; and in the sky had asserted that every generaThe larks, still bravely singing, fly . has a war. My mother was a Between the crosses, row on row, row . on row
 Scarce heard amid the guns below of World War I that We are the Dead . She spoke .Scarce heard . amid the . guns below . of WWI that we are the dead .
 Short days ago was declared to be the war to end all wars . We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow, ended all wars. We lived in the end of the war .
 We shall not sleep, though poppies grow In Flanders fields . I had assumed that ra. tional thinking would always overrule our emotions in de – Lieutenant Colonel John McCrae1 57 Intelligence .
 In her enthusiasm for the power of rational thought, I dismissed her assertion with the same dispatch as her declaration that if Kennedy were elected President, he would be assassinated . In the same manner, she said that if he was elected President he'd be assassinated, he was assassinated .
 It was easy to dismiss her predictions as “off-the-wall,” because mother was not good at chess or checkers . Mother was good at checkers and chess, but she wasn't good enough at chess .
 Before we learned to farm 12,000 years ago, we were hunter-gatherers . We were traveling in tribes and killing animals to survive . We are now living in the United States .
 Eldon Eldon: "We, like our primate cousins, fought for territory and killed competing tribes when our space was threatened" Eldon says, "We fought for territories and killed ... competing tribes"
 They’re herbivores, so they don’t eat meat and they kill only in self-defense . They are herbivore, so don't eat meat, and kill in self defense . They're herbivorous .
 Eldon sat straight in his chair, as if grouping a flood of ideas into a single response . Eldon said: "I don't know what I'm going to do with my life" Eldon: "It's a good idea, but it's not easy to think about
 We have to look at the record of human history to determine which primate species we most resemble . We have a history of looking at the history of our primate ancestors .
 Before the Europeans came to America this continent consisted of Indian tribes who staked out hunting grounds that they protected in territorial wars .
 When Europeans came to America, they used superior technology and numbers to slaughter the Indians and occupy their territory . The Europeans used their superior technology to slaughter Indians .
 Pearl Harbor was a direct result of Hitler’s invasion of Czechoslovakia and Poland . The invasion of China and Japan's conquest of mainland China culminated in the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Eldon saw where David was going and he could see a potential checkmate . Eldon was able to get his hands on David's back . David was not the first to see Eldon see where he was going .
 "That challenges my current assertion that our instinct for war may prevail over our cerebral decision making," he says . That challenges my assertion that . Our instinct may prevail, he adds .
 The Visceral Component response will always be with us, but I believe that our cerebral abilities can overrule this instinct . I believe we can overcome this instinct with our ability to overrule it .
 David and Sean were talking about how self-preservation overruled the tribal instinct for war . Sean, who had been listening intently as he devoured his donut, responded to the discussion .
 Eldon sat back in his chair and poured his tea from the silver aluminum pot as he reflected on Sean’s comments . Eldon: “I’m not sure what I’ve done since I was in the first place in the world, but I�
 CNN.com's John Sutter offers a personal anecdote about the debate . He says the debate has been evolving, but it's not always clear what happened .
 My father suggested we make a list of the pros and cons of owning a dog and then decide . He suggested that we should consider the pros, cons and pros and negatives of owning dogs .
 In the list under ‘cons’ we noted that dogs cost money, they need frequent walking, they can complicate travel arrangements, etc. etc. In the 'cons' list of 'cons', dogs can also be expensive and difficult to walk .
 All the reasons against acquiring a dog were outweighed by the single desire to have a dog . Assigning a weight to each factor was a purely visceral exercise .
 If the price of acquiring a dog were beyond your family’s financial reach, that factor could trump the desire to have a dog . The cost of having a dog may be too much to bear .
 The intuition is a powerful distillation of inherited and learned behaviors . We need to resort to rational thinking when our intuitions lead us astray, says author .
 Last summer we were at the cottage where there were lots of rocks inhabited by large garter snakes . This summer we visited the cottage with a large snake in the garden .
 My mother was freaking out; the stealth movement of these reptiles pushes her terror button, so she asked me to kill the snakes . "My mother was ... freaking out," she said. "I'm not scared. She's terrified."
 Although I knew that garter snakes are not venomous and are incapable of harming me, I was afraid to grab one . Garter snakes do not have any venomous tendencies, but are harmless .
 My heart was racing and I could feel an elevated anxiety as I seized it by the tail. My heart raced as I took the tail of the tail . I could hear the sound of my heart racing as I went on to seize the tail and seize it .
 The snake seemed heavier than expected and that increased my anxiety as I ran down the lane and tossed it into the dense brush . The snake was heavier than the expected weight of the snake .
 The pounding in my chest told me that something in the deeper underbrush of my brain was overriding my cerebral understanding that the snake was harmless . It's not the first time I've seen a snake in my life that I've encountered a snake .
 Cuddles was, indeed, a formidable presence in the McLennan Lab2 . She terrorized more than one generation of MPC students–but more about her later .
 As I too scurries to the physics lab, I reflected on the give and take of our Arbor Room discussion . As I scurried, I thought of the discussion .
 Most people I encountered would take a position in a debate and defend it to the limit, barely acknowledging other points of view and often repeating the same argument with escalating vehemence . Most people would defend their positions to the utmost in an attempt to win a debate .
 "Our group was distinctly different in their openness to opposing opinions. However, our group is distinctly different," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "My confreres seemed to welcome challenging opinions as an opportunity to learn," she said . Her confrereres "welcome challenging opinions," she added .
 In the years that followed, it became evident that this disposition paid significant dividends in enhancing our learning and moving us into the higher echelons of sophisticated thinking . "In the years following, this disposition became evident," she said .
 We came to suspect that the visceral components might have played a more prominent role in the decision making, though none of us knew how prominently the emotions and the instincts of the antagonists factored into that confrontation .
 On December 21, 2015, the United States top-secret report Strategic Air Command Atomic Weapons Requirements Study for 1959 was declassified . The report was released by the U.S. Air Force in 1959 .
 The U.S. targeted 1100 Soviet-bloc airfields and 1200 population centers in the Soviet Union for nuclear destruction in the event of a nuclear war . The list of targets was released by the United States in the 1980s .
 The fact that intelligent humans could coldly contemplate the brutal anreprinted nihilation of millions of members of their fellow species is a grim reminder that our visceral reaction to a perceived threat has not evolved much beyond tribal days . It's a reminder that the reaction to perceived threats is not evolved
 History has taught us that humans are territorial animals and the ongoing competition for land and resources demands that military escalation by a rival be met with a sufficient deterrent . However, the lessons of history have shown us that .
 World War II taught us that if the Allies had been unwilling to prepare for or engage in war with the Axis Alliance they would have become subject to the tyranny of those aggressors . The Allies would have been subject to tyranny of the aggressors, says David Cameron .
 Even prominent intellectuals like Albert Einstein and Bertrand Russell–originally pacifists–revised their opinions on the necessity of preparing for war in the face of a bellicose adversary . Albert Einstein was originally a pacifist .
 Until recently our closest cousin, the chimpanzee (who shares 98% of our DNA) was believed to be one of the few primates that does not kill other members of its species for territorial acquisition .
 Anthropologist John Mitani and his colleagues completed a ten-year study in which they observed a large chimpanzee community at Ngogo, Kibale National Park in Uganda .
 The Ngogo chimpanzees killed 18 members of a rival group and then occupied their territory . During this time, they witnessed the Ngogo chimps killing 18 people and occupying their territory.
 In times of emotional stress, we humans revert to our instinctive biological beginnings . We revert to the instincts of our instincts when we are in emotional distress .
 "Like our fellow animals, we respond to threats from external tribes by mobilizing for war," says the author . "We respond to external threats by mobilising for war. Like our fellow . animals," he says .
 It's naïve to think that people who plan for defense are evil, inhuman or uniquely hawkish . It's naive to think people planning to defend the U.S. are evil or inhuman .
 Our survival at the top of the food chain has shown that our instincts have served us well during the first million or two years in our evolution . Indeed, our mere survival at . the top . of the . food chain shows that our instinct has served us . well during . the first
 Our technology has changed more dramatically than our fundamental nature, says author . However, our primitive instincts are now threatening our survival, he says .
 Understanding the mechanisms that come into play as people make decisions in crisis situations requires a deeper insight into human cognition and the unconscious mind where all our hidden instincts reside . Understanding the mechanism that comes into play is critical to understanding the nature of crisis situations .
 We refer to these instincts as unknown knowns, because they are programs or scripts etched in our brains through evolution or experience and known only to our unconscious mind . These instincts are programs, scripts etched into our brains and are known only by our unconscious minds .
 In 2002, Daniel Kahneman shared a Nobel Prize in economics for his research on human decision-making under conditions of uncertainty . An Instinct that Plays a Key Role in Decisions during Crisis during Crisis .
 If it shows heads you OR You receive $46 for sure win $100; if tails, you win nothing . If tails is heads you get $46, you receive $100, if tails is tails .
 Though the rational choice is A (because it yields the greater expected value7 of $50), it was found that an overwhelming majority of people selected B as their preferred choice .
 The major insight that ultimately became the essence of prospect theory was that humans have evolved to be loss averse . The theory says that humans are loss-averse and that they evolved to lose things .
 Loss aversion prompts us to take a sure thing over a potential gain, even when the potential gain is disproportionately greater than the sure thing . This loss aversion prompts people to take sure things over potential gains, such as the sure things .
 Our loss aversion prompts us to seek risk when given the choice between a sure loss and the chance of a loss . Furthermore, our loss aversion is also a risk factor in our risk-seeking behaviour, says author .
 Most people rejected the gamble, even though the expected value is a gain of $508 . The Visceral component is expected to be $508. Most people reject the gamble .
 In 2000, he proved mathematically that according to standard theory, anyone who rejects the proposition above must also reject the following:9 Toss a coin.9 TOSS a coin . Anyone who rejects this must reject the proposition .
 It's clear that many people who would accept the second proposition might reject the first . It is clear many people would not accept the first proposition .
 Utility theory cannot distinguish between utility theory and utility theory . Rabin’s theorem proves that utility theory can’t distinguish between these two propositions . Utility theory is a form of utility theory that can only be proved .
 Loss aversion prevents us from making purely rational decisions as defined in game theory . Loss aversion embedded in the human psyche prevents us making rational decisions . The loss aversion is embedded in human psyche .
 In situations that threaten loss or regret, we select less than the optimal solution . That is, in situations where it threatens loss, regret, less is the best solution . We select less when we want to avoid the risk of regret .
 The degree to which a decision maker departs from a rational decision depends on that person’s loss aversion, known as his loss aversion coefficient . The coefficient of a decision-maker's loss aversion is also known as the loss aversion factor .
 The human tendency toward loss aversion was observed in a study of golfers published in 2011 . Loss Aversion in Golf–Playing Not to Lose was observed by golfers .
 The number of strokes a golfer takes from tee shot to the final putt is called par for that hole . In golf, a 0-handicap golfer is expected to take par for a hole . A golfer with a handicap expected to be par for the hole
 One stroke less than par represents a gain of one stroke against the golf course, and is called a birdie . A birdie is a shot that is one stroke less par than par is one shot less than the par .
 One stroke more than par represents a loss of a stroke against the course and is called a bogey . A bogey is a stroke that is one stroke less than par and is a loss against the golf course .
 If loss aversion is a factor in professional golf, it would be expected that golfers would be more focused on protecting against a loss than making a gain . Golfers are expected to protect against losing rather than making gains .
 Golfers make birdie putts significantly less often than they make similar par putts, study finds . Golfers are more likely to make birdies putts from equal distances than par ones, study shows .
 Professional golfers were significantly more focused on avoiding the loss of a stroke than on taking a risk to gain a stroke . Golfers were more concerned with avoiding a stroke loss than taking a shot to gain it .
 Both leaders recognized that they carried the ultimate decision and hence the heaviest responsibility for their government’s actions .
 Kennedy recited from a poem by Spanish bullfighter, Domingo Ortega . Kennedy had expressed this emotion at the height of the Missile Crisis in reciting the poem .
 Both antagonists struggled in repeated attempts to avoid a thermonuclear confrontation without appearing to capitulate . Both failed to appear to be willing to surrender .
 JFK was perceived as the perceived victor in the 1960s . JFK may have been closer to a tie than an all-out victory, but JFK was the perceived winner .
 The fear of precipitating a nuclear war and the ethical burden of responsibility for mass destruction of human life moved both leaders back from the brink of nuclear war .
 This was the visceral component–risk aversion–in the final decision to negotiate . This was a visceral component, risk aversion, in the decision-making process . The U.S. has been in the process of negotiating with Russia .
 This “gut” response was followed by a shift into rational mode when he met with the ExComm to solicit more information about known unknowns, such as the locations, numbers and nuclear capabilities of the missile sites .
 Khrushchev operating in rational mode, attempted to determine how Kennedy might react on discovering the existence of the Russian missiles in Cuba . The Visceral component of the Soviet Union's missile program is considered to be a key component .
 "His initial reaction was visceral, i.e., to refuse access to his ships and to retaliate," he said . His initial reaction to the incident was to refuse to be allowed access to the ships and retaliate .
 After Major Rudolf Anderson’s U-2 was shot down by a surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba, both leaders realized that the confrontation was escalating out of control .
 Both leaders assigned a huge negative payoff to the “worst outcome” in the game theory model . Not wishing to bear the responsibility for the first nuclear war, they moved to negotiation .
 Decision makers toggle back and forth between visceral and cerebral modes as they assess their options and assign weights to the outcomes . It appears that skilled decision makers toggle between the two modes of thinking and thinking .
 The weights assigned to the possible outcomes derive mainly from visceral considerations that vary from person to person . However, the weights assign to possible outcomes are mostly based on visceral considerations .
 In the classical economic theory of choice, each possible outcome of one or more decisions is assigned a payoff based on its perceived value . Each possible outcome is assigned an outcome based on the perceived value of the decision .
 The payoff may be expressed in any currency such as money, status, or dominance, but the underlying assumption is that this payoff can be expressed as a number . The payoff is expressed in money or status .
 A rational decision is one that selects from two or more choices, the one that yields the maximum payoff for the decision maker . A rational choice is a decision that selects between two or three choices .
 A tacit assumption in theories of choice, such as game theory, is that payoffs can be assigned to outcomes in a sufficiently precise manner to allow for the computation of an optimal or rational decision . Game theory is based on a tacit assumption that outcomes can be given in a precise manner .
 A second assumption is that the decision maker is expected to make a rational decision . A decision maker should be expected to have a rational mind, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Both assumptions have been challenged in the most recent decades by research in choice theory . Both assumptions were challenged by research into choice theory in recent decades .
 Variations in Risk Aversion Skew the Game Theory Payoff Matrix . The existence of known unknowns limits the application of game theory to human decision-making .
 The emotional component of our decision making plays a key role in assigning payoffs to outcomes . Different decision makers may have significantly different loss aversion coefficients, says author .
 For Kennedy and Khrushchev, the payoff for the “worst outcome’s in Chicken was a huge negative . Kennedy: The payoff for Chicken was huge negative for the U.S. and the world .
 In his “Armageddon letter” on Black Saturday, he embraced the con65 Intelligence cept of a “glorious death” He advised Khrushchev to use nuclear weapons to annihilate the U.S. if they were to attack Cuba .
 ISIS and al-Qaeda beliefs are rooted in ancient religious doctrines that promise an eternal life in exchange for a glorious death . Today, there are regimes like ISIS and Al-Qaeda whose beliefs have been rooted in religious doctrines . ISIS is the world's most violent religious group, with al-
 The “chicken” model no longer applies because the “worst outcome” may become a desirable outcome to one of the antagonists . In such cases, the ‘chicken model’ may no longer apply because the worst outcome may become desirable .
 The weights assigned to outcomes in a game theory model of conflict depend on the beliefs and visceral dispositions of the antagonists . The weights of outcomes in the model depend on beliefs and attitudes of antagonists .
 Nuclear threats contributed to the peaceful outcome of the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . Nuclear threats, it is true, but they contributed to a peaceful outcome .
 We owe our hair’s-breadth escape from catastrophe to the spectre of nuclear war . The world owes our hair's-breadhirst escape to nuclear war, author says .
 No one in a position of responsibility would have contemplated its repetition . But no one would for an instant have contemplated such a repetition .
 Stephen Hawking, in his 2018 posthumous publication, Big Answers to the Big Questions, warned:15 Aggression, …, has had definite survival advantage up to the present time .
 It could destroy the entire human race and much of the rest of life on Earth . But now it could destroy all of the world's life if it were to be destroyed .
 My first glimmer of the power and secret workings of our hidden instincts or unknown knowns came to light in our Arbor Room discussion on November 6, 1962 . A nuclear war is still the most immediate danger, but a nuclear war remains the most serious threat .
 These scripts that reside below our conscious level have a profound influence on our decision-making . These scripts reside below the conscious level and influence our decisions .
 Recent research in cognition has revealed some of these unknown knowns that work invisibly in the unconscious mind . They are observable only through our behaviors .
 These irrational effects are most dramatically manifest in our decision making during stressful situations, such as direct confrontation, stock market chaos, or divorce . The irrational effects of these irrational decisions are most evident in stressful situations .
 Game theory can be useful in modeling decision making, but it is limited by the unpredictability of our instincts . Game theory is a useful tool to model decision making in the real world .
 The fact that decision making is not purely rational, especially in crisis, limits the reliability of a purely mathematical treatment . Decision making in crisis is not a purely rational decision making, it says .