 In this section, you will read how John F Kennedy became barred nuclear testing in the atmosphere of the atmosphere president and how he handled a period of intense foreign affairs . You will also read how he became barred from nuclear testing .
 Use this diagram to take notes on the major foreign crises that the Kennedy administration faced . Use the diagram to help you understand the Kennedy Administration's foreign policy strategy .
 Kennedy impressed viewers with his strong, forceful personality during a televised debate . Kennedy's strong personality was evident during the debate .
 In 1960, President Eisenhower’s term came to a the arrest of Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The second factor was Kennedy's response to Dr. King's arrest . Dr. Luther King was arrested in 1960 .
 The economy was in a recession and the Soviet Union was gaining strength . King persuaded the judge to release King from a jail .
 His actions won him the support of African Americans . Some wondered whether the United American voters will support him .
 President Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline faced off in the 1960 presidential election . Kennedy and Nixon were married in 1960s . The couple was in the midst of a tumultuous election campaign .
 Jacqueline Kennedy influenced fashion and was a Democratic senator from Massachusetts . Kennedy died in 1963 at the age of 65 .
 People talked of the Kennedy Administrawas Eisenhower’s vice-president . People talked about the Kennedy administration . People talk of the Eisenhower administration .
 Critics believed that Kennedy should have invaded Cuba and ousted Castro . Kennedy's critics believed that the invasion should have been successful .
 Name the two Cuban crises that the Kennedy A New Military Policy; administration faced . Name the Cuban crisis that the administration faced. name the two . crises .
 Kennedy focused Crisis Over Berlin on foreign affairs . Kennedy focused on crisis over Berlin in the White House .
 He also supported a policy called How did the U.S. and flexible response . He also supports a policy that allows for flexible response to crises .
 Kennedy’s foreign policy probed jets, tanks, missiles, and guns . Conventional weapons included guns, tanks and missiles .
 In 1961, the president faced a growing probmore conventional weapons, Kennedy increased lem in Berlin . The president faced growing problems with conventional weapons in 1961 . In 1961 he was in Berlin with a growing problem .
 Kennedy's first foreign policy test came from under the control of Great Britain, France, and the Cuba . West Berlin was Kennedy’s first test of his policy .
 He declared Germans had fled into West Berlin and declared himself a Communist . Soon after that, he declared Germans who fled to West Berlin had fled .
 Khrushchev threatened to block all air and land Soviet Union routes into West Berlin . He then formed ties with the Soviet Union and formed ties to West Berlin with the West .
 Kennedy warned the Kennedy approved a plan to remove Castro Soviet leader against such action . Kennedy warned against such a move .
 The United States govcrete barrier along the border between East and ernment would supply air support for the exiles . The U.S. government would also provide air support .
 Many exiles were captured. prevented any more East Germans from fleeing to Germany . East Germans were captured .
 Despite their battles, Kennedy and Khrushchev did attempt to reach agreements . It left the Kennedy administration greatly embarrassed . Despite their efforts to reach an agreement, Kennedy administration was embarrassed .
 A year later, the United States and Cuba clashed hot lines between their two nations . They established a hot line between their nations .
 Pictures from U.S. spy planes revealed that phone hookup connected Kennedy and Khruschchev . the Soviets were building nuclear missile bases in It allowed them to talk directly when a crisis arose .
 The two leaders also agreed to a Limited Test Ban to launch missiles . Some bases already contained missiles ready .
 Name two ways the U.S. and Soviet Union worked to remove the missiles . Name one of the ways they removed missiles from the Soviet Union .
 In October 1962, he surto ease tensions between Cuba with United States Navy ships . He rounded Cuba with U.S. Navy ships in October 1962 .