 It is published as part of our mission to showcase peer-leading papers written by students during their studies .
 The fact that nuclear weapons were not used to resolve the crisis has attracted scholarly attention . Nuclear weapons not used in the crisis have attracted academic attention .
 In this essay, I contend that while the peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis provides some evidence that nuclear weapons have a deterrent effect with respect to great power wars . This is substantially negated by the possibility of their accidental or inadvertent use and the dire consequences this would entail .
 In the first section, I present a brief overview of the crisis and outline the difficulties involved in, but the necessity of, drawing conclusions from the missile crisis . The first section of this section includes an outline of the problems involved in the crisis .
 Next, I examine arguments about the deterrence value of nuclear weapons with regard to great power wars . I conclude that they are of moderate value, though for reasons not commonly advanced in the literature . I also conclude that nuclear weapons have moderate value .
 The potential for miscalculation, misperception and accident with regard to the use of nuclear weapons undermines faith in their capacity to keep the peace, he says .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council met in secret, to craft a response . In the week following, the Executive Committee met in the White House, in secret . The response was a response to the Obama administration's actions .
 In subsequent days, despite the USSR largely respecting the quarantine, numerous provocative events occurred . The USSR largely respected the quarantine . Despite this, numerous provocations occurred .
 In recent decades, the opening of U.S. and USSR archives and conferences with scholars and participants of the crisis have dramatically increased the amount of information available .
 In conducting such analyses one must be wary that a single historical event can provide only limited foundation for generalised conclusions . Furthermore, in conducting such an analysis one must also be wary of a one historical event providing only limited basis for generalising conclusions .
 An analysis of the Cuban missile crisis, therefore, cannot justify all-encompassing statements as to the deterrent value of nuclear weapons, writes David Frum .
 The Cuban missile crisis is the closest the world has come to the use of nuclear weapons since 1945 . Nevertheless, given the gravity of the consequences of nuclear war, one must seek to arrive at some tenable conclusions about what may be .
 Arguments that nuclear weapons are very valuable rely on the capacity of rational deterrence theory to explain the crisis . Arguments are unwarranted to rely heavily on the ability to explain nuclear weapons, say experts .
 Arguments that nuclear weapons have no deterrent value are not reflected in the actions of the participants in the crisis . On the other hand, arguments that such weapons are not a deterrent value, they are reflected in actions of participants in crisis .
 An argument that nuclear weapons were probably of some deterrent value, however, is able to account for the actions of participants in peacefully concluding the crisis . The argument avoids the pitfalls of rational deterrence theory .
 In this section, I address each argument in turn, dealing with them at a length reflective of their prominence in the literature . I address the arguments in turn .
 In doing so, I demonstrate why the best conclusion is that nuclear weapons have some deterrent value . I also demonstrate why I think nuclear weapons should be used as a deterrent .
 The corollary of this with respect to nuclear weapons is that “a country cannot sensibly attack unless it believes that success is assured’s assured”
 As regards the Cuban missile crisis, this is prima facie convincing given the simple fact that nuclear weapons were not used . This is prim a facie .
 The validity of the rational deterrence theory explanation has been recently asserted in passing, and uncritically, by Jervis , a prominent realist and cold war scholar . Indeed, the validity of this explanation was recently asserted .
 This is evident in the assumption that nuclear conflict is the worst possible outcome for all sides . The assumption is that all sides want to avoid a nuclear war is the best possible outcome .
 The logical consequence of this is that “deterrence cannot ever be successful.” “Deterrence can never be successful,” he writes . “The logical consequence is that it cannot be successful," he says .
 That there was a crisis precisely because Kennedy did not decide to quickly capitulate – in fact he originally favoured a military response – is a fundamental refutation, if any was needed, of this claim . The crisis was because Kennedy initially favoured military response .
 It is from this that rational deterrent theorists infer that there is a very low likelihood of nuclear war, given it is not in any actors’ interests . Theoreticists infer that the likelihood of war is very low .
 'At root it is at root an idealisation upon which a theory has been built. Put differently, it is a theory, rather than a theory,' says author .
 It is an idealisation because statesmen operate at the helm of vast and complex organisations, which act as intermediaries between them and the implementation of policy . It is a idealisation for statesmen to operate in an idealised state of state .
 Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay’s determination, in response, to launch a massive reprisal attack against Cuba such that presidential orders were required for him to stand down . The subordinate Soviet commander's shooting down of the American U-2 flying over Cuba .
 Psychological considerations support a more pessimistic view of leaders’ ability to rationally determine costs and benefits . Secondarily, psychological considerations also support a pessimistic view, according to the study .
 Such steadfast beliefs contributed to the transmutation of the missile placement into a ‘crisis’, in turn increasing the tensions and thus the risk of nuclear war . The risk of a nuclear war is the result of such beliefs .
 For these reasons, rational deterrence theory provides an unsatisfactory explanation of the resolution of the Cuban missile crisis . The theory is unsatisfactory to explain why the Cuban crisis was resolved .
 Concomitant arguments regarding the high value of nuclear weapons in deterring great power wars are unfounded . Concommitations are thus unfounded .
 The argument that nuclear weapons played virtually no part in the resolution of the Cuban missile crisis starts from the assumption that the possession of operational nuclear forces by the U.S. and the USSR meant that both participants in the conflict were capable of inflicting intolerable damage upon one another .
 Asserting that nuclear weapons played no part in the peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis is untenable given the extent of the attention the participants gave to the risk of nuclear war . The U.S. nuclear weapons were not involved in the conflict, but they played a key role
 Nuclear weapons played a deterrent role in promoting the crisis’s speedy resolution . For this reason, notwithstanding the irrelevance of U.S. nuclear superiority at the time given Kennedy's unwillingness to countenance any nuclear strike on America .
 Broader arguments as to the essential irrelevance of nuclear weapons are also unconvincing . The argument for nuclear weapons is not convincing .
 This is not a catch-all explanation of why the crisis unfolded the way it did as no such explanation is possible . Admittedly, this is not an all-clear explanation of the crisis unfolding .
 First, it avoids the theoretical deficiencies inherent in the rational actor model of deterrence . Second, it would be a better way of deterring the threat of terrorism in the future .
 Rather than simplistically assuming statesmen to be predictable utility-maximising entities, the crystal ball approach recognises their psychological complexity as human beings .
 Leaders are not assumed to be hostage to their psychological and cognitive limitations such that they are irrational; these are instead seen as motivations explaining their actions to avoid nuclear war . At the same time, leaders should not be held hostage to psychological limitations .
 This approach is realistic and largely commonsensical . Though it is important to refrain from . vesting too much confidence in conclusions about the specific psychological state of participants based purely on the historical record .
 Leaders seek to avoid nuclear war not purely on the basis of a zero-sum calculation of interests, but out of a broader appreciation of the unmitigated horror of such an event, and their involvement in it . Leaders want to avoid a nuclear war, not just because of their interests
 The crisis was brought to a swift conclusion with the help of the British government . It is not the first time a crisis has been brought to an end .
 Nuclear weapons probably exercised a deterrent effect during the missile crisis, but not in the way commonly assumed by the literature with its focus on rational deterrence models . Thus, nuclear weapons may have exercised deterrent effect in missile crisis but not as commonly assumed .
 It would be significantly misleading to assume that a peaceful end was inevitable . Though one must strive to arrive at justifiable conclusions as to why the Cuban missile crisis ended peacefully .
 The role of contingency and ‘luck’ in this event is important insofar as it undermines claims that nuclear crises can always be safely managed . This undermines the claim that nuclear weapons are necessarily peace-inducing .
 Numerous points at which the crisis could have escalated and ended differently exist . Numerous points could have been avoided, including the possibility of a nuclear war .
 Two examples were mentioned previously in the historical overview section, and another in the organisation theory critique of rational deterrence . Though they are incapable of being extensively catalogued here, two examples are mentioned previously .
 Command and control systems adequately performed their functions of safeguarding nuclear weapons from accidental use, experts say . One further issue is whether command and control can be relied on to prevent accidental use of weapons .
 For reasons such as these, the role of the crystal ball effect needs to be kept in perspective . For reasons like this, it must be kept from thinking, says CNN.com .
 The crystal ball argument is not that leaders’ fears will mean the possibility of inadvertent nuclear war is nil due to those leaders acting quickly to resolve crises . Instead, leaders should act quickly to deal with crises and avoid nuclear war .
 Such a general hypothesis could not be justified on the basis of the limited case example that is the missile crisis, says the author . The author says such a general theory is not justified in this case .
 The crystal ball argument’s relevance is confined to the missile crisis, where events occurred such that it was possible to untie the metaphorical knot and avoid nuclear war .
 Given the possibility for a combination of technical mishaps, misperceptions and personnel breakdowns to lead to disaster, the situation could have been different . The situation was different .
 The Cuban missile crisis’s peaceful resolution is not ipso facto justification for a view that the risk of inadvertent nuclear warfare is low given the deterrent effect of nuclear weapons . As such, the risk is not the same as a view of a low risk of accidental warfare .
 The Cuban missile crisis provides some evidence of the value of nuclear weapons in deterring war between the great powers .
 This evidence comes chiefly in the form of leaders resolving the crisis peacefully and quickly for fear that the situation could escalate such that nuclear weapons could be used . This is said to be the case that leaders are concerned that the crisis could escalate .
 The possibility that errors, misperceptions and miscalculations could have led to a different outcome cautions against drawing a strong conclusion, from this one event, that nuclear weapons are peace-inducing deterrents .
 E-IR is an independent non-profit publisher run by an all volunteer team . We are happy to feature some of the world's most interesting stories .
 Your donations allow us to invest in new open access titles and pay our bandwidth bills . Your donations help us keep our existing titles free to view .
 Donations are voluntary and not required to download the e-book your link to download is below . Donations for the book are voluntary .