 Review the aftermath to understand how the crisis affected the U.S., as well as the USSR . Recognize how communication between the two nations changed .
 The missiles were Soviet-made medium range ballistic missiles that could be launched without warning and strike targets in the United States, as far away as the Pacific Northwest, before America could respond .
 The U.S. responded to this perceived threat, the Cuban missile Crisis . The ensuing 13-day standoff between the United States and Cuba became what is known as the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Let's go into some background of this event . Log in or Sign up for the quiz .
 Soon after World War II, the communist Soviet Union and the capitalist U.S. became rivals . Soon after the war, the two countries became rivals.
 Since each side had the ability to destroy the other completely, it practically guaranteed peace . If both sides acted rationally, neither would fire first, knowing the other side would respond in kind and extinguish opponents .
 The much-hated dictator, Fulgencio Batista, was overthrown and replaced by Fidel Castro . Batista was replaced by Cuban leader Fidel Castro in 1959 .
 Batista had been a strong American ally, and the United States was pretty certain that Castro was a communist . Batista was a strong ally, but the U.S. had been pretty certain .
 Castro openly aligned with the Soviet Union in 1960 . Castro's relationship with the Soviets was confirmed in 1960 when he was in Cuba . Castro was the first Cuban leader to defect to Cuba .
 President Kennedy promised in 1961 not to intervene militarily to overthrow Castro . President at the time, John F Kennedy, promised to do so in 1961 . Castro Castro was overthrown in Cuba .
 Around 1,400 Cuban exiles, anti-Communists who had fled the country when Castro took over, landed on the coast of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . Later that same month, around 1,000 anti-communist exiles landed in Cuba at a place called the
 The goal of the exiles was to lead the popular uprising against Castro that they were sure would follow their arrival . Trained and equipped by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency .
 What happened instead was a fiasco and a major embarrassment for the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration was embarrassed by what happened .
 The Cuban military stopped the exiles cold and sent them back to the United States . Castro became a folk hero in Cuba and throughout Latin America . Kennedy had to accept responsibility for the entire mess .
 If he did what many in the U.S. military wanted, which was to invade Cuba outright, it would certainly mean war . The Soviets would retaliate with their nuclear weapons if he invaded Cuba outright .
 The U.S. came as close as it ever has to nuclear war . Let's go over the timeline describing the two weeks in which the United States came to a nuclear showdown .
 U.S. spy planes take photographs of Soviet-made missile launchers in Cuba . American spy planes spy on Cuban missile launchers .
 President Kennedy and his advisors call for a quarantine of Cuba . The U.S. Navy would block the coast and prevent any ship from reaching port .
 Kennedy sends a letter to Khrushchev in which he claims the U.S.R. is responsible for the current crisis . Kennedy sends the letter to the Soviet Union, claiming the United States is behind the crisis .
 The President's advisors come up with a possible way out of the standoff—the United States would remove nuclear missiles from Turkey, an ally nation, which were ''due for replacement'' in exchange for Soviet removal of the missiles in Cuba . The President of the Soviet Union in Cuba wanted to
 These missiles in Turkey had been seen by the U.S.R. as a threatening presence, similar, in their view, to the Cuba missiles . These missiles were seen in Turkey as a threat similar to those in Cuba .
 Kennedy is concerned that if the U.S. removes the missiles, the Soviets might believe that they could try similar attempts at blackmail in the future . Kennedy is also concerned that the United States might think that they might try to blackmail the Soviets again .
 The CIA reports that the Soviets seem to be accelerating their construction of missile sites in Cuba . The Soviets are now trying to camouflage the missile launchers . The CIA says they are trying to cover up the missile sites .
 Khrushchev: Soviets pledge to dismantle missiles in exchange for U.S. pledge never to invade Cuba . Letter from the Soviets comes from the same time as letter from the U.K. to dismantle the missiles .
 A second letter from Khrushchev arrives, now insisting on a trade for missiles . The U.S. missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The deal was a deal between the United States and Russia .
 Kennedy advisors worry that Khrushchev may have been overthrown by elements in his own government . Kennedy's advisors worried that elements in the government may have overthrown him . Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 The same day, an American U-2 plane, flown by Major Rudolf Anderson, is shot down over Cuban airspace by a Soviet missile . Major Anderson was killed in Cuba .
 At the same time, another U-2 accidentally violates Soviet airspace near Alaska . At the time of the incident, the U.2 accidentally violated Soviet airspace . The incident occurred near Alaska, Alaska .
 Robert Kennedy tells Anatoly Dobrynin that the U.S. government will pledge not to invade Cuba and that the missiles in Turkey will be removed within six months . Robert Kennedy, the Attorney-General and the President's brother, meets with Dobrynins .
 If any information about this pledge leaked prior to the six-month deadline, the Kennedy administration would deny the deal . Also, if any information is leaked before the deadline, it would deny it . The deadline is six months old .
 Khrushchev announces that he has agreed to remove missiles from Cuba . The missiles will be removed from the country's Cuba .
 The Cuban missile crisis was a diplomatic triumph for the Kennedy administration and an embarrassment for the Soviet leadership . The Aftermath was an embarrassment to the Soviet leaders .
 The only major concession by both sides after the crisis was the creation of a hotline phone link between the two capitals . The link was created to ensure direct communication between leaders in the future .
 President John Kennedy instituted a quarantine of the Cuban coast to prevent the shipment of new missiles . President Kennedy instituted the quarantine after U.S. planes discovered missiles in Cuba .
 The United States pledged not to invade Cuba and to remove its own missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of the missiles from Cuba . Ultimately, the U.S. agreed to remove missiles from Turkey and remove them from Cuba, but not from Turkey .
 The deal ended the standoff and reduced the possibility of nuclear annihilation . The deal was reached in 1998 .
 October 14 American spy planes take photographs of Soviet missile launchers in Cuba . October 14 U.S. spy planes fly over Cuba to take photos of missile launchers . American planes take pictures of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
 Kennedy announces quarantine of Cuba beginning the standoff and negotiations . October 22 Kennedy announces the quarantine .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy meets with the ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to cut a deal to end the crisis . October 27 Attorney General Kennedy met with the Russian ambassador to cut the deal .
 October 28 Khrushchev announces the removal of missiles from Cuba, and the crisis ends . The crisis ends October 28, 1962 .