 Explain what Stalin’s Soviet ‘sphere of influence’ in Eastern Europe meant . Explain what it meant to be a Soviet "sphere" of influence .
 The problem is that these countries are communist, don’t have free elections, and go against our values 2.2. 3.5.4.5 million people . 2.4 million people live in the United States .
 The U.S. should provide that loser, aid to all European nations that need it, says Booth . Booth says .
 The United States will buy its is not against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos . This move is against hunger and poverty, hunger, desperation and chaos, the author says . The U.S. will not buy its .
 Harry Truman --Foreign Policy Berlin Airlift .Soviets block access to west Berlin . Truman: "I will never forget what happened"
 Defined Warsaw Pact, 1950Defensive alliance between Soviet Union and Eastern European Countries . Warsaw Pact was formed from Soviet Union to Eastern European countries . Defined Poland Pact in 1950 .
 Jiang Jieshi in Mandarin or Chiang Kai-shek (stronghold in southwestern China..) – Who did we support? – Nationalists – • Pledged $2B 1.5 million man army – Who supported them? – Who else supported them: Nationalists
 Said he would return land to the Chinese peasants and the economy collapsed 2.2.2 years ago . Said that he would give land to peasants and China's economic collapse collapsed 2 years later .
 United Nations troops (made up of 90% Americans) defend South Korea led by Douglas MacArthur . Also, 300,000 Communist Chinese troops come into war on side of North Korea .
 Truman convinced that the North Korea aggressors were repeating what Hitler, Mussolini and the Japanese had done in the 30’s . Truman was convinced that North Korea . Korea – Korean War – Korea –
 Stalemate at 38th parallel 54,000 Americans die . Billions of dollars spent 2.2 billion dollars spent on the 38th Parallel .
 MacArthur asks Truman for authority to invade China for a full-scale nuclear war . Truman says No! – MacArthur goes over Truman’s head by talking to the press and making Truman look weak . Truman fired MacArthur on April 11, 1951 . DMZ established at 38th parallel which
 Communist leader Ho Chi Minh forced French leaders to surrender in 1954 . French leaders were forced to surrender by the Communists .
 The United States and France set up an anticommunist government under the leadership of Ngo Dinh Diem . In South Vietnam, the United States, France and the U.S. established an anti-communist government .
 Fidel Castro improved the economy and brought about social reforms, but suspended elections and executed opponents . Fulgencio Batista suspended elections, executed opponents, and controlled the media . Fidel Castro was overthrown by a young lawyer – Fidel Castro .
 Gorbachev’s perestroika and glasnost – Fall of Berlin Wall and Communism 4.0. The fall of the Berlin Wall was the fall of communism in Soviet Russia .
 Teenage militia unit formed by young Chinese people in 1966 in response to Mao’s call for a social and cultural revolution .
 They beat or killed anybody who resisted communism. – Purpose is to indoctrinate and conform people and next generation of people. They beat, kill or kill anybody who resists communism. They were beaten, killed and tortured by people who resisted them. They are now in control of the world's
 A 1966 uprising in China led by the Red Guards, with the goal of establishing a society of peasants and workers . The purpose was to put down resistance to communism .
 Called for collective farms, or communes – Peasants worked land together, ate in communal dining rooms, slept in dorms, raised children in communal nurseries . Owned nothing – No incentive to work hard when only the state profited from their labor . GLF was a
 Mao died in 1976 . Deng Xiaoping supported modernization, westernization, and private businesses . Incomes increased, youth wore stylish clothes, listened to American music, people buying appliances and TV's .
 Instead of considering political reform, Deng ordered 100,000 troops to surround Beijing . Many protestors left, 5,000 stayed – Started hunger protest and displayed a 33 foot statue named the goddess of democracy . June 4, 1989, tanks smashed through barricades and smashed the goddess . – Soldiers
 In late 70s, a Muslim revolt threatened to topple Afghanistan’s communist regime . Muslim revolt threatens to topple the communist regime in late 70's .
 This war had striking resemblance to the Americans fighting a war in Vietnam . This war was similar to the war in which the U.S. was fighting in Vietnam. This war is the first of its kind .
 Jewish people of Europe hoped for their own country along the coast of the Mediterranean or the roots of their biblical heritage in the Middle East . Jews were forced out of Palestine in the second century .
 Palestine was controlled by the British after WWI and promoted the idea of making a Jewish state within Palestine called the Balfour Declaration . However, Palestinians did not like this idea, and Palestinians were not keen on this idea .
 Jerusalem was to be an international city owned by neither side . The terms of the partition gave the Jews 55% of the area even though they made up only 34% of it .
 All Islamic countries voted against the partition because it was their land and they were the majority population in Palestine . After WWII many Europeans and Americans felt sympathy for Jews .
 As a result of the wars, the UN set aside land for Arabs for a Palestinian state, but it has not happened to this day which is known as a possible two-state solution .
 In South Africa, racial conflict was the result of colonial rule by the Dutch and British and was racially divided . Apartheid and the death of Nelson Mandela led to racial conflict in South Africa .
 It instituted a policy of apartheid, or complete separation of the races, in regards to schools, hospitals, neighborhoods, etc. etc. It instituted an apartheid policy of segregation . The South African government instituted the policy .
 He was released from prison in 1990 and ran for president in first free election in 1994 . Ran for president after racial discrimination finally ended in 1994 and ended .