 During these negotiations, tensions that had already existed between the Soviet Union and the U.S. intensified .
 By 1947, the distrust heightened between the United States and USSR leading to a conflict we now call the Cold War . U.S. and USSR fought in the first World War of World War II .
 The early Cold War was dominated by the United States following a plan of containment . The Truman Doctrine was outlined in the Truman Doctrine . The U.S. was in charge of the Cold War .
 One of the key programs of this policy was the Marshall Plan for European Recovery . The Marshall Plan was a key program for European recovery .
 In September 1962, United States planes flying over Cuba discovered the presence of several ballistic missiles . The missiles were discovered by U.S. aircraft flying over the island .
 The United States and the Soviet Union came the closest the world has ever come to nuclear war . Throughout the month of October, the U.S. and the USSR came closest to a nuclear war.
 JFK’s Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba, October 22nd 1962 . JFK's radio and television report to the U.S. on the Cuban arms buildup .
 After watching the speech, read the excerpts below and answer the analysis questions that follow . Read the excerpt below to answer the questions you ask about the speech .
 This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet Military buildup on the island of Cuba, Cuba .
 President Kennedy outlines the American plan to respond to the build up nuclear missiles on Cuba . President Kennedy outlined the first four steps of the plan in a speech to Cuba .
 Answer the general analysis questions below by thinking about the speech overall . Answer the questions using a general analysis of the speech . Think about what you think about about your own life in general .
 In 1962, television addresses were still new to the media, American citizens, and the Presidency . In 1962 the President's address was broadcast on television .
 Using information from the documents above, please respond to the following task . Use the information from this task to respond to a question about your knowledge of events in the news .