 These articles help to counter the anti-Arab campaign being waged in the U.S. news media . The selection includes articles that appeared in the October 19 and 26 and November 2 and 9, 1973, issues of The Militant .
 Dave Frankel, a staff writer for The Militant, has given lectures on the Mideast at over forty universities . Frankel is a staff member of the Militant and a lecturer at over 40 universities .
 Dick Roberts, the author of Mideast Oil and U.S. Imperialism, is currently at work on a book entitled The Economics of United States Imperialism . He is also author of the book "The Economics of Imperialism"
 Tony Thomas is a contributor to Black Scholar and author of In Defense of Black Nationalism . He is also a contributor of Black Scholar Tony Thomas .
 Pathfinder Press, Inc. printed in November 1973 . Manufactured in U.S.
 This land includes the territory occupied by Israel in its 1967 expansionist war against the Arab states, as well as Palestine itself . The land includes Israel's territory occupied in 1967, and Palestine itself, whose inhabitants were driven from their homeland in 1948 .
 The United States government must be held responsible for this denial of the right of self-determination to the Palestinian people . The U.S. government has militarily, economically, and politically backed Israel since the beginning .
 Without the backing of U.S. imperialism, the Zionist settler-state could not exist . The Zionist state could not have existed without the support of the US .
 The cornerstone of U.S. policy in the Mideast is to maintain Israel as the dominant military power in the region . Israel is used as a foothold for imperialism against the Arab peoples, the author says .
 Nixon would prefer to avoid direct U.S. military intervention, which could have explosive repercussions inside the United States and around the world . Nixon: "During the current fighting, Nixon would rather avoid direct United States military intervention"
 If Israel suffers major reversals in the struggle, Washington is fully prepared to intervene directly . The U.S. is prepared to do so in Vietnam, just as it did in Vietnam .
 The United States Sixth Fleet has already moved to waters off Crete, only several hundred miles from the war zone . To demonstrate this determination, the U.S. Sixth Fleet is already moving to waters .
 Helicopter carrier Guadalcanal with thousands of marines has moved into the eastern Mediterranean .
 It is against Israeli aggression and its imperialist backers that the current Arab war is directed . It is directed at Israel and its imperial backers, writes Peter Bergen .
 All. who support the struggle for self-determination, democracy, and peace in the From The Militant, October 19, 1973 3 1H Middle East . Middle East should be on the side of the Arab states in this war .
 The question of which side moved first on the military front is irrelevant in determining where responsibility for the war lies . But the question of who moved first is irrelevant, it is irrelevant to determining responsibility .
 The very existence of the Israeli state is based on permanent aggression against the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, and has been since 1948 . Israel has been accused of 'permanent aggression' against Palestinians, Arab people .
 There is ample evidence that the Israelis have long desired a new war as an excuse to further their expansionist designs against the Arab states . There is evidence that Israel has long desired to further its expansionist plans against Arab states, the author says .
 Israel's aim in the war is not only to hold on to the territories occupied in 1967, but to grab even more territory, says Israeli leader . Israeli leaders since the beginning of the current conflict make clear that their aim is to grab more territory . Israel's goal is to keep on
 The Wall Street Journal doesn't mention that ""Israel itself"" is also ""occupied Arab territory"" The Sinai and the Golan Heights were seized in the same way as the Sinai .
 The origins of the current war go back to the establishment of Israel, with the backing of imperialism, in 1948 . The partition of Palestine was the result of the creation of Israel .
 The Zionist state was created by a United Nations ""partition"" of Palestine . The state of Palestine was created in 1947 .
 The land was divided between its Arab majority and the minority of Zionist settlers, with the latter receiving the choicest parts of the country .
 This partition was carried out over the opposition of the overwhelming majority of Palestinians . The partition of the Palestinian state has been opposed by the majority of the population .
 During and after the 1948 war, the Israelis attempted to drive Palestinians out of Israel . The Israeli government attempted to remove Palestinians from Israel . Palestinians were not allowed to leave Israel .
 Massacres and bombings were carried out against unarmed and defenseless Arab villages . The Arab Spring was a major event in the Middle East .
 Arab refugees, who fled to avoid the battle zones, were not allowed to return to their homes . Arab refugees were forced to leave their homes in the wake of the conflict .
 Property and land of the refugees were seized by the Israeli government . Property was confiscated by the government .
 Zionist laws forbid Palestinians who fled to other Arab countries to return to land where they were born . Law of return opened Palestine to massive colonization by Jews from around the world .
 Palestinians who remain within Israel are treated as second-class citizens under repressive laws that restrict their political rights and control where they can live and work . Those Palestinians who stay in Israel remain second-level citizens under Israeli laws .
 In short, Israel is a settler-state built on a foundation of oppression and discrimination of the Arab peoples . Israel is not a state of Israel, it is a state that discriminates against the Arab people, says Dr. Ami .
 In that regard it is similar to the South African or Rhodesian settlerstates . The settlement is a similar to that of Rhodesian or South African .
 Israeli domination of Palestine is based on the fact that Israel, thanks to aid from the U.S. and other imperialist powers, is an advanced industrial nation with an imperialist economy . Israel is a powerful industrial nation and has a powerful economic system . Israel's domination of Palestinian territory is based
 The Arab states remain oppressed and semicolonial countries, and the goal of unifying the Arab peoples is still to be reached . The goal is to unify the Arab people, and unifying them is still a long way away .
 Despite limited anti-imperialist measures taken in Egypt, Libya, Iraq, and Syria, U.S. and European imperialism dominates the economic life of these countries, thwarting their development .
 Arab states, like the other capitalist countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, remain underdeveloped countries . The Arab states are like the others in the world, but they are still underdeveloped . Arab states like the Arab states remain under developed countries .
 Israel, as a military and economic bastion of world imperialism in the Mideast, stands as a major obstacle in the path of economic and social progress for the Arab peoples . Israel is an economic and military bastion for world imperialism .
 Scores of fortunes were made out of war-inspired projects, exploitation of Arab workers in the seized lands, and captured Egyptian oil and other Arab resources .
 Since the 1967 war, the Israelis have continued their military terrorism against the Arab states . Campaign of aggression since ’67 has continued since then . Israel has continued its campaign of aggression .
 Between 1967 and 1970, Israel launched scores of naval, air, artillery, and commando attacks on Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Egypt . The attacks were carried out in the early 1960s .
 These attacks 6 included major bombing of Cairo and Egyptian population centers and several ""retaliation"" raids in Jordan in which entire villages were destroyed .
 In 1970, Jordan's King Hussein massacred tens of thousands of Palestinian opponents of his regime . Israel and the U.S. made preparations to intervene if the Jordanian regime was endangered by the popular revolt .
 In 1972 and 1973, Israeli terrorism increased, centering on Syria and Lebanon, where the Palestinian resistance movement was strongest . Israeli terrorism in Lebanon and Syria increased in 1972-73 .
 Israel launched bombings and shellings that killed hundreds of Arab villagers . Supposedly in retaliation for the death of eleven Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, the attacks were supposed to be in retaliation .
 Several commando raids, air attacks, and a full-scale invasion have been launched this year against Lebanon because that country grants asylum to Palestinian militants . Lebanon has been accused of harboring Palestinian militants in recent years .
 This record makes it clear that Israel's permanent mission in the Middle East is to maintain the suppression of the Arab national liberation struggle through military aggression and terrorism . Israel's 'permanent mission' in the Mideast 'is to maintain suppression of Arab liberation struggle by military aggression', says
 Israeli military experts attempting to explain defeats in the current war expose these claims as lies . However, statements by Israeli military . experts attempt to . explain defeats against Israel exposed as lies by Israeli .
 The United States shares the aims of the Israelis in keeping the Arab peoples demoralized and blocking the Arab national liberation struggle . U.S. responsibility for the Arab liberation struggle is responsibility for Arab people .
 U.S. control over the bulk of the Arab world's oil depends on these results of Israel's aggressive policy . U.N. control of the oil industry depends on the results of the Israeli policy, says CNN's John Avlon .
 Jordan and Saudi Arabia have used their military power not against Israel but against the Arab masses . United States military aid has been refused to all the Arab states, except for Jordan .
 Of all the countries in the world, Israel has the largest percentage of its budget devoted to military expenditures . Israel also has the highest per capita military expenditure, and the biggest ratio 7 of regular armed forces to population .
 The United States gave Israel $300-million in arms aid in 1967 alone . The U.S. also gave Israel more than $500 million in military equipment in 1970 .
 In times of Israeli military action, the U.S. armed forces have stood by to protect the Israeli state . In 1967, the United States stood by during Israel's war and in times of Israel's conflict .
 The imperialist rulers of this country will not hesitate to risk a world nuclear holocaust to protect their interests . The world will be at risk of a nuclear war to protect its interests, the author says .
 The savage inhumanity of the United States warmakers was demonstrated for all to see in the horror inflicted on Vietnam . The savage cruelty of the U.S. warmakers demonstrated in the Vietnam war .
 They are quite capable of doing the same thing — or worse — in the Mideast . The U.S. is capable of changing the situation in the Middle East, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The only road to peace in the Mideast is to end the Zionist occupation of Arab territories and to grant the demands of the Palestinian people to return to their homeland, with equal social, political, and religious rights .
 Supporters of Israel claim it is committed to peace and de mocracy . Why the Arab Peoples Fight Israel by Dave Frankel is published by David Frankel .
 They portray Arab peoples struggling against the Zionist state as anti-Jewish fanatics motivated by hatred and racism . They portray the Arab peoples . The Arab peoples struggle against the . Zionist state .
 The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith declared that Arab extremists do not seek merely to eradicate Israel; they want to destroy world Jewry .
 An examination of the actual history of the Middle East shows that the opposition of the Arab masses to Zionism has nothing to do with irrational hatred . The opposition to Zionism is not irrational hatred, but an examination of history shows that .
 It grew out of the struggle from the struggle From The Militant, October 26, 1973 8 of the Arab peoples against colonial domination and for control of their own land .
 In 1917, when the British Lord Balfour announced, "His Majesty's Government view with favor the establishment in Palestine of a National home for the Jewish people,"" only 11 percent of the population of Palestine was Jewish .
 The British saw the Zionist community as a bulwark against Arab nationalist aspirations . The community was seen as an anti-Arab sentiment in the 1930s .
 The establishment and maintenance of the Zionist state could only be achieved with the backing of imperialism . The Zionist settlers were bound to support British rule, since the establishment of the state was achieved by imperialism .
 Jews fleeing the terror of Nazism in Europe were forced to come to Palestine because of the refusal of the United States and Britain to allow them entry . Today Israel plays the same role in relation to the U.S. Today Israel also plays the .
 The hundreds of thousands of new immigrants were organized by the Zionist movement to confront the Palestinians as enemies . They were organized to confront them as enemies and confront them .
 Boycotts of Arab labor and agricultural products were organized to build up a separate Jewish economy . Jewish boycotts were organized in the 1930s to build an Arab-Jewish economy . Arab labor was organized to help build up an Arab economy .
 Arab workers barred from the Jewish trade-union federation . Zionists sided with the British when Palestinian people rose up against British colonial rule in 1936-39 .
 U.N. voted to partition Palestine into two states in 1947 . Palestine was partitioned into Palestine by 1947 .
 This was a violation of the right 9 of the Palestinian people to determine their own future . This was the right to determine the future of the Palestine people, he said .
 At that time there were 1,280,000 Arabs in Palestine out of a total population of 1,874,000 . At the time of the Arab Spring, there were more than 1,800,000 in Palestine .
 The Palestinians demanded a single, independent Palestine, in which both Arabs and Jews could live . The Palestinians were demanding a single Palestine, which both Arab and Jewish .
 What prevented this was not the ""hatred and irrationality" of the Palestinians, but the determination of the Zionists to carve an exclusive Jewish state out of an Arab country . The Zionists were determined to carve out an exclusively Jewish state .
 Moshe Dayan explained this very well in the September 30, 1968, Jerusalem Post . Dayan was assassinated in 1968 in the wake of the Arab Spring in Israel .
 The Israeli state was founded on the expulsion of the majority of the Palestinians and on the suppression of those who remained . Israel was founded by the expulsion and suppression of the Palestinian who remained in the region .
 The maintenance of the Israeli state requires the maintenance of this injustice . This is the root of the ongoing conflict between Palestinians and Israelis, says Yossi . Israel is the only nation in the world to have a Palestinian state .
 Palestinians became a nation of exiles voluntarily, the truth is well documented by the Israelis themselves . Israel's expulsion of Palestinians from Israel has been documented in Israel's history .
 Arabs throughout the country . were seized with limitless panic and started to flee for their lives . Arabs in the country were seized by limitless panic, according to the Arab leader .
 The expulsion of the Palestinians is not merely a historical tragedy, something unrelated to the current conflict . It's not merely an historical tragedy. It's a tragedy unrelated to current conflict, but it's not a tragedy .
 Israeli loudspeakers warned the inhabitants, 'You have two hours to leave. You have been told to leave' Israeli loudspeaker warned residents to leave .
 The nature of the Israeli settler-state ensures that such atrocities will continue as long as Israel exists . Israel is a settler state, and the nature of Israel ensures that it will continue to do so .
 Backers of Israel say Israel is needed to protect the Jewish people from extermination . Israel has a history of cover-up of Zionist crimes by backers of Israel .
 In the Middle East, however, the hostility to Jews came about as a result of the crimes of Zionism . In the Mideast, it was the result of Israel's crimes, the author says . Israel's anti-Semitism was a major factor in the region's hatred of Jews
 The hatred that the Arab masses feel for Zionism is a natural reaction to oppression . The hatred is a reaction to the oppression of the Arab world, says Yossi .
 The suffering of the Jews in Europe is no justification for the oppression of another people. The suffering in Europe should not be justified for oppression of others, says the author of the book .
 The aspiration of the Palestinians is not to oppress the Jews, but to cast off their own oppression, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela Mandela: 'The aspiration of Palestinians is to oppress Jews, not oppress them' Mandela says .
 Virtually all the major Palestinian organizations have rejected the idea of expelling the Israeli Jews from Palestine . Virtually every Palestinian organization has rejected the idea to expelling them .
 Talk about extermination of the Jews if the Palestinians were to regain their rights is on the same level as Nixon's claim in 1969 that there would be a ""bloodbath"" if the U.S. got out of Vietnam .
 Similar arguments were used against the demands of the Mau Mau freedom fighters in Kenya and the Algerian revolution . Similar arguments have been used in the past to justify the demands .
 The real danger to the Jewish people and the real source of anti-Semitism is not the struggle of the Palestinian people for their rights, but the capitalist system . Anti-Semitism can be traced back to the struggle for Palestinian rights in Israel, he says .
 Zionism pits Jewish people against those who should be their natural allies . Instead of recognizing this, Zionism pits the Jewish people vs. those who are natural allies, Israel says . Zionism pits Jews against those they should be allies .
 Israeli state was imposed and maintained only by force of arms . Israel must rely on U.S. imperialism and oppose the right of the Arab peoples to control their own resources and modernize their countries .
 Israeli Jews must reject their role as oppressors of Palestinians and as counterrevolutionary shock troops for the U.S. They must accept the idea of giving up their special privileges won at the expense of the Palestinians, and live together with them in a single state .
 They must join with the Palestinians and the other Arab peoples in a common struggle for a socialist Middle East . Finally, they must join forces with other Arab nations in a shared struggle for socialism .
 The 1967 war left Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, Syria's Golan Heights, the Jordanian-held West Bank of the Jordan River in Israeli hands . The 1967 conflict also left the Egyptian-administered Gaza area in Israeli control .
 The rulers of Egypt, Syria, and Jordan have been under pressure from the Arab masses to regain those lost territories . Since that time, the rulers of those three countries have faced similar pressure to regain their territories .
 The Arab rulers sought to regain the occupied territories through diplomacy and by making concessions . Instead of mobilizing this sentiment against Israel in a revoarly struggle, the Arab rulers tried to regain control through diplomacy .
 A mobilization of Arab peoples to win victories against Israel and its imperialist backers could lead to a social revolution against the rulers of the Arab world as well . They feared that a mobilization of . the Arab peoples . to win . victories against . Israel . and its imperial backers could . lead to
 Arab heads of state agreed to support the 1967 UN Security Council resolution on the Mideast . Following this course, the Arab leaders agreed to back the 1967 resolution . Arab heads agreed to vote for the resolution in 1967, which led to the Arab Spring .
 Resolution provides for return of the Arab territories occupied in the six-day war in exchange for Arab recognition of Israel's sovereignty . Resolution was formally backed by Washington and Moscow .
 These concessions offered to Israel represented a retreat for the Arab struggle . These concessions were a retreat to the Arab movement, Arab leaders say .
 Arab states had refused to recognize Israel because of mass support to the right of the Palestinian people to regain their homeland . Previously, the Arab countries had refused recognition Israel .
 Acceptance of UN resolution showed that Arab rulers were willing to sell out the Palestinian struggle in exchange for a U.S.-Soviet endorsed deal with Israel . However, acceptance of the UN resolution shows that .
 Jordan, Lebanon, and Israel carried out military campaigns against the Palestinians . Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and the other supposed "progressive" and pro-Palestinian Arab states refused to lift a finger . The other supposed ""progressive"" states refused .
 Tens of thousands of Palestinians were killed, and the resistance organizations were greatly weakened . Tens of Thousands of Palestinians died, and resistance groups were weakened .
 All this is seen as a concession to Washington and Tel Aviv and a move toward a settlement . All this was seen as an effort to reach a settlement with Israel .
 In 1972 and early 1973 massive demonstrations took place in Cairo and Helwan . Students and workers took part in the demonstrations .
 These actions demanded nationalization of the holdings of U.S. imperialism, arming the Egyptian masses to fight Israel, ending the policies of negotiating through the United States and the UN .
 Sadat regime responded by attacking demonstrators with the army and police . Sadat's regime responded to the demonstrators' protests with the military and police forces .
 Sadat announced he would pursue his plan to obtain a settlement under the auspices of Washington and Moscow . Sadat said he would seek a settlement with the two countries .
 The idea that Arab concessions would result in the U.S. making Israel back down has been disproven in six years since the 1967 war . Arab concessions have been disproved in the six years .
 Israel, as a colonialist enterprise, depends on continued expansion against the Arab peoples . Israel's colonial enterprise, Israel, needs to continue to expand against Arab peoples, writes David Frum . Israel needs to be able to continue expansion against Arab nations, he says .
 A return of major portions of the territories occupied in 1967 — even in exchange for Arab recognition of Israel — would put into question Zionist control over the lands occupied in 1947, 1948 .
 U.S. imperialism has stood behind Israel since the Zionist state was established . United States has stood by Israel since it was established in 1948 . Israel is the only Arab state in the Middle East .
 The ""survival"" of Israel has been dependent on billions of dollars worth of U.S. arms, United States economic assistance and loans, and other support . Israel's "survival" of Israel is dependent on the United States arms, economic assistance, and loans .
 Israel serves the interests of the U.S. ruling class, especially the oil magnates with holdings in the Mideast, by keeping the Arab revolution weak and imperialism strong . Israel is a major ally of the United States ruling class in the region .
 A return of the Arab territories would be a setback to the imperialists as well as to the Zionists, writes David Frum . The return of Arab territories is a setback for imperialists, he says .
 Washington may press Israel to make minor concessions for the sake of a settlement, but the Zionists have nothing to fear . The Zionists are not at risk of being pressured to make concessions, but they are not afraid .
 The U.S. will never abandon Israel for fear of an anti-imperialist victory . The United States will not abandon Israel in fear of a defeat against the West . Israel is a key ally in the Middle East, Israel has been a model of democracy .
 Washington backed Israeli aggression in 1967 and the numerous bombings, shellings, commando raids, and military invasions of Arab territories launched since that time . Thus Washington backed Israel in 1967 .
 The interests of imperialism are at the heart of Israeli aggression and war in the Mideast . Tel Aviv appears more "hawkish" and Washington is more "dovish,""’s” than Washington .
 The illusions of the Arab rulers that a pro-U.S. ""tilt"" could win them concessions should have been dispelled by the case history of Jordan . Jordan is the most blatantly proimperialist country bordering Israel .
 Jordan served as the instrument for the ""liquidation"" of the Palestinian resistance in 1970 and 1971 . Jordan was used as the 'liquidation' of the resistance in Jordan .
 Jordan is the Arab country that has the most significant portion of its pre-1967 population and territory occupied by Israel . Despite U.S. backing, Jordan still has most significant portions of its former territory .
 Arab states relied on a diplomatic and military alliance with Moscow as a means of pressuring the U.S. and 14 Israel to return the occupied territories . The Arab states also relied on the alliance to pressure the United States and Israel to give them back their territories .
 As the detente was inaugurated with Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union in 1972, it became increasingly clear that Moscow was cutting down its support to the Arab states .
 In 1972 Soviet military experts told Syrian journalists that the Soviet Union opposed the Arab policy of ""no war—no peace"" until the return of the occupied territories . In 1972 military experts said that the Arab war would not end until return of occupied territories.
 Moscow refused to give Egypt weapons that could be used effectively to carry the war to Israel and put pressure on the Zionists to withdraw . Moscow demanded an immediate settlement, that is on U.S.Israeli terms .
 In July 1972 the Sadat regime ordered the entire Soviet military assistance group — including 20,000 Soviet advisers concentrated in antiaircraft, missile, and tank units — to leave Kgypt . The Sadat government ordered the withdrawal of the Soviet military aid group .
 This step greatly weakened Egypt's capacity to defend itself from Israeli aggression . Egypt has been weakened by the decision to take action against Israel .
 Egyptian attempts to get arms and military assistance from Western European countries in the fall of 1972 failed, and the Egyptians reestablished close relations with Moscow . Egypt reestablished relations with Russia in 1972 .
 Sadat broke with Moscow on the advice of Saudi Arabian officials, who predicted that this step would change U.S. policy, by showing that the Egyptians were willing to line up with the United States against the Soviet Union .
 Arab concession led to no change in U.S. or Israeli policy, as usual, says U.N. President Obama .
 The detente became more and more clearly an attempt to impose solutions favorable to U.S. imperialism on the peoples of the world, as was clear in Vietnam, says John McCain .
 In the Mideast, detente encouraged the Israelis to launch dozens of attacks on the Arab peoples and not to make any concessions in the direction of returning Arab lands . Detente encouraged Israeli attacks on Arab peoples, not to give concessions in direction of return Arab lands.
 In this atmosphere, Zionists launched a campaign not only to retain Arab territories but to settle and integrate them into Israel . The Zionists want to integrate and integrate the Arab territories into Israel, the author says .
 The Golan Heights, taken from Syria in 1967, had been ""practically integrated"" into Israel . Israel took control of the area in 1967 after taking it from Syria .
 Urbanization was taking place at Sharm el-Sheikh at the southern tip of Sinai and in the northern part also also . Urbanization is taking place in the southern part of Sinai .
 The detente has prevented the Arab states from gaining the limited goals of the 1967 UN resolution, despite their demonstrated willingness to suppress the Arab revolution in exchange for these goals . Arab states are willing to suppress their own revolution in order to achieve these goals, writes Peter Bergen .
 Israelis hope to force U.S. imperialism and Soviet bureaucrats to force Israel to grant concessions through war . Now they hope to compel United States imperialism and . Soviet bureaucrats . They hope to . force the Israelis to . grant concessions .
 This is a demonstration that even from the point of view of the ruling classes of the Arab world, the detente and other ""peaceful solutions"" are only declarations of war against oppressed nations . This is an example of a declaration of war by the ruling class of Arab world against oppressed
 Rather than a force for peace, detente and "peaceful coexistence" will be used to rationalize military aggression against peoples who resist aggression and oppression, as the Arab states currently are doing, writes Peter Bergen .
 All those with a real interest in peace should support the Arab states in their struggle against Israeli aggression . The Arab states should be supported in the struggle against Israel aggression, writes David Cameron .
 Arab nations must break from the restricting policies of the current Arab rulers, says Arab scholar . However, to end the Zionist occupation in the Mideast, the Arab countries must break their policies, he says .
 The Arab capitalists must be replaced through the process of social revolution that will put power in the hands of the Arab workers and poor farmers . The Arab workers must replace the Arab capitalists through a social revolution .
 This would unleash the massive anti-imperialist sentiment of the Arab peoples, who would institute the type of measures demanded by the Egyptian workers and students . This would be the first time the Arab people have taken to the streets to protest against imperialism .
 A massive shipment of U.S. military equipment to Israel is under way . The shipment is expected to take in at least two years .
 The need to mobilize international opposition to the U.S. aggression in the Mideast is urgent, says Frida Ghitis . Ghitis: International opposition to Israeli aggression is urgent .
 Washington's assertion that the airlift of weapons was begun only in response to Moscow's military aid is pure cynicism and hypocrisy . Washington's claim that Moscow's aid was only response to Russia's military assistance is pure hypocrisy .
 U.S. maintains Israel as a military outpost of American imperialism in the Arab lands . Israel supplies arms for the Zionists' permanent aggression against the Arab peoples .
 Washington's Mideast policy hinges on maintaining unchallengeable Israeli military superiority . Washington's Middle East policy relies on Israel's military superiority in the region .
 Only the U.S. can replace lost material fast enough to do Israel any good,""The leading financial newspaper stated .
 Nixon's ominous decision to intervene with U.S. military might heightens the ever-present danger of a nuclear holocaust that could engulf the entire world . Nixon's decision heightens danger of an entire world being wiped out by a nuclear war .
 The likelihood that the Israeli regime possesses its own nuclear weapons underscores the danger of a third world war . Western military analysts have reported that Israel has nuclear weapons . The likelihood of Israel possessing nuclear weapons is a major concern for the world .
 The American ruling class is virtually unanimous in its determination to punish the Arabs for fighting to regain their land . The U.S. government is determined to punish Arabs for losing their land in Iraq .
 Democratic and Republican politicians throughout the country are calling for steppedup U.S. military support for Israel . Israel is a key ally in the Middle East . Israel has been a major ally of the Arab world since Israel began its rise in the 1970s .
 Vast quantities of ""guns, tanks, missiles, and planes"" are already en route to Israel, says Israel's president . Vast quantity of weapons, tanks and planes are already being sent to Israel .
 Associated Press dispatch from the Azores, site of the giant U.S. Air Force base in the MidAtlantic, reported an airlift of cargo and warplanes at fifteenminute intervals .
 The planes included Galaxies, Boeing 707s, C-130s and C-141 cargo planes . F-4 Phantom fighterbombers, Galaxies and F-2 Phantom fighter bombers .
 The Pentagon has ordered the attack carrier John F Kennedy to remain in the eastern Atlantic . The attack carrier was scheduled to return to the U.S. when it was ordered to leave .
 There are already two attack carriers with the United States Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean .
 The American people are far less united than the capitalist politicians in support of this new war drive by the imperialists . But the U.S. is not united against the war drive, says Julian Zelizer .
 Gallup poll published October 16 found that less than half of the American people supported Israel . Less than half support Israel in spite of the anti-Arab propaganda barrage .
 Badillo declared on October 9 that the Holy Day attack on Israel by the armed forces of Egypt and Syria was totally without provocation . Badillo: "It becomes clearer by the hour"
 The fact is there was no ""attack on Israel"" as Badillo and others on Capitol Hill claim . Badillo says the attack was not an attack on Israel .
 The territory in dispute was violently seized from Arab governments in 1967, by Israel's unprovoked six-day blitzkrieg . Israel seized the territory in 1967 by Israel in a 'provoked' six-week blitz .
 This is not to speak of the 18 whole history of Israel's bloody seizure of Palestinian land to establish the Zionist state to begin with . Israel has seized Palestinian land since the start of the state of Israel .
 Washington initially held back in hopes that Israeli regime would repeat its crippling attack on Arab armies of 1967 . Washington initially hoped that Israel would not repeat its attack on the Arab armies .
 A repeat of the 1967 Arab defeat would make the oil-rich Arab states more pliant . From the imperialists' standpoint, a repeat of this would make it easier for the Arab states to resist .
 Egyptian, Jordanian, and Syrian territory, and any new territory Israel seized from. the Arabs, would be one more blow to the Palestinian liberation movement. The Arab Spring would be a major blow to Israel's liberation movement .
 If Egypt or Syria regain some of the land occupied in the 1967 war, it would be a blow to imperialism . Egypt and Syria have been involved in the conflict in the Middle East .
 It would demonstrate to the masses of the colonial and semicolonial lands that it pays to fight rather than rely on diplomacy with Washington and Moscow .
 It would encourage Arab militants to go much further than the limits imposed on the war by Egyptian President Sadat and the other misleaders of the bourgeois Arab regimes .
 Even a partial Arab victory would encourage the Arab masses to demand the full liberation of Palestine and the overthrow of the Zionist state . The Arab masses would also demand the liberation of the Palestinian state, the writer writes .
 This is what brought the vast armada of U.S. tanks, missiles, and bombers into the rapidly expanding war . The armada is the largest armada in the world of tanks and missiles .
 Arab gains Whatever now happens, the Arabs have won a significant political victory . Arab gains are significant political gains, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The imperialists' shock and surprise is a reflection of their racist denigration of the Arabs and their typically imperialist underestimation of the capacity of the oppressed masses to fight back . This is itself eloquent testimony to the gains that have been made in the Arab Spring .
 It is revealing to compare the first assessments of the war 19 with those of a few days later . The first assessment of the first war 19 was made by the British government .
 The reaction of a young Arab in Brooklyn, N. Y., the first night of the war, reflects a feeling that has swept Arab communities throughout the world and is manifested in the ranks of the armed forces in the Mideast .
 The capitalist regimes in Cairo and Damascus are seeking a diplomatic edge through military maneuvers . The two regimes are seeking to gain diplomatic advantage through military moves .
 Their objective is to gain concessions from Israel to appease the Arab masses . The Arab masses want to appease Israel, according to the Arab League .
 "They oppose mobilizing the masses even for these limited ends, which are being sought mainly on the battlefield," says Ravi Agrawal .
 bourgeois politicians fear the independent thrust of mass movements and look to behind-the-scenes deals with Washington and Moscow for a solution . These bourgeois politicians are looking to behind the scenes deals with Russia and Washington and Russia .
 The only realistic long-term solution to the Middle East crisis is the overthrow of the Zionist state of Israel and the return of Palestine to the Palestinians . The overthrow of Israel would eliminate the cause of the aggression, writes Dr. Peter Bergen .
 Arab, African, and “neutralist"" bloc in U.N. against U.S. policy in Mideast . mass pressure has turned virtually the entire Arab and African bloc in the United Nations against U S. policy . It is this mass pressure that has turned the
 There has been a shift in thinking among significant sectors of the U.S. population as well .
 Millions of Black people identify with Arab peoples as victims of oppression at the hands of the same forces that oppress them — the U.S. government . Millions of Arab people, for example, identify with the Arab peoples . The United States is the only nation not to be oppressed by Arab
 As the radicalization process of recent years has deepened, more and more people have learned to see through the lies spewed forth by the warmakers in Washington .
 Millions of people, having just .gone through the experience of the U.S. military intervention in Vietnam, have no desire whatever to get dragged into yet another shooting war . Millions of Americans have no . desire to get involved in yet another war .
 In this political atmosphere, opponents of U.S. intervention in Mideast have a crucial role to play . Opponents of intervention in the Middle East have a key role to help, writes Peter Bergen .
 "It is our job to expose the lies and phony justifications being churned out by the rulers of this country," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: It's our job .
 Some questioners say that since both Israel and the Arab states are capitalist, we should not take sides . Some say since both countries are capitalist they should not be taken sides . Israel and Arab states both are capitalist and Israel has a right to freedom .
 Others say it is contradictory for us to favor the overthrow of the capitalist Arab regimes, yet support the Arab side in a war against Israel . Others say that it's contradictory to support the capitalist regimes and support Israel .
 These questioners confuse our stand on the Arab-Israeli war with the position revolutionary Marxists take in regard to wars between two imperialist countries . These questions are confused by the position Marxists have taken on the issue .
 The question in imperialist wars is in the division of spoils taken from the working class and colonial peoples by the different imperialist robbers . The question is in . The division of the spoils .
 The victory of neither side advances the struggles of the working class and oppressed peoples, says the Workers Party Party .
 The basic issue in the current Mideast war is the struggle of a nationally oppressed people against colonial oppressors . However, the basic issue is that the struggle for a nation oppressed against colonial oppression is national oppression .
 In that struggle socialists take the side of the oppressed despite differences with their leadership . In the struggle socialism takes a stand for the oppressed, not the party leaders .
 A victory for the Arabs in the war against Israel would be an advance not only for the struggle of the Arab peoples, but in the general colonial struggle against imperialism . A victory would be a victory for Arab peoples but also for the colonial struggle .
 The Arab states have yet to overcome the legacy of colonial domination left them by the Ottoman Empire and the European and U.S. imperialists . Arab states still struggle to overcome a legacy left by colonial domination .
 21 mies, including oil resources, remain dominated by the imperialist powers . Today, their econoities are today's econocities .
 Israel's colonial domination of Arab lands is based on the imperialist-imposed backwardness of the Arab states, as well as the massive U.S. aid the Zionist colony has received since 1948 . Israel has received massive aid from the United States since 1948, including from the U.N
 Israel was established in 1948 with the seizure of the Arab lands in Palestine . Backed by this imperialist power, Israel was created in 1948 . Israel is now a state of Israel .
 Seven hundred and fifty thousand Palestinians were driven from their homes . 7,000 people were driven out of their homes. 7,500 Palestinians have been driven from homes .
 Israel again expanded in 1967 with the seizure of the Golan Heights, the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank of the Jordan River . Israel also seized the Sinai and the Gaza Peninsula in 1967 . Israel then expanded in the 1967 Arab Spring .
 Half a million Arabs were driven out of their homelands in this operation . Half-a-half a million Arab refugees were driven from their homes in the operation .
 The dynamic of the Mideast war centers on the struggle of the Arab peoples to rid themselves of the Zionist colonialists . The Arab peoples are trying to rid them of the colonialists and weaken them . The colonialists are also trying to weaken Arab peoples .
 Marxists give unconditional support to the colonized peoples . In struggles against colonialism and national oppression, Marxists support colonized people . Marxists are committed to the liberation of colonized nations .
 By the word ""unconditional,"" we mean we support the struggle against oppression regardless of our differences with the current leadership of the Arab states . By the term, we mean "we support the struggles against oppression,"" regardless of differences .
 Revolutionary socialists do not think Arab capitalist leaders have a program that can win the struggle against Zionist colonialism . Revolutionary socialists think Arab leaders have no program to win struggle against Zionism colonialism .
 In the years since 1967, these leaders have opposed the revolutionary anti-Zionist, anti-imperialist sentiments of the Arab masses . In 1967, the Arab Arab masses were united against the Israeli regime .
 Instead of mobilizing the Arab masses against Israel, they chose to make concessions to Zionism and to Israel's imperialist backers . The Arab masses chose not to mobilize against Israel but instead to give concessions to Zionists .
 Anti-Zionist actions carried out by Egyptian workers and students carried out over the past few years . They have repressed the attempts of the Arab masses to move against Israeli colonialism .
 The rulers of the Arab states feared that such mobilizations could lead to the overthrow of their own corrupt regimes . The rulers feared that the mobilizations would lead to their own overthrow of themselves .
 Revolutionary socialists believe that only through the process of socialist revolution can the resources of the Arab world be mobilized against colonialism . The full power of Arab workers, students, and farmers can be mobilized, they say .
 Marxists have the difference with Arab rulers over how and for what to wage against Israel, not whether to wage it . But in the current war with Israel, the difference is over how to wage this struggle, writes David Frum .
 A refusal to support the Arabs in this struggle would be a rejection of the active fight against Israel . The Arab Spring would be the first Arab Arab to join the struggle against Israel, Arab leaders say .
 We support the Black struggle against white racist oppression in this country, in spite of its inade quate leadership . To use an analogy, we support the black struggle against racist oppression . We support our inadequate leadership. We support it, and we support it .
 It would do nothing to advance the Black struggle if revolutionists refused to support a specific struggle because it is being led by NAACPers, or by Black Republicans or Democrats .
 A position of unconditional support of such struggles is a key condition for revolutionary socialists to win Black activists to a revolutionary socialist perspective . In fact, a position of . unconditional support is a . key condition . for revolutionary . socialists .
 revolutionary socialists would oppose any of the limitations such procapitalist leaders might try to place on the struggle . At the same time, they would oppose such limitations .
 Revolutionary socialists support the struggle of African liberation organizations that are fighting Portuguese, Rhodesian, and South African colonialism, even if their leadership is not explicitly in favor of socialism .
 Such opposition would only play into the hands of Portugal, Rhodesia, and South Africa, says Rhodesia . Such opposition is likely to play a negative role in Rhodesia and Rhodesia in the future .
 To fail to be at the side of the Arab masses in the struggle against Israel would be a refusal to take sides in a concrete struggle against Zionist racism and colonialism . It would only stand in the way of the efforts of Arab revolutionary socialists .
 Richard Nixon brought the world to the brink of nuclear war with the Soviet Union on October 25, 1973 . Behind Nixon’s Threat of Nuclear War by Dave Frankel is a book by David Frankel .
 Missiles were raised to firing positions, special battle staffs went on duty, bomber crews slept in their planes, leaves were canceled, and the entire U.S. military machine of 2. million men was placed on combat alert .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev clashed over Cuba's right to defend itself with Soviet missiles . The crisis saw an ""eyeball to eyeball"" nuclear confrontation between President John Kennedy and . Soviet premier Nikita . President Kennedy . President Khrushchevski faced
 Robert Kennedy was prepared to launch an all-out nuclear war if Khrushchev refused to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba . Robert Kennedy later admitted in his book that his brother had been fully prepared to go nuclear .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger set a different tone at an earlier news conference . Kissinger: "We are not going to be able to talk to each other. We are going to have a very difficult time," Kissinger said .
 Nixon was the man with his finger on the nuclear button . Nixon's assessment carries some extra weight since he was Nixon's nuclear boss .
 The first reaction of many people to the military alert was to assume that Nixon had engineered another foreign policy spectacular to divert attention from the latest Watergate scandal . The military alert is a response to the Nixon administration's massive pressure for impeachment .
 Kissinger: "It is a symptom of what is happening to our country that it could even be suggested that the U.S. would alert its forces for domestic reasons" Kissinger: 'It is even a symptom that the United States would alert ... forces'
 The illusion that the Washington-Moscow detente ruled out the possibility of a real confrontation was the illusion . Another factor contributing to the disbelief was the fact that the detente had been agreed to be a reality .
 Nixon certainly tried to get all the mileage he could out of the Mideast crisis . Nobody can deny that widespread distrust of Nixon and cynicism about government pronouncements are well founded .
 Nothing could be more dangerous than to discount Nixon's nuclear saber-rattling as empty rhetoric, or to mistake the detente as a defense against nuclear war .
 Ample evidence that the Middle East showdown was real is provided by the reactions of sections of the capitalist class unfriendly to Nixon, writes Richard Quest .
 On October 29, the Times gave its seal of approval to Nixon's threat to use the H-bomb . The Times also gave its approval of Nixon's threats .
 The Israeli government had de clared its intention of inflicting the heaviest possible casualties on the Arab armies at the beginning of the latest war .
 UN Security Council passed ceasefire agreement with Russia and U.S. on October 22 . U.N. Security Council made no secret of its distaste for the agreement .
 Israelis continued to pump troops and supplies into their bridgehead on the west bank of the Suez Canal . Israel accepted the ceasefire verbally, but continued to maintain control of the bridgehead .
 Whether the Israeli offensive was planned with Nixon's and Kissinger's agreement, or was carried out and later won their acceptance, may never be known . The Israeli offensive may never have been planned or accepted by Nixon or Kissinger .
 The Security Council reaffirmed the original ceasefire resolution on October 23 . The Egyptian III Corps was in an untenable position when it was reaffirmed by the UN .
 President Sadat of Egypt called for an emergency meeting of the Security Council . Egypt demanded that the original cease fire lines be restored . Washington and Moscow and Washington sent troops to police the agreement .
 In the meantime, according to Nixon, the Kremlin began pre paring to send troops into Egypt . Nixon says the Kremlin was pre-parading troops into the country . Nixon: The Kremlin began sending troops to Egypt in the meantime .
 The shroud of secrecy that veils U.S.-Soviet diplomacy keeps us from knowing exactly what Brezhnev intended to do . We are not sure exactly what he meant to do with the Soviet Union .
 President Nixon said he wasn't about to tolerate the destruction of III Corps . But there can be no doubt that he said enough to convince Nixon .
 Nixon chose to jump in behind Israel with the threat of the H-bomb . Nixon, however, chose to choose not to use the threat .
 Apparently the Kremlin backed down, and another agreement was reached before the confrontation went any further . The Kremlin has backed down .
 The Security Council passed a new ceasefire resolution October 25, this one with provisions for a UN force to oversee the cease-fire . The UN force will be tasked with overseeing the ceasefire in Syria .
 The Egyptian III Corps remained surrounded, but in no immediate danger of being forced to surrender, since the Israelis were permitting food and water to be supplied to it . The Egyptians are still surrounded by the Israelis .
 The Militant warned that Brezhnev's summit policies of capitulating to Nixon and prettifying the imperialist warmakers will not lessen the danger of nuclear war; rather these policies will embolden Nixon and strengthen his hand .
 The truth of this analysis has been proved once again by the events of the past week . The truth has been proven once again, says the author of the book .
 Brezhnev has been pleading all along for a deal that would protect the status quo in the Middle East in return for Israel's giving up some of the territories occupied during the 1967 war .
 He has been more than willing to help suppress the struggle of the Palestinian Arabs to reclaim their homeland in order to make such a deal .
 In his speech to the World Peace Congress in Moscow on October 26 Brezhnev again stressed his commitment to ""normalization"" of the imperialist status quo, with ""secure borders"" for the colonial-settler state .
 They represent a capitalist system that must expand to survive . They represent the capitalist system, which must expand, survive . The system is expanding to survive.
 The result is constant attempts to enlarge their field of activity and to push back the struggles of the colonial masses for political and economic independence . The result of these attempts is that they are constantly trying to enlarge the field of . activity .
 House-Senate conferees restored most of the money that had been cut from the Pentagon budget . This dynamic was shown five days after the outbreak of the Middle East war .
 Whether or not Nixon knew of Israel's planned Suez offensive in advance, once it materialized he had no compunctions about trying to improve the position of the U.S. client state, even at the risk of nuclear war . Similarly, whether or not . not . Nixon knew
 Soviet bureaucrats were willing to stand by and watch Nixon terror bomb the Vietnamese, and even talk about generations of peace while he was doing it . But they took a different view when the capitalist regime in Egypt was threatened with a decisive defeat .
 The Middle East lies just south of the Soviet Union, and the Kremlin has no desire to see its southern flank under exclusive U.S. domination .
 Moscow's bureaucratic caste in Moscow is motivated by the most narrow and immediate considerations of national interest . The bureaucracy in Russia is motivated only by the interests of national interests, says the Russian president .
 It saw those interests threatened in the Middle East, but not in Vietnam . Vietnam saw its interests in the Mideast threatened, not in the region, but in Vietnam.
 The Kremlin policy of seeking an accomodation with the United States by making concessions to it is doomed to failure because of the predatory nature of imperialism . The U.S. is the most powerful and most powerful in the world, writes Andrew Hammond .
 "This policy increases the possibility of nuclear confrontation," he says . "The bureaucrats refuse to take a firm stand except when they see their vital interests threatened," he adds .
 Nixon's readiness to wipe out human civilization is such a palpable sign of insanity that some are tempted to blame the nuclear threat on his particular mental condition . Nixon is a man who has a long history of insanity .
 Nixon's madness is wholly in keeping with the system he represents, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "It's the system that Nixon represents. It's the madness he represents."
 The Times supports the threat of blowing up the world as a tool of U.S. foreign policy . It also took the same position when Kennedy used the same threat during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Another aspect of imperialism revealed by the latest Middle East crisis was the sharpening competition between the major capitalist powers . The Middle East has been rocked by the Arab Spring .
 White House spokesman Robert McCloskey, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, Kissinger, and Nixon berated their European allies for their attitude during the crisis . Kissinger, Kissinger and Nixon all berated European allies .
 Kissinger complained that he was ""disgusted"" with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Nixon agreed that European countries had not been as cooperative as they might've been in attempting to help us work out the Middle East settlement .
 West Germany had been allowing the United States to use its territory to supply military material to Israel . West Germany publicly demanded that this stop —it had been done too blatantly .
 The European capitalist counties depend on the Middle East for about 75 percent of their oil . The policy of maintaining Israel as an imperialist beachhead in the area against the Arab revolution is no fundamental difference .
 The U.S. wants to appear to take their distance from Washington in the latest conflict . But at the same time, in their diplomatic posture, they wanted to appear a distance .
 Europe's interests are ""rather different from the interests of the United States,"" says Lord Carrington, the British minister of defense . Europe's interest is different from that of the U.S., he says .
 The public rift in the NATO alliance was unprecedented, reflecting the growing power and independence of the European capitalists vis-a-vis Wall Street . The rift in NATO alliance reflects growing power .
 Nixon took the world to the brink of nuclear war without even consulting his NATO allies . At the same time, American predominance was reaffirmed when Nixon took world to brink of war .
 The prospect in the Middle East is not for peace and stability, says CNN's John Sutter . NATO's ambitions in the region are growing, Sutter says . But even without the growing ambitions of Washington's partners in NATO, the prospect is not good for peace .
 Israel has made no secret of its dismay over U.S. pressure for even the most minimal concessions . There is little possibility that the Arab states will regain all or even most of the land that was taken from them in 1967 .
 The U.S.-Soviet deal to recognize Israel as a permanent fixture in the Middle East . Added to these factors is the denial of the rights of the Palestinians by the U.K. deal .
 The Zionist state, which acts as an imperialist spearhead in the Arab world, will continue its policies of aggression and expansion . The Palestinians will continue to fight for their rights until they win .
 There will be new crises in the Middle East as long as imperialism exists, says George Clooney . He says there will be more crises if imperialism continues to dominate the region .
 Until the U.S. disarms the Nixons and the Kissingers, the entire human race will be threatened with extinction again and again . Until the socialist revolution in the United States disarms them, the human race is at risk .
 Nixon's promises of 'permanent peace' notwithstanding, that is the real lesson of the events of the last week . Nixon's promise of ""permanent peace" notwithstanding, the lessons of last week are clear .
 The experience of the Vietnam war has led many people here in the U.S. to view with healthy suspicion the idea of a new military adventure . The Vietnam war led many Americans to view the Vietnam War as an adventure .
 Capitalist politicians, Zionist propagandists, and the mass media are working zealously to overcome this reluctance . Capitalists and the media have been reluctant to give up on the issue .
 It is a campaign of racist slander and vilification directed against the Arab peoples . It's a campaign, it is a racist slander directed against Arab peoples. It is the campaign of racism, it's the racist slander .
 The anti-Arab racism the Zionist regime breeds is the conquerors' contempt for their victims . The contempt is used to justify oppression . The Zionists' contempt is a contempt that is used by oppression .
 Stein: Arabs are not civilized people— they are barbarians . Stein: In Stein's view, Arabs are barbaric people . Stein says Arabs are civilized people but they are barbaric .
 The Israeli oppressors and their imperialist backers, as usual in such cases, believe their own propaganda . Israel's government and Israel's military have been accused of being anti-Semitic in the past .
 That they could have taken such a myth seriously is a small indication of the imperial arrogance of the U.S. rulers . The United States rulers are imperialistic and arrogant .
 A recent television newscast was typical in this regard . The difficulties of its client state in the Middle East have made the propagation of such racist poison more important than ever for the U.S.
 It showed Israeli troops dancing a hora, followed by Israeli wounded at a field hospital . The video was posted on YouTube .
 Israeli wounded were portrayed as human beings . Arab casualties were converted into statistics . The Israeli government portrayed the wounded as human being .
 Involved here is conscious preparation for U.S. intervention in the fighting, says CNN.com . Involved in the fight is a "conscious preparation for United States intervention" in Iraq .
 There are clear indications that such an effort would be able to reach masses of Americans . And there is clear indications such a program could be successful .
 Gallup poll shows that most Americans do not identify with Israel in this war . Gallup poll: Most Americans don't identify with the Israeli government in this conflict .
 Rallies, teach-ins, and information campaigns exposing the role of Israel in the Middle East have occurred on campuses and in communities across the country . Israel is a major ally of the U.S. in the region .
 They serve as an example of what has to be done on a larger scale in the coming weeks . They are examples of what must be done for the future of the country .
 A Socialist Answer to Zionism by George Novack ao Mideast Oil and U.S, Imperialism by Dick Roberts 70 Leon Trotsky On the Jewish Question . 60 Leon Trotsky on the Jewish question .