 Visible on deck are crates containing the fuselages of Il-28 Beagle bombers being returned to the Soviet Union from Cuba from Cuba .
 The events that would almost cause a nuclear war that day were already happening . When the sun rose over the Eastern Time Zone on Oct. 1962, the events that almost caused nuclear war had already happened .
 Rudolf Anderson, a U-2 pilot from the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, was launching on an overflight mission over Cuba . Anderson was the pilot of a U.2 U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 Chuck Maultsby, was headed to the North Pole to take air samples to monitor Soviet nuclear tests . Chuck Maultby was headed for the North pole to monitor nuclear tests at the time of the Soviet Union's first nuclear test .
 Anti-Submarine Warfare group was hounding the submarines of the Soviet 69th Torpedo Submarine Brigade in a vicious "hold down" engagement .
 Before the end of 'Black Saturday' they would combine to drive the Soviet Union and U.S. to within seconds of multiple nuclear weapons releases, and global nuclear war . ‘Black Saturday’ was known as “Black Saturday .
 Khrushchev's settlement offer letter arrived overnight at EXCOM meeting . Kennedy was shocked to find another offer letter from Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchell .
 The U.S. should withdraw their SM-78 Jupiter ballistic missiles based in Turkey, the U.N. letter says . The “second note” had the added demand that the United States withdraw the missiles . The letter was worded more toughly than the “
 The EXCOM meeting discussion that morning went distinctly “sideways,” with the participants openly angry at the sudden additional Soviet demand to reach a settlement . The participants openly agreed to a settlement with the Soviet Union .
 Some EXCOM members even suggested the possibility of an overnight coup by Kremlin hardliners against Khrushchev . Some members of the EXCOM suggested the idea of a coup by the Kremlin .
 Majors Anderson and Maultsby were killed in the U.2 missions . Anderson was one of two U.S. pilots to carry out the missions in the early 1990s .
 Anderson’s U-2 mission had begun normally, as he coasted in from the north near the Port of Banes in eastern Cuba . Anderson's mission had started normally, but he was shot down in Cuba .
 Soviet leaders were monitoring his flight, and believed it was in preparation for the airstrikes they were expecting shortly . On the ground though, Soviet leaders believed it to be preparing for the strikes .
 Anderson’s U-2 was destroyed, the major was probably killed instantly . Anderson was killed in the attack on Banes . The major was killed by the V-75/SA-2 Guideline Surface-to-Air Missile site .
 Immediately, the United States military and intelligence leadership wanted to retaliate and destroy the Banes SAM site, though the president and other EXCOM members wanted to confirm the facts of what had happened .
 Chuck Maultsby’s U-2 air-sampling mission to the North Pole was also reported to the U.S. At the same time, they were assessing what had been reported to them about the mission .
 Maultsby accidently tracked west of his planned route home and into eastern Siberia . He was lost in Siberia .
 Soviet Far Eastern Military Command launched a pair of MG-19 Farmer interceptors to shoot down the intruding spy plane . However, the interceptors were launched by the Soviet Far East Military Command .
 Alaska Air Defense Command launched a pair of F-102 Delta Dagger interceptors to protect Maultsby’s U-2 . In response to the incident, the Alaska Air Force launches two Delta Dagger Interceptors .
 Aboard each F-102 were 3 or 4 GAR-11/AIM-26 Falcon air-to-air missiles . At least one of which on each aircraft was armed with a W54 nuclear warhead .
 The F-102s were within seconds of launching a salvo of the nuclear-tipped AAMs . The U-2 had re-entered United States airspace, and the MiG-19s had turned for home .
 Kennedy received word of what had happened during Maultsby’s U-2 mission . Kennedy was both angry and worried .
 American and Soviet forces were “bumping’ into each other, with deadly consequences . From Siberia to Berlin to the Caribbean Sea, U.S. and Russia were "bumping" each other across the globe . The deaths of Soviet and American forces were tragic .
 Attorney General Robert F "Bobby" Kennedy was President Kennedy’s defacto consigliore . Kennedy was also running back channel contacts with the Soviets .
 Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly Dobrynin was a close friend of Bobby Kennedy . He was the son of former Soviet ambassador to the United States . He died at the age of 92 at age of 98 .
 President Kennedy sent Bobby to meet with Dobrynin for one last try at negotiating a peaceful end of the crisis . President Kennedy decided to send Bobby to try and negotiate an end to the Korean War .
 The last and potentially worst events of ‘Black Saturday’ were playing out in the tropical waters of the Sargasso Sea northeast of Cuba . Kennedy and the White House staff prepared Bobby for his meeting that evening .
 Soviet Project 641/Foxtrot-class diesel-electric boats of the 69th Torpedo Submarine Brigade were being “held down” by destroyers and ASW aircraft .
 This included use of so-called “practice depth charges” and extremely aggressive ship handling by the United States destroyers . The U.S. destroyers are known to be aggressive and aggressive .
 All three boats of the 69th were forced to surface, but one of them almost started World War III in the process . Eventually, all three of the boats were forced out of the water .
 The U.S. Navy shadows Soviet submarine B-59 commanded by Capt. Capt. Vladimir Kuznka . Capt. Kuzkka was the last submarine to be sent to the Soviet Union .
 Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky was held down by U.S. destroyers and aircraft for hours . He was killed by Soviet Union forces in October 1962 . Savitsy was the last ship to surface in the Soviet Union .
 The meeting between Bobby Kennedy and Dobrynin that evening took place in the attorney general’s office in the Justice Department Building . National Archives photo shows the meeting between the two .
 Kennedy quickly laid out the situation to Dobrynin . Airstrikes on Cuba, followed by an invasion, would begin in just over 36 hours if a settlement was not reached .
 Kennedy indicated a U.S. willingness to settle the crisis based upon diplomatic notes and back-channel exchanges of the past few days . Kennedy then indicated that the United States would be willing to resolve the crisis .
 When Dobrynin brought up the U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey, Kennedy indicated that those weapons could be removed in 4 to 5 months, as long as the Soviets did not link it to the Soviet missile withdrawal from Cuba . Kennedy indicated in Turkey that the weapons were removed in
 Dobrynin cabled Kennedy’s offer directly to Khrushchev, who received it in the early hours of Sunday, Oct., Moscow time . The offer was made in the hours of October 1, 1962 .
 U.S. Navy photographers took close-ups of Soviet submarine B-59 in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy ordered a stand down of the air and invasion forces until the withdrawal of the Soviet ballistic missiles could be verified . The DEFCON-2 alert was continued until mid-November .
 The Soviets loaded up their R-12/SS-4 Sandal missiles, loaded them as deck cargo and sailed home with American reconnaissance planes tracking them the entire way . U.S. reconnaissance planes tracked the missiles down the coast .
 The withdrawal of the Anadyr force from Cuba proceeded with little public drama . The U.S. had to press the USSR on removing the Il-28 Beagle bombers due to their capability to deliver nuclear weapons . Overall, the withdrawal proceeded without any public fuss .
 Khrushchev had his own “mini-crisis” Fidel Castro demanded that the Soviets leave behind their stockpile of tactical nuclear weapons, which they refused to do . Castro refused to leave behind his nuclear weapons .
 The Soviets left behind most of the conventionally armed weapons, like the V-75/SA-2 SAMs and MiG-21 interceptors . They also left behind elements of one of the four Motor Rife Regiments they had deployed to Cuba .
 From this failure came the first “hot line’s” in 1963, a secure teletype/text system, and an upgraded version that remains in place today . The first "hot line" in 1963 came from a failed teletype line .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev met only once at the volatile Vienna Summit in 1961 . The two leaders met in 1961 at the height of the tensions between the Cold War and Soviet Union .
 Cold War saw long periods with little or no personal contact between U.S. and Soviet leaders . The Cold War often saw increased tensions and caused a crisis .
 A reconnaissance photo taken by an RF-101 of the 363rd Tactical Reconnaissance Wing over Port Casilda, Cuba, Nov. 1962 . The photo was taken by a photo of the Cuban island .
 RF-101 was verifying the departure of Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuba . It was the first time the Soviet Union had sent nuclear weapons out of Cuba .
 The two near-releases on Oct. 31 shook leaders on both sides of the crisis, resulting in Permissive Action Links, known as PALS, along with better procedures to ensure such incidents never happened again .
 The “bumping” by U.S. and Soviet forces on Oct. 31 was a natural result of these conditions . The need for a quick settlement on “Black Saturday’s” before someone made a really big mistake led to the need for quick settlement
 Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev were able to do much with the lessons of the crisis . Less than two years later both were gone from the world scene .
 Googletag.push is a command that sends a message to the user . Lt. Cevallos is a member of the U.S. Army National Guard .
 The World Catches Jazz Fever, Compliments of the U.S. Army Veterans Health Administration 75 Years: A Legacy of Service . The world has been rocked by the success of the Army's health care system .
 Armed Services Blood Program Urges Donors to Step Up . Advertise with us. Get our newsletter .