 Much has been written about the Cuban ted"" and the more ""established"" workers, missile crisis . Despite its role as a turning point in the evoluation of the . U.S.-Soviet global rivalry, it was a work of vast learning .
 There were many mentation and hyperspecialization, skillfully skillfully other severe and important crises since World crossing the boundaries of political economy, War II, some with the United States and the USSR as international relations .
 Cox's clearly presented sympathy for the Middle East, the 1962 Sino-Indian Border War, for the plight of labor and radical social change . Readers will find much more regional significance, such as the 1967 Six in the book that provokes critical reflection .
 This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the state's independence referendum . It is the first time in 20 years that the referendum has been held in London . The referendum will be held in 2015 .
 The most intensive, dangerous and climactic Liberalism, we are told, had only ""a circumcrisis of the cold war" The volume contains much that is familiar to students of specifically political activity and institutions .
 First, Garthoff offers fresh insights into the Regimes in other countries proved capable of Soviet decision process . First, he offers fresh insight into the Soviet Regimes .
 Second, by emphasizachieving the same balance between economy ing the ""disjunction in perceptions of reality . . . and politics under authoritarian auspices . Third, by . emphasising the balance between . economy ing and the . disjunction between . perceptions of . reality .
 These sources seem a flimsy basis for inferring""offensive"" weapons other than the missiles, ring such far-reaching lessons .
 Joseph amine is the peak or most intense phase of the Richard Goldman era . Joseph Goldman is the son of Richard Goldman, who is now a successful businessman .
 There is much to agree on what became the nonproliferhere to learn and to argue about . For instance, ation and SALT agreements years later .
 The variant assesssile crisis led to a basic shift in Soviet policy ments of the essential characteristics and retowards the West, apart from Khrushchev's quirements of U.S. national security, from downfall in 1964 .