 Grant has written extensively in the fields of military history, general history, current affairs, and biography . Grant has also written extensively about military history and current affairs .
 Her research focuses on the changes in human society, from the very small social groups of our prehistory to the global social networks that characterize people’s lives today .
 Thomas Cussans, writer and historian, has contributed to numerous historical works . He has published numerous works on the subject of historical fiction .
 He was previously publisher of The Times History of the World and The Times Atlas of European History .
 Joel Levy is a writer specializing in history and the history of science . He is also a member of the American Museum of Science .
 He is the author of more than 20 books, including Lost Cities, and 50 Weapons that Changed the World .
 Philip Parker is a historian specializing in the classical and medieval world . He is the author of a new book on the history of the classical world .
 A Journey Around the Frontiers of the Roman Empire, The Northmen's Fury: A History of the Viking World, and The Great Trade Routes: A history of Cargoes and Commerce Over Land and Sea .
 He was a contributor to DK History Year by Year and DK History of the World in 1000 Objects . He has also written a number of books about the world's history .
 He has previously worked as a diplomat and publisher of historical atlases .
 Sally Regan has contributed to over a dozen DK titles including History, World War II, and Science . Regan is the author of numerous science and history books .
 Philip Wilkinson has written many books on historical subjects, heritage, architectural history, and the arts . Wilkinson has also written books on heritage, heritage and architectural history .
 Bestsellers include What The Romans Did For Us and The Shock of the Old and Great Buildings . He has contributed to numerous encyclopaedias and popular reference books .
 St. Petersburg as a window to let in the light of Europe . The founding of St. Peter's Cathedral was founded in 1881 .
 From earliest times, all societies told stories about their origins or their past, usually imaginative tales centering around the acts of gods and heroes . In the past, stories were often told by people who were literate or pre-literate .
 The first literate civilizations kept records of their rulers' actions on clay tablets or on the walls of palaces and temples . The first written records of rulers were found in clay tablets .
 Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it . But at first these ancient societies made no attempt at a systematic inquiry .
 George Santayana The Life of Reason 99 into the truth of the past . They did not differentiate between what had really happened and the events manifest in myth and legend . They were not distinguish between the events and those made up in myth .
 Ancient Greek writers Herodotus and Thucydides first explored questions about the past through the collection and interpretation of evidence . The word ""history" means "inquiry" in Greek and "history" in the word first used by herodotus .
 Herodotus’s work still contained a considerable mixture of myth, but Thucydides’ account of the Peloponnesian War satisfies most criteria of modern historical study . The Peloponerasian War was the most famous war between the two sides .
 It was based on interviews with eyewitnesses of the conflict and attributed events to human agency rather than the intervention and actions of the gods .
 Historians Polybius and Livy both sought to create a narrative of the rise of Rome . The historian wanted a “big picture” that would help make sense of events on a large timescale .
 This was the beginning of what is sometimes called “universal history,” which attempts to describe progress from earliest origins to the present as a story with a goal, giving the past apparent purpose and direction . Although restricted to the Roman world, this was the start of ‘universal
 Historians established the tradition of history as a source of moral lessons and reflections . Historians in the ancient world made sense of events through narratives, narratives . History is also a place to reflect on moral lessons, say historians .
 The history writing of Livy or Tacitus was in part designed to examine the behavior of heroes and villains . Livy and Tacitus meditated on the strengths and weaknesses in the characters of emperors and generals .
 Historical studies of Lincoln, Churchill, Gandhi, or Martin Luther King, Jr. perform the same function . Historians of Gandhi, Lincoln, Gandhi and King use historical studies of their subjects as a basis .
 The rise of Christianity in the late Roman Empire fundamentally changed the concept of history in Europe . The “Dark Ages’s ‘dark ages’ were created by the Roman Empire .
 Historical events came to be viewed by Christians as divine providence, or the working out of God’s will . Historical events were viewed as the working of God's will, or providence .
 Skeptical inquiry into what actually happened was usually neglected . Accounts of miracles and martyrdoms were generally accepted as true without question .
 The Muslim world, in this as in other ways, was frequently more sophisticated than Christendom in Medieval times . The Arab historian Ibn Khaldun railing against the blind, uncritical acceptance of fanciful accounts of events that could not be verified .
 Renaissance Humanism is a form of modern history writing in Western Europe . Renaissance humanism was a formative form of history writing . It was in Europe that modern historiography evolved .
 Renaissance began in Italy in the 15th century, then spread throughout Europe lasting until the end of the 16th century in some areas . The Renaissance was centered upon the rediscovery of the past .
 Renaissance thinkers found a fertile source of inspiration in classical antiquity, in areas as diverse as architecture, philosophy, politics, and military tactics . Renaissance thinkers often looked to classical antiquity for inspiration in their work .
 Humanist scholars of the Renaissance period declared history one of the principal subjects in their new educational curriculum . To live with men of an earlier age is like travelling in foreign lands .
 Rene Descartes Discourse on Method 99 became a familiar figure in elite circles . He was rummaging among ancient ruins and building up collections of old coins .
 The spread of printing made history available to a much wider audience than ever before . At the same time, the spread of printed history made history accessible to a wider audience .
 By the 18th century in Europe, the methodology of history had reached a fair level of sophistication . History consisted of ascertaining facts by criticizing and comparing historical sources . The Enlightenment was the beginning of history .
 Medieval period dominated by the Church was viewed as a time of irrationality and barbarism . Medieval period was seen as separating the dignified world of ancient civilizations from the newly emerging, rational universe of modern Europe .
 Enlightenment philosophers wrote histories that ridiculed the follies of the past . Enlightenment philosophers ridiculed the folly of past . But they also ridiculed the past.
 Romantic movement that swept across Europe from the late 18th century found an intrinsic value in the difference between the past and the present . In stark contrast, the Romantic movement found value in difference between past and present .
 As nationalism triumphed in Europe in the 19th century, history became a celebration of national characteristics and national heroes, often veering into myth-making .
 Every country wanted to have its sacred heroic history, just as it had its flag and national anthem . Every country had its sacred history, as well as its national anthem and its flag .
 In the 19th century, history became increasingly important and took on the quality of destiny . The “Grand Narrative’s” was created by the French Revolution .
 European civilization saw itself as the goal to which all history had been progressing, and constructed narratives that made sense of the past in those terms . Arrogantly, European civilization thought it was the goal for all history to progress, he says .
 The German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel articulated a grand scheme of history as a logical development, which culminated in the end point of the Prussian state .
 Karl Marx adapted Hegel’s scheme into his own theory . Marx claimed that economic progress caused conflict between the social classes would inevitably one day result in the proletariat seizing power from the bourgeoisie . The capitalist world order collapsed under its own inner contradictions .
 In the 19th century history underwent professionalization and became an academic discipline . History is now an academic field of knowledge .
 Academic history aspired to the status of a science, and the ** History is little more than the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind . Academic history was little more like a science .
 Edward Gibbon The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire . The accumulation of ‘facts” was its avowed purpose . Gibbon’s history of Roman Empire was his avowed aim .
 In the 20th century, the subject matter of history increasingly expanded to embrace the common people . Social history has become accessible through more in-depth research . The rise of social history has led to the rise in social history .
 Some historians chose to disregard the ‘history of events’ altogether, preferring instead to study social structures and the patterns of everyday life, beliefs, and ways of thinking .
 Until the second half of the 20th century, most world history was written as the story of the triumph of Western civilization . A Eurocentric approach to history has led to a Eurocentric view of the world .
 This approach was as implicit in Marxist versions of history as in those histories that celebrated the progress of technology, enterprise, and liberal democracy . InTRODUCTION 15: This approach is as implicit as those that celebrated progress in technology and democracy .
 It did not necessarily imply optimism—there were numerous prophets of decline and doom . But it did mean optimism, and optimism was not necessarily pessimistic .
 History had been made by Europe and European offshoots further afield . But it did suggest that history was made, and was still being made, by Europe .
 For instance, it was deemed acceptable for respected European historians to maintain that black Africa had no significant history at all . Having failed to contribute to the onward march of humanity, black Africa did not contribute to humanity .
 In the course of the second half of the 20th century, the notion of a single, purposeful, historical ‘grand narrative’ collapsed, taking Eurocentrism with it . In the post-colonial world, postcolonial revisionism is a form of revisionism .
 The postcolonial, postmodernist world was seen as requiring a multiplicity of histories told from the point of view of many different social identities . Postcolonial and postmodernism is seen as a need for multicity of social identities to be told of .
 There was a surge of interest in the study of black history, women’s history, and gay history, as well as histories narrated from an Asian, African, or American Indian standpoint, historian says .
 The marginal and oppressed in society were reassessed as ‘agents of history’ rather than passive victims . The marginal were reassessed as “agents’ of history rather than victims”
 A riot of revisionism upturned much of the history of the world as commonly known to educated people in the West, although often without putting any satisfactory alternative version in place of the old . The world's history has been turned upside down by revisionism .
 The response to the 500th anniversary in 1992 of Christopher Columbus's first voyage to the Americas was puzzlement . For example, the puzzlement that resulted can be seen in the response to that anniversary .
 It would once have been expected to excite widespread celebration in the United States . But it was in practice acknowledged with some embarrassment, if at all .
 People are no longer sure what to think about traditional history, its Great Men, and its epoch-making events . People are now unsure what they think of traditional history . People no longer know what to say about the Great Men .
 It aims to present a general reader with an overview of world history through specific moments, or events, which can act as windows upon selected areas of the past . The book is published in the UK and Australia .
 In line with contemporary concerns, this book also reflects the long-term importance of key factors such as population growth, climate, and the environment throughout human history .
 The Magna Carta, the Black Death, and the American Civil War all feature in the book . At the same time, it gives an account of matters of popular historical interest .
 The book begins with the origins of humans and “pre-history” and then progresses through different historical ages to the present day .
 In reality there were no such clear breaks between epochs, and where there is an overlap on dates, entries are included in the most appropriate ideological era . In reality, of course there was no such breaks between . epochs .
 As this book illustrates, history is a process rather than a series of unconnected events . History is not a single event, but a process, rather a process of progress .
 We can only speculate on how the events we experience today will shape the history of tomorrow . We can't predict how the history will be shaped by today's events .
 Jericho (in the modern-day West Bank) is settled; to this day it remains one of the oldest continuously inhabited towns in the world . Jericho is settled in the modern day of the modern West Bank .
 Humans have spread across the globe and inhabit most of Eurasia and Australia . They have reached most of the world by boat from Southeast Asia .
 The first examples of human figurines emerge, usually representing women . They are carved or sculpted from bone, ivory, terracotta or stone .
 Humans start to arrive in North America, either across the land bridge connecting Asia and North America (now the Bering Strait) or by sea . Humans arrive in America either by land or sea .
 It is widely believed that the origins of the human race lie in Africa . A settlement at Catalhoyiik central Turkey is established .
 The genus Homo evolved in East Africa over millions of years alongside the chimpanzees, its near relatives . By the usual processes of biological evolution and natural selection, it evolved alongside the chimpances, which evolved alongside Homo .
 About 100,000 years ago or so, the scattered bands of hunting and foraging humans would have been almost indistinguishable from the other great apes . Humans would have hunted and foraged humans, but not all of them were apes .
 At some point humans began to change in a new way, not by the process of biological evolution but by cultural evolution . But at some point human evolution began to be different, not biological evolution .
 They developed the ability to alter their way of life through the creation of tools, languages, beliefs, social customs, and art . They created tools, language, beliefs and social customs through creation of art .
 By the time they were painting exquisite pictures of animals on the walls of caves and carving or sculpting figurines out of stone or bone, they had marked themselves out .
 Their transformation was slow in the early years, but it was set to gather incredible momentum over millennia . Their transformation began in the 2000s, but has continued to gather momentum over centuries .
 Early development of human cultures and societies presents a particular problem to historians . Discovering history is a challenge for historians to solve .
 First writing was not invented until about 5,000 years ago . The first writing was written about about five thousand years ago. Writing is a form of communication .
 Traditionally, the period before writing tended to be dismissed as “pre-history,"" since it left no documents for historians to study . The period of writing before writing was considered ‘pre-historians'
 In recent years a wide range of new scientific methods have been added to the long-established techniques of archaeology . These include the study of genetic material and radiocarbon dating of organic remains .
 The narrative of the distant human past is under constant revision as new discoveries and research—its findings frequently disputed, create radical shifts .
 Fresh investigation of a single cave, burial site, or a human skull can still throw large areas of accepted knowledge into question . The fresh investigation of one cave or burial site can still challenge accepted knowledge, experts say .
 Much of the history of early humans can be described with a reasonable degree of confidence . However, in the 21st century much of the human history can be explained with confidence .
 There is evidence of copper smelting in Serbia and the wheel is invented in the Near East . The wheel is probably for the production of pottery rather than for transport .
 Bronze Age begins in the Near East, and the Indus Valley Civilization emerges on the Indian subcontinent . Bronze Age began in Near East and began in the Bronze Age of Bronze Age .
 Civilizations develop in Mesopotamia, in the Tigris-Euphrates valley (modern-day Iraq, Syria, and Kuwait), where irrigated agriculture is established . 'V' begins in 5000 BCE .
 Narmer unifies Upper and Lower Egypt, becoming king of the First Dynasty . Egyptian hieroglyphs are prevalent . Narmer was king of Egypt's First Dynasty, king of Egyptian First Dynasty.
 The first stone pyramids are constructed as monumental tombs in Egypt . The Great Pyramid of Giza was built two centuries later . The first pyramids were constructed as tombs .
 Alphabetic writing (Proto-Sinaitic script, based on hieroglyphs, emerges in Egypt; it is the ancestor of most modern alphabets . Alphabetic script is ancestor of modern writing .
 All historians agree that until about 12,000 years ago humans were hunter-gatherers . They used stone tools and lived in small, mobile groups .
 Humans were a successful species, expanding their numbers to perhaps 10 million and spreading to most parts of the Earth . Humans expanded their numbers and spread to most of the world .
 They adapted well to major natural climate changes that occurred over tens of thousands of years . They were temporarily driven out of northerly areas, such as Britain and Scandinavia, during the coldest phase of the Ice Age .
 Humans existed in an intimate relationship with their natural environment . But their effect on that environment even at this early stage was not necessarily benign .
 There is a disturbing coincidence between the spread of human hunters across the planet and the extinction of megafauna such as mammoths and mastodons .
 Human hunting is not being identified as the sole cause of these extinctions, but from our modern perspective they can seem to set a troubling precedent . Natural climate change may well have been a contributing factor .
 The hunter-gatherer lifestyle, which can be described as ""natural'' to human beings, appears to have had much to recommend it . The farming revolution is now underway in the UK .
 Examination of human remains from early hunter-gatherer societies has suggested that our ancestors enjoyed abundant food, obtainable without excessive effort, and suffered very few diseases .
 Development of settlements and agriculture indisputably led to a high increase in population density . Whatever its immediate effect on the quality of life for humans, the development of settlements .
 Denisovan hominins were present in south-central Russia . Homo sapiens arrived in Europe 45,000 years ago . Neanderthals died out 40,000-40,000 year ago .
 Homo floresiensis fossils date from 18,000 years ago . Their last known sites are on the Iberian peninsula . Humans are present near Clovis, New Mexico .
 Homo sapiens spreads into the Near East but retreats to Africa, only later reaching Europe and western Asia . M odern humans are the only truly global mammal species . Homo sapien groups follow the coastline to Southeast Asia .
 Homo sapiens has rapidly expanded across the world since evolving in Africa around 200,000 years ago . It is a testament to our species’ curiosity in exploring its surroundings and creativity in adapting to different habitats .
 Some studies suggest that its small size was due to disease rather than indicating a new species . The earliest dates of the discovery are controversial .
 Evidence suggests widespread colonization of Australia only around 45,000 years ago . Small groups may have visited much earlier .
 Homo sapiens was the first hominin to arrive in Australia . Homo sapien arrived in Australia in the early 2000s . It is believed to have been the earliest hominic species to arrive .
 By the time humans reached Europe, Neanderthals had already been there for around 250,000 years, having evolved from an ancestor they shared with modern humans, Homo heidelbergensis . They were well adapted to life in the region .
 Homo sapiens is the only one to have survived and gone on to colonize the New World . Of all these species, Homo sapien is only one of them to survive and have colonized the New world .
 Beringia, a landbridge between Russia and Alaska, exposed when sea levels dropped as a result of the Ice Age, allowed humans to reach the Americas from northeast Asia . The landbridge was a land bridge that allowed people to reach Beringa .
 Sapiens ff from the 13,000-year-old “Clovis culture"" were once thought to have belonged to the earliest humans in the New World . Sapiens from the13,000 year-old "Clovas culture" were once believed to be the earliest
 Older sites now known, but many of the earlier dates, particularly in South America, remain highly contentious .
 Denisovans and Homo floresiensis remain unknown . Neanderthals died out around 40,000 years ago, according to the most recent research . The fates of Homo florentiensis and Neanderthalans are unknown .
 It is thought that they could also rely on more extensive social networks than those other species . The social networks would have proved crucial to survival in lean times and to helping them colonize unfamiliar environments .
 DNA shows small traces of Neanderthal and Denisovan genes, suggesting that a few individuals from each species interbred, albeit rarely . Modern human DNA shows traces of Denisovan and Neanderthal genes .
 Neanderthals were skilled manufacturers of stone tools and excellent hunters . Modern humans may have been quicker to adapt to the rapid climatic changes occurring during the Ice Age .
 They developed new stone tools, as well as techniques that made use of resources such as bone and antler . Archaeologists developed new tools, including techniques that were made from bone and bone .
 Group established extensive networks of support, enabling various groups to pool resources across large distances, enhancing their chances of survival . They also established extensive support for each other .
 This cultural adaptability may have been what allowed humans to outcompete their cousins for access to increasingly unpredictable resources . Humans may have outcompeteteted their cousins with access to unpredictable resources.
 After 26,000 years ago a triple burial is carried out at Dolni Vestonice, in the Czech Republic . 23,500 years ago The Arene Candide ""prince” is buried in Italy richly adorned with dentalium shell jewelry . 18,000-years
 Altamira cave complex, near Santander on the northern coast of Spain, is one of the best examples of Stone Age, or Paleolithic, cave art yet discovered . It comprises a series of passages and chambers extending for nearly 984ft .
 When the cave was discovered in 1880, it was widely considered fakes and took 20 years to be accepted as the genuine creations of prehistoric hunter-gatherers .
 Some of the early artistic activity here may date from more than 35,000 years ago . But most of the famous paintings were probably created much later, around 22,000 year ago .
 Other stunning displays of cave art are also known, concentrated in southwest France and northern Spain . The artistic impetus is the artistic impetus for cave art .
 They include finely detailed images of animals, and engraved and painted signs, symbols, and handprints . They include not only finely detailed animals, but also engraved signs and symbols .
 Archaeologists are divided over the meaning and function of Stone Age art . Archaeologists remain divided on the meaning, function and significance of the art form .
 One explanation is simply that these people appreciated the aesthetic qualities of art—-just as their descendants do today . One explanation could be simply that they appreciated art as much as they did today .
 The incredible detail of some of the images may mean the paintings were conveying vital survival information, such as which animals to hunt, and when and how they could be found and targeted . Others suggest that the sex of the animals or the season in which it was observed can still be determined
 Cave art might be linked to the world views or religions of Paleolithic people . Alternatively, cave art might have been linked to religious beliefs or world views .
 Many societies still living mainly by hunting and gathering share animistic beliefs . They believe entities such as animals, plants, and parts of the landscape have spirits with which humans interact .
 Many societies' religious specialists, or shamans, believe Foraging lifestyles rely on the hunting and gathering of natural resources .
 Beliefs and practices emphasizing connectedness and communication start to develop . Humans develop an intimate knowledge of animal and plant species and their environment .
 The first examples of art, such as the cave paintings at Altamira, appear in cave paintings . Cave paintings are thought to be the earliest examples of cave art in existence .
 Handprints in the cave of Fuente del Salln, in Spain’s Cantabria region, were probably left by youngsters . It suggests that venturing underground might have been a coming-of-age ritual . Shamans are often thought to be able to transform themselves
 Creating images of animals may have also been part of ""magic" rituals designed to improve the chances of success during hunting . Creating images may also be part of 'magic' rituals .
 For societies dependent on animal resources for a significant part of their diet, the importance of such rituals cannot be overstated . The importance of these rituals can't be over-stated .
 The undulating structure of the rock cave at Altamira enhances, rather than detracts, the art . The animals in the Bison Chamber acquire an almost three-dimensional quality with only a lamp filled with animal fat .
 More evidence of human beings engaging in religious or ritual practices at this time comes from burials . Burials are the most significant evidence of religious practices in human history .
 At Dolni Vestonice, Czech Republic, three bodies were buried together in a sexually suggestive pose . One of the male individuals flanking a female skeleton reaching toward her pelvis, and the male on the other side buried face down .
 A red pigment known as ochre had been sprinkled across their heads and across the female’s pelvis . The red pigment was sprinkled across the heads and on the pelvis of the women .
 People everywhere and throughout time have shared the basic instinct to represent themselves and their world through images and symbols . Interestingly, all three individuals have a common sense of humor .
 26 CAVE PAINTINGS at ALTAMIRA share the same rare skeletal deformities and may therefore have been related .
 Although the reasons why these bodies were arranged this way will probably always be a mystery, it is clear that there was more to this burial than just the functional disposal of remains .
 At other sites, some individuals were buried with many ‘grave goods’ – for example, jewelry made from dentalium shells at Arene Gandide, Italy, and spears fashioned from mammoth ivory .
 They do not appear to have become widespread until much later . However, they do appear to become widespread later in life .
 For the first time, people were now increasingly concerned with what happened after death . People were increasingly concerned about how the dead should enter into the afterlife . It is clear, however, that for the first .
 People may have lived here in fairly large numbers, packed closely together . This may have led to social tensions among groups vying for territory and resources . As a result, there may have been social tensions in the area .
 Historians are still unsure whether or not there are precise meanings behind the majority of cave art . Just as human groups today— whether it be football supporters or nation states— use symbols such as flags, costumes, and markings of .
 People thought of themselves as part of a living world, where animals, plants, and even landmarks and inanimate objects had lives of their own . People were able to hunt and hunt for food, water and medicine .
 European Paleolithic groups may have decorated caves for similar reasons at a time when there was potential for intense competition for resources . Brian Fagan Cro-Magnon says the caves may have been decorated by similar groups .
 Such complex social interactions may help explain how Homo sapiens was able to survive in the harsh environments of Ice Age Europe .
 Hunter-gatherers probably lived in small groups scattered at relatively low densities across the landscape . Hunter hunters lived in groups scattered around the landscape in the area .
 Most archaeological sites from this time do not demonstrate any evidence of complex buildings or structures, suggesting that people moved around a lot, according to the weather and the local environment .
 Homo sapiens' ability to forge new relationships readily allowed groups of hunters to combine as and when necessary . Homo sapien's ability to forged new relationships allowed groups to combine .
 When resources were plentiful, they would hunt together, hunting together . They would intercept migrating herds of reindeer at places in the landscape where they were most vulnerable .
 In leaner times, these groups would split up again and range far across the landscape to find enough wild resources to sustain themselves . In lean times, the groups would range far from the land to find food and resources .
 These hunter-gatherers expended considerable effort on hunting technology, since it could spell the difference between life and death . Early technologies were used to hunt for food and water .
 Spear-throwers were used to launch spears at a target using atlatls or spears . They were designed to increase the distance over which a spear could travel and the force it hit its target .
 Atlatls were carved and decorated with representations of the animals being hunted . These tools were crucial to hunting success, so it was no surprise that some were beautifully carved . Some of the tools were important tools for hunting success .
 They painstakingly carved complex barbed harpoons from bone and antler for fishing . Similarly, they also painstakingly crafted complex barbs from bone .
 Stone Age humans used animal skin and fur with much more care than their predecessors . They also made jewelry finely crafted from animal teeth and shell, and figurines carved from stone or sculpted from clay .
 Many of these may have been traded, gifted, or exchanged with individuals from other groups as part of large-scale social networks . Many of them may also have traded or gifted with others in large social networks.
 These kinds of exchange relationships probably linked even very far-flung groups together into complex networks of individual and group relationships that were fundamental to survival .
 While facial features and feet are largely ignored, feminine sexual characteristics (breasts, belly, hips, thighs, thighs and vulva) are often exaggerated .
 The focus on features related to sexuality and fertility, and the round body shapes depicted, suggest that the figurines may have played a symbolic role as a charm relating to childbirth or fertility .
 Others have focused instead on the fact that the figurines demonstrate widely shared cultural ideas and symbols .
 These would have been crucial to social interactions and exchanges of resources, information, and potential marriage partners in the Ice Age world .
 Habitats change, and plant and animal species’ ranges alter for survival for survival . Habitats are changing for survival, and species' ranges are changing .
 Animals and humans colonize newly exposed low-lying land, only to be isolated when sea levels rise again . Human groups are faced with new opportunities and constraints as sea levels .
 The Pleistocene, or Ice Age, begins. 200,000 years ago Homo sapiens emerges as a species . The Ice Age is the first time humans have seen climate change before 2.58 million years .
 After 9700 bce The Pleistocene ends, marking the beginning of today’s relatively warm and stable climates . The last mammoths are thought to have died out, on Wrangel Island, Russia, in 2000 bce .
 Around 21,000 bce in a “Big Freeze,"" a period of intense cold known as the Last Glacial Maximum . However, toward the end of the Ice Age, these shifts became more pronounced and occurred at shorter intervals .
 Beringia, the continental shelf that connects North America and Asia, is the route by which humans first reached the Americas . Such huge amounts of sea water froze that froze that sea levels dropped, exposing low-lying land .
 Temperatures eventually rose again, and today’s relatively warm and stable climate had become established by around 7000 bce . Temperatures rose again in the 1970s, and the climate was stable .
 Rising sea levels separated Eurasia from the Americas, turned Southeast Asia into an archipelago, and made islands out of peninsulas such as Japan and Britain . The ice caps melted, and rising sea levels isolated many human groups .
 The impact on ecosystems was particularly severe for the large animals known as megafauna—mammoths, for example . Mammoths were particularly vulnerable .
 The open glacial steppe grasslands in which megafauna thrived were replaced by expanding forests . Across the globe the combination of environmental change and human hunting drove many species to extinction .
 The forests and wetlands of the new post-glacial world offered humans many new opportunities . The forests, wetlands and wetlands offered humans new opportunities. The forests were the first humans to find them .
 They hunted large forest animals such as red deer and wild boar, as well as smaller mammals like rabbits . They foraged for a range of aquatic and coastal food sources .
 Migratory fish like salmon, sea mammals such as seals, and shellfish, seasonal wildfowl, and a range of fruits, tubers, nuts, and seeds all became important dietary staples .
 In areas that were particularly rich in natural resources, human groups may not have settled in one place . Small bands may have sent small bands on forays further afield to target specific resources . In some areas, small bands may not settle one place, sending small bands out forays to
 Natufian communities of the Eastern Mediterranean were able to exploit abundant stands of wild cereals in the Near East . The Natufians exploited abundant cereal stands in the region to grow crops .
 Few humans have ever lived in a world of such extreme climatic and environmental change . Some groups began to manipulate their environments, burning vegetation and cutting down trees to encourage their preferred lifestyles .
 Brian Fagan Expert in human prehistory . 99 plant and animal species to thrive . 99 plants and animals to thrive. Fagan: Pre-history plant, animal species thrive .
 They started to select and care for productive plant species and sowed the seeds of favored strains, while managing and controlling certain animals . They managed and controlled certain animals, including animals .
 This manipulation led to the development of agriculture, a radical change in the human way of life that has since resulted in even more dramatic human impact on the environment . The manipulation of these species led to these species becoming more reliant on human input .
 Tiny sea creatures known as foraminifera absorb two different forms of oxygen, le O and ls O, from sea water . Tiny creatures absorb the oxygen from two different types of water in the ocean .
 During warmer periods it falls as rain and drains back to the sea . Because le O is the lighter of the two, it evaporates into the air more easily . It evaporates more easily in the air during the warmer periods .
 le O and ls O exist in sea water and appear in the shells of foraminifera, in roughly equal ratios . The ratio is roughly equal .
 Sea water contains more ls O than ls O when foraminifera die . Most of the evaporated 10 O does not return to the ocean but freezes as ice . In cold conditions most of the 10 O doesn't return to sea but freezes in ice .
 Paleoclimatologists drill into the ocean floor to extract cores of sediment and study the changing proportions of le O and ls O in different layers to see how climates have changed .
 After 8000 bce Cultivation and domestication begin in East Asia . Agriculture spreads west into Europe via Cyprus, Greece, and the Balkans . The earliest cities are built in Mesopotamia .
 Hunter-gatherers interact closely with animal and plant species . Climate and environment stabilize after the Ice Age . Human populations begin to grow .
 People build larger and crops and the V settlements, such stockpiling of harvests 7 as the one at reduce mobility . The cultivation of land People build . build larger . crops and crops .
 Neolithic town of Qatalhbyiik on the Konya Plain in Turkey was discovered by James Mellaart in the 1960s .
 It has become one of the most famous archaeological sites in the world due to its size, density of settlement, spectacular wall paintings, and evidence of complex religious behavior .
 Several other large settlements across West Asia have been found that attest to the growing scale of human communities during the shift from foraging to agricultural lifestyles, or “Neolithic revolution,"" that occurred between 10000 bce and 7000 bce .
 New ways had to be found to resolve social stresses such as disputes between neighbors . New ways of resolving social stresses had to find ways to cope with it .
 Early villagers invested time and effort in planting and cultivating crops, then storing the harvest to last the year, so they could no longer simply move as foragers had . Early villagers invest time in planting, cultivating crops and storing them to last year .
 It is thought that the development of more formal religious organization and group ritual practices helped community cohesion .
 Qatalhoyuk boasts murals and figurines of a range of subjects including wild animals such as bulls, leopards, and vultures . The city is home to the largest museum in the world .
 At many sites, some inhabitants remained in the community even when they died . They were buried under the floors of the houses . Some inhabitants remained at many sites even after death .
 Facial features were molded on some in plaster and painted with ochre for display . Sometimes they were later dug up and their skulls removed . Some facial features were later molded in plaster .
 At sites like Ain Ghazal in Jordan, large statues made of lime plaster have been found, and there are many examples of clay figurines of animals . This illustration shows the way in which humans lived and worked close to each other at the (fatalhoyrik site,
 It is not clear whether these decorated skulls, statues, and figurines represent specific individuals or heads of households or lineages . They may have been part of communal ideologies, rituals, and social practices that helped smooth over tensions .
 Some of the success of Qatalhoyiik may have been due to its role as a center for the large-scale trade of items made from the obsidian, or volcanic glass .
 Neolithic revolution helped shape both human history and the world's ecosystems ever since . Neolithic society was formed in the Neolithic era and has helped shape the world since .
 Farmers may have had to work harder at times than hunter-gatherers did . Their limited diets may have led to nutritional deficiencies, experts say .
 Living at close quarters with animals meant some animal diseases spread to humans . Smallpox, anthrax, tuberculosis, and the flu are some of the diseases that humans can expect .
 Larger communities living at higher densities allowed for such diseases to be more easily passed around . Larger populations allowed for the disease to be passed around, experts say .
 Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II builds two vast temples at Abu Simbel to glorify the pharaohs and assert dominance in Nubia . Two vast temples were built at the end of Ramesses' reign .
 The start of the Persian Wars between Greece and the Persian Empire . Military successes influence the development of classical Greek identity . The Persian Wars were the first Persian Wars .
 Celtic culture developed around Halstatt, Austria, and spread to France, Romania, Bohemia, and Slovakia . The high point of the Celtic culture is the Celtic War of the Ages .
 Siddartha Gautama rejects material life to seek enlightenment and preach Buddhism in India . Siddarthas Gautamas rejected material life for seeking enlightenment and preaching Buddhism .
 Macedonian king Alexander the Great invades Asia Minor and creates a vast empire . Greek culture spreads eastward . Alexander's invasion of Asia Minor led to the creation of an empire in Asia Minor .
 A bout 5,000 years ago, humans began to form societies of unprecedented complexity . The first human society was formed by humans around the world .
 These ""civilizations” typically had state structures and social hierarchies, they built cities and monuments such as temples, palaces, and pyramids, and used some form of writing . They built cities, monuments, and wrote, often with state structures .
 The basis for the development of civilizations was progress in agriculture . Agriculture was the basis for progress in civilization, says historian .
 When only part of the population was required to work in the fields to produce food, the rest could inhabit towns and palaces . The rest could perform a range of specialty functions as bureaucrats, traders, scribes, and priests .
 The invention of civilization undoubtedly raised human life to a new level in many ways, but also established inequality and exploitation as the basis of society, leading to larger-scale warfare as states expanded into empires .
 The earliest civilizations developed in areas where it was possible to practice intensive agriculture . The Tigris and Euphrates in Mesopotamia, the Nile in Egypt, the Indus in northern India and Pakistan, and the Yangtze and Yellow rivers in China .
 The civilizations of Eurasia and North Africa seem to have been founded independently of one another . They developed multiple contacts over time, sharing ideas, technology, and even diseases .
 In the Americas, the use of stone tools persisted and most of the epidemic diseases that plagued Eurasia were unknown . In Mesoamerica, stone tools were used, and most diseases were unknown in the region .
 Eurasian civilizations found an innovative momentum from around 1000 bce . Writing and philosophy is a key part of Eurasian history .
 The use of writing evolved from practical recordkeeping to the creation of sacred books . Sacred books embodied founding myths and beliefs of different societies . Homeric tales in Greece to the Five Classics of Confucianism in China and Hindu Vedas in India .
 35 Qin Shi Huangdi unites China, previously a region of warring states, and begins major projects . Forms of writing using an alphabet developed in the eastern part of China .
 Julius Caesar assassinated in Rome by senators who believe he is becoming increasingly power-hungry . Julius Caesar was assassinated by senators in Rome in the early Roman years of his life .
 Maya Classical Period begins; many cities, temples, and monuments are built throughout Mexico and Guatemala . Maya Classical period begins; Maya cities and temples are built in Mexico, Guatemala and Mexico .
 Rome falls to the Visigoths; the Roman Empire shrinks and much of Europe is invaded by Barbarian tribes . The Roman Empire is destroyed by the Barbarian tribes and the Roman empire shrinks .
 Roman rule extends to Wales and the Scottish border . A Roman army led by General Aulus Plautius invades southern England . Roman rule extended to Scotland and Wales .
 Roman emperor Constantine adopts Christianity after victory at the Battle of Milvian Bridge . Christianity rapidly gains popularity in Rome . Constantine's Christian faith rapidly grows in popularity among Roman population .
 Clovis, leader of the Salian Franks, defeats the Romans in Gaul and unites France north of the Loire under his dynasty . He defeats the Romanians in Gaul, defeats them in Gaul .
 The Phoenician were spread by the Phoenicians, a race of traders and sailors . They spread across the Mediterranean region and spread by trade and trade .
 The Greek city-states became a test-bed for new forms of political organization, including democracy . The city-state became a source of new ideas in the arts and philosophy .
 The influence of Greek culture spread as far as northern India . India itself was the birthplace of Buddhism— the first “world religion,"" winning converts beyond its society .
 The ancient world reached the peak of its classical period around 2,000 years ago . Ancient world reached peak of classical period 2,200 years ago, reaching peak of 2,300 years .
 About 50 million of these lived in a united Han China, while about the same number were under the governance of the Roman Empire . The Roman Empire extended its rule to the shores of the Atlantic and the borders of Persia .
 In large part, empires were successful because of efficient communications by land and water, and the ruthless deployment of military power . The empires were succeeded because of the efficient use of land, water and military power, historian says .
 Long-distance trade routes linked Europe to India and China, and cities had expanded to a great degree—Rome’s population was estimated at over 1 million .
 The causes of the decline of these powerful classical empires from the 3rd century ce have long been disputed among historians . Causes of decline of the empires from 3rd to 5th century ce are disputed .
 Bred in overcrowded cities and transmitted along trade routes, epidemic diseases certainly played a part . Bred and infected in overcrowding cities and . transmitted along . trade routes . The epidemic diseases played a role in the spread of disease in the past .
 Internal power struggles were also a major factor, leading to political fragmentation and a decline in the quality of government . Internal power struggle led to a decline of government, according to the report .
 Eurasia is a relatively small part of the world's most civilized region . But perhaps most crucial was the geographical limitation of the civilized areas of Eurasia .
 Both the Roman and Han empires built walls to mark and defend the borders of their empires . Beyond them lived mostly nomadic or semi-nomadic “barbarian” tribes, beyond which lived mainly nomadic .
 The civilized societies had little or no military advantage over these peoples, who increasingly raided or settled within their territories . The civilized society had little . no . no advantage over . these peoples .
 The eastern part of the Christianized Roman Empire survived until 1453, and Chinese civilization revived to full vigor under the Tang dynasty from 618 . Western Europe would take centuries to recover the levels of population and organization that it had known under Rome .
 Agriculture, Local networks population, and break down and urbanization break down . Mechanisms for dispute j \ increase. / \ resolution weaken.
 Hammurabi writes a new code of law to cement his control over the region . Hammabi wrote a new law in order to keep control of the region under control . The code was written in the ancient Egyptian state of Mesotria .
 A six-foot-tall slab of black stone was found in the ruins of the city of Susa . I n 1901, a six foot-tall stone slab was found .
 The slab had originally been erected in Babylon, in around 1750 bce, by Hammurabi, one of the greatest kings of ancient Mesopotamia . The slab was originally built in Babylon in the early 1700s by Hammabi .
 Mesopotamia, which means “between two rivers,” lies between the Euphrates and the Tigris, and it is considered to be the first human civilization ever . Mesopotamians are considered to have been the first humans to discover the Bronze Age .
 Its writing, math, and astronomy were also the first known, and its cities were arguably the world's first true examples . The city was the first to have its own language and science .
 Mesopotamian communities coordinated manpower to build large structures such as defensive walls and huge temples, and to mobilize armies . Mesopotami communities built large structures and mobilized armies to build .
 They utilized hydrological engineering to divert river water and irrigate the alluvial floodplains . The project was completed in the 1960s .
 Administrative needs such as bookkeeping led to the development of cuneiform writing, the first known script, and complex mathematical concepts such as fractions, equations, and geometry .
 Sometimes called the Bronze Age Revolution, this great step forward can be seen as the most important change in the human world before the Industrial Revolution . The Bronze Age revolution is sometimes known as the greatest change in history .
 In around 2000 bce, the Amorites swept across Mesopotamia . They replaced local rulers with Amorite sheikh dynasties .
 By the early 18th century bce, the three most powerful Amorite kings were pre-eminent Shamshi-Adad in the north, Rim-Sin in Larsa in the south, and Hammurabi in Babylon in the center . By the mid-18th
 Hammurabi consolidated all of southern Mesopotamia into his kingdom . Over the course of his long reign, he extended his power as far up the Tigris as Mesopotamian unification . Mesopotami was a mosaic of competing kingdoms and city-states such as Uruk
 Hammurabi, the Amorite king of Babylon, unified the region through a combination of guile, diplomacy, opportunism, military might, and longevity . Hammababi was a king who united the region with his long-lasting reigns .
 Hammurabi used previous edicts as the basis for his laws, but these laws were ** When Marduk sent me to rule over men... brought about the well-being of the oppressed . As was traditional with conquering kings, Hammahah used . previous . edicts
 Hammurabi ff Nineveh, and as far up the Euphrates as Tuttul, on the junction with the river Balikh . Hammurababi ff 9veh, 9veh and 9thveh . 9veh .
 He personally supervised the construction of many temples and other buildings . He personally oversaw many temples .
 The prelude to his code, a tribute to Hammurabi, and a long historical record of his conquests, boasts that his leadership was divinely sanctioned by the gods who passed control of humanity to Marduk .
 He saw his role as guarantor of a just and orderly society distinguished by the reach of his empire, and by the fact that they were inscribed on stelae .
 Hammurabi's laws and their detailed prelude reveal much about life in what is known as the Old Babylonian Period . The laws were written in the ancient Babylonian period, known as Old Babylonians .
 They contain judgments on matters ranging from property disputes to violence against the person, to runaway slaves and witchcraft . The judgments were made in the 16th century .
 Hammurabi's laws seem to have carried little weight and were rarely followed at the time, and despite the fact that his empire disintegrated soon after his death, his reign was a turning point for southern Mesopotamia . Hammabi's law was not widely followed and his empire
 He firmly established the ideal of a unified state, centered in Babylon . His laws were copied by Mesopotamian scribes until at least the 6th century bce .
 Laws of the Hebrew Bible may have influenced laws of the Bible, which in turn influence laws in many societies today . They show many points of similarity with, and may have influence, laws of Hebrew Bible . The laws are thought to have influenced, but not all of them .
 After 1160 bce Ramesses III fights off invasions of Egypt by Libyans and raiding tribes known as the Sea People . 1085 bce Collapse of the New Kingdom; Egypt is divided with Libyan rulers in the north and Theban priestkings ruling in the south
 Ramesses II (c.78-1237 bce) had two mighty temples hewn out of the cliffs on the west bank of the Nile .
 The entrance was guarded by four vast statues of the pharaoh, seated in glory and wearing the symbols of divine kingship, including the double crown that signified his authority .
 The temples were designed to signify and embody the unique status, ambition, and power of the ancient Egyptian pharaohs . The temples are designed to symbolize the status of the pharaoh .
 Narmer's deeds were recorded on a stone palette, which was recovered from a temple at Hierakonpolis in the 19th century . The palette provides one of the earliest known depictions of an Egyptian king .
 The palette is inscribed with many of the symbols and traditions that would come to typify the pharaohs for the next three millennia . Pharaohs would use the palette as a tool for their artistry .
 Narmer is shown holding an enemy by the hair, about to smite him, and Ramesses II was often depicted in the same way . Military might and supernatural strength were hallmarks of Egyptian kingship .
 The pharaoh, like the gods, was frequently shown much larger than ordinary mortals . Pharaohs were often shown to be bigger than ordinary humans .
 Inscription in temple at Abu Simbel,1264 bce 99 north into the Mediterranean Sea, and the surrounding expanses of uninhabitable desert—gave rise to the kingdom’s unique culture and civilization .
 The pharaoh was viewed as a living god who could control the order of the cosmos, including the annual flooding of the Nile, which brought fertilizing silt to replenish the soil .
 Pharaohs were also depicted as farmers in agricultural scenes, representing their role as guardians of the land . Pharaohs also often depicted as agriculturalists .
 The Old Kingdom that followed Narmer was ruled by a succession of dynasties . Powerful pharaohs channeled the bureaucratic and economic might of the unified kingdom into monumental building projects .
 Trade with other kingdoms in the Near East and the Mediterranean led to increased trade . These, in turn, stimulated scientific, technological and economic development .
 In the Old Kingdom the predominant gods were Ra, the sun god; Osiris, Osiris, the god of the dead; and Ptah, the creator . Ra was Ra, Osiris . Osiris was the god .
 Amon became the main deity in the Middle and New Kingdoms that followed . Amon was Amon's main deity during the reigns of Thebes . Amon became Amon in the middle and middle periods of the period .
 As supreme ruler, the pharaoh was closely associated with the gods, and was believed to be the living incarnation of certain deities . The pharaoh is believed to have ruled Egypt for over 100 years .
 The Hyksos were expelled from Egypt in about 1550 bce . The XVIII dynasty— arguably the greatest and most important— came to power and established the New Kingdom .
 By this time, immortality was believed to be available not just to the pharaoh, but to priests, scribes, and others who could afford offerings, spells, and mummification . Many tombs were dug into the Valley of the Kings to be filled with extraordinarily rich grave goods
 Under expansionist pharaohs such as Thutmose III and Ramesses II, Egyptian control was extended into Asia as far as the Euphrates River, and up the Nile into Nubia .
 A sophisticated, coherent, and unified civilization develops over a vast stretch of terrain . A sophisticated and unified society develops over vast stretches of land .
 Trade and conquest boost the economy and population levels . A large, prosperous kingdom emerges . Trade and conquests boost the population .
 Vast monuments, such as the Abu Simbel temple complex, are constructed, reflecting Egypt’s power, wealth, and belief systems . Vast monument complex is constructed in Egypt, reflecting its power and wealth . Egypt's monuments reflect Egypt's power and religious beliefs .
 S iddartha Gautama, better known as the Buddha, was born at the end of the Vedic Age . He was born in a South Asia in transition . The Buddha was born during a period of transition .
 Siddartha Gautama was born into the priestly Brahmins and the warrior-elite Kshatriyas . He was born in a group of warrior warriors who ranked highest in the country's caste system .
 India was then a ferment of sects and new ideologies, some of which espoused a philosophy renouncing the material world . Some of India's new ideologies were some of the world's most popular sects .
 Siddartha developed a similar philosophy based on mystical Hinduism . He rejected the increasingly rigid strictures of Vedic ritual and the inherited piety of the Brahmins . He also rejected the rigid Vedic rituals of the Brahman .
 Renouncing material possessions, he sought and eventually found enlightenment, and became the Buddha . The Buddha renounced material possessions and found enlightenment .
 He preached in northeast India and founded the Sangha—the monastic order of Buddhism—to continue his ministry . The Sangha is an order of monastic monks who live in India .
 Under the Mauryan emperor Ashoka the Great, Buddhism became India's state religion . For the next two to three centuries, Buddhism remained one among several minor sects .
 From then he embraced a new model of kingship and religious philosophy based on a creed of tolerance and non-violence . From then it became a model of kingmanship based on tolerance .
 He extended Mauryan control and, his Buddhism proving a powerful unifying force, succeeded in joining all of India, except the southern tip, into an empire of 30 million people . The Buddha extended his control and extended his empire of India .
 He sent Buddhist missionaries to every corner of the subcontinent and abroad as far as Greece, Syria, and Egypt . He sent missionaries to all corners of the world .
 His missions established Buddhism initially as an elite pursuit, but it went on to take root at all levels of society . Buddhism was established in Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, along the Silk Road in the Indo-Greek kingdoms (in modern-day Pakistan and Afghanistan)
 Siddartha was said to have been born miraculously through the side of his mother . He was raised in luxury in the palace of his father, King Suddhodana Tharu .
 Siddartha left his wife and child to seek enlightenment through asceticism . He renounced material things and renounced his life and became asceticistist . He was inspired by the Buddha's teachings of the Buddha .
 Stone reliefs depicting the life of Buddha decorate gateways of The Great Stupa at Sanchi, commissioned by the emperor Ashoka in the 3rd century bce .
 The Buddha spent six years wandering and meditating, he achieved enlightenment and became the Buddha . Instead of ascending to nirvana, the transcendent state that is the goal of Buddhism, he chose to remain and preach his new message, the dharma .
 Buddha pursued his ministry until he died, at age 80 . Gathering followers who formed the Sangha, a monastic order, he died at 80 years old .
 After 1640 bce Massive eruption of volcano Thera devastates Minoan colonies and coastline . 1500 bce Deeper stratification of Minoan culture; local administration devolved to large villas .
 Minoan society becomes highly prosperous through agriculture and trade . Minoan Society becomes prosperous through trade and agriculture .
 Social stratification develops, with a wealthy elite controlling trade . I W. I W Social Stratification develops as a result of the social stratification .
 The need for recordkeeping gives rise to “writing’s” in the form of hieroglyphs . Elaborate palace complexes are built to store commodities for redistribution .
 British historian Arthur Evans came across some ancient clay seals for sale in Athens in the 1890s . He found them in an attempt to sell them in the hope they could be found in Greece .
 Evans says the Crete writing system was the first writing system in Europe . He says it was from the relatively unexplored Mediterranean island of Crete . Evans says they offer a tantalizing hint at the existence of the first European writing system .
 Evans excavated a vast palace complex at Knossos, north of the island, in the north of Cretos . Evans followed the seals to their Cretan source and excavated the palace complex .
 The iconography of the palace centered on a bull-cult, including frescoes that depicted the sport of bull-leaping . The palace's iconography centered on the sport .
 The Minoans were a people of unknown origin (possibly from Anatolia), who settled on Crete in the Neolithic era, in about 7000 bce . Evans discovered that they had invented an early type of alphabet, which he called Linear A .
 By 1900 bce, in what is known as the Palatial Period of the Minoan civilization, the palaces at Knossos, Phaistos, Malia, and Chania had been constructed in broadly similar forms .
 It was destroyed, possibly by fire or perhaps a tsunami, around 1700 bce . But it was rebuilt soon after on the same site . It was rebuilt in the same place .
 Minoan palaces all had large central courts, flanked by manychambered buildings, and were highly decorated with frescoes of flora and fauna . The Minoan palace is the largest in the world and most of its palaces were found in Egypt .
 The rulers may have served dual roles as priest-kings or priest-queens .
 This bull-leaping fresco in the palace at Knossos in Crete is the most completely restored of several taureador stucco panels .
 Bull-handling was a common theme in art at this time of the Bronze Age . The Bronze Age culture controlled trade with other Bronze Age civilizations around the Mediterranean .
 The Minoans developed their own script, probably initially for recordkeeping purposes . It was probably for administration purposes .
 The Minoan language as recorded in Linear A script remains undeciphered to this day . The Minoans were invaded by the Mycenaeans from mainland Greece in 1450 bce . The language was written in Linear B, which was used to write archaic Greek .
 Minoan civilization collapsed long after the Mycenaeans invaded Crete . Minoan culture collapsed completely after the invasion of Crete by Myceneans .
 Minoan writing links with the Phoenician alphabet, which is used in many parts of the world today . The Minoan alphabet is the basis of the Latin alphabet that is used today's Latin alphabet .
 Although dated to 1700 bce, it was made using the technique of woodblock printing, which was not thought to have been invented for another 2,000 years or so . The disc is one of the great archaeological mysteries .
 The symbols, many of which are recognizable as everyday objects, are arranged in a spiral . The symbols are divided into words by vertical lines .
 Some scholars have drawn parallels between certain symbols in Cretan hieroglyphics and Linear A, suggesting that the writing on the disc may be an elaborated form of an existing Minoan script .
 There are many theories about the disc’s significance . Some consider the inscription a hymn to a goddess, others that it tells a story, or that the disc is a calendar or a game .
 The envoy of his enemy demanded that he lay down his arms at the feet of the Persian god-king . He was killed in battle with the king of Persia in the Persian kingdom .
 Persian Wars pitted a vast and cosmopolitan empire against a small band of city-states in the south of Greece . The Persian Wars was also known as the Greco-Persian Wars .
 The conflict profoundly influenced the development of Classical Greek identity and culture . It left a vivid trail in Western literature and myth . The conflict left a lasting trail in the Western world .
 The story of the Persian Achaemenid Empire remains comparatively neglected, belying the significance of that great Middle Eastern civilization . By contrast, the story of that civilization is comparatively neglected .
 First Persian Empire, ruled by the Achaemenids, grew rapidly . The first Persian Empire was known as the first Persian empire .
 Cyrus’s successors Cambyses II and Darius extended the empire into Egypt and the Balkans, where Thrace and Macedon gave the Persians a foothold in Europe .
 Despite its vast size, the state embraced a degree of multiculturalism . The state allowed conquered peoples to keep liberty of religion, language, and culture .
 Under the Achaemenids, the Middle East was united under a single umbrella culture for the first time . The Middle East united under the Acaemenids under the reigns of the Aqmanid .
 Xerxes planned an even larger invasion, but it was only after his death that his son Xerxes began mustering a huge army to execute the plan . Xerxes died in the Persian city of 5th century AD .
 The main source for the GrecoPersian Wars is the ancient Greek historian Herodotus of Halicarnassus, known as both the Father of History and the 'Father of Lies' The main historian of the Persian Wars is also known as the "Father of History"
 Herodotus estimated that Xerxes' land army was made up Cyrus the Great ** All other expeditions... are as nothing compared with this, Herodotson said . Herototus said Xerxes had a land army of 10,000 men .
 Herodotus 99 of 1,700,000 men—but modern historians believe the maximum figure to be closer to 200,000 . Historians believe the figure is closer to 1,200,000, but historians believe it is closer than 1,800,000 people . Herodot
 Later the Athenian navy lured the Persian fleet into a trap at Salamis . The Persian fleet was ambushed by the Greek navy in the same trap .
 According to legend, he won the Persian army’s support by making them spend one day clearing thorn bushes, and the next banqueting . Then asking why they remained slaves to the Medes when, by backing his revolt, they could live in luxury . The Persian army's
 Some ten years later he had conquered Media, Sardis and Lydia in Asia Minor . He conquered Media and Sardis in Media and Lydia .
 Greek success can probably be ascribed to Xerxes’ difficulties in keeping his vast army supplied and supported after naval defeat . Herodotus ascribed it to the moral superiority of their cause .
 The Greeks began to go on the offensive, forming the Delian League to oppose Persia . The League was formed by the Greeks in the early 1900s .
 Persian War reinforced Greek identity and bolstered cultural and military confidence, most significantly in Athens . The Persian War had reinforced the country's identity and confidence .
 This victory brought him the lands of the neo-Babylonian Empire, including Assyria, Syria, and Palestine . The victory also brought him to Assyria and Syria .
 He liberated the Jews from their Babylonian bondage and allowed them to rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem . He liberated them from their bondage and rebuilt the Temple .
 He was buried in a great tomb inside the royal palace he had built at Pasargadae in Persia . The king was buried inside the great tomb he built inside the palace .
 The democracy of ancient Athens, however, differed from its modern form, reflecting the history of Athens and the warring Greek states of the age . The democracy in ancient Athens differs from the modern form .
 After the chaos of the ancient Greek Dark Ages, most of the emergent city-states evolved into oligarchies . Powerful nobles monopolized government and served their own interests .
 Pericles Pericles became Athens' most famous democrat and the leading man of the city-state for about 30 years . In Athens, the Areopagus—a council and law court consisting of men of aristocratic birth—controlled the Pericles .
 After Ephialtes’ death, Pericles undertook further reforms, including the introduction of pay for those serving in the courts, making it possible for the poorest citizen to have his say .
 He is also believed to have helped drive Athens' assertive foreign policy . Athens sought to exploit its dominance of the Delian League in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Pericles 99 was the machinery of state, appointing officials and serving as a civil court . The lower classes were excluded from office . Pericles ruled out the lower classes of state .
 The development of the ""hoplite” model of citizen-soldiery in the 8th to 7th centuries bce proved disruptive to those who were in power, as it led to a certain level of egalitarianism .
 Hoplites were men in the heavy infantry, mainly free citizens, whose primary tactic was the phalanx . Phalanx was a military formation in which soldiers stood in tightly packed ranks, with each man’s shield protecting him to his left .
 Any man who could afford the arms and armor would be putting his life on the line to defend the state . Any man could afford to do so would be risking his life to protect the state, he says .
 A kind of middle class emerged, which declared that service should bring full citizenship and political representation . As a result of this, the middle class has emerged, it has emerged .
 At the same time, the lower classes were also making demands, and tensions between them and the higher orders threatened to lead to civil breakdown . Land reform and debt slavery were key issues, such as land reform, was a key issue .
 The aristocracy was to control the highest offices, the middle class the lesser offices, and the poor could be selected by lot to serve on juries . At the same time, however, he mollified the upper classes by introducing a graded oligarchy .
 Athens fell under the sway of the tyrant Pisistratus and his sons in the 6th century bce .
 Aristocrats led by Cleisthenes allied with lower-ranking members of society to take power . In response, a faction of aristocrats allied with . members of . society to oust aristocrats . Cleisthenses was the first king of the Roman Empire .
 He reorganized the citizenry into units by geography rather than kinship, breaking the traditional ties that underpined Athenian aristocratic society . He established sortition, the random selection of citizens for government positions .
 Athens now had a genuine direct democracy, but many people were not allowed to participate in the system as they were not considered true citizens . Athens now has a genuine democracy, with many people being considered not citizens .
 Political rights were restricted to adult male Athenians; women, foreigners, and slaves were » Aristocratic oligarchy monopolizes power . Poor farmers are forced into debt slavery, causing major resentment .
 Middle-class hoplites achieve military success, leading to desire for representation . Pressure for change is strong. Pressure for new leadership is strong .
 Solon's limited political reforms of Solon fail to meet the demands of the lower and middle classes . Solon: The limited political reform will not meet the needs of the low and middle class .
 This was essential to make the practical operation of direct democracy possible, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'This is essential to making the operation of democracy possible. This is essential'
 It also ensured that all citizens could serve and that power could not be abused, it also ensured all citizens were not abused .
 Military magistrates commanded the military . Citizens could stand for Ecclesia voted on new laws, decrees . Tribunal tried civil and criminal l Supervises .
 Out of the 300,000-strong total population of Attica, just 30,000 men comprised the voting population . Attica was the region of Greece controlled by Athens . In the 4th century bce, out of the total population, there were 30,00 men .
 In theory, men became voting citizens at age 18, but as they were generally liable for two years of military service they were not enrolled on the rosters of the council until they turned 20 . Men did not come into their full political rights until the age of 30, and did not become
 During the “Pentekontaetia”— the decades between Greek victory in the Persian War and the start of the Peloponnesian War —Athens reached the height of its glory .
 Earlier Greek philosophers, collectively known as the pre-Socratics, had introduced a revolution of their own in human thought in the 5th and 6th centuries bce .
 They rejected supernatural explanations for the ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS 51 world, the explanatory power of mythology, and the authority of tradition . They set out to discover the origins and workings of the natural world through reason and observation, and set out .
 The pre-Socratic natural philosophers developed theories about the elements, classifications of nature, and mathematical and geometric proofs . They also developed theories of the elements .
 The Socratic method tended to lay bare the limits of existing thinking, often making people look foolish or pompous . The method was often criticised for being too much pompous and overreaching .
 Socrates was unpopular and eventually accused of two crimes by his enemies . He was accused of corrupting youth by encouraging them to go against the government and impiety .
 The fate of Socrates was taken as an indictment of democracy by his successors, particularly Plato . Plato saw him as a martyr for truth .
 Plato ran a school and developed ideas about universal truths and metaphysics that have shaped all subsequent religion and philosophy in the Western world . Plato's ideas have shaped the development of religions and philosophy throughout the world .
 Aristotle's student Aristotle was equally influential, setting up the Lyceum school and writing on such diverse topics as politics, ethics, law, and natural sciences . His student Aristotle became equally influential . Aristotle's son Aristotle was also influential .
 Plato opposed democracy, as he believed that the people were not equipped with philosophical grace to legislate . He believed that if governance were left in the hands of the ordinary, citizen tyranny would emerge .
 He also challenged the basic principle of democracy, that of liberty, which he believed could divert people from the proper pursuit of ethics and cause social disunity . He believed that liberty was a distraction from the pursuit of ethical principles .
 Athenian oligarchs claimed that *4 Dictatorship naturally arises out of democracy, and the most aggravated form of tyranny and slavery out of the most extreme liberty . Athenians claimed that democracy naturally arises from democracy .
 Sir William Blake captures the atmosphere at the Greek tragedy Agamemnon by Aeschylus .
 Athens' weak position was due to democracy and led to a counterrevolution to replace democratic rule with an extreme oligarchy . Athens was overthrown by an oligarchy and replaced by an extreme state of oligarchy instead .
 Although democratic rule had been quashed, Athenian science and philosophy lived on . Athenian scientists and philosophers lived on in the ancient city .
 Plato and Aristotle influenced Western thought through the ages . Much of their work continues to influence Western thought to this day . Aristotle's work is thought to have influenced many of the world's thinkers .
 Alexander the Great blazed a trail of conquest across most of the known world of his day . He set in motion a process of Hellenization, the spread of Greek culture and its fusion with non-Greek traditions .
 Alexander conquered Persian king’s empire and destroyed its capital in Persepolis without suffering a defeat . Alexander conquered the Persian king's empire . Alexander destroyed the Persian kingdom without suffering defeat .
 Alexander set about pursuing his father's quest, while satisfying his own thirst for glory . After securing the Macedonian throne by destroying his rivals, Alexander set to pursue his own quest . Alexander was the son of his father, who died in childbirth in childbirth .
 At its heart lay the Macedonian phalanx, a well-drilled, tight-knit corps of 15,000 men armed with the sarissa, a pike that was up to 23ft long . The sarissa is a 23ft-long pike used to carry
 When combined with the shocking cavalry charge provided by the king's personal bodyguard, the Companions, the formation proved irresistible . The battle proved irresistible for the king .
 Alexander defeated the Persians at the River Granicus in the northwest of Asia Minor . Alexander pressed on across Asia Minor after initial victory over the Persian .
 Alexander Alexander, in a typically forthright move, cut the knot with his sword . Alexander's sword was the only weapon of choice for the ceremony .
 Alexander drove his troops eastward, across mountains, deserts, and rivers into Afghanistan and Central Asia, and on to the Indian Punjab . He ruthlessly crushed all resistance .
 Throughout antiquity, Alexander was widely regarded as the most remarkable man who ever lived . Alexander was now the king of a vast and ethnically diverse empire that included 70 newly founded cities . The Hellenistic legacy Alexander was .
 The process of Hellenization was already underway in the western half of Persia before his expedition . Alexander had accelerated its spread throughout the Middle East .
 His empire was carved up by his leading generals, but some of the Hellenistic dynasties they founded survived until Roman times . He was a brilliant tactician and a point of recklessness with his own life and those of his men .
 He maintained the loyalty of his forces throughout his long and arduous campaign . But his quick and violent temper, fueled by his heavy drinking, occasionally spurred him to eliminate those closest to him, including friends .
 His funeral cortege was hijacked by Ptolemy, one of his generals, and diverted to Alexandria in Egypt, where his tomb was later visited by Julius Caesar . His tomb is now lost, but his tomb is later lost .
 At this point in China's history it is by no means certain that an overarching Chinese identity or state would emerge . At this time in China, it is not certain that a Chinese identity will emerge .
 If anything, it was more likely that the considerable geographical, climatic, cultural, and ethnic differences between the various kingdoms would see the region develop in a similar fashion to Europe many centuries later .
 He inherited a militarized state, in which effective bureaucracy, powerful armies, and ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS 55 competent generals combined to produce a formidable war machine .
 Since he was the first emperor of the Qin dynasty, he was known as Qin Shi Huangdi . He was also known as the first Emperor of Qin Shi . He is the first Chinese emperor of Qin dynasty .
 The emperor now set about applying this philosophy throughout the whole of China, ruthlessly imposing cultural, linguistic, economic, and technological unity . He set about imposing this philosophy on all of China .
 There was to be a single, unified system of weights and measures, a uniform coinage, and even the gauge of cart tracks was standardized so that axle widths could be the same across the empire .
 The new social and political order of the empire reflected changes that had been underway since the Spring and Autumn Period . The empire was ruled by the Roman Empire until the end of the period .
 The feudal system was abolished, so that the mass of peasantry now owed their allegiance to the state rather than feudal or clan lords . The mass of peasants now owe their allegiance . The state was abolished and the peasants were no longer able to rely on feudal lords .
 Reports claim that he needed just one hour’s sleep per night . He set himself a daily work quota, measured by the weight of papers he needed to go through . He was a brutal despot but was innovative, dynamic, and energetic .
 He regularly walked the city streets in disguise to keep tabs on the populace . He made five great tours of inspection of the empire .
 Emperor became obsessed with the quest for immortality, sponsoring expeditions to look for magic ingredients and mystics who could brew an elixir of life . Highly paranoid, he survived assassination attempt .
 His death at the age of 50 might well have been linked to his consumption of toxic mercurybased potions that he had taken to extend his life . Ironically, his death might well be linked to the consumption of mercury-based potions .
 During the Warring States Period, the pressure of fncessant military competition had generally favored the emergence of more meritocratic avenues for advancement, thereby facilitating social mobility while undermining the importance of noble lineage . The pressure of military competition generally favored more meritocracy .
 Qin dynasty ruled by aristocratic rule in Qin era of China . Country was divided into 36 commanderies, which were administrative divisions controlled by appointed governors .
 Censors, or inspectors, traveled the country to enforce adherence to Qin law . Qin law was enforced by government officials .
 Qin is a man of scant mercy who has the heart of a wolf, says Qin . The educated gentry would replace the nobility as the main source of wealth .
 The merchant class was officially the lowest and most despised of the orders, and was subject to legal discrimination . However, wealthy merchants were able to use their financial muscle to become important political players .
 Qin Shi Huangdi’s greatest achievements were his ambitious civil engineering projects . There was a great human cost as many lost their lives in the process of building the projects .
 He is traditionally credited with building the first part of the Great Wall of China . He is credited with connecting parts of old walls erected by the Warring States .
 Most famous of all the emperor’s ventures was the construction of his own elaborate mausoleum complex, which took 38 years and over 700,000 workers to construct .
 Within the pyramid was a tomb in which his beloved empire was recreated in miniature, complete with liquid mercury rivers and seas . Within the tomb, the tomb was also a tomb for the Egyptian king .
 Buried around the tomb were large pits filled with thousands of life-sized terracotta warriors, bureaucrats, and entertainers . The tomb was intended to serve the emperor in the afterlife .
 Workers on the tomb were killed after completing their tasks so the secrets of the mausoleum’s location and contents died with them . The tomb remained undiscovered for over 2,000 years .
 Despite the megalomaniacal exertions of the First Emperor, the Qin dynasty was to prove short-lived . Qin was the first Chinese state of the Qin era .
 Life-sized terracotta soldiers were discovered in 1974 by workers digging a well . Guarding the tomb of Emperor Qin Shi Huangdi, they were discovered .
 The figures were originally brightly painted and each has a unique facial expression . Each has a different facial expression and the figures were painted brightly .
 Qin Shi Huangdi imposes unification, standardization, and homogeneity. by deep-seated resentment over the brutal extortions of money and the many years of forced labor, plus bankruptcy as a result of overambitious civil works, combined to undermine the carefully ordered administration of the
 Hu Hai was subsequently murdered after just three years of being in power . His successor, Zi Ying, adopted the title of king, rather than emperor, after Hu Hai's death .
 The Han Dynasty China collapsed into rebellion and civil unrest . A few days after Zi Ying's accession, the Han general Liu Bang marched into Xianyang .
 Han expanded Chinese territory in all directions . The Han expanded to Xinjiang and Central Asia, northeast to Manchuria and Korea .
 They consumed the Xiongnu Empire in the north . Most importantly they consumed the powerful Xiongn Empire in north . They also consumed the strong XionGN Empire .
 Confucian education and ethics soon became the cornerstones of the scholarbureaucracy . The all-important civil service examination system would give a meritocratic basis to imperial institutions and combat the power of the aristocracy .
 Han success in building and maintaining a unified, centralized China was based on the foundations that had been laid down by the First Emperor . First Emperor was the first Emperor of China .
 The influence of the First Emperor is still felt in modern China . Chairman Mao Zedong explicitly drew on the emperor for inspiration . The emperor is still influential in modern Chinese culture .
 His teachings emphasized the importance of morality, integrity, humility, and self-discipline . His teachings emphasize morality and integrity .
 The oligarchic political system in the Roman Republic is corrupt , and decaying . 60 The assassination of Julius Caesar is the most famous assassination of the Roman Roman Empire .
 Julius Caesar becomes dictator and forces political reforms on the nobility . Julius Caesar forces political and social reforms on nobility . Caesar forces the nobility to reform .
 Rome’s nobility dominate the Senate, protecting their privileges at the expense of political change, leading to a crisis of the republic . Calling himself Augustus, he becomes the first emperor of Rome .
 Fearing Caesar’s popularity and power, a group of senators assassinate him . Caesar was assassinated by senators in the Roman Roman Empire .
 Augustus ensures that the office of emperor survives by making Tiberius his heir, transforming Rome into a hereditary monarchy . Augustus ensured that the title of emperor survived by making him his heir .
 After 31 bce Octavian’s victory at the Battle of Actium leads to his accession as Rome's first emperor . 79 ce Vesuvius erupts, destroying Pompeii . 2nd century ce The Roman Empire reaches its greatest extent, with a population of around
 Julius Caesar's life came to a bloody end at the hands of a faction of aristocratic senators . The aristocrats were determined to rescue the Roman Republic from what they saw as Caesar's tyranny .
 Caesar's great-nephew Octavian was left powerless to resist the rise of absolute power . The Roman Empire was left in disarray by the fall of the Roman Empire .
 Rome began as a cluster of small villages on seven hills by the River Tiber . Rome grew into a city-state that was just one of many on the Italian peninsula .
 A new constitution allowed the election of two top officials, known as consuls, to run the state . In order to prevent abuse of power, the consuls' term was limited to one year .
 The office of king was also prohibited, and special provision was made for the appointment of a dictator to replace the consuls in times of crisis . The dictator's term was limited to six months .
 Its conquered territories were organized into provinces, ruled by governors who maintained order and oversaw the collection of taxes .
 By the 1st century bce, Rome was a Mediterranean superpower, yet its long tradition of collective government, in which no individual could gain too much control, was being challenged by the personal ambitions of a few immensely powerful military men .
 Julius Caesar was a brilliant general and statesman whose murder at the hands of his political enemies led to the demise of the republic and the birth of the Roman Empire . A series of bloody civil wars, internal political struggles, and civil unrest culminated with the dictatorship of Julius Caesar .
 A small group of patrician families known as the Optimates had long dominated the Senate and jealously guarded their privileges . However, in reality, a small . group of . patricians had long ruled the Senate . The Optimates kept their privileges in secret .
 In the late Roman Republic, those who championed the rights of the plebs sought popular support against the Optimates . The Optimates were either in the interests of the people themselves, or more often in pursuit of their own careers .
 The self-interested Optimates resisted making the social and economic reforms that were urgently required to meet the changing needs of the Roman people . The Optimates were not prepared to make the reforms needed to meet their needs .
 In Italy and the provinces, an unequal system of taxation and corrupt governance was causing social unrest . In Rome itself, the infrastructure was barely able to cope with a growing population . In the city of Rome, Rome was struggling to cope .
 In Caesar were combined genius, method, memory, literature, literature and prudence, deliberation, and industry . The empire’s rapid expansion had brought a flood of .
 A handful of military leaders in Rome’s provinces had begun to use their armies to jockey for political prominence . Meanwhile, a handful of Roman military leaders were using their armies for political purposes . Julius Caesar was born in Rome in the Roman capital .
 Julius Caesar was a highly intelligent and ambitious general from a patrician family . He had aligned himself with the Populares and risen swiftly through the political ranks . Caesar was an ambitious and intelligent general from an ambitious family . Julius Caesar is one of the most ambitious men in Roman history
 Caesar maneuvered himself into a position that would allow him to achieve his goal . Caesar was intent on making the reforms necessary to meet the challenges of the republic, he says .
 In 60 bce, Caesar became consul, and two years later he was appointed governor of the province of Gaul . Caesar's role enabled him to remain abreast of developments in the Senate while also offering him a springboard to military glory .
 Julius Caesar conquered Gaul in a series of masterful campaigns over the next eight years . He brought the whole of what is now France, along with parts of Germany and Belgium, under his Julius Caesar rule .
 Caesar's heroic military exploits left him immensely rich and increased his personal prestige . Caesar enjoyed the loyalty of his armies and the love of the Roman mob, upon whom he could now afford to lavish feasts, games, and money .
 Caesar attempted to dictate the terms on which he would return to Roman politics . He demanded to be allowed to stand for a second consulship while remaining in command at Gaul . Caesar wanted to stand again while still in charge of Gaul .
 Roman law required military leaders to relinquish control of their armies before entering Rome, a prerequisite for running for office . This put him on a collision course with the Optimates in the Senate, since Roman law requires that .
 Caesar knew that if he agreed to enter the city as a private citizen, without his armies, his political opponents would most likely attempt to try him for abuse of power during his first consulship . Caesar knew if he entered the city he would be tried for abusing of power .
 From an early age, he grasped that money was the key to power in a political system that had become hopelessly corrupt, he said . He grasped that he grasped the power of money in the political system .
 He quickly learned that forging a network of alliance and patronage would be crucial to his success . He also quickly learned he had to forge alliances and patronage .
 Caesar was briefly held hostage by pirates during his time in the Roman Empire . Caesar was involved in the war to crush the slave revolt led by Spartacus in 72 bce .
 Once he returned to Rome in 60 bce, Caesar spent vast sums on buying influence and positions . Even yet we may draw back, but once across that little bridge, and the whole issue is with the sword .
 Julius Caesar spoke to his army before crossing the Rubicon . Pompey's Pompey was Julius Caesar's general Pompey . Julius Caesar was assassinated by Pompey in the Roman Empire .
 The Senate passed laws intending to strip Caesar of his command when he returned from Gaul, and in 49 bce they declared him hostis, or public enemy . Caesar was declared hostis by the Senate in 49 BC .
 Caesar was acutely aware that crossing the river would constitute a declaration of war against the Senate . He eventually team-up with the two other leading men in Rome, Crassus and Pompey, to form the First Triumvirate .
 Between 58 and 50 bce, he formed a provincial power base in Gaul . Launched a series of campaigns that made him master of Western Europe, with fabulous wealth and powerful armies .
 His campaigns earned him many opponents among the governing classes, who would eventually cut short both his career and his life . However, these campaigns also earned him some opponents .
 63 Consuls were chief judges, who XX chaired the Senate and commanded the army . XX chair the Senate, who also led the army, was the first Consuls to become a president . XX was the last Consul to be elected to a post in the Roman Empire .
 Praetors acted as judges and commanded armies in Rome in the consuls’ absence . Consuls' absence of consuls led to the death of many of Rome’s most famous men . Praetor was a judge and commander of the Roman army .
 Aediles had responsibility for maintaining the public buildings and temples, and for ensuring the city's grain supply . He was responsible for maintaining public buildings, temples and the grain supply of the city .
 The rank of aedile was the highest plebeians could hope to achieve . Aediles had a lower status than patrician aediles . The rank was the lowest plebeian status .
 Senators directed other magistrates and controlled the granting of public money . Senators also controlled the grant of money to magistrates .
 Tribunes protected plebs from abuses of power by vetoing legislation or judgments . Tribunes were protected by vetoes of legislation or judgements . Plebs were protected from abuse of power .
 Caesar triumphed over Pompey’s forces at the Battle of Pharsalus in northern Greece in 48 bce . In the ensuing civil war, Caesar won the battle in 48bce . Caesar's new order was the creation of the Roman Empire .
 Pompey fled to Egypt for sanctuary, where he was later assassinated . Pompey was assassinated in Egypt in the aftermath of his defeat .
 Caesar finally returned to Rome in 45 bce, to consolidate his political position . After crushing the remaining pockets of resistance, Caesar returned home to Rome . Caesar was the first Roman to return to Rome since his reign .
 In 46 bce he accepted the dictatorship for 10 years; two years later, he was granted the office for life . He accepted the presidency for life; he accepted 10 years .
 Caesar initiated far-reaching social and political reforms during his reign . Caesar was in a position to begin the monumental task of reconstructing the Roman state and restoring stability .
 He extended Roman citizenship, enlarged the Senate, established colonies outside Italy, and established colonies abroad . He spent lavishly on grandiose public works and buildings; he cut taxes; and he even reformed the Roman calendar .
 Caesar’s pragmatic solutions for re-establishing unity in the empire after years of chaos found favor with many parts of society . But at the same time, his increasingly autocratic attitude to power was alienating fellow members of the ruling class . Caesar's autocratic approach to power
 Caesar was trying to destroy the cherished traditions of the Roman state, and undermine the prestige of the nobility . Caesar spread the rumor that he was planning to make himself king, according to the Romans . Caesar was accused of attempting to destroy Roman traditions and undermine prestige .
 He accepted unprecedented honors, such as assuming the title “Imperator” as a family name . He also allowed temples and statues to be erected in his honor, and coins minted bearing his image .
 When he adopted his grand-nephew, Octavian, there were fears that he was trying to establish a dynastic succession . There were also fears he was attempting to establish his own dynasty .
 Some members of the Senate concluded that the only solution to the problem was to assassinate Caesar, and so they hatched a conspiracy to carry it out . The assassination of Caesar was the assassination of Julius Caesar .
 Gaius Cassius Longinus was a general who had risen to political prominence during a largely disastrous campaign in Persia . Representing those opposed to the dictator’s reforms, he was a leading agent in the plot to murder him .
 Ancient Roman historians argued that Cassius's involvement was prompted by a combination of jealousy and greed . Historians said Cassius may have been motivated by jealousy, greed .
 Caesar is said to have recruited the most important conspirator, Marcus Junius Brutus . Brutus was a trusted colleague and confidante of Caesar, opposed to his presumed monarchic ambitions .
 Pompey’s Theatre was part of a great civic complex Pompey had constructed . The Senate gathered at Cassius's home, each senator concealing a dagger beneath his robes, before moving on to Pompey's Theatre .
 A group of gladiators had been stationed in the theatre itself to help control crowd problems .
 Many of the conspirators were nervous and ready to flee, convinced that the plot had been uncovered . However, many of the plotters were ready to leave the country .
 Caesar's wife pleaded with him not to attend the Senate meeting, but one of the conspirators, stationed at Caesar’s house, helped calm her fears . Caesar was assassinated by the assassination of Julius Caesar in 1877 .
 When Caesar arrived at the meeting, a conspirator distracted his deputy, Mark Anthony, delaying him outside the theatre . Caesar arrived in the theatre to meet with his deputy Mark Anthony .
 As Caesar took his seat, the conspirators drew their daggers and struck, stabbing him 23 times . Caesar was stabbed 23 times. Caesar died at the hands of his enemies in the Battle of the Medonte .
 In an ironic twist, 99 I found Rome a city of bricks, and left it a marble city of marble . In an irony twist, he left Rome with a marble statue .
 According to Suetonius, Augustus’s biographer 99 99 Caesar, like a most gentle physician, had been assigned to the Romans by Heaven itself . Augustus was appointed by Heaven by the Romans in August .
 Caesar breathed his last slumped against the base of a statue of his old rival Pompey . Caesar's last was seen slumped against a statue in Pompey's honour .
 The Second Triumvirate doused their hands in Caesar's blood and rushed out into the Forum to proclaim their tyrannicide . Seized with manic fervor, the conspirators dipped their hands into the blood of Caesar .
 Caesar’s heir, Octavian, assumed control of the state in 43 bce . Mark Anthony and Lepidus, one of Caesar's former allies, formed a triumvirate in 43bce . Lepidu was one of the former allies of Caesar .
 The triumvirate drew up a list of those who supported Caesar's murderers, and declared them outlaws . Needed to gather funds to stabilize their authority, and to remove political opposition, they drew up the list .
 The treasury's coffers now filled, the triumvirate hunted down and destroyed Brutus and Cassius . Brutus, Cassius and Brutus were killed by the Romans .
 In 40 bce, the triumvirs met again, this time to carve up the Roman world . In 40bce, they met again in a bid to carve out the Roman empire .
 Africa was given to Lepidus, the East to Mark Anthony, and the West to Octavian . Africa was then given to the East, the West and the East .
 Octavian defeated Anthony's forces at Actium in western Greece in 31 bce . However, it was not long before he went to war against Anthony in north Africa . After defeating Anthony in Actium he became master of the Roman world .
 Rome's first emperor Octavian returned to Rome in 28 bce and renounced the dictatorial powers granted to him in order to wage his war against Antony . Instead of following Caesar’s example, he renounced his powers to wage war against Caesar .
 In 27 bce, in gratitude for his service to Rome, the Senate bestowed on him the name Augustus (“revered personage"") and granted him wideranging legal powers . The Senate gave him the title Augustus in tribute to his service .
 Eventually, through political sleight of hand, he became Rome’s sole ruler . He controlled all aspects of the Roman state and command of the army . Eventually, he was able to control the entire state of Rome .
 Augustus set about transforming the ruins of the republican system into an imperial autocracy, all the while maintaining the illusion that his authority was dependent on the will of the people . Augustus was careful to spurn titles, styling himself instead as princeps, or “first citizen"
 He loosely established the boundaries of the empire, pushed through reforms to clean up both private and public life, and crushed dissent . He pushed for reforms in both public life and private life, but also crushed dissent.
 After the long periods of exhausting civil war, many in the empire were grateful for peace . After the war, the empire was at the center of the world's longest civil war .
 The might of the Roman military and the consequent improvements in security and stability across a vast stretch of territory, in what became known as the Pax Romana . This led to a growth in trade, economic activity, population, and general prosperity .
 The arts and culture ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS 65 flourished, public and private building works proliferated . The provinces outside Italy underwent a process of Romanization, in which the Roman language, culture, laws, and institutions were embedded into diverse societies and across ethnic boundaries .
 Provincials were even granted full Roman citizenship after a period of military service . Provincialiales were granted a full Roman passport after serving in the military .
 Augustus's Pax Romana often meant just the opposite . However, for the regions beyond the bounds of empire, it was often meant to be an empire . Augustus's 'Pax Romana' often meant the opposite.
 Augustus had to find employment for 150,000 soldiers . Even after reducing the army from 80 legions to a permanent force of just 28, he had to look for employment . Augustus reduced the army to 28 legions and found employment for just 28 .
 He launched a series of campaigns to extend borders, suppress and harry rebels and “barbarians,"" and seize slaves from conquered areas .
 The Ara Pacis Augustae altar in Rome is dedicated to Pax, the Roman goddess of peace . Pax is a Roman god of peace who was worshipped in Rome .
 Processional frieze shows members of the Roman Senate with a priest . Processional processional fieze shows Roman Senate members with a priests .
 Augustus established a new imperial system that would endure for centuries . Augustus 99 was Augustus' first king of the Roman Empire . Augustus died in 14 ce in Rome .
 Augustus had prepared the way for an heir to succeed him, and retain control of the state . Augustus had been preparing for some years before his death, Augustus had planned for a successor .
 His step-son Tiberius was gradually granted powers until he could effectively be considered to be a co-emperor . The Roman emperor died at the end of his reign .
 This smoothed the transition of authority on Augustus' death, preventing a vacuum of power and ensuring continuity . Augustus' son Augustus was Augustus' first king, who died in 17th century .
 Augustus established the principle of direct succession and ensured the survival of the office of emperor . Augustus thus established the . principle of . direct succession . Augustus also ensured the . survival of his office of the . office .
 The system continued through multiple dynasties, with the empire reaching its height under the Nerva-Antonine dynasty . Hadrian ordered the building of a wall in northern Britain to mark the empire's outer limit .
 The transition from republic to monarchy, while drastic, gave Rome a new stability . The transition between republic and monarchy was a major transition period .
 Augustus created a new autocratic system of government, which was much better able to resist upheavals that had plagued the Roman Republic a generation before . Augustus created the autocratic state of government .
 The Christian god was not the first deity Constantine had auditioned . An earlier version of his vision had involved the Greek and Roman god Apollo .
 Christians were periodically persecuted for their egalitarian nature . Some aspects of Christianity, such as its egalitarian nature, made it suspicious to the imperial authorities . Christians were persecuted for being too egalitarian .
 Christianity was just one of a number of monotheisms gaining popularity in the Roman Empire . The Persian cult of Mithraism, with which it had much in common, was also gaining popularity .
 In 324, Constantine became sole ruler of the Roman Empire . He sought to use Christianity as a unifying force across his fractious and fractious realm .
 Constantinople was consecrated with both Christian and pagan rites, but only Christian churches were allowed to be built . To make the eastern half easier to govern, he founded a new city called Constantinople .
 The emperor built basilicas across the empire in Rome . The higher ranks of society, seeking political advancement and favor with the emperor, flocked to the Church .
 Christianity, however, was not a single, uniform religion at this time, and splits, or schisms, formed . Christianity was not always a single single, unified religion .
 In 325, Constantine convened the Council of Nicaea to settle the Arian schism, a theological dispute over whether Jesus was of the same substance as God . The council was the first universal council of the Christian Church .
 The Roman state adopted and molded the Church into an instrument of social and political control, unity, and stability . The faith was increasingly bound up with empire, as the Roman state embraced and molded it .
 Under Emperor Theodosius I, pagan temples and cults were suppressed, heresy was outlawed, and Christianity became the official religion of the Roman Empire .
 Eventually, it also became the faith of the barbarian successor states in the Roman Western Empire, as well as of the Byzantine Empire in the East . Eventually, the faith was also adopted by barbarian successors to the Western Empire .
 Over the course of many centuries, the western and eastern churches grew apart in doctrine and organization . Christianity endured, but Christianity endured .
 Constantine sees Christianity, with its one supreme deity, as a tool for unity . He sees Christianity as a validation of imperial authority . Constantine saw Christianity as an instrument for unity, and validation of authority .
 Germanic tribes secure their independence with victory at Teutoburg Forest . The Church is refashioned in the image of the Roman state, with a strict hierarchy and centralization of dogma .
 Rome had already ceased to be the capital of the Western Roman Empire . The sack sent shock waves across the world after the sack .
 Changes known as the Migration Period, or the Barbarian Invasions, were taking place . Great movements of peoples across all of Eurasia, from China to Britain .
 Roman army comprised mostly kingdoms, which in many cases gave rise to the nations of the modern era . The Roman army was formed by mostly kingdoms .
 Climatic changes in Central Asia drove nomadic horse tribes of the steppes to seek better pastures, which in turn forced neighboring nomads to invade the so-called civilized empires .
 China was ravaged by the Xiongnu, Persia by the Hepthalites, and India by the White Huns . India was ravaged in the same way by the white Huns and the Xionsi .
 The arrival of the Huns in the lands east of the Rhine and north of the Danube displaced Germanic tribes who had long lived in delicate balance with the Roman Empire . The Huns were the first to arrive in eastern Europe .
 In Destruction by Thomas Cole, invaders overrun a once-great city often likened to Rome . The Visigoths moved into Roman lands, eventually storming Rome in 410 . Other tribes including the Vandals, Suevi, Alans, Franks, Burgundians, and Alemanni
 Citizens' bodies litter monuments that were built to celebrate the now fallen civilization . They include Germanic auxiliaries and mercenaries, or Roman citizens who were actually Gauls .
 Much of Italy, Gaul, and Spain fell under the sway of the “Germanic" Goths, Suevi, and Vandals . But their languages resisted Germanic influence and remain Romance languages .
 Huns, under Attila, ravaged Eastern Europe in 440s before being defeated by coalition of Romans and Germans . Huns were defeated by a coalition of Roman and German forces in the 440s and 440s .
 The Western Roman Empire shrank to encompass little more than Italy itself . Its puppet emperors were controlled by barbarian generals . The West Roman Empire was dominated by barbarians .
 In 476, the last nominal emperor was deposed by one such general, Odoacer . The end of the Roman Empire in the west marked the end of Roman Empire . The Roman Empire was officially abolished in 476 .
 Western Empire had however been in decline since at least the 3rd century . The Western Empire was however in decline for the past four centuries .
 Its population and economy had diminished, making it increasingly financially dependent on the Eastern Empire . weakening central authority had given more autonomy to the provinces . weakened central authority gave more autonomy .
 The military, obliged to recruit from barbarian tribes, was losing its core strength . The military was losing core strength. It was losing it .
 Roman customs, culture, language, and religion in the form of Christianity, endured across the provinces . Many of the new ruling elite saw themselves as continuing in the tradition of Rome . Roman customs and language, language and religion, and particularly its religion, endured .
 successor states formed by Germanic tribes over the following centuries eventually found themselves under attack by further waves of invaders such as the Magyars and Vikings . In their turn, the successor states found themselves facing further attacks by the Viking and Magyar invaders .
 By 1900 bce, this civilization was in decline and no longer producing the elaborate jewelry and fine seals for which it was famous . This civilization was no longer making elaborate jewelry or fine seals .
 By1700 bce, the great Indus cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro were virtually empty . The Indus city was virtually empty by the time of the time .
 The most likely explanation is a combination of crop failure and a decline in trade with Egypt and Mesopotamia . The reason is unclear, but the most likely is that the decline in Egypt-Mesopotamia trade .
 There is also some evidence of flooding due to a change in the course of the Indus River . There are also some signs of flooding in Pakistan .
 The idea that the emperor of China rules with the approval of heaven dates to the Zhou dynasty, which was founded when Wu and his ally Jiang Ziya defeated the long-ruling Shang at the Battle of Muye in 1046 bce . Wu claimed to have the power of
 The Shang had presided over a long period of peace and prosperity but by the 1040s had become corrupt . Shang was corrupt by the time he ruled the Shang dynasty .
 The Zhou concept of the Mandate of Heaven aimed to prevent this from happening . It placed good government above noble birth, and sanctioning others to overthrow the ruler if he did not display these qualities .
 It influenced the way the Chinese regarded their rulers for thousands of years . It influenced how they viewed their rulers in thousands of centuries .
 In the 9th century bce, the Hebrew state of Judah (west of the Dead Sea) was part of the large Assyrian empire . Judah was one of the most powerful states of the Assyrian Empire .
 Judaean ruler Hezekiah refused to pay tribute to the Assyrians in 8th century . Judaeans refused to give tribute to Assyrians . Assyrians were defeated by Judaeaeans in the 8th Century .
 The Assyrian king, Sennacherib, laid siege to Jerusalem, but the Judaeans resisted their mighty enemies, who failed to take the city . The Judaean resisted the Assyrian kings, but they failed to capture Jerusalem .
 Judaeans attributed their victory to Yahweh . Assyria was a relatively small setback for Assyria, but it was a triumph .
 This was a major factor in the Hebrew peoples' adoption of monotheistic religion soon after . This was the main reason for the adoption of the monotheist religion .
 In the 8th century bce, a distinctive culture developed around Hallstatt, southeast of modern Salzburg, in Austria, in the area .
 Its people produced fine tools and ornamental objects in bronze, but they also used iron for items such as swords . They were among the first in Europe to use iron for such items .
 Their striking bronze jewelry bore intricate patterns featuring spirals, knotwork, and animal designs, which had a lasting influence on later Celtic art . The striking bronze designs were created by Celtic artists .
 The Peloponnesian Wars were fought between Athens and Sparta . Athens was the most powerful citystate and the center of classical civilization . Sparta was the more militaristic Sparta, the most militaristic city state in ancient Greece .
 Sparta first launched land-based attacks on Athens, while Athens used its superior sea power to suppress revolts along the coast . Sparta was defeated by Athens in the battle of Sparta in the 4th century .
 The war deeply damaged Athens, ending the golden age of Greek culture and leaving Sparta dominant . The war left Athens without a permanent capital, leaving the city of Athens in ruins . Sparta defeated Athens in the war .
 Carthage, in Tunisia, established itself as a regional power in the 3rd century bce . By the 230s bce, Carthage had established itself a major regional power, extending along the coast of North Africa before invading Spain .
 The Romans had proved their strength, put an end to the idea that Carthage was invincible in the Mediterranean, and paved the way for their own rise to power . The Romans put the idea of Carthage's invincible status to the back of the Mediterranean .
 At the Battle of Alesia, Roman forces built an ingenious donut-shaped fortification around the town, blocking Vercingetorix . Julius Caesar's forces built the fortification while also creating a Gaulish reinforcements . The fortification was created by Julius Caesar during the Battle
 The chieftain was forced to surrender, and after five years in captivity he was strangled on Caesar’s orders . He was killed by Caesar on the orders of the king .
 The battle resulted in an all-embracing Roman Empire stretching right across Europe . The battle ended in a victory for the Roman Empire in Rome .
 In 43 ce, a Roman invasion force landed in Britain on the command of the emperor Claudius . The invasion took place in 43 ce .
 Roman rule extended across England to the Scottish border and into Wales . In spite of opposition from local chieftains such as Caratacus, the Roman rule eventually extended across the border .
 Romans governed Britain until410, founding towns, developing a system of roads, and introducing such innovations as underfloor heating and the use of concrete for building . Romans ruled Britain until the end of the Roman era .
 Many Britons benefited from Roman rule and from strong trading links with the empire in products such as metals and grain . The Roman Empire was ruled by the Roman Empire and ruled by Roman soldiers .
 These Three Kingdoms—the Wei in the north, the Wu in the south, and the Shu in the west—reached a fairly stable agreement over territory until fighting broke out from 263 . The rival Jin dynasty challenged and then conquered them .
 Maya civilization reached its Classic phase in the 3rd century ce, with a large number of cities across Mexico and Guatemala . Maya cities featured distinctive temples shaped as stepped pyramids, carved monuments inscribed with dates from the complex Maya calendar .
 The largest city was Teotihaucan in central Mexico, although lowland cities such as Tikal were also powerful . The biggest city in Mexico was the capital city of Teotahaucan, located in central and southern Mexico .
 Maya civilization left a lasting mark in North and Central America . Maya culture influenced later peoples, such as the Aztecs . Maya people are believed to have lived in the region for centuries .
 In the 4th century ce, the people of the Ethiopian city of Axum erected tall stone obelisks that would be a feature of their civilization . The obelisk is one of the most prominent landmarks in the Ethiopian kingdom .
 Axum dominated the maritime trade routes around the Horn of Arabia and into the Indian Ocean . It was a vital link between Asia and the Mediterranean making the kingdom an impressive income .
 They testify to the power of this early African kingdom and its development of a distinctive civilization . The images show the impact of the kingdom's development of an early African civilization .
 Clovis' victory brought virtually all of France north of the Loire under his dynasty, called the Merovingians, after his grandfather Merovech . This victory added to those of Childeric's father Childeric, brought the region under the rule of his dynasty . Clov
 The Abassid caliph al-Mansur's founding of Baghdad marks the start of the Islamic golden age . Al-Mannur was the first caliph to establish the city of Baghdad .
 Viking warriors mount a brutal raid on a monastery on the holy island of Lindisfarne, northern England . The raid was the first of many Viking raids on the island . Viking warriors mounted a brutal assault on the monastery .
 Christian knights seize Jerusalem from Muslims, go on to found crusader states in Palestine and Syria . Christian knights seized Jerusalem from the Muslims .
 In the eastern Mediterranean, the Roman Empire continued for almost 1,000 years after the fall of Rome, although it was rebranded by historians as the Byzantine Empire . In the east Mediterranean, historians rebranded it as the Eastern Roman Empire .
 The ancient tradition of a united China ruled by an emperor was revived in the 6th century . It continued to the Ming dynasty, albeit with interruptions, until the end of the dynasty .
 Even in Western Europe, the breakdown after the Roman Empire's collapse was most evident . Christian religion survived in Rome as the key marker for the distinction between what were considered “civilized” and “barbarian” societies .
 The dominance of two mutually hostile monotheistic religions was the most distinctive characteristic of this period across much of Eurasia . Christianity and Islam were the most distinct characteristic of the period . The rise of Islam was the rise of Christianity .
 Although a united Islamic caliphate could not be sustained, the religion ensured continuity of civilization even when power shifted from the Arabs to other peoples such as the Turks .
 The great cities of the Muslim world surpassed any in Christendom in size and sophistication . Muslim scholars preserved the science of the ancient Greeks and built upon it, writes Peter Bergen .
 Islamic civilization remained dynamic and expansive throughout the medieval period . Islamic culture remained dynamic throughout the entire medieval period. Islamic civilization was dynamic throughout .
 In Western Europe, civilization fell drastically from the level achieved under the Roman Empire . Western European fortunes fell drastically during the Roman era .
 Warrior kings ruled over a thinly spread population sustained by subsistence agriculture . The area remained prey to non-Christian raiders and invaders, such as the Vikings and the Magyars .
 A nostalgia for ancient Rome led to King Charlemagne being crowned emperor in 800 . But the Holy Roman Empire failed to unify Western Europe politically . The Roman Empire was based on the tradition Charlemagna founded .
 feudal relationships held societies together in the absence of strong centralized state systems . feudal relationships are key to society's survival .
 King John of England signed the Magna Carta, which asserts that all individuals, including the king, are subject to the law of the land . King John was king of England from 13th century to 14th century . The Magda Carta asserts that individuals, as well as
 Mansa Musa, the wealthy ruler of Mali, makes a high-profile hajj to Mecca, resulting in the spread of Islam in West Africa . He makes the pilgrimage to Mecca in Mecca .
 Korean king Sejong declares creation of new, simpler alphabet for the Korean language . The new alphabet is intended to encourage literacy .
 Marco Polo arrived at the court of Kublai Khan at the time of 1215 . The Mongol ruler would go on to conquer southern China four years later .
 Hongwu is proclaimed the first emperor of the Ming dynasty, having ousted the Yuan dynasty . Hongwu becomes the first Chinese emperor to be declared emperor .
 From the 11th century, a revival of Western European culture, trade, and urban life gathered pace . The revival of European culture gathered pace in the early 12th century .
 The Medieval Warm Period was a period when Europe experienced aboveaverage temperatures, improved yields from agriculture . It was also a time when great cathedrals and castles were constructed . The medieval warm period was also known as the Medieval Warm period .
 Christian crusaders fought their way to Jerusalem at the heart of the Muslim world . Islamic scholars far advanced in medicine, philosophy, astronomy, and geography . But the flow of civilization was the other way .
 A wide-ranging network linked Europe to China and the thriving trading kingdoms of Asia . The Silk Road was by land along the Silk Road and by sea across the Indian Ocean . The network was linked by land, sea and by land .
 Cairo and Venice both became wealthy cities as focal points at the western end of this trade . Cairo became wealthy as a focal point for the trade between the two cities .
 Nomadic warriors from the Asian steppes seized major cities from the Middle East to southern China, carrying out large-scale massacres . The Mongols—nomadic warriors -- seized cities across Asia from the Mideast to China .
 The Black Death epidemic may have killed a quarter of the world's population . Carried along the trade routes in the mid-14th century, the epidemic was carried along trade routes . It may have led to the deaths of around a quarter the world .
 Inventions and progress were slow but substantial . Technological progress was slow but cumulatively substantial .
 China was the ultimate source of most inventions, from paper and printing to the magnetic compass and gunpowder . As the world’s most advanced country, China was also the source of many inventions, including gunpowder and paper .
 Even relatively backward Europe benefited from improvements in shipbuilding and metalworking . Invention and spread of the plow and the windmill transformed agriculture .
 By the end of the Middle Ages, Western European kingdoms had developed from ‘feudal’ states, based on oaths of loyalty, to more stable and centralized states . Western European states were able to channel their resources into large projects of colonization and exploration .
 In the Americas, civilizations such as the Aztecs and Incas continued to evolve independently, untouched by developments in Eurasia and Africa, until the Spanish conquistadors arrived in the 16th century . The Incas were the last of the Incas to arrive in the Americas
 The Byzantine's arrival forced the rapid departure of the city’s current defenders, the barbarian Ostrogoths, who were fleeing northward through the Porta Flaminia . The city was attacked by the Romans in the 4th century .
 Italy had fallen out of imperial hands 60 years after it fell into Roman hands . Almost precisely 60 years later, it appeared that the empire’s ancient birthplace might be restored to Roman rule .
 The loss of the empire's birthplace was a blow to the prestige of the Byzantine emperors, who refused to accept it . However, the loss of its birthplace was not accepted by the emperors .
 Emperor Zeno despatched one tribe of Germanic barbarian mercenaries, the Ostrogoths, to remove another, led by Odoacer, who had been responsible for deposing the last Western Roman emperor . In 488, Zeno sent one tribe to remove one led by
 In return the Ostrogoths would be allowed to rule Italy as subjects of the Byzantine Emperor . In return they would be given the right to become a subject of the Emperor .
 Zeno hoped their removal to Italy would neutralize both problems . The Goths had been encroaching on imperial lands . Zeno wanted to neutralize the Goths' encroachment .
 For the following 40 years, the Goths' rule of Italy was relatively untroubled . The Goths ruled Italy for more than 40 years .
 He was determined to restore Roman dignity, and this meant reconquering the lost Roman provinces . This was the first time he had conquered the lost provinces .
 Justinian ordered an invasion of Italy in 535 . Emboldened by his success, Justinian invaded Italy . The invasion was successful .
 Gothic King Witigis counterattacked and subjected Rome to a grinding, year-long siege . Byzantine euphoria at the recovery of their ancient capital was rudely shattered, however, by the Gothic king .
 Belisarius launched a fresh assault, but he was recalled after Justinian began to fear that he would set himself up as an independent king in Italy . Justinian feared he would be setting himself up in Italy as a king .
 The country passed back and forth between the two sides as the war in Italy dragged on for almost 20 years . The war was fought between Italy and Italy in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 Twice the Goths retook Rome but, lacking the resources to hold it, lost it again both times to the Romans . The Goths lost Rome twice before, but never again before .
 Although the Byzantines had won the war, the victory was hollow . The impact of the war was the loss of the Byzantine Empire . Although the Byzantine empire had won, the loss was not permanent .
 Italy was devastated by the loss of much of its population and the rural economy . Italy's rural economy was in tatters and the cities were devastated .
 The traditional Latinspeaking ruling classes found that Greek-speakers from Constantinople were given all the key positions . The Greek-speaking ruling classes were found to be dominated by the Greeks .
 Rome was treated as a provincial outpost of the Byzantine Empire, and hopes that the city might be restored as the center of imperial power were dashed . The city was once considered a province of the Roman Empire .
 The effects of the war, together with a plague that killed one-third of the empire’s inhabitants in 542, made it hard to find troops that could garrison Italy . The plague killed one third of the population in 541 .
 Byzantine Empire was never again able to make another serious attempt to restore the Roman Empire in the west . The Byzantine Empire survived a further nine centuries, surviving nine centuries .
 Germanic kingdoms in Italy, France, and Spain were left free to develop unhindered . Instead of defending its Greek-speaking core in the east, it focused on defending its eastern core .
 Within 20 years, this creed had come to dominate the Arabian peninsula . Within a century later its followers had shattered the ancient Byzantine and Persian Empires, creating a state that stretched from Spain to Central Asia .
 From the first millennium bce there were sophisticated kingdoms in southern Arabia, which derived their wealth from the spice trade . Arabia before Islam .
 In the early days, the trade routes ran along the northwest coast, but by the 7th century these had diminished as merchants used a maritime route up the Red Sea . Many places that had been relatively prosperous in decline in decline .
 Medina and Mecca dependent on more local trade in wool and leather, along with a few key imports such as grain and olive oil . There were a few scattered towns, such as Medina, Mecca, which were dependent on local trade .
 Bedouin tribes followed a nomadic lifestyle, and competition for scarce resources shaped a society in which primary loyalty was to a kinship group, or tribe .
 At the time of Muhammad, Arabia was in a state of religious and political ferment . Muhammad was the first king of the Islamic kingdom .
 Strong Jewish communities had become established in Yemen in the south and in northwestern oasis towns, such as Medina . Christianity had gained footholds in Yemen and eastern Arabia .
 Although monotheistic faiths were making inroads against the traditional polytheistic paganism of the Bedouin Arabs, paganism still remained strong in the region .
 In Mecca, in the sacred enclosure known as the haram, a truce was enforced so men of different tribes could trade freely without violence . Conflict between tribes was also common, and in Mecca, men of each tribe traded freely with each other .
 The Meccan haram was controlled by the powerful Quraysh clan, of which Muhammad was a member . Muhammad in Mecca was the son of Muhammad's father .
 Tradition relates that he was an orphan, whose first marriage to a wealthy widow named Khadijah secured his economic future . Tradition says he was orphaned by his first marriage .
 Muhammad's religious revelations were imparted to Muhammad over a period of about 12 years from about 610 . The revelations caused a rupture with the traditional Meccan elites there was but a single God .
 His preaching of a single religious community that cut across social boundaries was perceived as threatening by the traditional leaders . Traditional leaders felt it undermined the source of their authority .
 By 622, the atmosphere in Mecca had become so tense that Muhammad and his handful of followers fled north to Medina . The event called the hijra (meaning emigration), marked the real foundation of the Islamic community .
 The Medinans were sympathetic to Muhammad’s cause and allowed him to preach freely . Muhammad was given the opportunity to attract further converts by the Medinan .
 The Qurayshi were not content to see Muhammad's powerbase grow in Mecca . Within two years he began to preach against pagan polytheism and practices such as female infanticide .
 Muhammad proved an inspirational leader, and his adept handling of the challenges facing the new religion meant that by the time he died in 632, its adherents had spread throughout Arabia . By the time of his death, his followers had spread across Arabia .
 Muhammad outmaneuvered the Qurayshi, first by raiding their caravans, then defeating them in a pitched battle in 627 . He finally negotiated the right to return to Mecca on a pilgrimage in 629 .
 By the time he died in 632, Muhammad was re-established in Mecca . His diplomatic and military successes in attracting other tribes to his cause made his position unassailable .
 As his authority spread, so too did the reach of his religious message and the numbers of new Muslim converts . As he became a Muslim leader, he was able to reach millions of Muslims .
 After Muhammad’s death, Islam entered a crisis and the fledgling religion might easily have been crushed . Islam may have been in a crisis after the death of the prophet .
 Tribes in the east broke away from the Muslim religious community and declared allegiance to their own prophet, while the Medinans were unhappy about the dominance of Meccans in the movement .
 The choice of Abu Bakr, Muhammad's father-in-law, as caliph signaled that the leadership would remain in the Prophet's family . This, together with a series of successful military campaigns against the malcontents, enabled the umma to survive .
 The Battle of Uhud was one of several bloody conflicts fought between the Muslims of Medina, led by Muhammad, and the larger Qurayshi army from Mecca . The battle was fought in the early years of Muhammad's reign .
 Muhammad’s successors, in particular Umar, initiated campaigns of conquest further afield . Umar was the son of Muhammad . Muhammad was the founder of the Islamic kingdom .
 They were fortunate in that profound changes had occurred on the northern fringes of Arabia . They were lucky in that they had been able to live in the country .
 Their coffers had been drained by the costs of the conflict . Some regions within their territories had been utterly devastated by the loss of life .
 Both sides had also become reliant on Arabs to defend their borders . Small, semi-independent Arab states had emerged on the peripheries of the two empires .
 Arab armies that swept northward in 630s faced far less resistance than they would have faced half a century earlier . Arab armies faced less resistance in the 630s than they did in the 60s .
 Provinces fell easily as weakened garrisons and the doubtful loyalty of citizens undermined resistance . The fall of the Crimean War was largely due to a lack of resistance .
 Arab armies were very mobile and did not need to defend fixed positions, giving them a huge advantage over their opponents . Although relatively small in number and lightly armed, the Arab armies are very mobile . The Arab armies did not have fixed positions .
 When they defeated the Byzantines at Yarmuk in 636, the whole edifice of imperial control in Palestine and Syria came crashing down . The Byzantine Empire lost control of Palestine, Syria and Syria .
 It took Arab generals just nine years to dismember the Sassanid Empire . In the case of Persia, it took just 9 years to disemapment .
 The newly conquered lands became part of the Islamic caliphate . Islamic society was established in the Islamic state of Islam .
 Many of its inhabitants converted, while those who did not were tolerated were tolerated if they were Christians, Jews, or Zoroastrians, provided they paid a special tax . Many of the inhabitants converted .
 As well as sweeping away the old imperial structures, it imparted a new sense of religious community, often uniting the conquerors and the conquered . It often unites the conqueror and the captured .
 Islamic scholars resurrected the works of Greek philosophers and scientists that had languished forgotten for centuries . They translated them into Arabic, and beautiful mosques began to adorn the towns . Islamic scholars revived the works and translated them to Arabic .
 Areas that had been marginalized under the Byzantine or Sassanid Empires now found themselves at the heart of a new, vibrant civilization . Areas that were marginalized under those of those empires now found their place in the center of civilization .
 Acquiring lands far more urbanized than Arabia meant that the caliphs had to adapt from being warrior chiefs commanding a tight-knit group of followers to monarchs ruling over a huge area with complex economies and societies .
 Muslims were initially in the minority, and not wholly united . In addition to this, Muslims were also not fully united, and Muslims were not in the majority of Muslims .
 Qur’an The first words revealed to Muhammad were the first words . Muhammad receives the divine revelation . Muhammad received the Qur'an .
 Arab armies make swift raises tensions over who conquests in the Middle has supreme authority . Traditional political and religious allegiances are weakened - ■ Expansion of Islam makes rapid Arab conquests more difficult .
 Islam continues to spread but divides into Sunni and Shia factions and competing caliphates . Tensions over the succession to the caliphate resulted in a major schism in Islam .
 A struggle between Ali, Muhammad's son-in-law, and Muawiya, the Governor of Syria, led to a civil war that ended in 661 . Ali’s murder led to the death of his son in the war that led to his death . Muaw
 Muawiya's descendants ruled from the Syrian city of Damascus . Ali's followers opposed their authority, claiming the caliph should be chosen from among Ali's offspring . Ali’s followers opposed the authority .
 After the murder of Ali's son Husayn at Karbala in 680, the split between the Shia and the more mainstream Sunni (who rejected this) became definitive . The split is a division that continues to this day .
 Islamic unity was fractured in other ways too, with messages from the eastern and western extremities taking months to reach the caliph’s court . Message from the east and west was almost impossible when messages from those extremities might take months .
 Independent Muslim dynasties emerged in peripheral areas and rival caliphs appeared in 10th century in Spain, Tunisia, Egypt, and Egypt .
 Muhammad's creed was so popular and successful that by the 21st century there were about 1. billion Muslims worldwide . Muhammad's political unity had been shattered, but its religious unity was compromised .
 He unites Germany and Italy to form what was later called the Holy Roman Empire . The Roman Roman Empire was formed by the Roman Empire of Rome and Germany .
 Pope Leo III crowned the Frankish King Charlemagne with an imperial diadem . The first emperor in the west for three centuries was crowned by Leo III .
 The imperial crown established Charlemagne and his successors as secular rivals to the Papacy’s claim (as spiritual head of the church) to a position of authority over western rulers . It established the imperial crown as a secular rival to the papacy .
 Charlemagne's empire expanded to cover a vast area and laid the foundations for some of the future nation-states of Western Europe . The Holy Roman Empire was later known as the Holy Roman Roman Empire .
 Frankish provinces were invaded by barbarian tribes who established smaller kingdoms on its former territory . Frankish Frankish tribes established smaller kingdom on former territories . The Frankish kingdom was conquered by the tribes of 99 provinces .
 At first, the Eastern Roman emperors did not recognize the legitimacy of these new kings’ right to rule in nominally Roman territory . The Eastern Roman . emperors didn't recognize the . legitimacy of the new kings' right to . rule .
 Eastern Roman recognition ceased to matter as the new kingdoms became stronger and more unified . The new kingdoms, particularly that of the Franks, were stronger than Roman ones .
 Charlemagne expanded his dominions extensively over time, conquering northern Italy and Saxony . He gained some areas from the Arabs in northern Spain, and took some Avar territories in the Danube .
 He established a network of missi domenici —royal agents — who would enforce his will in the provinces . He strengthened Frankish administration, establishing a network . He set up a network, establishing an office in every province .
 For the first time in centuries, a powerful ruler controlled most of the former Western Roman Empire’s lands, turning them into a single political entity . The Roman Empire was once ruled by the Roman Empire, but was ruled by a single ruler .
 Papacy experienced difficult times in the 8th century, snared in petty power politics as various Roman noble families sought to secure positions in the ecclesiastical hierarchy . By contrast, the Papacy had experienced a difficult period of stability .
 Leo was assaulted in Rome in 799, he fled across the Alps to seek help from Charlemagne . He invited him to bring order to Italy and restore the status of the church . After Leo was attacked in Rome, he invited the king to help restore order in Italy . Char
 A year later, Leo crowned Charlemagne, creating a Western emperor alongside the Eastern one . A year after the emperor was crowned, Leo became the new emperor .
 He also encouraged academic disciplines that had languished since the collapse of the Roman Empire, including grammar, rhetoric, and astronomy . He also invited distinguished scholars to court, and encouraged academic discipline .
 Music, literature, art, and architecture also flourished during his reign .
 The Frankish custom of dividing the kingdom between several heirs weakened central authority and led to civil wars . It also allowed the emergence of powerful landowners, who often challenged royal authority .
 Ultimately, the empire split into two main portions, which roughly equate to France and Germany today . The empire was divided into parts of France, Germany and France .
 The title of emperor was passed down to the immediate descendants of Charlemagne and then, from the 10th century, to more distantly related German princes . The title was then passed down from the more distant relatives of the emperor .
 In this form, as the Holy Roman Empire, it was to survive to the early 19th century . The Holy Roman empire was to last until the end of the 19th Century .
 Charlemagne greatly expanded the Frankish kingdom . Energetic and visionary, he was a great leader of the Frankian kingdom .
 He was also a very strong ruler, implementing reforms that enhanced the authority of the monarchy and the church . He was a strong ruler and a strong leader .
 He introduced a new monetary system, standardizing weights and measures, and unifying an array of different currencies to encourage commerce and trade . In addition, he reformed the kingdom's economy by introducing new monetary systems .
 His first decision on the succession, in 806, divided the realm between three of his sons but made no mention of the office of emperor . The king divided the kingdom between three sons but did not mention the title .
 Charlemagne bequeath his lands and title to a single heir—Louis the Pious . Louis died after the deaths of two of his sons . Louis was the only son to have a son to inherit the title .
 Tang authority is restored, but central control is weakened, eventually leading to the break up of China . The state is destroyed and Tang is overthrown, but the state is weakened .
 I n 618, the Tang dynasty succeeded the Sui as rulers of China . It ushered in one of the most glittering eras in the country's history .
 The early Tang emperors directed military campaigns that pushed China's frontiers deep into Central Asia . They established a centralized government with a highly competent bureaucracy to administer the empire .
 Later rulers presided over long periods of peace, relative political stability, and economic growth . Economic growth triggered cultural and artistic renaissance .
 In 755, An Lushan led an internal rebellion against the Tang dynasty that plunged northern China into a devastating war . The Tang dynasty was never again fully in control of the country until 755 .
 The state was struggling to raise sufficient taxes to fund a sharp rise in military expenditure, it has been claimed . The state is struggling to find a way to raise enough money to fund military expenditure .
 The fu-bing, the cost-effective and self-supporting national militia system, was proving inadequate in the face of repeated invasions by neighboring groups . Soldiers worked the land when not required for active military duty .
 Xuanzong was forced to establish military provinces along China’s northern frontiers . The provinces were headed by local governors who commanded huge armies . They came to acquire considerable power and autonomy .
 The Tang's coffers were drained further by the failure of the ""equal field"" system, a program of land distribution and tax collection that protected small farmers from the depredations of wealthy landowners .
 Its gradual demise enabled the nobility to grab land to increase their regional power bases, and led to unrest among the peasantry . It led to the demise of the nobility, which led to protests among the peasants .
 Emperor Taizong created a bureaucracy based on merit that eroded the power and influence of the aristocracy . Earlier reforms made to the examination system used to recruit civil servants opened it up to able men from humbler backgrounds .
 Xuanzong now had to manage rival factions in his court . Ten thousand houses with stabbed hearts emit the smoke of desolation . Xuanzongo now has to manage rivals in court .
 Wang Wei Tang poet 99 An Lushan’s rebels conquered and occupied Chang’an, but the general himself remained in Luoyang, where he was later assassinated by one of his sons in a dispute over the succession .
 Discontent exploded among the military, which saw its position threatened now that the era of conquest was over . Turning on the Tang Discontent explodes among the army .
 An Lushan, a prominent military governor who had become a court favorite, rose up against his masters . The former military governor was a prominent court favorite .
 Claiming that the emperor had asked him to remove Yang Guozhong (the court’s chief minister), he mobilized a rebel army and marched south . An Lushan was engaged in an intense power struggle with the emperor's chief minister .
 After eight years of war, the Tang finally crushed the revolt, but the effort had fatally weakened it . The Tang was weakened by the effort, but it was never fully recovered .
 Over the next century it lost more political power to the military, and further rebellions broke out . Over the century, the country lost more power to its military .
 By 907, the empire had fragmented into local dynasties and kingdoms that vied for power for 50 years . The empire was divided into smaller groups of local dynasts and kingdoms .
 The move is often seen as marking the beginning of an Islamic golden age in which science, art, and culture flourished . The move was seen as the start of a golden age of Islamic culture .
 Arabic translations of Greek authors appear in Europe where they are translated into Latin, so diffusing knowledge of lost classical texts . dropping brass balls onto cymbals at the base of the mechanism’s .
 Arab timepiece was just one of the advances the Arabs had made that left their European counterparts far behind . It was one of them that left Europeans far behind in Europe .
 Abbasids spent their first decade pacifying the empire, with the help of troops from Khurasan in northeastern Iran . The Abbasids were the first to pacify the empire . They spent the first 10 years pacifying their empire with help of Khurasans .
 Abbasids were supported by Arabspeakers, Persians, and central Asians . They had been among the Abbasids' principal backers and had provided them with a power base independent of the Arab tribes .
 Al-Mansur established the city of Baghdad in 762 . It was in part to provide land for his Khurasani soldiers . The city was established to provide space for his soldiers .
 He chose the site for its mild climate and its location on the trade routes between Persia, Arabia, and the Mediterranean .
 The heart of the new capital was a milewide, circular enclosure in which sat the caliphal palace and main government offices . The heart was the square enclosure of the capital, a mile wide, circular .
 Abbasids laid claim not only to their predecessors' political heritage, but also to their cultural and scientific achievements . Abbasids lay claim to their political and scientific heritage . The Abbasids were the first Abbasids to claim to be the descendants of their predecessors .
 The Umayyad Empire had included ancient seats of Greek learning such as Alexandria in Egypt . Under their rule there had been little sponsorship of scientific endeavor .
 Abbasids spent their time consolidating Islamic rule rather than on campaigns of conquest . This changed under the Abbasids, who spent most of their time in the Middle Ages .
 During the midto late 6th century, a philosophical school at Gondeshapur in southHarun al-Rashid 4* was known for his knowledge of logic and law very interested in philosophy and observational astronomy .
 It was staffed mainly by Christians from the Nestorian sect, which had been persecuted in the Byzantine Empire . Nestorian Christians were persecuted in Byzantine Empire during the period .
 In 765, al-Mansur is said to have summoned staff member Jurjis ibn Jibril ibn Bukhtishu to Baghdad to diagnose a stomach complaint . The incident happened in 765 .
 For the first 20 years of his reign, the Barmakid family dominated court . He helped strengthen a powerful central administration, which he helped strengthen .
 Under Harun’s rule, Baghdad became the most powerful city in the Islamic world . Baghdad flourished as a center of knowledge, culture, invention, invention and trade .
 For eight generations until the mid-llth century, members of the Bukhtishu family occupied the position at the Baghdad court . They brought with them knowledge of Greek and Hellenistic texts and medical practices . Even so, for almost two decades Harun based himself at Raqqa,
 Jurjis’s grandson Jibril ibn Bukhtishu was asked to head the new hospital in Baghdad, the first in the Islamic world . In 800, Caliph Harun al-Rashid asked Jibil ibn .
 Al-Mansur established a library in Baghdad to house his collection of manuscripts . Al-mansur set up the library in Iraq to house manuscripts .
 Arabic speakers had no access to this learning, the library did little to advance an indigenous Arab scientific tradition . However, since Arabic speakers were not able to access this learning .
 Harun al-Rashid and al-Mamun established the Bayt al Hikma in 806 . He personally commanded an army of many thousands in the city . House of Wisdom was founded by Harun in 804 .
 Many of them were not available in Western Europe at all, and even if they had been, knowledge of Greek had all but disappeared there . Even if they were available there, they were all but gone .
 An understanding of mathematics and astronomy is essential to the calculation of the times at which Muslims must observe their five daily prayers . Both disciplines were studied assiduously in the vast Islamic Empire .
 Jews and Christians translate these scientific books and attribute them to their own people... when they are indeed Muslim works . Another, separate, intellectual tradition contributed to the development of these works .
 The House of Wisdom played host to scholars who translated Latin and Greek works into Arabic . The scholars were visiting al-Mansur's court (which in itself illustrates the comparative openness and tolerance of the Arab world .
 In doing so, they built upon classical knowledge and made breakthroughs in fields such as mathematics and medicine . They built on classical knowledge to make breakthroughs such as medicine .
 Philosophical and scientific works by Aristotle and Plato came from conquered Greek lands . Mathematical advances made possible the use of algebra and decimal places . i House of Wisdom .
 Arabic versions of classical Greek texts ensured the survival of ancient knowledge . The texts were written in Arabic and Arabic . They were translated into Greek texts .
 Avicenna set the standard for medicine in the Islamic world and medieval Europe . He brought with them India’s relatively advanced mathematics, including trigonometry to help solve algebraic equations .
 Al-Khwarizmi also pioneered work on algebraic equations . He explained a method of calculating the square roots of numbers, and pioneered work .
 He and his fellow scholars made rapid strides in geometry . Euclid's and Archimedes’s work on spheres and cylinders was their starting point .
 Al-Khwarizmi compiled the first known tables of daily prayer times at Baghdad . His calculations were assisted by direct astronomical observation of the sun .
 The early Islamic astronomers drew from Ptolemy's Almagest, adopting his view that the Earth was at the center of the solar system . The planets rotated around the Earth along the lines of eight spheres .
 Astronomers learned from Hindu astronomers, translating and perfecting Indian zij, or tables of planetary positions . They continued to refine Ptolemy's system, only occasionally toying with heliocentric system that had sun at center .
 Their calculations were made simpler when in the mid-eighth century they adopted the astrolabe, an instrument in which the celestial sphere was projected onto a plane marked with latitude and longitude lines .
 Islamic astronomy was at its zenith in the 13th century . In 1259 a great observatory was constructed at Maragha in eastern Iran .
 Nasr al-Din al-Tusi and his successors made fine adjustments to account for slight discrepancies in the orbit of the planets . They used mechanical clocks that enabled them to record their observations in fine detail .
 Muslim scholars made advances in many other areas, too, first building on the base of Greek manuscripts translated into Arabic, and then making their own discoveries .
 Arab physicians continued to make progress, combining their practical observations with theoretical analysis . Arab physicians combined their observations and theoretical analysis. Arab physicians continue to work in the Arab world .
 Composed around 1015, it included separate sections for diseases that are specific to one body part, and those that afflict the body as a whole . The book was first published in the early 1900s .
 Islamic learning embedded itself in the Iberian Peninsula, known to the Arabs as al-Andalus . A tradition of Islamic learning was embedded in both areas of the peninsula .
 There he had access to manuscripts that had filtered over the border from Muslim-held al-Andalus . The manuscripts were found in the region of Spain .
 He took back to France knowledge of Arabic technology such as the water clock and the astrolabe . He also learned of a type of abacus that used a decimal system .
 A medical school was established at Salerno in the 9th century . It was a small beginning, and one paralleled in southern Italy where it was established .
 A few Islamic manuscripts reached the school in the early years, but many more arrived in the late 11th century when Muslim doctor Constantine the African returned from Qairawan in Tunisia .
 He brought back with him works such as the Complete Art of Medicine by Ali ibn al-Abbas al-Majusi (known in the West as Haly Abbas) parts of which he translated into Latin .
 This translation gave Western doctors and scholars access to comparatively advanced Muslim medical knowledge . This translation of the Koran was translated into Islamic medical literature .
 Classical Greek texts arrived directly from the Byzantine Empire to the West, including works by the philosopher Aristotle . Pisa, which had a trading quarter in Constantinople, was a major trading hub in the empire .
 The main channel for the transmission of Islamic learning into Europe, however, continued to be Spain . Spain continued to transmit Islamic learning .
 As Islamic Spain shrank, pressurized by the Reconquista, the flow of materials accelerated . The flow of material accelerated as Islamic Spain shrunk, pressurging the Spanish population .
 The Christian reconquest spread increasingly into Muslim emirates until 1085, Alfonso VI of Castile captured Toledo . The Christian reconquest spread increasingly into the Muslim emirates .
 The city became a center for the translation of Arabic works by an international group . The group included the Englishman Herbert of Ketton, Slav Hermann of Carinthia, the Frenchman Raymond of Marseilles, Jewish scholar Abraham ibn Ezra, and Italian Gerhard .
 In the mid-12th century, the group THE MEDIEVAL WORLD 93 translated many Arabic texts into Latin . The group translated works on mathematics, medicine and philosophy .
 Western Europe now had access to Ptolemy's Almagest, and to the medical works of Galen . New works by Arabic writers who had built on or summarized the work of their ancient predecessors .
 This five-book encyclopedia became one of the most widely used treatises in European medical schools until the 16th century . The encyclopedia was published in the 17th century and became widely used in medical schools .
 This transmission of knowledge to the West mirrored the process by which the Islamic world had absorbed Greek learning during the great period of translation into Arabic in the 9th and 10th centuries .
 Noble and royal patrons played similar roles in both phases of the transmission of the language .
 King Roger II of Sicily invited Arab scholar al-Idrisi to his court in 1138 with a commission to construct a map of the world based on Islamic geographical and cartographic works . The map was based on the works of Islamic geography and cartographers .
 The result was by far the most accurate world map yet available to Europeans . It showed areas as far east as Korea, and showed areas in the Middle East .
 Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor from 1220 until 1250, sponsored translations of Arabic texts . Roger’s grandson Frederick II continued his grandfather's tradition of sponsoring translations . Frederick II died in 1250 at the hands of Frederick II .
 Among his proteges were the Scottish scholar Michael Scot, who translated key works of Aristotle on zoology, and Pisan Leonardo Fibonacci, who had been sent by his merchant family to study mathematics at Bougie in Muslim North Africa .
 The difficulties of ruling such a far-flung empire and the effects of a series of civil wars had led to key provinces such as Spain, Tunisia, and Egypt breaking away to be ruled by their own caliphs .
 Even in Baghdad, where the Abbasid caliphs clung on, they were only notionally sovereign . The Abbasid Caliphs were notionally dominant .
 Roger II invited scholar al-Idrisi to create an accurate map of the known world in 1138 . Real power was held by other dynasties .
 Al-Idrisi presented the planisphere, and an accompanying book, to his patron in 1154 . He is responsible for singular innovations .
 Al-Idrisi,1138, was a leader of the Seljuqs, a Turkish group originating in central Asia . He was one of the Buyids, and, from 1055, the Seljaq, a group originating from central Asia. The Seljuq were
 Mongols surged westward into the Islamic world in the early 13th century . The final blow was dealt by the Mongols, who surged westwards into the Muslim world .
 In 1258, the Mongol Great Khan Mongke unleashed an army against Iraq, which laid siege to and then sacked Baghdad, inflicting an appalling massacre on its inhabitants . The Mongol army sacked Baghdad in 1258 and inflicted a massacre on the inhabitants .
 The last ruling Abbasid caliph al-Musta’sim was executed, and political and cultural leadership of the Islamic world passed first to the Mamluks in Cairo and then, after their conquest of Egypt in 1517, to the Ottoman Turks .
 A further wave of interest in classical manuscripts in the 15th century to spark the Renaissance in Europe sparked the Renaissance .
 House of Wisdom founded by the Abbasid caliphs played a key role in ensuring the survival of Greek and Roman science in the Islamic world . It allowed its transmission centuries later to Christian Europe .
 A party of men landed on the shore of the holy island of Lindisfarne in 793, and mounted a ferocious attack on its monastery . NEVER BEFORE HAS SUCH A TERROR APPEARED IN BRITAIN THE VIKING RAID ON LINDISFARNE
 The invaders murdered some monks, dragged others away into slavery, and plundered the church's treasures before slipping away . They murdered some of the monks and dragged some away from the church .
 Viking raid was the first recorded raid by Vikings, pagan seafaring warriors from Denmark, Norway, and Sweden . News of it sent waves of horror and fear across Christian Europe . Vikings were pagan seafarers from Denmark and Norway .
 They were also colonists and traders with a sophisticated artistic culture . They left a lasting imprint on the places they invaded and settled . But they also left an artistic culture behind them .
 Vikings were known in Anglo-Saxon England as "Danes" as they were known . Vikings were targeting the wealth of other Christian sites in England, Scotland, Ireland, and France .
 Viking longship was a slender vessel with a shallow bottom that enabled its crew to sail far up waterways and alight on shores . Key to the success of these missions was the slender vessel . Viking longships were built in the 1800s and 1800s .
 Each ship could carry up to 80 warriors, recruited by a warlord whose authority depended on his military prowess and his success in capturing booty for his followers . Each ship was equipped with 80 warriors recruited by warlords .
 In parts of Scandinavia, population growth may have forced young men into a piratical lifestyle . In others, perhaps the increasing strength of local clan leaders sparked power struggles that pushed the losers into exile .
 The ravages of heathen men miserably destroyed God’s church on Lindisfarne with plunder and slaughter . And the newly rich trading towns in northern Europe .
 Many of the men started to settle in the territories they invaded, including those in Britain and France . The Vikings’ raiding parties grew in size, and many of them settled in their territories .
 In the late 9th century, England was divided into a number of kingdoms that offered no coherent resistance to the Viking challenge . France was consumed by civil war, while England was consumed with a series of kingdoms . The Viking invasion of England in 9th Century took place in the 9th
 In the east, Vikings traded and raided along Russia’s rivers, which brought them silver from the Islamic world and contact with the Byzantine Empire . Vikings traded, raided and raided Russia's rivers, bringing silver from Islamic world . Vikings also raided and fought in the east .
 The Vikings were among the most skilled shipbuilders, sailors, and navigators in the Western world of the early Middle Ages . By the 11th century, most of the Scandinavian kingdoms had adopted Christianity .
 Cnut of Denmark created a Viking North Sea empire that included Denmark, Norway, and England . Cnut's empire included Denmark and Norway, Norway and England. Cnut was the founder of a Viking kingdom .
 The Vikings used their knowledge of winds and currents to navigate the seas and discover new lands . Yet it did not survive his death, the Vikings used his knowledge of wind currents .
 Around 800, they colonized the Faroe Islands, and used them as a stepping stone to explore the North Atlantic . Around 800 years ago, they used them to explore North Atlantic, and colonized them around 800 .
 By the 870s, their ships had reached Iceland, where settlers founded a colony that grew politically independent . The colony was founded by settlers and grew independent .
 Erik the Red, exiled from Iceland for murder, established a colony in Greenland in 982 . Erik established a new colony there after being exiled for murder from Iceland . Greenland was the site of Erik's first colony .
 Viking colony was abandoned after attacks by hostile indigenous people . Subsequent expeditions to this area led to a tiny Viking colony . This was abandoned .
 Leif and his crew had been the first Europeans to set foot on North American soil . Nevertheless, Leif was not the first European to land in North America .
 Pope Leo IX issues decrees against simony and priestly marriage, beginning the reform movement . Viking expansion in the North Atlantic 96 in focus on the medieval church and papacy .
 After 1084 Henry IV captures Rome, forces Gregory VII to flee to southern Italy . Henry IV captured Rome in 1084 . Gregory VII was forced to flee from the city . Henry captured Rome and captured Gregory VII .
 Emperor and pope clash over investiture; pope is excommunicated . Gregory VII promotes reform, including a ban on lay investiture .
 The pope's victory in the investiture struggle strengthens the reform movement and papal administration . The papal election is the first of its kind in the papal church .
 Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV begged Pope Gregory VII for absolution in 1078 . Henry IV stood penitent barefoot in the snow outside the Italian fortress of Canossa . The Emperor was forced to plead with the Pope to absolution .
 This event was the culmination of the Investiture Controversy, a struggle between the two men about the extent of secular authority over the Christian church, and the authority to appoint bishops .
 Both king and pope were rulers of particular domains, but they also had rival symbolic claims to lead all Christendom . King and pope had symbolic symbolic claims of leading all Christendsom .
 An emperor had to be crowned by the pope before he assumed the imperial title . The pope had to crown an emperor before the emperor assumed the title .
 Pope Gregory VII asserted that the pope’s authority was supreme in spiritual matters, and that even in secular affairs it stood far above that of worldly princes . Gregory VII said that even though the pope was in charge of secular affairs, his authority was superior to that of world princes .
 Gregory signaled forgiveness of the penitent emperor, it marked a bitter blow for imperial prestige and a huge triumph for the independence of the church . Gregory's pardon of the emperor marked a huge victory for the independent church .
 By the early 11th century, the papacy was at a low ebb . The state of the church was in a state of crisis .
 Only after three days' penitence was the emperor’s excommunication lifted . monarchs were appointing their own bishops, especially in Germany .
 Itinerant preachers started to inveigh against these betrayals . Calls for reform were beginning to be heard from within the church itself .
 Gregory vigorously promoted papal authority . In 1075 a church council declared that only the pope had the power to appoint bishops or move them to a different area . Gregory vigorously defended his authority in 1075, 1075 .
 Henry, facing the loss of authority over large tracts of Germany, continued to appoint bishops and called for the pope to step down . Henry continued appointing bishops and continued to call for the papal resignation . Henry died in 1881 .
 Gregory retaliated by excommunicating the king and declaring him deposed . Gregory was declared deposed by the king . Gregory then excommunicated him and declared him ex-communicated .
 Many German nobles felt that this released them from their oath of loyalty, and many rose up in revolt . Henry's attempts to centralize power led many to revolt against him .
 Caught between the papacy and the nobles, Henry eventually chose to take the road to Canossa in a humiliating retreat . Henry was forced to retreat in humiliating fashion .
 The issue of investiture was not explicitly settled and underlying dispute caused partisans of pope and emperor to clash repeatedly until 1122, when Henry's son Henry V agreed to the Concordat of Worms . The issue was never explicitly settled but underlying dispute was never resolved .
 By the 11th century, many felt that monastic orders had strayed from their original mission, accumulating wealth and abandoning spirituality . The new monasticism was created by the monks in the early 12th century . Squeezed between an
 Men such as Bruno of Cologne led calls to return to a purer form of monasticism . Bruno led calls for a return to the purer, monasticistism .
 Their way of life attracted others to found similar groups, which became the core of the Cistercian Order . The Cistercians are now the core members of the Order .
 The Franciscans, founded in 1209 by Francis of Assisi, and the Dominicans, established in 1216 by Dominic de Guzman, represented the most successful exponents of this new apostolic form of monastic life .
 Henry V conceded virtually all investiture rights to the papal in 1122 . Henry V's increasingly assertive insistence on papal supremacy, and the growing independence of the German nobles, forced him to concede .
 A growing thirst for education led to the foundation of universities such as that at Bologna where many students studied canon law . Many of the universities in Italy were founded in the early 1900s .
 With rising confidence, popes ruthlessly persecuted heretics and swept away lax practices . Popes were ruthless and ruthless in the fight against heretics . Pope Francis was one of the most successful popes in the world .
 The reforms strengthened the church, whose diplomatic stature grew to equal that of any monarch . The church survived in a united form until the Reformation in the 16th century . The reforms weakened the church's diplomatic stature .
 Secular lords seized the opportunity to magnify their own power, fragmenting the empire into a constellation of lordships and competing authorities who paid only lip service to the emperor . Secular lordes seized the chance to expand their power and magnify his power .
 After 1221 Emperor Gotoba fails to re-establish imperial power in the Jokyu Disturbance . After 1222 Emperor Gotob fails to . re-enter imperial power . Emperor Gotobi fails to regain imperial power.
 The Japanese imperial court had been dominated since the mid-7th century by regents from the Fujiwara family . They had reduced the emperors to mere figureheads .
 Samurai fought as mounted bowmen at the time of the Gempei Wars . By the 15th century the long-bladed katana had become their principal weapon of battle .
 The situation became entrenched after the capital moved (following the emperor) to Kyoto in 794 . The situation was entrenched after Kyoto moved to Kyoto .
 Non-Fujiwara nobles were denied preferment at court, so sought positions in the provinces . Non Fujiwara noblemen sought positions at the provinces instead of court .
 Kyoto court appointed the most talented samurai as governors . This was to bind them to the imperial government and prevent them from building their own power bases . The Kyoto court also appointed the best samurai governors .
 The samurai developed loyalty to their extended family, or clan, and its leader rather than to the emperor . They fought one another from their power bases in the provinces . However, the samurai were loyal to extended family rather than the emperor, and fought from their bases .
 The Minamoto and Taira clans engaged in a series of struggles which culminated in the Gempei War, during which the Tairas were utterly crushed by the Minamoto clan .
 He dispatched military estate governors to cement his control over the provinces . Other clan chieftains became his vassals or gokenin, and he dispatched military .
 Yoritomo accepted from the emperor the title of shogun in 1192, becoming the de facto military ruler of Japan . In 1192 he accepted the title from the Emperor, becoming a de facto ruler of the country .
 Over the following centuries, the emperors made periodic vain attempts to reassert authority over the shogunate . The shoguns in turn could not maintain control of the samurai and their warlords, who fought among themselves .
 Japan dissolved into a patchwork of military warlords or daimyo, each with its own power base and retinue of samurai warriors . Japan dissolved in a series of warlords, each having their own military power base .
 This war ended with the reunification of Japan under the new shogunate of Tokugawa in 1603 . This war was the first to end with the unification of Japan .
 Yoritomo was exiled to Hirugashima, an island in Izu province, after the war . He was orphaned by the Japanese army .
 Taira was a member of the National Socialist Party in Japan for 20 years . He rose up against the government in the 1970s and 1980s . Now he is fighting for his country's first time in his homeland .
 He established a headquarters in Kamakura, from which he began to organize the warlords and samurai into an independent government . From that he organized warlords, samurai into a government .
 Yoritomo became the undisputed leader of Japan in 1185 . A decisive victory over the Tiara sealed his military success, and he became undisputed ruler of Japan .
 Yoritomo developed policies to relieve the strain between the military lords and the court aristocrats . He set up an administrative network that soon took over as the central government . Much of his life was spent in suppressing those clans who had not accepted Minamoto dominance .
 Samurai clans become semi-independent as shogunate authority weakens . Shogunate collapses and power devolves to daimyo .
 Lawlessness in the Kyoto becomes inwardprovinces leads to the looking and loses touch rise of the samurai with the provinces military class . The imperial court at Lawlessness becomes inwardwardward .
 The Magna Carta is reissued on the accession of Henry III, and again in 1225 in exchange for a tax grant . After 1216, the Carta was reissued by Henry III .
 King John of England signed a charter at Runnymede, a meadow beside the Thames, on June 15, 1215 .
 Designed to make peace between the king and a group of rebel barons, the Magna Carta was a form of the document became known, at first seemed ineffectual .
 The British Empire's assertion of the rights of subjects against arbitrary actions of the Crown provided a blueprint which, more than eight centuries later, is still viewed as a fundamental guarantee of rights in the United States .
 When King John acceded in 1199, England was a feudal society, a land-based hierarchy headed by the king . The king owned all the land, and the land was owned by him .
 The tenants-in-chief received land from the king in exchange for loyalty and military service . Land was given to the tenants in return for loyalty, military service and land .
 In turn they leased the land to their own armed retainers, who leased it to peasants, or villeins . The land was leased by the king and his family .
 monarchs levying an ever-increasing series of taxes and additional financial burdens on their barons . Yet monarchs, especially in England, were levying a series of tax and additional burdens on them .
 These royal courts raised revenue for the Crown through fines and charges . But at the expense of the barons, who had previously raised those funds from their own local courts .
 The barons' discontent at these growing demands intensified under King John . The exactions of King John were exacted by the barons at the time .
 Scutage, a further cash levy, left many barons in debt to money-lenders, was bitterly resented . It left them in debt and left many of the world's richest barons deeply in debt .
 The king had broken the unspoken contract between himself and the barons, that allowed them to run their lands as they chose . Not only was the king proving lamentably unsuccessful in war, but he had also broken the deal . The king was proving to be a disaster for the bar
 The rebellious barons confronted the king in 1209 . Hoping for support from the pope, who had excommunicated John in 1210, they confronted him .
 By May 1215, the barons had occupied London, forcing John to enter into a treaty with them to avoid a civil war . Attempts at diplomacy failed, and John entered into an agreement to avoid civil war with them . The treaty was made in 1215 .
 Archbishop Stephen Langton of Canterbury led negotiations to sign the agreement . Archbishop: "It's more a truce than a peace" than a truce .
 The charter was known as the Magna Carta, or Great Charter, to distinguish it from a more restricted Forest Charter issued in 1217 . It was issued by the King of England in 1215 .
 The Magna Carta has acquired an almost mythical status as the constitutional bedrock of subjects' rights . It has acquired a mythical status .
 Several American colonies' charters contained clauses modeled on it, while the design of the Massachusetts seal was chosen at the start of the state . The section that has exerted the most influence down the ages was Chapter 39 .
 Revolutionary War depicts a militiaman with sword in one hand and Magna Carta in the other . This open-ended clause protected all “free men"" from arbitrary actions by the Crown .
 Revolutionary feeling fueled by belief that the Crown breached the fundamental law enjoyed by all English subjects . U.S. Constitution, enacted in 1789, and Bill of Rights adopted two years later, were influenced by Magna Carta's limitations .
 The charter survived the civil war that broke out soon after the Magna Carta was agreed . The papal repudiated the charter’s terms in August 1215, which led to the barons’ excommunication . The charter was agreed in 1215 .
 It survived longer than most of the other provisions, including the security clause . It allowed barons to seize all the king's land if he failed to fulfil his obligations under the agreement .
 What had seemed a small concession that day in Runnymede provided a long-lasting rallying cry for opponents of royal tyranny . The concession provided a rallying cry that day for opponents .
 After 1282 Kublai’s corrupt chief minister Ahmad killed by Chinese assassins . After 1283 Kublani’ed chief minister was killed by assassins in China .
 Mongol warriors swept through southern China in 1279, capturing the last strongholds of the Chinese Song dynasty . The Mongol leader was the most powerful man in the world .
 Mongols' rise marked the culmination of their rise in under 70 years from nomadic nomadic group from the Central Asian steppes to masters of a vast empire stretching from China to eastern Europe . This defeat heralded the start of the Yuan dynasty .
 One of the major challenges they now faced was to make the transition from roving tribesmen to settled conquerors .
 At the start of the 13th century, the Mongols had consisted of many different warring clans . The Mongols were one of the most powerful and most powerful of all clans in Asia .
 In 1206 Temujin—later known as Genghis Khan—proclaimed himself the ruler of a united Mongol nation . However, in 1206 he proclaimed himself to be ruler of the unified Mongol nation. Genghi Khan was born in 1204 .
 Genghis’s grandson Kublai Khan ruled China from 1260 . The challenges of mediating between nomadic traditions of the Mongols and the culture of the conquered proved difficult .
 By the Yuan dynasty, banknotes were issued by the government . The Yuan dynasty issued banknotes from 1287 to 1288 .
 Kublai's restoration of Chinesestyle administration displeased many Mongols and he was nearly removed in 1258 . Mongke’s death led to Great Khan achieving the position of Great Khan himself in 1260 .
 Kublai established a bureaucracy staffed largely by Chinese officials . He placed Mongol officers in key towns to ensure loyalty to the empire . The Mongol empire was ruled by the Chinese, not by the Mongolians .
 He took measures to restore the economy, initially encouraged religious tolerance . He welcomed foreigners such as Marco Polo to the Mongol court, aware of their expertise .
 Kublai dispatched armies to Japan, Annam, Myanmar and Java . However, these either failed or did not establish a lasting Mongol presence .
 By his death, Kublai was a disappointed man, who drank to excess, suffered from obesity, and had to be carried to his final campaigns in a litter . By the end of his life he had to carry his final campaign in his litter .
 The old informal hierarchies of the steppes no longer sufficed to administer a land that contained great cities, and the immediate rewards of plunder were replaced by the deferred benefits gained by good governance and taxation .
 Kublai gave Mongols greater rights and privileges than the native Chinese . To appease his fellow Mongols, he gave them greater rights than the natives .
 He promoted Confucian scholars, funded Taoist temples, and had his son educated in Buddhist scripture . Meanwhile, to gain favor with the traditional Chinese elites, he promoted his son .
 Mongol postal system used horses and relay stations to link up the empire . He also set up schools for peasants and introduced a postal system of using horses .
 Kublai’s attempts to subjugate the Song in the south were delayed until 1268 . The need to restore stability in northern China delayed the attempt to conquer the Song . The end of the empire was the end to the empire .
 Although ultimately successful, the 11-year campaign was ruinously costly, it was costly . It was ultimately successful but it was also costly .
 To preserve their warrior identity, the Mongols needed the spoils of conquest to fund their huge army . The Mongols were forced to fight for their identity to preserve their identity .
 Kublai's successors failed to work out how to preserve their identity while also keeping their monopoly of power . The Mongol military gradually declined, and the Mongol army gradually declined .
 In 1368 the heirs of Kublai were defeated in a rebellion led by Zhu Yuanzhang, founder of the Ming dynasty . After decades of famine, lethal epidemics, and corruption at court, they were defeated . Zhu Yuanzang led the rebellion .
 After more than a century of occupation, China was back in the hands of the native Chinese . China was returned to its own hands after more than 100 years .
 After 1340s The Black Death spreads along the Silk Road, reaching Europe in 1347 . Black Death reaches Europe in the 1347s .
 Long-distance trade r| from China to the Middle East is damaged by the collapse of traditional powers .
 Mongols conquer lands through which the Silk Road runs, improving the route's security . Silk Road is one of the world's most important routes to cross the world .
 Trade along the route increases, attracting European merchants including Marco Polo . Marco Polo was the first European merchant to travel the route .
 Marco Polo's arrival at Shangdu, the capital of the Great Khan Kublai, in 1275 marked the end of a four-year journey . Marco Polo arrived in Shangdu at the start of his journey to Shangdu . He was the first merchant to reach Shangdu in
 He had traveled from Italy to the Mongol capital Shangdu along the length of the Silk Road . The Silk Road is an ancient network of routes carrying precious goods between China and Europe for centuries .
 Silk Road had first become a conduit for trade when the Chinese Han Dynasty pushed into Central Asia in the late 2nd century bce . The Silk Road was first established by the Han Dynasty when it pushed into central Asia .
 Chinese inventions ranging from gunpowder and paper to the magnetic compass were also brought to the west along the route, arriving at Constantinople and the Black Sea ports . Genoa and Venice chiefly traded with Genoa .
 By the 13th century, empires that had controlled sections of the Silk Road had fragmented . The Mongol revival of the route was a major success in the Mongol empire .
 This left the route less secure for travelers, and so deterred merchants from using it . The route was also less secure, leaving it less secure . This left travelers from using the route to avoid paying for it .
 The Great Khan ruled Khanbalik between 1205 and 1269 . The area was controlled by a single authority, the Great Khan, so a merchant could travel to Baghdad without leaving Mongol territory .
 A thousand cart-loads of silk enter Cambaluc daily . Rare things that come from India are brought in from India . Precious stones and pearls, and other kinds of rarities, are also brought in .
 Marco Polo, 1300 years ago, was famous for his work in the Middle Ages . Marco Polo was known for his travels in the early 1900s and early 1800s .
 From the 12th century, Italian city States such as Pisa, Genoa, and Venice, pioneered maritime trade across the eastern Mediterranean . Merchants to connect directly with sea routes that linked West Asia and Egypt to China via Indian Ocean .
 The profits for merchants taking advantage of the ""Pax Mongolica,” or Mongol peace, could be huge .
 Genoese traders were a common sight in the principal Chinese port of Zaitun in 1326 . The costs of setting up a caravan might amount to 3,500 florins, but the cargo once sold in China could yield seven times that sum .
 The Silk Road flourished for another century, but the collapse of the Mongol Ilkhanate of Persia in 1335 left the route divided between politically weak powers . The overthrow in 1368 of the Yuan, the Mongol ruling dynasty in China, once again left the path divided between political weak
 It was also blocked to European traders at the western end by the growth of the Muslim Ottoman Empire .
 European powers sought alternatives to the now defunct Silk Road, this time by sea . A taste of the profits of longdistance trade in luxury goods encouraged European powers to seek alternatives to Silk Road .
 In 1514, Portuguese merchants arrived off the coast of China, near Guangzhou . They were eager to take up direct trading links with China that had been pioneered by Marco Polo . Marco Polo was Marco Polo's illustrious predecessor .
 He traveled with his father and uncle, who had previously visited China and been entrusted by Kublai with a message for the pope . The pope's uncle had been entrusted with the pope's message for China .
 Polo was received with great favor at the Mongol court and stayed in China for 17 years . Polo was sent to China by the Mongols and stayed there for more than a century . Polo died in 17th century .
 He traveled extensively throughout the country in the Khan's service . He left for home in around 1291 .
 Polo was captured and imprisoned by the Genoese during a naval battle in 1298 . Polo was later imprisoned in Italy . Polo died in 1297 .
 The stories he told of his sojourn in the lands of the Great Khan attracted the attention of his cell mate, Rustichello, who wrote them down, embellishing them as he went along . The stories of the Khan's sojourney in the land of Khan Khan attracted
 The resulting book was translated into many languages and includes much invaluable information about late-13th-century China . It includes much valuable information about the late 13th century China .
 Polo returned to Venice, where he lived for the rest of his life . After his release, Polo lived in Venice, Italy .
 Some 15,000 Christian knights surged into Jerusalem after a month-long siege . The fall of 1099 was the end of a long-standing siege of Jerusalem .
 Neither the Byzantine emperors in Constantinople nor the Christian kings in Western Europe had the political willpower or the strength to reverse the conquest . The city was sacred to both the Byzantine and Christian emperors .
 Victorious crusaders flooded into Jerusalem in a ruthless assault seized the city from the Fatimid caliphate, laying the foundations for a new kingdom .
 Seljuk Turks' defeat of the Byzantines at Manzikert threatened to push the frontiers of Christianity back to the gates of Constantinople . In the 11th century, however, the advances of a new group, the Selkuk Turks, disrupted the pilgrimage routes to Jerusalem
 In 1095, Emperor Alexios I Komnenos sent emissaries to Pope Urban II asking for help to bolster the Byzantine retaliation . Pope Urban asked for help in 1095 to help the Byzantine Empire .
 In a sermon of 1095, he described atrocities against Christians in the Holy Land . He called for an expedition to free them, calling for a Christian expedition .
 Christian warriors rallied to the cause, eager to gain both salvation and plunder by joining a so-called Just War in God’s name . Christian warriors joined the cause .
 Some 100,000 crusading knights, mostly French and Norman, set out in 1096 . The crusaders set out from 1096 to 1096 in the Middle Ages .
 In the area they had conquered, the crusaders established four states, at Edessa, Antioch, Tripoli, and the Kingdom of Jerusalem, known collectively as Outremer . The crusaders set up four states in the area, known as Edessa .
 To withstand Muslim counter-attacks, crusaders built a dense network of fortresses . Beaufort, Margat, and Krak des Chevaliers dominated strategic routes into the Holy Land .
 As the initial crusading impulse waned, Outremer began to suffer from a shortage of manpower . The initial crusades waned and the organization began to struggle .
 Templars and Hospitaller knights swore monastic vows to defend the Holy Land . This was partly resolved by the founding of crusading orders such as the Templars .
 When Muslim armies captured Edessa in 1144, a Second Crusade was called . However, even this was not enough, and when Muslim armies capture Edessa, the Second Crusades were called .
 A race absolutely alien to God has invaded the land of Christians, has reduced the people with sword, rapine, and flame . This, and the ** A race . alien to . God has . invaded the . land of Christianity, has . reduced the . people with . sword,
 Third Crusade mustered in response to catastrophic loss of Jerusalem in 1187 . Louis VIII of France, Richard I of England, and the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa assumed their leadership .
 By 1270 there had been eight further crusades, and the movement had extended to include attacks on Muslims in North Africa and the Reconquista (the Christian reconquest of Islamic emirates in Spain) and launching expeditions against pagan groups in eastern Europe .
 In the Middle East, the emergence of stronger Muslim states, such as the Mamluks in Egypt, rendered the later expeditions largely ineffectual . The emergence of strong Muslim states in the region rendered the crusader's efforts largely ineffective .
 The last crusader stronghold in the Holy Land, Acre, was taken by the Mamluks in 1291 . Acre was the last stronghold of the crusader kingdom in the Middle Ages .
 Angkor was built by the Khmer Empire in the early 12th century . The city was controlled by a succession of god-kings who ruled as the representatives of the Hindu god Shiva .
 Angkor Wat, completed 37 years later, was enclosed by a huge moat, adorned with lotusshaped towers, and decorated with an 2,600ft-long gallery of fine bas-reliefs depicting scenes from Hindu mythology and the king .
 Angkor Wat is a testament to the remarkable productivity and creativity of one of the greatest powers in Southeast Asia's history . Yet its construction also marked the onset of its decline, as later Buddhas decorate all the immense columns and lintels .
 Chinese kings faced foreign invasions, shifts in trade, and wars with rival kingdoms that shrunk its territory . Zhou Daguan Chinese diplomat M kings faced invasions and shifts of trade shifts .
 The empire’s fortunes were revived under Jayavarman VII, who made Mahyanana Buddhism the state religion, but his death in 1218 left it fatally weakened . The empire was revived under his death, but it was fatally weakened by his death .
 Khmer Empire was preeminent among the powerful states that had emerged in present-day Cambodia, Myanmar, and the islands of Java and Sumatra in Indonesia toward the end of the first millennium .
 The network introduced Indian and Chinese ideas, concepts, and practices, including Hinduism and Buddhism, to the region's civilizations . It adapted them to create original, indigenous varations in architecture and the arts .
 Srivijaya, with its base at Palembang in Sumatra, dominated commerce by controlling the two straits between India and China . The Khmer Empire held sway in mainland Southeast Asia .
 By the end of the 12th century it had been reduced to a small kingdom . It was later eclipsed by the Majapahit in Java . Over time it had grown rich from its trade in spices, especially nutmeg .
 In the late 13th century, Mongol forces under the Chinese emperor Kublai Khan invaded Vietnam, Java, and Myanmar . Although these campaigns failed, the Khmer lost control of eastern Thailand in their wake .
 One of the Khmer Empire's greatest kings, Suryavarman II ascended to the throne in 1113, after killing his rival, and reunited Cambodia after decades of unrest . In the early 1400s, the empire contracted further as armies from Champa invaded Cambodia .
 In 1128 his kingdom was recognized as a Chinese vassal, which helped deter neighboring states from attacking it . He quickly resumed diplomatic relations with China, and in 1128 he was recognized .
 Suryavarman was a warlike leader, waging campaigns in what is now Vietnam against the Dai-Viet between 1123 and 1136 . He also fought against the Khmer’s traditional enemy, Champa, in 1145 .
 After its rediscovery by Europeans in the late 19th century, Angkor Wat suffered decades of looting and unregulated tourism . It was made a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1992 .
 Suryavarman's spiritual masterpiece Angkor was reclaimed by the jungle in 1431 . In 1431, the capital was relocated to the coast, leaving the city's spiritual creation to be reclaimed by jungle .
 Angkor Wat remains the largest religious structure in the world . The king also built other temples in the same style at the capital at the time .
 After 1433 Mali loses control of Timbuktu, it was incorporated into the Songhai Empire of Gao . Mali was defeated in 1433 and incorporated into Gao in 1483 .
 Mansa Musa’s hajj showcases the wealth and power of the Muslim Malian kingdom . Islam spreads into West Africa from the 9th century, in the wake of transSaharan trade .
 Islam continues to take root throughout West Africa, even after the collapse of Mali . Islam is taking root in Mali, despite Mali's collapse .
 Mali burst onto the world stage with a flourish in the early 14th century . Its fabulously wealthy ruler, Mansa Musa, made an unusually extravagant hajj to Mecca . Muslim scholars from other Islamic countries are attracted to Mali .
 The emperor's year-long expedition became legendary in the Muslim world, and even in Europe . His subsequent promotion of Islamic culture in his kingdom was symbolic of the faith’s influence .
 They exchanged gold until they depressed its value in Egypt and caused its price to fall . They depressed the value of Egypt's gold, causing it to be depressed .
 The Kingdom of Ghana became known as “the land of gold,” a reference to the source of its huge wealth . Arab historian Chihab al-Umari says the kingdom of Ghana was known as the land of the gold .
 Arab conquest of North Africa in 7th century gave impetus to transSaharan trade . Muslim states had huge appetite for West African gold and slaves .
 Muslim merchants were drawn to the area between the headwaters of the Niger and Senegal rivers . Muslim merchants, and with them Islam, were drawn into the area .
 The Almoravids, a Moroccan Berber dynasty, swept south in 1076 and sacked Ghana’s capital, shattering its authority over the region . They swept south and sacked the capital, breaking the kingdom's authority .
 Mali was founded around the Upper Niger River in the mid-13th century . Ghana’s reduced power opened up a vacuum that was gradually filled by Mali . Mali began to expand in the 13th century, expanding in the middle of the century .
 Mali forged highly lucrative caravan connections with Egypt and other important trade centers in North Africa . Under Mansa Musa, Mali reached its greatest extent and power .
 Gold, salt, and slaves were taken north in exchange for textiles and manufactured goods . Gold and salt was taken to the north in the 18th century .
 The king invited Muslim scholars and a great architect, Abu Ishaq al-Sahili, to make the return journey with him . The expedition had a purpose beyond advertising Mali's prestige however .
 The latter built West Africa's first mud-brick mosques at Timbuktu and Gao, trading posts recently captured from neighboring Songhai .
 Timbuktu became Mali's main commercial hub under Mansa Musa’s guidance . The city is located at the junction of the desert trade and the maritime routes down the Niger . Timbuctu is now the region's intellectual and spiritual capital .
 Mansa Musa’s great empire was one of the most prosperous states in the 14th century . His celebrated hajj had longer-lasting effects, helping to spearhead the spread of Islamic civilization in West Africa . Mansa
 I n 1325, a band of Central American refugee warriors, known as the Aztecs, saw a sign their patron god Huitzilopochtli had long ago prophesied . An eagle perched on a cactus, marking the spot they had been told to settle,
 Before long, they had built a temple that became the nucleus of their capital, Tenochtitlan . The temple was built in the city of Tenochitlan, Mexico .
 Within two centuries, the city was the center of the most predominant empire in the history of Mesoamerica . Aztec and Inca migrants filled the power vacuum .
 The Aztecs and Incas found capital cities at Tenochtitlitlan and Cuzco respectively .
 Inca empire expands by co-opting conquered peoples and seeking to integrate them . Inca conquests were conquered by the Inca Empire in Peru . Incas empire was founded in the 1920s .
 In just a few decades, South America had the largest state South America seen . This progress was paralleled by the growth at much the same time of Cuzco, the capital of the Incas . The Andean people of humble beginnings created the largest South American state .
 The Aztecs may have begun their wanderings in northern Mexico around 1200 . Aztec foundations may have been built in the Aztec city .
 Their flight to Tenochtitlan was prompted by one such incident . Frequently, they had to flee after committing violent acts, such as human sacrifice .
 Aztecs had asked their host, the lord of Culhuacan, whether he would give his daughter as a bride for their chief . The Aztec had asked him to give his wife to their chief, and she died in the process .
 He agreed, believing she would be greatly honored as queen . However, to his horror they killed and flayed her as a sacrifice to their deity Xipe Totec .
 The Aztecs fled southward toward the future site of Tenochtitlan . Driven out by the lord and his soldiers, the Aztec fled .
 The soil around Lake Texcoco, on which the island of Tenochtitlan was situated, was marshy and there was very little timber available . The Aztecs used it to consolidate their position in the area .
 The Aztecs went on to form a Triple Alliance with the cities of Texcoco and Tlacopan in 1428 . The union kick-started a period of imperial expansion in Mexico .
 Aztec society had little formal hierarchy in the early days of the Aztec era . Aztec expansion was a major factor in the development of society .
 In 1376, the Aztecs chose for the first time an overall leader . He came to serve as war leader, judge, and administrator for the burgeoning empire . The Aztecans chose a war leader in 1376 .
 Aztec armies subdued neighbors in the Valley of Mexico and then spread outward, reaching Oaxaca, Veracruz and to the edges of land controlled by the Mayan people in the east of modernday Mexico and Guatemala .
 At the bottom of society bondsmen who owned no land were bound by labor service to their lords . A warrior elite emerged, with a warrior elite emerging, while at the bottom were bondsmen .
 This reinforced the warrior ethos and gave the Aztecs an incalculable advantage over neighboring tribes in Mexico . The Aztec warrior ethos gave them an advantage over neighbors in Mexico.
 Tenochtitlan was adorned by many temples to the gods of the Aztec pantheon . The imperial system was adorned with many temples for the gods .
 Templo Mayor had twin shrines dedicated to Huitzilopochtli and Tlaloc, the rain god . Each god had their own temple, with each god having their own .
 The founding of Tenochtitlan is illustrated in the Codex Mendoza '. A record of Aztec history and culture was created 1540 by an Aztec artist for presentation to Charles V of Spain .
 Templo Mayor in 1487—by burning alive, decapitation, or cutting open the chest and removing the heart . Templo mayor was executed by burning alive or decapitation .
 Aztecs relied on this tribute to reward the nobility and the warriors, who ensured that the towns subjugated by the empire remained submissive . Little mercy was shown to those who revolted .
 While the Aztecs provided some security to their subjects, they gave little else . The Aztec provided little more than security to the people .
 At Tenochtitlan, artificial islands were created at great expense to expand the land available to produce food, but no such works were carried out for the subject cities . No such work was carried out .
 Defeated states did not provide troops for the Aztec army, and so did not share in the spoils of future victory . Little effort was made to propagate the language of Aztec .
 If the land had not been divided by the wars... we could not have entered or conquered it unless over a thousand Spaniards had come simultaneously . The Incas, whose heartland lay in the central Andes around Cuzco, in modern-day Peru, had similarly humble origins
 Pedro Pizarro's 99 status was even more meteoric than his conquistador 99 status . Pedro was the Spanish conqueror of the Spanish conquistado .
 They began as a small, somewhat disregarded tribe . They developed their own strategies to co-opt neighboring groups into a successful empire . They began with a small tribe .
 The Incas' origin myth told of their emergence from a cave in the high mountains, from where their first leader—Manco Capac—led his people to Cuzco .
 It is generally believed that the Incas arrived in the region around 1200, and for two centuries they remained a relatively Tlacaelel . As the Aztec Empire expanded and conquered new territories, it became increasingly necessary to create a more complex administration .
 The office's first incumbent was Itzcoatl's nephew, Tlacaelel , who held the office until his death . The office was first held by the nephew of the Mexican leader . It's the first incumbent of the office .
 Tlacaelel served through several reigns and provided continuity . He provided invaluable continuity in his reign .
 He created impetus for his reforms (mostly benefiting the royal family and nobles) by ordering the destruction of earlier chronicles and the rewriting of Aztec history to establish the basis of his imperial ideology . In addition, he created impetus .
 He also presided over the formation of the Triple Alliance, solidifying the Aztec position . He also ensured a steady stream of sacrificial victims .
 Tlacaelel's influence in Tenochtitlan shows that the Aztec system of authority was not as monolithic as it might appear . The Aztec society was divided up into clans of roughly equal status .
 The Incas began to make their mark as a major power around 1438 . The neighboring Ghanca people attempted to push the Incas out of the Cuzco valley .
 Pachacuti defeated the invaders, and then led Inca armies to conquer the rest of the Cuzco valley and the southern highlands around Lake Titicaca .
 The Incas overcame Chimor in about 1470 . Chimor was conquered by the Incas .
 They then absorbed the rest of the northern highlands and extended to parts of modern-day Ecuador and Colombia . They then extended south to the deserts north of Chile .
 Unlike the Aztecs, the Incas recruited troops from among the conquered peoples (placed under the command of Inca officers) in return for their loyalty . The Incas provided them with the lure of plunder in exchange for loyalty .
 The empire of the Incas was highly centralized; censuses recorded the number of peasants who all owed labor service to the Sapa Inca . Inca communication was extremely centralized .
 This level of organization enabled the construction of public works on a vast scale, says the author of the book .
 A boy had to prove himself a warrior before he could be considered a man . A boy must prove himself to be a man before he was considered a boy .
 Noble Aztec youths joined warrior societies and progressed through the ranks by taking more captives for sacrifice . Noble Aztetemen took captives to join warrior societies . Aztec warriors took captives and sacrificed their captives for their service .
 Men had to take four human captives before they could be admitted to the ranks of the Eagle and Jaguar Warriors . The Shorn Ones Deadly warriors swore not to step back in battle .
 Otomies may have been the first warriors to enter battle . Named after skilled allies of the Aztecs, they may be the first Aztecian warriors .
 Alongside Jaguar Warriors, these may have been the lowest rank of the elite Aztec warrior societies . Eagle Warriors were the highest rank of Aztec warriors in their history .
 Inca domestication of the llama as a beast of burden made it easier to transport heavy loads across the empire . The llama was domesticated by the Inca at the same time .
 Unlike the Aztecs, the Incas actively sought to spread their own language and system of religious beliefs, which was initially based around the worship of Inti . Viracocha was a supreme creation god and therefore considered a more suitable deity for a conquering power . The Incas
 They also dispatched colonists shifting troublesome groups into more pacified areas to dilute their resistance .
 By the early 16th century the Inca Empire—which the Incas called Tawintusuyu ("The Realm of Four Quarters") consisted of about 4-6 million people in total . The Inca minority and their subjects were operating to the advantage of the
 Spanish invaders led by Pizarro captured the Sapa Inca Atahuallpa in 1530s . Without their leader, the Incas rapidly collapsed .
 The Aztecs and the Incas built the first true empires in their regions of the Americas . The Incas and the Aztec Empire ruled the Americas for centuries .
 Food surpluses released a large proportion of their population to fight in the armies that conducted their campaigns of expansion . They were able to do so by creating food surplusions through irrigation projects .
 They reorganized the traditional tribal structure to favor a warrior and noble elite . The tribal structure was also reorganized by the tribal elite . They also re-organized the tribal structure .
 In both cases, the momentum of conquest demanded further wars to reward the warrior caste or to provide an incentive for newly conquered peoples to remain loyal and thus to gain the rewards of new campaigns .
 Neither the Aztecs nor the Incas survived long enough to govern after their expansion slowed down . The Incas were not the first to govern long enough after they expanded .
 Had they done so, they might have developed strategies to bring long-term stability to their empires, or declined to the status of competing city-states fighting to control limited resources .
 Late 1330s Bubonic plague spreads gradually westward from western China . Plague was first discovered in China in the 13th century .
 After 1349 Accused of starting the plague, Jews are murdered in the thousands in Germany . Jews were accused of being responsible for the plague in 1349 .
 The Outbreak of the Black Death in Europe was the 13th-century outbreak of the black death in Europe . The only person left alive was a single person who died in Genoa .
 Within a mere two years, more than a third of the population of Europe and the Middle East was killed by the lethal pestilence . The region's economic, social, and religious makeup was altered forever .
 Black Death originated in Central Asia or western China in the 1330s . Initial progress westward was slow, but after it reached Crimea and Constantinople in 1347 it spread rapidly along maritime trade routes .
 Having hit Genoa, it appeared quickly in Sicily and Marseilles; by 1348 it had struck Spain, Portugal, and England . By 1349 it had reached Germany and Scandinavia by 1349; it had also struck Spain and Portugal .
 The epidemic's main vector was infected fleas and the rats that harbored them, both of which flourished in unsanitary conditions of the time . Fleas and rats were the main vector .
 Main symptoms of the disease were swellings, known as buboes, that appeared in the groin, neck, or armpits . The main symptoms of disease were swelling swelling in groin and neck .
 These were followed by black blotches on the skin (hence ‘Black Death"") and then, in around three-quarters of cases, by death . These were then followed by the death of the sufferer .
 Contemporaries ascribed the causes of the pestilence variously to divine punishment for immorality, adverse conjunctions of the planets, earthquakes, or bad vapors .
 There was no cure, but preventive advice included abstinence from hard-todigest food, use of aromatic herbs to purify the air . Avoiding the company of others was the only effective measure .
 Employees are refusing to work unless they are paid an excessive salary . More than a hundred million people may have died of the plague; estimates put the world population at 100 million .
 Black Death kills over a third of Europe’s population . Fall in population leads to demands for better living conditions and wages .
 In Egypt, about 40 percent of the population are thought to have died . The effects were more deadly in some areas than in others . In some areas, the death toll is thought to be at least 40 percent .
 Populations did not reach pre-plague levels again for nearly three centuries . Populations were reduced to pre-lague levels for almost three centuries after the plague .
 Jewish communities in Germany were accused of causing the plague by poisoning wells, and many were attacked . Jewish communities accused of poisoning wells in Germany .
 With the population diminished, landholdings fell vacant, labor became scarce, and peasants' bargaining power increased . The population decreased, land holdings fell vacant and labor scarce .
 By 1350, English laborers could demand five times the wages they had asked in 1347 . Tenants were paying rent in cash in cash rather than with compulsory labor .
 Governments tried to clamp down on wages, but peasants responded with outbursts such as the Jacquerie in France in 1358, and the Peasants’ Revolt in England in 1381 .
 By the time it ended, the Black Death had killed proportionately as many clergy as laity . Some clergy deserted their posts .
 As a result the church’s authority, like that of the nobility, was greatly weakened . The church's authority was weakened, as was the nobility's authority .
 The plague had loosened the ties that had previously bound medieval society together, leaving a freer and more volatile population to face the challenges posed by the Renaissance, Reformation, and economic expansion of the 16th and 17th centuries .
 A landscape of mass graves, abandoned villages and an all-pervading fear of death deepened the sense that God had abandoned his people, and diluted the claims of traditional morality .
 Flagellants roamed the countryside, scourging themselves with knotted ropes, until a Papal bull banned the practice in 1349 .
 Bequests to charitable foundations rose as the rich gave thanks for their survival . Hospitals were among those who gave thanks to their survival in the 1930s .
 Death selects his victims indiscriminately from among the social orders in the allegorical Danse Macabre or Dance of Death . Death selects victims from among social orders from among his victims .
 Hongwu founds the Ming dynasty and institutes reforms that restore stability . Hongwu gives the emperor absolute authority .
 Autocratic system provides centuries of stable rule and economic prosperity . Autocratic, highly centralized system provides stable rule of rule and prosperity .
 After 1380 Hongwu takes on the role of chief minister, laying the basis of an authoritarian political culture . Hongwu is one of China's most powerful men .
 Zhu Yuzhuang, the son of poor peasant farmers, was proclaimed first emperor of China's Ming dynasty . Zhu offered sacrifices to Heaven and Earth as he was proclaimed emperor of the Ming Dynasty .
 It was the culmination of a remarkable rise to power by the monk turned rebel general, who had ousted the despised Yuan dynasty . Kublai Khan was the Mongol conqueror of China, the country's rulers since 1279 .
 Zhu reigned as emperor Hongwu from 1368 until his death in 1398, by which time he had established one of China’s most influential, but also most authoritarian, dynasties .
 He and his successors brought three centuries of prosperity and stability to the country . He established its government and bureaucracy in a form that would endure, with slight modifications, until 1911 .
 Zhu’s new dynasty arose from the chaos that followed the decline of the Yuan . Zhu's new dynasty came from chaos that led to the collapse of the Mongols .
 Zhu lost most of his family in an outbreak of plague in 1344, and after a few years spent as a mendicant monk, begging for food, he joined the Red Turbans . Zhu was one of a constellation of native Han Chinese peasant secret societies in rebellion against the
 Young rebel became national leader against the Yuan . He overcame his rivals to become the leader of the Red Turbans .
 Zhu took control of much of southern and northern China and declared himself emperor . He pushed the Mongols out of their capital at Dadu in 1368 . Zhu died of his injuries in the fall of 1368 in a battle for the throne in China .
 The unification of China was not achieved until the defeat of the last Mongol forces in the south in 1382 . The rest of the country was then subdued, although the Mongols resisted in the north until the early 1370s .
 Zhu’s first priority as emperor Hongwu was to establish order . Years of conflict had ravaged China and impoverished its rural population . Reform and despotism Zhu was the founder of the first dynasty of China's dynasty .
 From 1380, Hongwu instituted government reforms that gave him personal control over all matters of state . Hongwu was given personal control of state in 1380 . He instituted reforms to give him control of government matters .
 After executing his prime minister, who had been implicated in a plot to overthrow him, he abolished the prime ministership and the central secretariat . He had the heads of the next layer of government, the six ministeries, report directly to him .
 In a single week-long stint, he had to scrutinize and approve some 1,600 documents . The state became incapable of responding swiftly to crises, he says .
 Only the emperor could use the central passage, with the next highest rank able to use the neighbouring paths . The emperor was the only person in the world to be on the path .
 Hongwu diluted the strength of the army in a bid to avoid a collapse of the state . The state had been torn apart by competing power bases outside the central court .
 Yuan established garrisons in key cities, particularly along the northern frontier, where the threat of nomad incursions was ever-present . He created a hereditary caste of soldiers that supported itself on land granted by the government .
 Hongwu also had a deep mistrust of the elite scholar class that had been at the heart of government for centuries .
 In 1373, he suspended the traditional examinations used to recruit civil servants . He also ordered the establishment of local county and prefectural schools . He suspended traditional examinations for civil servants in 1373 .
 From these, the best candidates would be called for further study at a national university in the capital . Eventually 10,000 students from the original intake were enrolled .
 The civil service examinations were restored in 1385, when the emperor considered the well-trained graduates of the university ready to take them . Soldiers were stationed outside cubicles where examinees sat to avoid any collaboration or illicit use of reference materials .
 Some people in the morning are esteemed , and in the evening they are executed . Innovation was discouraged and innovation was discouraged . Some people were esteemed and executed in the night .
 Hsieh Chin's bureaucrats became set in their ways after bureaucrats got stuck to their ways . The official memorial to Chin is a memorial to the former president of Taiwan .
 Those who were perceived as having stepped outside their brief were publicly flogged, sometimes to death . Those who stepped out of the brief were often flogged .
 This maltreatment of public servants was a sign of the cruel side of Hongwu's personality . Hongwu was known for his cruelty to public servants . He was also known for the brutal treatment of many of his colleagues .
 He was also violently paranoid, and vicious in suppression of dissent . He was violently paranoid and violent in his own way .
 In 1382, he established a secret police, the Embroidered Brocade Guard, whose 16,000 officers stamped out all signs of resistance . He established the secret police in 1382 .
 The Guard’s reach and influence was wide, and as a result, until the very last years of its rule, the Ming dynasty experienced no significant rebellions by either the military or the aristocracy . The Guard's influence was so wide that until the last years, there were no
 The dynasty’s self-confidence appeared to grow even further under Yongle . Yongle moved the capital from Nanjing to Beijing, and embarked on an ambitious program of reconstruction and public works .
 He also built the extravagant Forbidden City, which housed an imperial palace complex containing more than 9,000 rooms . The Forbidden City was also built by the Chinese emperor .
 Yongle's initially aggressive foreign policy led to four campaigns against Mongolia and an attack on Annam in 1417 that resulted in its incorporation into the Ming Empire . Yongle attacked Annam and annexed it to the Ming empire in 1416 .
 Zheng He was captured by the Ming as a boy, castrated, and sent into the army . Zheng He acquired military and diplomatic skills and distinguished himself as a junior officer . He was a Muslim of Mongol descent .
 Yongle chose to lead a grandly conceived maritime expedition around the rim of the Indian Ocean in 1405 . He went on to become an influential eunuch in the imperial court . Yongle was both a fleet admiral and diplomatic diplomat .
 Although these voyages were dramatic in their conduct and scope, they were not in any real sense commercial or exploratory ventures . The last three sailed as far south as Mombasa, Kenya .
 Their intention was strictly diplomatic, designed to enhance China’s prestige abroad . They extracted declarations of loyalty and exotic tributory gifts for Yongle . The intention was to extract loyalty from Yongle.
 The enormous cost of Zheng He’s ambitious ventures put great strain on the treasury . To ensure they would never be repeated, all records relating to them were destroyed . The later Ming .
 Official ideology regarded China as the center of the world, and the later Ming saw no reason to encourage further maritime contact .
 The confidence and stability of the Ming bureaucracy also created a sense of self-sufficiency, with little use for external influences, says historian .
 Shopkeeper's unauthorized contact with foreigners could result in the confiscation of his stock . Shopkeepers in Beijing are banned from selling goods to foreigners in China .
 Annam became independent once more in 1428, while resources were devoted to containing the threat posed by the Mongol tribes on China's northern borders . Annam remained independent once again in 1426, while huge resources were spent to contain the threat .
 Emperor Zhengtong personally led a disastrous expedition against the Mongol leader Esen Khan in 1449 . Majority of the 500,000 Chinese soldiers died of hunger, were picked off by the enemy, or perished in a final battle as they retreated .
 In the 1470s, the building of the final stages of the Great Wall— begun by the Qin dynasty in the 3rd century bce — was not only a bid to prevent a similar disaster, but also to compensate for the Ming’s waning energy .
 Like their predecessors, they were unable to absorb the lands of the nomadic groups to the north of the border, or to send out expeditions that had any lasting effect on discouraging their raids .
 A fixed, strongly garrisoned border defense was the best compromise . Therefore, a fixed, strong garrisoning border defense is the best solution . A fixed and strong border defense would be best compromise, he says .
 In 1619, tribal people, who later renamed themselves Manchu, began to encroach on China's northern borders . The tribal people were later renamed Manchu .
 Ming China's great productivity was a magnet for European maritime states seeking new commercial connections in East Asia . European traders finally reached the coast of China in the early 16th century .
 Hongwu’s final resting place, the Xiaoling Mausoleum, lies at the foot of the Purple Mountain in Nanjing . It is guarded by an avenue of stone statues of pairs of animals, including camels .
 Spanish and Portuguese merchants secured an important share in trade with China from 1601 . Dutch merchants operating from Nagasaki in Japan and Manila in the Philippines . From 1601, the Dutch secured a significant share of trade in China .
 Ming policy discouraged foreign maritime trade, but individual Chinese merchants participated actively in the revived economy . Individual Chinese merchants had participated actively .
 Before long there were flourishing Chinese colonies in Manila and on Java in Indonesia, near the Dutch-controlled trading city of Batavia, near Batavia .
 The technical sophistication of the Chinese porcelain industry under the Ming led for the first time to mass production of ceramics for export to European markets .
 Ming China inherited a legacy of scientific and technological innovation from the Song dynasty . The Song dynasty had left the country at the forefront of many scientific fields, including navigation and the military applications of gunpowder .
 Under the Ming, the pace of progress in China had slowed under the Ming dynasty . By the later part of the dynasty, ideas had begun to flow in from Europe .
 In 1626, the German Jesuit Johann Adam Schall von Bell wrote the first treatise in Chinese on the telescope . The Heliocentrism is an astronomical model in which the sun lies at the center of the universe .
 The late Ming began to suffer many of the same issues that had led to the fall of the Yuan . The Ming collapse began to be the same problems that led to its collapse .
 Crop failures reduced the productivity of China's vast agriculture, and famines and floods led to widespread unrest in rural areas . The country has been hit hard by famines, floods and famine .
 The army’s pay began to fall into arrears, leading to discipline problems and desertions . Local peasant uprisings coalesced into more general revolts . The army began to suffer from discipline problems .
 Manchus built a state along Chinese lines at Mukden in Manchuria in 1636 . They were poised to take advantage of the Ming’s imminent collapse . Meanwhile, on the northeastern frontier, the Manchuans had built their own state .
 Li Zicheng's forces entered Beijing in 1644 unopposed, prompting the emperor to commit suicide . They were aided in this by a revolt led by a rebel leader who entered Beijing unoppopposed . Li's death was assisted by the revolt led to the emperor's suicide
 The tribesmen swept into the capital and drove out the rebels, but then seized the throne . The Qing dynasty proclaimed the Qing dynasty in China in China .
 Ming dynasty fell victim to agrarian crisis that coincided with renewed nomadic activity on its frontiers . This was a combination that had also brought down dynasties before it .
 The bureaucracy that had given China centuries of constancy and reduced the possibility of internal dissent, was slow to adapt itself to times of fast-moving crisis . The bureaucracy had been given the . possibility of or even the need for internal dissent .
 Ming era had brought great wealth and success to China . Yet even so, the Ming era was not the end of the Ming dynasty .
 The population expanded from around 60 million at the start of its rule, to around three times that number by 1600 . The population grew from 60 million to three million by 1600.
 Much of this growth was centered in mediumsized market towns, rather than in large cities . Increase in agricultural production led to the rise of an affluent merchant class in the provinces . Much of the growth in China was centered around medium sized market towns .
 Many of the elements of orderly government that Hongwu had inaugurated were carried over into the succeeding Qing dynasty, providing China with a degree of unity, stability, and prosperity .
 After 1492 Ferdinand and Isabella decree the expulsion of all Jews from Castile and Aragon . Ferdinand and isabella decree that all Jews must be expelled from Spain .
 Abu Abd Allah, the Muslim Emir of Granada, handed over the keys of his city to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella in 1492 .
 Spain was a kingdom of so many cities and towns, of such a multitude of places . At the same time, it signaled the birth of a self-confident, united Spain that day .
 Spain would soon divert its energies away from crusading against its Muslim neighbors, turning them instead towards building an overseas empire in the New World . Andres Bernaldez .
 Muslim Spain dated from the Islamic conquest of the Visigothic kingdom in 711 . Christian conquests of Muslim Spain date from 711 to 715 . Muslim Spain was the first Christian conquest of Spain .
 Christian resistance survived in Asturias, in the far north, but it took centuries for the kingdoms of Castile, Aragon, Leon, and Navarre to gain the strength to push southward into Muslim lands .
 Reconquista began during the Uth century, when Muslim regions broke up into numerous competing emirates and lost the strategically important city of Toledo in 1085 . This gradual reconquest, known as the Reconquistas, gathered pace during the Muslim regions .
 The growth of the crusading spirit in western Europe also accelerated the progress of the Reconquista . The growth in the crusader spirit in Europe accelerated the process .
 Formal crusades against Spanish Muslims (or Moors) were declared several times from the mid-14th century to mid-15th century . Raids into al-Andalus acquired the air of righteous expeditions .
 Reconquista escalates as Christians benefit from greater resources and unity, culminating in the fall of Granada to the Castilian-Aragonese army . Christian infighting led to the death of the Christian rebels .
 Spanish kingdom allocates resources to expelled from Spain. overseas expansion in the New World. the 12th century, military orders such as Santiago and Alcantara, were founded.
 They frequently spearheaded independent thrusts into Muslim territory, amassing great wealth in the process, which enabled them to sustain extended campaigns and ransom Christians taken prisoner in the wars .
 In Portugal, the Reconquista was completed with the conquest of the Algarve in 1249 . In Spain the Muslims clung on to power in the south, while in Portugal the Muslims were still in power .
 In 1474, Queen Isabella ascended to the throne of Castile, in northern Spain . She was the first queen to rule Castile in 1474 .
 Her husband Ferdinand was already king of the neighboring state of Aragon . They resolved to permanently expel the Muslims from the south .
 The union of the two crowns enabled them to devote more resources to completing the Reconquista . The union allowed them to spend more resources on completing the reconquista.
 It also put an end to centuries of Christian infighting, and this unity coincided with a period of Muslim division . The unity of the Muslim community coincided with the end of centuries of infighting .
 Ferdinand and Isabella used military might to restore Christianity in Spain, suppress other religions, and colonize the Americas . From 1482, the monarchs undertook a series of military campaigns to conquer Granada . Known as the Catholic Monarchs, Ferdinand and . Isabella joined forces and used
 The cities were put under siege and fell one by one, until finally the major city of Granada surrendered in 1492 . Granada was one of the last major cities to fall under siege in Spain .
 Spanish monarchs decreed that any Muslims over the age of 14 who refused to convert to Christianity must leave Spain within 11 weeks . In 1502, Spaniards over 14 were ordered to leave Spain if they refused to accept Christianity .
 This edict, combined with the expulsion of the large Jewish community in Granada 10 years earlier, left Spain a more homogeneous and less tolerant place . The crusading impulse, now shorn of obvious targets, would have to find other channels . Spain's crusading impulses would have
 Christopher Columbus's expedition to the New World in 1492—the same year as the fall of Granada—provided the Spanish with just such an outlet, leading to their colonization of the Americas . Spain’s subsequent emergence as the first global superpower led to their emergence as a global
 I HAVE NEWLY DEVISED 28 LETTERS KING SEJONG INTRODUCES A NEW SCRIPT . I n 1443, the Korean court of King Sejong announced the creation of Han’gul .
 Yuan dynasty had controlled the Korean Peninsula from the late 11th century until 1368, when it was overthrown by the Ming dynasty . Rise of the Yi dynasty saw the rise of the Chinese dynasty in China .
 Korea was left in chaos as its Koryo kings tried to reverse the effects of a century's authoritarian domination . North Korea was ruled by the Korean peninsula for centuries .
 Yi Songyye deposed the last Koryo king in 1392 and assumed the throne as King T'aejo . The redistribution of land and the sacking of pro-Mongol ministers led almost to civil war . Sejong’s grandfather, a former general
 King T’aejo’s immediate priority was to secure stability, and the installation of a state ideology based on neo-Confucianism was key to achieving that . King T'aejo's immediate priority in the early 1930s was securing stability .
 King Sejong of Choson, also known as Sejong the Great, revolutionized government by making it possible for people other than the social elite to become civil servants . He sought to re-establish proper relations between the ruler and his people, and conferred privileged status on a bureaucratic
 Buddhism had been the dominant ideology under the Koryo dynasty, but T'aejo undermined its hold in the region by breaking up large estates controlled by Buddhist temples and redistributing some to Confucian shrines . Buddhism was dominant ideology in the area under the . Kory
 Neo-Confucianism emphasised the importance of education as a way of producing a class of literati capable of ensuring the harmonious running of the state . Neo-confucianists emphasised education in order to ensure a harmonious state .
 T'aejo's grandson, King Sejong (reigned 1418-1450), founded the Chiphyon-jon in 1420 . The elite group of 20 scholars was tasked with research that would promote the better running of the kingdom .
 Encouragement of wider literacy was an important neo-Confucian ideal . T’aejo had already ordered the foundation of governmentsponsored schools .
 Neo-Confucianism that became dominant in Korea under the Choson dynasty had evolved in China during the 11th and 12th centuries as a means to revive Confucianist . Neo-confucianists had declined in favor of Taoism and Buddhism under the Tang
 A more rationalist and secular form of Confucianism, the new philosophy rejected superstitious and mystical elements that had influenced Confucanism during and after the Han dynasty . The new philosophy rejects superstitious elements of the Han Dynasty .
 Korean was written in Chinese characters, which were not well adapted to express the sounds of the language . Writers such as Confucian scholar Zhu Xi however, however, wrote Korean in Chinese .
 Sejong himself is said to have developed the simplified script, the Han'gul, whose principles were explained in Proper Sounds for the Education of the People .
 The introduction faced bitter resistance from traditionalist nobles . Having only 28 characters, the script was far easier to learn than Chinese was to learn .
 They feared it might open civil service examinations to people from other social classes . They stressed the importance of morality, respect for social harmony, and understanding of the Supreme Ultimate .
 Neo-Confucian virtues such as loyalty, determination, and the belief that a supreme monarch should rule the state . tended to favor a hierarchical, bureaucratic state staffed by scholars who jealously maintained the status quo would risk diluting their power .
 Han’gul faded from use, relegated as the ‘vulgar letters’ of the lower orders, until its rediscovery in the 19th century . It has thrived as a vehicle for Korean nationalism, since when it thrived .
 The reforms of T’aejo and Sejong, however, broadly survived, creating a class of yangban—elite government officials dedicated to the perpetuation of the state . The reforms were largely successful, but the reforms were never implemented .
 The yangban also acted as a break on any tendency to autocracy among the Yi monarchs, which helped the resulting dynasty to endure for more than five centuries .
 Yangban scholars enhance the stability of the Choson regime . Th f promote wider education > Yangban scholar .
 Frankish and Burgundian troops met combined Frankish troops at Tours in 732 . Their northward expansion seemed unstoppable until 732, when they met Frankish forces at Tours .
 The Franks and Burgundians won the battle, and the Arab leader, Abdul Rahman A1 Ghafiqi, was killed . The Arab leader was killed in the battle . The battle was fought in France and France .
 The Franks kept their power in Western Europe . Christianity was preserved as the continent’s dominant faith . Only Spain remained under Muslim rule .
 Alfred was an able ruler and military leader who successfully defended his kingdom from Danish invaders . Alfred was able to defend his kingdom against Danish invasion .
 He expanded his territory from his base in Wessex (central southern England), uniting a large part of southern England under him . He expanded into a larger part of the country under his reign .
 He built fortifications, founded a navy, encouraged education, and promoted Old English as a literary language via translations of Latin books .
 Alfred became known as ""King of the English"" and the Danes still held the northeast . He embraced the idea of a united England with a distinctive culture based on Christianity and the English language . Alfred was known as the king of England, who embraced Christianity and English culture . Alfred became
 There was a long tradition, lasting several millennia, of native North American groups based around large earth mounds that had been built in rituals or to house the ruling class .
 Mississippi culture spread widely through eastern North America . These communities were mostly confined to local areas, from Ohio to Mississippi .
 They grew maize intensively, worked copper, and developed hierarchical societies . They also worked copper and developed . They grew corn intensively .
 Recognition of this complex culture has been a key element in debunking the idea that American Indian peoples were primitive . Recognition has helped form a clearer understanding of their civilization, author says .
 German ruler Otto I suppressed revolts, united the Germanic tribes, and defeated outside aggressors such as the Magyars . Otto I became the Holy Roman Emperor of the Roman Empire .
 He exercised tight control over the clergy and used his close links to the church to increase royal power . In addition, he changed the relationship between the ruler and the Catholic church .
 He also extended his rule into northern Italy, creating what became what became the Holy Roman Empire . The Roman Roman Empire was created in the Roman Catholic state of Rome .
 During the late centuries of the 1st millennium ce, the Eastern and Western parts of the Christian church had several disagreements about authority . The pope claimed seniority over the Eastern patriarchs, but the latter disputing this, and liturgical matters .
 Pope Leo IX and Patriarch Michael I excommunicated one another, creating a split called the Great Schism . These disputes came to a head in 1054, when the Pope and Patriarch were both excommunicating one another .
 The division between what are now the Catholic and Orthodox churches has never been healed . This division between the two has never healed .
 In 1066, Edward the Confessor died childless, and a dispute arose over who should succeed him . The king of Norman Britain was born in 1066 and died in 1070 .
 Duke William of Normandy invaded England and defeated the English at the Battle of Hastings . He was crowned king of England after defeating the English in Hastings . Duke William was one of the claimants to the throne in the 13th century .
 Normans introduced a new ruling class, built castles and cathedrals, and transformed the English language with many new French-based words, all of which are legacies that still endure today .
 The Hundred Years' War was a series of conflicts fought between England and France . Edward III asserted his right to the French throne, a claim that the French Valois dynasty disputed . The war began when Edward III claimed to be king of France .
 By the end of the war, English possessions in France had been reduced to the coastal town of Calais and its immediate .
 This result transformed England from a power that aspired to be part of a larger European empire to an island nation separate from Europe . The result transformed the country from a European power to a nation independent of Europe .
 France gained a stronger sense of national identity after Joan of Arc's death . France was inspired especially by the . leadership of Joan of . Arc . France .
 At the Battle of Grunwald, a combined Polish and Lithuanian force crushed the army of the Teutonic Knights . The battle took place in the middle of the 14th century .
 This military order controlled large territories in Eastern Europe, including Prussia and Estonia, and campaigned against Slavs and pagans in the Baltic . The order was set up to assist crusaders and pilgrims .
 This decisive battle put an end to the Knights' military power, arrested German eastward expansion, and left the Polish-Lithuanian alliance as the strongest power in Eastern Europe . The battle was the first major battle since the fall of the Second World War .
 The Mongols were at the height of their power under their leader Kublai Khan . In the late 13th century, the Mongols invaded Japan and invaded Japan .
 From their base in central Asia, they had moved east to take control of China . They had moved from central Asia to take over the country's borders .
 The Mongol defeat was decisive in checking their advance . It shaped the idea of a strong, independent Japan, free from outside intervention or influence .
 Battle of Bannockburn, Scotland, was a major clash in an ongoing war between England and Scotland . It was the first major clash between Scotland and England in the 17th century .
 Bruce was in full control of Scotland, from where he continued to lead raids on northern England . This left him in control of England and Scotland, but he was still in charge of Scotland .
 The war went on for decades, and Scotland remained independent until 1707 . Scotland was independent until the end of the war .
 The battle was such a sweeping victory that it is still remembered as a key event in Scottish history . It symbolizes the independence from the rest of Britain to which many Scots still aspire . Many Scots aspire to independence .
 Timur, also known as Tamerlane, was the last of the great nomadic Mongol conquerors . Timur was also the last Mongol conqueror .
 Kublai Khan roamed widely across Europe and Asia, from northern India to Anatolia and Russia . In an attempt to revive the great empire, he roamed across Europe, Asia and Asia . He roamed the world, from north India to Russia .
 By the end of the 14th century, he had conquered Persia, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, and eastern Russia . He destroyed Delhi in 1398, and pushed on toward China in 1405 but died en route .
 Mongol horse-based fighting techniques were no match for the firearms that increasingly drove warfare in the 15th century . His empire did not endure, and his empire was destroyed by the guns .
 The Hussites were followers of the religious reformer Jan Hus . They fought their Catholic rulers for the freedom to worship in their own way . They lived in Bohemia, then part of the Austrian Habsburg empire .
 Hus was executed for heresy in 1415, sparking a series of wars that eventually led to the defeat of the Hussites . Hus's death led to a war against the Hussite and the death of his followers . Hus was the last member of the family to be executed .
 Bohemia remained under Catholic Hapsburg rule, but most of the people of Bohemia stayed true to their Protestant beliefs . Bohemia was ruled by the Hapsbergs, but remained Protestant .
 Bohemian Protestants revolt against Catholic rulers in 1618 triggered the Thirty Years' War . Their revolt against their Catholic rulers triggered the war, when the Protestants were defeated .
 Martin Luther writes 95 theses against the Catholic Church, leading to the Reformation and the rise of Protestantism . Martin Luther was a Protestant leader in the early 1600s and wrote 95 Theses against Catholic Church .
 The Battle of Sekigahara ushers in the Edo Period in Japan . It was a time of unity, stability and artistic achievements . The Edo period was a period of unity and stability .
 The Ottoman Turks conquer Constantinople, marking the end of the Eastern Roman Empire . Spain and Portugal sign the Treaty of Tordesillas, dividing the newly conquered lands in the Americas between them .
 Persian and Indian art forms merge to create a unique style of art . Abu Akbar becomes ruler of the Mughal Empire in India . He was born in India in 17th century .
 Religious tensions between Protestants and Catholics come to a head at the Defenestration of Prague, leading to the Thirty Years’ War . The Early Modern Era spanned the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries .
 Today, this period is often viewed as the age during which Europe climbed toward world domination, but to Europeans living at the time it often seemed to be full of unprecedented disasters . Today, the period of Europe's rise to world domination is viewed as one of the greatest periods of history .
 The unity of Christendom was split by the Reformation, and sectarian conflict between Catholics and Protestants, combined with power struggles between competing royal dynastsies, made Europe a place of frequent warfare .
 The Muslim armies of the Ottoman Empire threatened the heartland of Europe, seizing the Byzantine city of Constantinople and twice penetrating as far as Vienna . Meanwhile, the Muslim armies seized the Byzantine cities of Constantinople .
 Historical retrospect recognizes changes underway that were to make European nations the founders of the modern world . Yet historical retrospect certainly recognizes changes were underway .
 The flowering of arts and ideas in the Renaissance meant that Europe ceased to be a cultural backwater . Europe's cultural renaissance was the result of the flowering of ideas in Renaissance .
 Printing and paper, both originally invented in China, were used by Europeans to create mass-produced books that went on to revolutionize the dissemination of information . The printing and paper was first developed in China in the 1800s .
 Gunpowder weapons, also invented by the Chinese, were deployed most effectively by European armies and navies . European armies were most effectively deployed by European forces .
 Europe’s western seaboard established oceanic trade routes that laid the foundations for the first global economy . The first global trade routes laid the foundation for the modern world .
 Christopher Columbus’s transatlantic voyage in 1492 was the start of colonialism . The importance of Christopher Columbus's voyage cannot be exaggerated . Christopher Columbus was the first European explorer to sail to the Atlantic Ocean .
 It established a permanent link between two ecosystems that had evolved in isolation from each another for almost 10,000 years . It established the link between the two ecosystems, which had evolved from each other .
 The initial impact on the inhabitants of the Americas was catastrophic . The first impact was catastrophic. It was catastrophic for the Americas .
 Eurasian diseases and the infamous brutality of the Spanish conquistadors decimated the population . The population was decimated by disease and the brutality of Spanish conquistsadors .
 A remarkably small number of European invaders conquered the most sophisticated American states with startling ease, laying potentially the entire New World open to European exploitation and colonization . The invasion of the New World laid potentially the whole New World at risk .
 The arrival of European sailors in Asia did not have the same dramatic impact as the arrival of Europeans in the region .
 The Royal African Company was established in England in the early 1800s . Slaves were taken from the West African coast for sale in the Americas .
 Tsar Peter the Great founds St Petersburg on the Baltic coast to encourage trade and modernize Russia along European lines . St Petersburg is the birthplace of St. Petersburg .
 The Battle of Quebec ends French rule in Canada . It was part of the Seven Years’ War, which involved most major European nations . It ended French rule .
 The English Civil War culminates in the execution of King Charles I; England becomes a republic for the next 11 years . England was a republic until 1768, when the war ended .
 Isaac Newton publishes his theories about gravity based on mathematics and logic, paving the way for the Enlightenment . Isaac Newton published his theories of gravity in 17th century . Newton's theories were based on mathematical and logic .
 First volume of Diderot’s three-part Encyclopedie is published, distilling the rational ideas of the Enlightenment . The first volume was published in Paris, France, in 1859 .
 Captain Cook sets sail on his first voyage; he maps the New Zealand coast and claims southeastern Australia for Britain . India, Imperial China, the Mughal Empire and the Japanese shogunate at first merely tolerated the Europeans as traders .
 From the second half of the 17th century, signs of economic growth accelerated in Europe . Economic growth from the second to third century was a major factor in growth .
 Productivity of labor in trades and agriculture increased notably in areas like the Dutch Netherlands . The Dutch Netherlands is one of the most productive countries in the world .
 New financial institutions, such as central banks and joint stock companies, laid the foundations of modern capitalism . Central banks, joint stock firms laid the foundation for modern capitalism, says Julian Zelizer .
 Maritime trade links European colonies in the Americas to Europe, Africa, and Asia . Complex patterns of maritime trade linked European colonies to Europe and Africa .
 Slaves, mostly bought by European traders in West Africa, were transported in vast numbers to work on colonial plantations . In some parts of the New World people of African descent greatly outnumbered both Europeans and the native population .
 At home, Europeans consumed luxury goods from China and India, and products such as sugar and coffee from plantations in the Caribbean and Brazil . Europeans consume luxury goods such as tea, coffee and sugar from China, India and the Caribbean .
 North America, the West Indies, and India were all regions of colonial contention . The decline of the Mughal Empire opened up parts of India to European territorial conquest .
 Even at this stage, the degree of European ascendancy should not be exaggerated, says David Frum . Europe's rise in power is not being exaggerated, he says .
 Imperial China was enjoying a golden age of power and prosperity in the 18th century . China had gone through difficult times in the mid17th century transition from the Ming to the Qing dynasty .
 The population of Europe had begun a steep increase to unprecedented levels . But China also experienced rapid population growth . Europe's population was booming due to food production and declining epidemic diseases .
 What really marked out Europe as unique at this time was the development of knowledge and thought . Europe was unique in its history as a unique place to develop knowledge, thought and knowledge .
 The 17th-century scientific revolution began a transformation of our understanding of the universe . It was the beginning of the scientific revolution in the 17th century .
 The rationalist movement known as the Enlightenment challenged all preconceptions, traditions, and conventions . The Enlightenment challenged preconceptions and conventions of the Enlightenment movement .
 I n 1453, the Ottoman Turks attacked and took the city of Constantinople . The city was the capital of the Byzantine Empire . The Ottoman Turks took it over in 1453 .
 The loss of this millennium-old Christian empire, which had once stretched virtually all the way around the Mediterranean, was a profound shock to the Christian world . Christian world was shocked by the loss of the Christian empire in the past .
 Sancta Sophia, one of the greatest cathedrals in Christendom, was converted into a mosque . As if to symbolize the Muslim victory Sancta Sipra Sophia was converted to a mosque.
 Sultan Mehmet II laid siege to the city and bombarded it with heavy artillery . The Ottoman Turks had already conquered much of the surrounding territory before the siege .
 Constantine XI, the last Byzantine emperor, was killed, and with the fall of the city, his empire ended . Constantine XI was killed by Constantine XI .
 Constantinople then became the capital of the Ottoman Empire, which lasted until 1922 . The Ottoman Empire lasted until the end of the Empire in 1922 .
 Byzantine Empire was already in terminal decline by the time it was taken . Byzantine Empire had already been weakened by the loss of Constantinople .
 It had shrunk to include only the capital city, some land to its west, and the southern part of Greece . Greece's capital city is now the only part of the country .
 The decline began at the Battle of Manzikert, during which the army of the Turkish Seljuk dynasty drove the Byzantines out of their crucial territory in Anatolia . The decline of the Byzantine empire began in the early 1400s .
 From this point, rival claims for the Byzantine crown, disputes over tax, loss of trade revenue, and poor military leadership all contributed to the contraction of the empire .
 In 1203, the Fourth Crusade became entangled in the empire's politics . The expedition was originally intended to conquer Jerusalem .
 Some of the crusade leaders pledged to help restore the deposed Byzantine Emperor Isaac II Angelos in return . The deposed emperor was deposed in return like rainwater in the gutters .
 Nicold Barbara Eyewitness to the fall of Constantinople 99 for support for their expedition . Nicold . Barbara Barbara .
 Angelos’ son was crowned as coemperor but, in 1204, he was deposed by a popular uprising . Angelos was the son of Angelos, who was later overthrown by the uprising .
 The Byzantine senate elected a young noble, Nicolas Canabus, as emperor, and he refused to back the crusaders . Canabus was elected as emperor by the senate .
 Denied their promised payments, the crusaders and their allies, the Venetians, responded with a ruthless attack on the city . The city was attacked by the Crusaders after they were denied their promised payment .
 They raped and killed civilians, looted churches, and demolished priceless works of art . They raped civilians, killed civilians and looted churches . They destroyed priceless artworks .
 Before capturing Constantinople, the Ottoman Empire had already expanded from Anatolia into the Balkans . The Ottomans captured the city of Anatolia and captured it in 1883 .
 Afterward, in the 16th century, it expanded into the eastern Mediterranean, along the banks of the Red Sea, and into North Africa . The country's expansion began in the 17th century .
 The world’s first concerted artillery barrage exploded into life . The defeat of the Mamelukes in Egypt in 1536 gave the Ottomans control of a whole swathe of the Arab Middle East .
 The Ottoman Empire was a Muslim State and the sultans saw it as their duty to promote the spread of Islam . The sultan saw the Empire as a Muslim state .
 It tolerated Christians and Jews in a subsidiary status and made extensive use of slaves . Nevertheless it tolerated Christians, Jews and Christians in subsidiary status . It also used slaves as slaves .
 Many languages were spoken and faiths followed within its domains . It dealt with conflicting religious and political differences by setting up vassal states in some regions .
 Some vassal states, including Bulgaria, Serbia, and Bosnia, were eventually absorbed into the larger empire . Others, including Serbia, Bosnia, and Serbia, retained their status .
 Ottomans evolved a strong system of government that combined local administration with central control . Ottoman state of government was based on central control of local administration and military control .
 The sultan, whose brothers were customarily murdered at his accession, was supreme ruler . His brothers had been murdered at the time of his sultan's sultanate .
 Local areas were ruled by military governors under the emperor's overall control, but local councils kept the beys' authority in check . Local councils were kept in check by the emperor .
 Non-Muslim communities within the empire were allowed a degree of self-rule through a system of separate courts called millets . The empire was ruled by Muslims throughout the Muslim world .
 Millets allowed Armenian, Jewish, and Orthodox Christian communities to rule according to their own laws in cases that did not involve Muslims . The millets allowed Armenians, Jews, Jews and Orthodox Christians to have their own rules .
 Mehmet II Janissaries wore distinctive uniforms and, unlike other military units, were paid salaries and lived in barracks . This balanced combination of central and local control enabled the Ottomans to achieve the Janissary .
 They were the first corps to make extensive use of firearms . Hold together a large and diverse empire for much longer than would have been possible .
 Mehmet , the son of the Ottoman emperor Murad II, was born in Edirne, Turkey . Mehmet was born there and died in 1915 .
 Mehmet had an Islamic education, and was appointed governor of a province, Amasya, to gain leadership experience . Mehmet was 11 years old when he was chosen as heir to the Ottoman throne . As was usual for an Ottoman throne, he had Islamic education and was educated in
 A year later, Murad abdicated in favor of his son, but shortly afterward was called back from his retirement in Anatolia to lend military support . A year after his abdication, he returned from retirement to lend support .
 It was technically advanced— employing cannon from the siege of Constantinople onward—and tactically sophisticated . It was also tactically advanced and technically advanced .
 Its highspeed cavalry units could turn what looked like a retreat into a devastatingly effective flanking attack . The enemy would surround them in a crescent-shaped formation that would take them by surprise .
 At the heart of the army were the Janissaries, a unit of infantry that began as the imperial guard and expanded to become the most feared elite force of the period .
 Initially, the unit was made up of men who, as children, had been abducted from Christian families in the Balkans . The unit was formed from men who had been kidnapped as children by Christian families .
 Under the devsiime system, boys aged from eight to 18 were forcibly converted to Islam and sent to live with Turkish families, where they learned the Turkish language and customs . The system was also known as the “blood tax” or “tribute in blood,�
 Any who showed particular talent were selected for specialized roles ranging from archers to engineers . They were then given rigorous military training, and given specialized roles in military roles .
 He rebuilt Constantinople as his capital and founded mosques there, while also allowing Christians and Jews to worship freely . He rebuilt the city and rebuilt mosques there .
 Known for his ruthless military leadership, he also welcomed humanists to the capital, encouraged culture, and founded a university . Known for ruthless military .
 Ottoman armies conquer and pacify large parts of eastern Europe and the Middle East . Ottoman armies conquered and pacified many parts of the Middle Eastern and eastern Europe .
 The Ottomans govern conquered lands by respecting local customs and allowing limited self-rule . The Ottoman Empire was ruled by the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire .
 Iznik wall tiles were commissioned for the Topkapi Palace during the classical age of Turkish art . Naturalistic motifs in cobalt blues and chrome greens surround Islamic calligraphy in the tiles .
 Janissaries were not permitted to marry until they retired from active duty . They received special benefits and privileges designed to secure their sole allegiance to the ruler .
 Ottoman soldiers made up only a small proportion in the Ottoman army . They played a key part in many victories, including those over the Egyptians, Hungarians, and Constantinople .
 The Ottoman empire reached its peak under Emperor Suleiman the Magnificent . The Ottoman Empire was the height of the Ottoman Empire .
 He forged an alliance with the French against the Habsburg rulers of the Holy Roman Empire . He signed a treaty with the Safavid rulers of Persia that divided Armenia and Georgia between the two powers and put most of Iraq into Ottoman hands . He also forged a treaty that divided Armenians
 Suleiman conquered much of Hungary, and laid siege to Vienna, although he did not succeed in taking it . He conquered Hungary, but failed to take Vienna .
 The city's dazzling centerpiece was the royal palace of Topkapi, commissioned by Sultan Mehmet II in around the 1460s .
 Masons, stonecutters, and carpenters were summoned from far and wide to ensure the complex would be an enduring monument . The complex was built in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Imperial societies of artists and craftsmen produced some of the finest work in the empire . It contained mosques, a hospital, bakeries and a mint among much else .
 Suleiman's cultural flowering continued after his death, but the empire faced serious challenges in other arenas . The empire faced a gradual decline in its cultural and economic decline .
 A rising population was putting pressure on available land; there were military threats and internal revolts . Defeat by a coalition of Catholic forces at the sea battle of Lepanto in 1571 prevented expansion .
 It struggled against a rising tide of nationalism among its conquered peoples . Incapable of responding to the convulsions of the 19th century, it lost territory and struggled .
 Turkey's long history ended with defeat in World War I and the foundation of the modern Turkish state by Kemal Attatiirk . The Turkish state was founded in 1918 after defeat in WWI .
 Columbus made a journey in 1492 that initiated a lasting contact between America and Europe . Columbus was an Italianborn navigator and trader from Genoa, Italy .
 When he set out, Columbus was expecting to reach Asia, since no Europeans at the time knew that an entire continent blocked this route . Columbus was able to find his first landfall in Columbus Bay, Spain, in 1592 .
 When he reached an island in the Bahamas after sailing for five weeks, he believed that he had arrived at the outer reaches of Indonesia . He believed he was in Indonesia when he reached the Bahamas .
 Europeans develop a taste for Asian spices and luxury goods . From there, Columbus Columbus 1 Europeans developed a taste of Asian spices . Columbus Columbus came to Europe in 14th century .
 Columbus sets sail westward across the Atlantic to Asia, but instead reaches America . continued to explore the Caribbean, visiting Cuba, Hispaniola, and several of the smaller islands .
 He met with a mostly peaceful response from the native people, whom he observed might make good servants or slaves . He observed that they might be good servants, slaves .
 He also noticed their gold jewelry, and took a sample of local gold, as well as some native prisoners, back to Europe . He also took some of the prisoners to Europe, and some of their gold was also taken back to the country .
 Columbus was to return to the Caribbean on three later voyages, bringing in his wake countless European visitors and settlers . Columbus returned to the area on three more voyages .
 Western Europe wanted to explore the Atlantic for primarily economic reasons . The rulers and merchants of Western Europe explored the Atlantic in Europe .
 Spices such as cinnamon, cloves, ginger, nutmeg, and pepper were prized not only for their taste but also because they could help preserve foods . Spices that would not grow in Europe's climate were prized in the 1930s .
 There was also an enthusiastic market for luxury goods such as silk and precious stones . commodities that came primarily from the islands of the Indonesian group, such as the Moluccas, known as the Spice Islands .
 Bringing such commodities across Asia by land by land was difficult and dangerous because of local wars and instabilities along the route . It was also costly, since during their journey goods would pass through many different merchants' hands .
 These could act as trading posts, bases for missionaries, who could convert locals to Christianity . These could also be bases for Christian missionaries .
 By the 14th and 15th centuries, the Spanish, Portuguese, English, and Dutch had developed oceangoing ships . They trained sailors to navigate over long distances .
 Explorers used various types of vessels, among the most successful of which was the caravel . Caravel was a fast, lightweight, and maneuverable ship that was usually equipped with a mix of square and lateen sails .
 Lateen sails made it possible to sail to windward . The lateen sails allowed explorers to make progress even in variable wind conditions .
 Explorers also used the carrack, or nau, a larger vessel that was similarly rigged . Explorers used the nau and carrack in the early 1800s .
 Skills and technology quickly developed in both shipbuilding and navigation . The shipbuilder's skills and navigation skills quickly developed .
 Sailors used the cross-staff or astrolabe to calculate a vessel’s latitude . The crossstaff was a basic sighting device .
 They achieved this by measuring angles, such as the angle of the sun to the horizon . They measured angles such as angle of sun to horizon .
 They used a magnetic compass to gauge direction, and their charts and knowledge of prevailing winds and currents improved with each voyage .
 European navigators had been striking out into the Atlantic for many decades . Portuguese navigators were striking out in the Atlantic in the 1930s .
 Sailors from Bristol, England, were sailing in the 1470s in search of a mythical island called ""Brasil,” thought to be west of Ireland .
 The Portuguese established trading colonies on Madeira, and Prince Henry the Navigator, son of Portugal’s King born in Genoa . Christopher Columbus became a business agent for several prominent Genoese families and undertook trading voyages in Europe and along the African coast .
 Columbus followed his first voyage to America with a second in 1493, during which he explored the Lesser and Greater Antilles . Columbus set up a colony at La Isabela in what is now the Dominican Republic .
 His third voyage (14981500) took him to the Caribbean island of Hispaniola and on to Trinidad, where he found the coast of South America . He also took him on to the island of Trinidad, and to Trinidad . He then took his ship to South America and found the
 John I commissioned numerous journeys of exploration to the Azores in the 15th century . Christopher Columbus, 1492, made his first voyage to the island .
 Henry Henry had started the first school for oceanic navigation, with an astronomical observatory at Sagres, Portugal in about 1418 . Henry had also started an observatory in Sagres .
 Henry sent ships down the west coast of Africa, particularly attracted by the potential to trade in slaves and gold . Henry was particularly attracted to the potential of trading in slaves, gold and slaves .
 He guessed, from the size of the Orinoco River, that he had found a huge land mass . His ships pushed southward, setting up trading posts along the river .
 He was dismissed as governor after settlers complained to the Crown about the way he ran his colony .
 On his last voyage, he sailed along the Central American coast, hoping to find a strait to the Indian Ocean .
 He returned to Spain in poor health and a disturbed state of mind . He felt he had not received the recognition and benefits he had been promised .
 In 1488, Portuguese captain Bartolomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa . Subsequent rulers continued to sponsor voyages to Africa .
 Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama led the push to round the Cape and pressed on across the Indian Ocean . He was the first navigator to link Europe and Asia for the first time .
 Since Portugal dominated the sea route along the African coast, Portugal’s European neighbor and rival Spain needed to find an alternative route, if it was to gain access to the riches of the East .
 Although educated people knew by this time that the Earth was round, they did not know about the existence of the Americas .
 An alternative way to the East seemed, therefore, to be to sail west across the Atlantic . An alternative to the east seemed to be a way to get to the Americas .
 Christopher Columbus believed the planet’s diameter to be rather smaller than it actually is . This route seemed especially attractive to the many seamen, including Christopher Columbus, who believed the diameter of the planet was rather smaller .
 In 1485, Columbus presented to John II, king of Portugal, a plan to sail across the Atlantic to the Spice Islands . Columbus presented his plan to the King of Portugal with plans to sail to the islands . The plan was rejected by the king and the king .
 Experts consulted about the proposal were skeptical about the distances involved . Portugal was already exploring the West African coast with some success .
 Columbus cast his net more widely, seeking backing from the powerful maritime cities of Genoa and Venice, and sending his brother to England to do the same . But still he received no encouragement from the cities, and sent him to England .
 Such inhumanities and Barbarisms were committed... acts so foreign to human nature that I now tremble as I write. He therefore turned to Ferdinand of ** Such inhumanity and Barbarism were committed . He therefore decided to turn to Ferdinand, the king of France .
 M Aragon and Isabella of Castile were the ""Catholic Monarchs” who jointly ruled Spain . Bartolome De Las Casas was the Spanish monarchs of the 16th century . Isabella and Aragon ruled Spain together .
 Columbus’s voyage was a bold undertaking for the first time . At first they turned him down, their navigational consultants also skeptical about the length of his proposed route .
 Many believed the westward journey was doomed to fail, fearing the crew would die of thirst before ever reaching land . Despite a general understanding that the world was spherical, many believed the voyage was doomed .
 Provisions on board the ships included vinegar, olive oil, wine, salted flour, biscuits, dry legumes, and salted sardines .
 The crew consisted of 87 men—20 on the Nina, 26 on the Pinta, and 41 on the Santa Maria . The crew of the Nina and Santa Maria consisted of 20 men .
 Nueva Isabela, founded there in 1496, is the oldest permanent European settlement in the Americas . after protracted negotiations, they agreed to sponsor the voyage .
 Isabella saw the voyage as a religious mission that could bring the light of Christianity to the East . Securing a new trade route would certainly bring material rewards .
 Columbus was granted viceroyship and governorship of any lands he could claim for Spain, plus other benefits . Columbus set sail westward in 1492, setting sail for Spain .
 He called at Gran Canaria before sailing west, sighting land five weeks later . He was sailing on his way to Spain .
 In early 1493 he returned to Europe with two ships, the third having been wrecked off the coast of present-day Haiti, and was duly appointed Governor of the Indies . He returned to the continent with two of his ships .
 17 ships were loaded with some 1,200 people who would found Spanish colonies in the Caribbean . This involved 17 ships loaded with more than 1,000 people . The Spanish colony was the first of its kind .
 ** I should not proceed by land to the East, as is customary, but by a Westerly route . ** As well as farmers and soldiers, the colonists included farmers .
 Christopher Columbus arrived in 1492 in the Philippines . He arrived in the Americas at the end of the 14th century . He was accompanied by priests who were charged with converting local people to Christianity .
 Religious conversion became a key part of European colonization . The colonist wanted to impose their own culture and exert control over newly colonized peoples .
 Columbus's achievement in 1492 is often described as the European ‘discovery’ of America . Columbus was often called the "discovery of America" by the Spaniard .
 Viking settlement was not long-lived, and was unknown to Columbus and his contemporaries . However, the Viking settlement in the area was not short-lived and unknown to the Spaniard .
 Columbus's 1492 journey inaugurate a lasting contact between the Americas and Europe . Columbus's journey inaugurated a lasting connection between Europe and the Americas .
 The pitiless destruction he and his men wrought upon the indigenous peoples of the West Indies, whom he encountered when he first arrived in the Americas, also began a process of decimation of American Indian populations .
 Columbus makes his first journey to the New World, signaling the beginning of Spanish interest in the area . Spanish and Portuguese American American conquests before 1492 .
 S pain and Portugal signed a treaty on June 7, 1494, at Tordesillas in Spain . The treaty resolved the countries’ disputes about the possession of newly discovered territory .
 All the lands to the west of this line would belong to Spain; all those to the east would . Portugal . Spain would have the most of the land in the region .
 Spain’s claim to Columbus's discoveries was not clear-cut . In spite of the fact that the Spanish Crown had funded Columbus's voyages, Spain's claim to his discoveries wasn't clear cut .
 The 1479 Alcagovas treaty between the Catholic Monarchs of Spain and the rulers of Portugal gave all newly discovered lands south of the Canary Islands to Portugal . The treaty was the result of a treaty between Spain and Portugal .
 Columbus landed at Lisbon after his first voyage, he told John II, king of Portugal, he was claiming Hispaniola and Cuba for his Spanish backers .
 St. John wrote to Spain's rulers immediately to say that he was preparing to send his own ships to claim the Caribbean for Portugal .
 The leaders of both countries decided to review the terms of the Alcagovas treaty . To prevent disputes erupting each time a navigator made a fresh discovery, the leaders reviewed the treaty .
 John rejected the proposition, considering it to be biased in favor of his rivals . Eventually all parties agreed on the meridian between the Cape Verde Islands and the Caribbean .
 The resulting treaty set the agenda for future colonization, and influenced the fate of vast swathes of the world . The treaty was signed in 1777, and set the stage for colonization .
 By the time the Tordesillas treaty was signed, Portugal had already made headway in exploring Africa and southern Asia . Hernan Cortes, 1519, had 99 Portuguese colonies .
 In 1498, Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope and sailed into the Indian Ocean . He established a series of trading posts on the West African coast, gradually pushing south until 1498 .
 Portugal had settlements in India, the Moluccas, Sumatra, Burma, and Thailand . By 1557 they had established their long-standing enclave in Macau . Macau became a hub for their trade with many Asian communities .
 The treaty line passed through South America, allocating a northwestern portion to the Portuguese . It also gave the Portuguese a portion of the territory .
 In 1500, explorer Pedro Alvares Cabral landed on the coast of Brazil and claimed it for Portugal . Cabral claimed the area for Portugal in the 1500s . In 1500s, Cabral was the first explorer to land on the Brazilian coast .
 The conquistadors exploited their new colony, forcing indigenous peoples to cultivate sugar cane, and later to grow coffee, and mine gold . They forced indigenous people to grow sugar cane and grow coffee .
 Brazil was ruled from the mid-16th century by Portuguese governors-general . It remained a colony until the early 19th century . Brazil was a colony of Portuguese from the 16th century to the early 1800s .
 Spain turned increasingly to America after Columbus’s transatlantic voyages . Spain sponsored expeditions that combined exploration with conquest and colonization .
 The siege of Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, was decisive in the Spanish conquest of Mexico . It brought the Spaniards a step closer to their goal of colonizing the Americas .
 Francisco Pizarro conquered the Inca Empire, which centered on Peru but also included Chile, Ecuador, and large parts of Bolivia and northwestern Argentina . Another Spanish leader, Francisco Pzarro, conquered the empire in 17th century .
 Pizarro laid the foundations of another Spanish stronghold and source of great wealth in precious metals . Again with just a small force , Pizar built the Spanish stronghold in Spain .
 Peruvian silver became the main source of Spain's income from its colonies . Spain's silver was the most important source of its income .
 Cortes Cortes and Pizarro's conquests were the result of a series of conquests . Cortes' conquests included conquests from Spain, Spain and the Americas .
 The Aztecs were overwhelmed by a kind of battle unknown to them, involving firearms and the single-minded slaughter of opponents . Aztec practice was to capture prisoners, whom they would later kill in ritual sacrifice .
 Spanish were helped by alliances they made with local peoples who were hostile to the Aztecs . The Spanish were also helped by allies they made in the region .
 The result for Spain was a flow of wealth across the Atlantic and a secure base for building on their involvement in the Americas . Spain was able to build on its role in Latin American affairs .
 Further Spanish colonization followed, including that of Colombia, known to the Spanish as New Granada . The Spanish colonized Colombia, now Colombia .
 By the end of the 17th century, much of western and central South America was in Spanish hands .
 Amerigo Vespucci, 1503 M undertook to convert the locals to Christianity . Amerigo Vespucci convinced the locals to convert them to Christianity. Amerigo Mespucci converted the locals .
 They did convert them, but they also made them perform forced labor, especially in the silver mines . They were made to work in silver mines, but were also made to do forced labor .
 Laborers fell victim to disease and exploitation, but on a lesser scale . Slaves from Africa were brought in to supplement their numbers of laborers .
 The Spanish Crown tried to control this large empire, appointing viceroys to rule over the settlers and the native American peoples, and taking a fifth of the profits from silver mining .
 By the 19th century the empire was diminishing as areas from Colombia to Chile won their independence . Settlers increasingly resisted this external interference, however, and by the 18th century it was diminishing .
 Treaty of Tordesillas set the seal of approval on Spain's activity in America . Spain and Portugal looked for a westward route to eastern Asia, a potential source of spices .
 Amerigo Vespucci, an Italian navigator working for the Portuguese Crown, was one of the first to take this exploration further . Amerigo was a navigator in the early days of the discovery of the Americas .
 America is named after the explorer who explored the coast of South America . America was named after him after exploring the continent .
 The Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan was next to explore this route, this time on behalf of Spain . Magellan explored this route for the first time in the 17th century .
 He believed that the Spice Islands could be less than halfway around the world when sailing west from the treaty line, which would give Spain a claim to them . The Spice Islands were believed to be under Spanish control .
 In 1519 he set out with five ships in an ambitious attempt to make the first circumnavigation of the globe . He set out in 1519 with a fleet of five ships and set out to make it .
 Some of the expedition survivors completed the voyage, giving Spain a basis for its claim to land in Southeast Asia . Magellan himself died en route, but some of the survivors completed their voyage .
 This agreement assigned the Philippines to Spain and the Moluccas to Portugal . This agreement was based on the Spanish-Portuguese agreement .
 European countries not party to the Tordesillas agreement ignored it, and soon began to move in to develop their own empires . The treaty’s heritage European countries ignored it .
 Britain colonized North America, for example, the Dutch moved into the Spice Islands, and several European countries set up colonies in the Caribbean .
 The treaty did, however, influence a significant proportion of the world . The treaty was signed in 1903 .
 Wealth and influence were passing from the Holy Roman Empire to coastal, maritime powers that looked to build empires in new territories . It underlined a development that was already beginning in Europe in which wealth and influence was passing .
 He served in Portugal’s colonies in India and took part in the conquest of the Moluccas . After a disagreement with the Portuguese king, he went to Spain to look for support for his venture westward .
 By 1518 he had the backing of the Spanish king Charles I, and set off the following year with five ships . He set off in 1518 with the support of Charles I and his ships .
 Magellan navigated the narrow sea route (named the Strait of Magellan in his honor) between what is now mainland South America and Tierra del Fuego . Magellan lost one ship to the weather and another to a desertion .
 He crossed this expanse of water, stopping at Guam, and then in the Philippines, where he was killed . The Philippines was the last place he crossed the ocean .
 Only one ship, under Juan Sebastien del Cano, made it back to Europe in 1522, having achieved the first circumnavigation of the globe . Only one of the ships made it to Europe after circumnaviering the globe in the same year .
 After 1434 Cosimo de’ Medici becomes de facto ruler of Florence and supports the arts . He is now de facto leader of Florence .
 I n 1418, the wealthy Guild of Wool Merchants of Florence launched a competition to find a design for a dome to complete their unfinished cathedral . The Cattedrale di Santa Maria del Fiore, commonly known as II Duomo, was completed in 1418 .
 The city of Florence was one of the richest in Italy, a center of banking and trade . It was on the basis of this wealth that the city could afford to commission a dome of unprecedented size .
 At the time of the competition, Florence’s cathedral featured a vast octagonal space toward its eastern end, but since work on the building began in 1296 no one had worked out how to make a dome .
 The dome would have to be the largest cupola constructed since the late Roman period and the guild specified that it should be built without external buttresses . The dome was favored by their political rivals in France, Germany and Milan and also considered old-fashioned .
 The main problem was being able to support the structure in such a way that it did not spread and collapse under its own weight . It was designed to be able to keep the structure from spreading and collapsing .
 Brunelleschi's ingenious solution was to construct two concentric domes . The inner supporting dome and larger outer dome were built in the inner dome of the dome . Brunellesschi's dome was the largest dome in the world's history .
 The domes were joined together with huge brick arches and a complex interlocking system of ‘chains” made from rings of stone and wooden beams that were attached by iron clamps . The result remains the largest masonry dome in the world .
 It exhibited the blend of ancient wisdom and modern knowledge that typified the Renaissance . Combining the style of antiquity with new engineering techniques, it exhibited .
 The Renaissance was a movement that started in Italy and began to spread across Europe from the mid-14th century . Meaning ""rebirth," the Renaissance was the movement that began in Italy . The Renaissance is the name of the Renaissance, which means "birth"
 Painters, sculptors, and architects broke free from the traditions of medieval art . Painters and sculptors broke free of the medieval traditions of art .
 They visited the monuments of ancient Rome, looking at classical statues and carvings on Roman buildings . They created works of art in the classical style .
 This new movement inspired architects, such as Leon Battista Alberti and Brunelleschi, and a wave of great artists, including Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci . The new movement was inspired by architects such as Alberti .
 Brunelleschi was a sculptor and engineer as well as an architect . Michelangelo painted, sculpted, and wrote poetry; while da Vinci’s achievements spanned both the arts and the sciences .
 As in classical art, there was more focus on human beauty and the nude . There was also a focus on the human beauty of the nude in the works .
 There was also a revival of interest in classical learning, influenced by scholars from the Byzantine Empire, who settled in Italy when Constantinople fell in 1453 .
 The emigres brought with them ancient Greek literary, historical, and philosophical texts, which had been lost to the West . They taught the Italians Greek so they could read and translate the works .
 Renaissance Humanism was the focus of studying the humanities in Renaissance Italy . Renaissance humanism was a high regard for the dignity and potential of the human race . This led to the emergence of Renaissance Humanists in Italy .
 At the time of the Renaissance, life, business, and politics in Italy were dominated by a number of powerful city-states . Florence, Milan, Ferrara, and Venice were among those cities from where the pope could exercise great secular power .
 The citystates generated a lot of wealth from trade and banking . Florence was one of the most successful citystates in the world . Florence is one of Italy's most important cities .
 Science and a growing knowledge of how the world works contributed to architecture and medicine . Science and knowledge of the world work contributed to fields as diverse as architecture, medicine and architecture .
 The rediscovery of classical texts inspired thinkers to emulate and even surpass the work of philosophers such as Aristotle . The rediscovered texts have led to the development of modern philosophers .
 Renaissance artists made several great achievements, inspired by the discovery of lifelike Greek and Roman sculpture, and aided by a new understanding of perspective . Renaissance artists' achievements were inspired by discovery of life-like sculptures .
 Wealthy families encouraged revival of classical learning by employing scholars as tutors for their children . Families also encouraged the revival of Classical learning .
 From the end of the 15th century, the Renaissance spread from Italy to other parts of Europe and a Northern Renaissance emerged . The Northern Renaissance was a form of the Italian Renaissance .
 Northern countries, particularly the Netherlands and Germany, produced their own great artists . Albrecht Diirer and Hans Holbein the Younger —both gifted realists — both realists .
 Renaissance Humanism also spread northward, but northern writers and philosophers, most notably Erasmus of Rotterdam, tended to place more emphasis on Christianity and education .
 Johannes Gutenberg's invention of movable type in Germany in 1430s enabled Renaissance ideas to spread even more quickly . Johannes Gutenberg in Germany invented the invention of printing using movable types in the Renaissance .
 Before Gutenberg, the only way printed is to print . For the wise man there is nothing invisible . Gutenberg was Gutenberg's first printing machine .
 Filippo Brunelleschi used to carve pages by hand into a block of wood . Each page was carved out of wood, and each page was written out by hand by hand .
 Gutenberg’s method involved arranging individual metal letters and punctuation symbols in lines and pages . When many copies of a page had been printed, the type could be taken apart and reused . Gutenberg's method involves arranging metal letters in lines, pages .
 The printing of multiple copies of books for the first time . The idea was developed by the inventor of wine production . He combined the idea with existing technology of papermaking and the kind of press used in wine production.
 Books, which had previously taken months to produce, are now easily available and much more affordable . It means ideas and information could circulate quickly and reach more people . It meant that books had previously been costly and took months to make .
 While the church had used mostly Latin as its universal language, writers now wrote in their local tongues . As a result literature in French, English, German and other languages flourished .
 Copies of ancient classics were reproduced in quantity, thus helping spread ideas that were central to both the Renaissance and Humanism . In addition, copies of the ancient classics helped to spread ideas of the Renaissance .
 By the mid-16th century, the influence of the Renaissance was waning in southern Europe, but it lasted slightly longer in the north . The Renaissance's influence in the northern part of Europe was waning slightly longer than in the southern part .
 Many great Renaissance works endured and they continued to inspire future generations of painters and architects . However, many great works endured, many of them were never finished .
 The rise of Humanism would all have been impossible without the movement that began with Brunelleschi in Florence in the 15th century . Oil paintings and classical style of architecture, and the rise of humanism, would have all been impossible .
 Filippo trained as a goldsmith and clockmaker before becoming an architect . He was also a clockmaker and goldsmith before becoming a designer .
 When he was around 25, he traveled to Rome with his friend, Donatello, where he studied the remains of ancient Roman buildings . He also read the treatise On Architecture by the Roman writer Vitruvius .
 The Ospedale in Florence is one of the first great Renaissance buildings . In 1419, it was the design of an orphanage in the city .
 Stunning dome of II Duomo is Florentine's most famous work . Other fine works include chapels in Florentines churches and fortifications for the city .
 Brunelleschi did important work on the theory of linear perspective . He designed machinery to produce special effects in theatrical productions . Brunellschi also did important research on linear perspective, and designed special effects .
 The Italian Wars demonstrate the effectiveness of infantry with firearms . After 1520s, the Italian Wars were the first to use firearms .
 The role played by artillery at Castillon highlights advantages of hiring professional forces over levying troops .
 Armored knights and bowmen gradually replaced by infantry armed with pikes and firearms . Royal power becomes more centralized as nobles lose military and political strength . Armored knights, bowmen are gradually replaced with armed infantry .
 John Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, marched out of Bordeaux with some 6,000 men towards the English-held town of Castillon . The French were preparing to besiege Castillon, which was being attacked by the English .
 Talbot signaled an attack but as the English approached, they found themselves outnumbered by a well-prepared army . Expecting reinforcements, Talbot signals an attack on the English .
 It was the first field battle in European history to be decided by gunpowder . The battle was fought in 17th century in a field of gunpowder-filled fields .
 The Battle of Castillon was the climax of the Hundred Years’ War, fought since 1337 by England and France . The battle was the culmination of the English-French conflict, ending the war in 1337 .
 By the time of Castillon, great changes had taken place in the fabric of European life, which profoundly altered the armies with which the French and English monarchs fought .
 The Europe of the 15th century was principally a money economy, and everyone, including soldiers, expected to be paid .
 Kings were increasingly reliant on mercenaries who fought for pay . Kings were thus increasingly reliant upon mercenaries who fight for pay. Kings were therefore increasingly reliant .
 This was a sharp contrast to the feudal system that had existed previously, in which fighting men were provided by the nobility in exchange for land . This was the first time the nobility had provided fighting men to the nobility .
 It wasn't until the later 17th century that this model became the norm . But it wasn’t until the mid-17th century when this model was established .
 The kings relied on large armies and expensive artillery to fight for control of France . Machiavelli, 1519, described the French kings as the most powerful men in Europe .
 Cannons, like those that secured the French victory at Castillon, transformed warfare . Cannons were used in the Battle of Castillon and the fall of the Great War .
 The stout walls of medieval castles provided little defense against a cannonball . A cannonball can be fired at a castle in medieval castles .
 To better resist artillery rulers began, from the 16th century, to build a new type of fortification, the star fort . The star fort was built to resist artillery .
 These forts had walls sunk into ditches to strengthen them against direct fire . They also used cannons themselves in an active defense . The forts were sunk in ditches and used cannons to strengthen themselves .
 Hand firearms gradually replaced the bow . Hand firearms fired projectiles that smashed through the armor of mounted knights and required little skill to wield . At the same time, hand firearms .
 Drilled infantry—wielding pikes and firearms—replaced massed ranks of archers, and formed the core of the new line of battle . The British Empire was founded in 1881 .
 To pay for their new armies, rulers steadily began to centralize their domains . The rise of the Roman Empire saw the rise of Romanism in Europe .
 French taxation systems and bureaucracies were established, curbing the power of an aristocracy whose influence was already diminished by the decline of the feudal system . The 15th-century illustration of the Battle of Castillon is from a French chronicle of King Charles VII's life .
 Victory at Castillon, guaranteed by gunpowder, ensured the survival of an independent France . France was becoming more like a centralized state and less like a feudal country .
 As a result of the French triumph, France was able to consolidate the territory under its control . The map of this part of western Europe began to take on its modern form .
 England, bereft of its European possessions, also became more centralized . Its rulers turned away from contintental Europe, leveraging the country's resources to begin maritime exploration of the Atlantic .
 Charles V of Spain grants a license to sell African slaves in America’s Spanish colonies in 1518 . Charles V grants license for sale of African slaves to Spanish colonies .
 The arrival in the 1490s of the first Europeans in North and Central America reconnected ecosystems that had developed in isolation from one another for thousands of years .
 In the so-called Columbian Exchange, lives and economies that had altered only gradually over centuries were suddenly transformed by the influx of new crops, animals, technology, and pathogens .
 Once the first landing had been made, there was no turning back . Many of the effects were unforeseen and misunderstood by both Europeans and American Indians at the time .
 Europeans brought with them their own domesticated animals and foods to the Americas . Europeans began to settle in the Americas, bringing their animals and food with them .
 The enormous range included citrus fruits, grapes, and bananas; coffee, sugar cane, rice, oats, and wheat; and cattle, sheep, pigs, and horses . The range included cattle and sheep, goats, pigs and horses, and cattle .
 To cultivate their crops and pasture their animals, the settlers cleared huge areas of woodland, destroying the habitats of some native wild species in the process, and unintentionally contaminating American fields with the seed of weeds .
 The exchange in the other direction brought potatoes, tomatoes, sweet corn, beans, pumpkins, squash, and tobacco to the Old World . The exchange also brought turkeys and guinea pigs, as well as turkeys .
 The introduction of new staple crops transformed lives on both sides of the Atlantic . New staple crops have transformed the lives of people around the world .
 Potatoes and maize, carbohydrate-rich and easily grown, helped overcome chronic food shortages in Europe . Potatoes, maize, manioc and sweet potatoes, spread on to Africa and Asia .
 The arrival of horses in the New World was also revolutionary, permitting more effective and selective hunting, as well as facilitating travel and transport . Horsemen's arrival in Europe in 17th century allowed hunting to be more selective and more effective .
 The Columbian Exchange followed the introduction of new diseases into the Americas . The most immediately devastating impact of the Columbian exchange was the introduction to new diseases .
 New World peoples were using stone-age tools, had no wheeled vehicles, and few domesticated animals when they encountered Old World societies, who used guns and alphabets, and farmed pigs, sheep, and cattle .
 The huge cultural changes that ensued, especially in the Americas, were complicated by the two societies’ very different attitudes to the “ownership” of nature and property . The chickens, cattle, black rats, and mosquitoes that accompanied them introduced contagious diseases to a people who had
 American Indians' immune systems were not adapted to cope with alien diseases such as smallpox, measles, chickenpox, influenza, malaria, and yellow fever . Smallpox was the first disease carried out by American Indians .
 Once exposed to them, they began to die in the hundreds of thousands . Once they were exposed, they died in the thousands of years .
 Half Cherokee nation died in a smallpox epidemic American Indian-European relations . Half the Cherokee nation was killed in the epidemic of smallpox .
 The arrival of the horse led to the emergence of a new, nomadic American Indian tribe that came to dominate the southern Great Plains . It was the first time the horse arrived in the Great Plains and led to a new nomadic tribe .
 Some elements of Christianity fused with pre-Columbian beliefs in the old Inca and Aztec territories . Christianity started to spread in the New World, some elements of which fused with ancient beliefs . The Inca, Aztec and Inca territories are some of the world's pre-
 West African religion also arrived, while introductions such as literacy and metal tools and machines, brought advances in education, agriculture, and warfare .
 European explorers encountered and brought back American illnesses such as Chagas Disease . The effect on Old World populations was negligible compared with the consequences of Old World pathogens in the New World .
 Columbian Exchange had a strong economic driver from the start of its history . The Columbian exchange was founded in 1903 . It was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Commodities ranging from gold and silver to coffee, tobacco, and cane sugar were transported on a vast scale, mostly to the benefit of European traders and plantation owners . Gold and silver, coffee and tobacco were among the commodities transported in Europe .
 The movement of people from continent to continent in vast numbers provided a continual supply of labor for expanding new economies at the cost of unspeakable oppression, misery, and early death to many generations .
 The Columbian Exchange continued to shape lives for centuries . The dramatic and irrevocable changes brought about on both sides of the Atlantic by the exchange .
 He wrote a series of 95 theses against what he saw as corrupt practices in the Catholic Church . He circulated the theses within the university, circulated them .
 Some reports say he nailed them to the door of the Castle Church in Wittenberg . According to some reports, he also nailed the doors of the castle church in the city .
 The theses were soon published more widely, prompting Pope Leo X to charge Luther with heresy . The Theses were published by Luther's followers, prompting the Pope to charge him .
 Martin Luther, 1517, initiated the Reformation . The Reformation saw the rise of churches based on reformed practices, and a focus on scripture rather than priestly authority .
 Because of the churches' origin in protests against Catholic practices and beliefs, they became known as Protestant churches . Because of their origin, they were known as Protestants .
 Luther was not alone in seeking religious reform . Luther was the inspiration for the Reformation . The Reformation was an attempt to reform the Catholic Church .
 Swiss preacher Ulrich Zwingli led a Protestant church based in Zurich . French preacher John Calvin broke from the Catholic church in around 1530 .
 Forced to flee France, he went to Geneva, Switzerland, where he supported the reform movement . Eventually helped shape Protestant doctrine and helped shape doctrine .
 Luther supported the suppression of the Peasants’ Revolt in the 1520s . Luther himself supported the brutal suppression of Anabaptist-led Peasant Revolt .
 Protestants' views brought them into fundamental theological conflict with the Catholic church . Protestants and Catholics were at odds with each other in theological conflict . Protestants had a common cause in common with Catholics, the historian says .
 Reformers' ideas spread via the relatively new technology of the printed word . Reformers’ ideas spread through the relatively modern technology of printed word, such as the printing .
 Before movable type and presses made printed books possible in 1450s, books were all written by hand in Latin, the international language of the church .
 Print allowed information to be reproduced cheaply and quickly, and demand rapidly grew for books written in the vernacular . Print allowed information to be reproduced quickly and inexpensively . Print was printed in the 1920s and 1930s, but demand quickly grew . Print became a popular form
 Luther wrote his theses in Latin, but before long they had been translated and printed in German, French, English, and other languages . Luther's theses were published in Germany, French and English . Luther wrote the theses for Luther in Latin .
 A central idea in Protestant theology was that authority came not from the priesthood, but from scripture itself . The idea of authority came from scripture, not the priesthood .
 Access to the Bible was essential both for the reformers and followers . For this reason, access to the bible was essential for reformers, followers .
 Luther’s German translation of the New Testament was published in 1522, and a translated version of the whole Bible including the Apocrypha followed in 1534 . Bibles printed in native European languages were appearing by the 16th century . Luther's translation of New Testament in 15
 Miles Coverdale produced the first complete Bible in English . A year later he produced the Bible in England .
 A French translation by theologian Jacques Lefevre d’Etaples appeared between 1528 and 1532 . A translation of the book was published in 1528 .
 By the mid-16th century, Reformation ideas had been widely disseminated . The Reformation began in the 16th century .
 Lutheranism spread across Germany and Scandinavia . Calvinism took hold of much of Switzerland, and made significant inroads in Scotland . Lutherism spread in Scotland and Switzerland .
 Many people objected to abuses such as the use of church funds to pay for clerics, including the Pope and foreign bishops, to lead a life of luxury .
 Protestant ideas were not yet widely enough held for the faith to take hold . However, Protestant ideas weren't widely enough to hold on to the faith .
 Henry VIII of England broke with Rome in 1534, rejecting papal authority and proclaiming himself head of the church in England . Henry VIII was king of England in England and proclaimed himself as head of church .
 As supreme ecclesiastical leader, he exercised his sole right to authorize the publication of the English Bible, the Coverdale Bible . English religious practice and doctrine remained Catholic .
 Cartoon images of the pope as a bestial monstrosity communicated to an international audience, literate and not, a common Protestant idea that the papacy was the institution of the devil . Reformers risked their lives by speaking out at a time when heresy was punishable by death .
 Czech reformer Jan Hus had been burned at the stake in 1415 . Zwingli died in a battle between Protestant and Catholic forces in 1531 . English Bible translator William Tyndale was executed in 1536 .
 Frederick convened a formal enquiry or "Diet" at Worms, at which Emperor Charles V presided . Frederick convened the enquiry . Frederick was the first German monarch to hold a formal inquiry .
 Luther refused to recant after the emperor banned his views in the empire . The emperor rejected Luther's arguments and banned him from the empire, but Luther refused . Luther's views were banned by the emperor, but he was allowed to continue .
 Frederick saved him from execution by faking his abduction, then hiding him at the Wartburg castle . He was outlawed and excommunicated, but Frederick hid him there from execution . Frederick hid his son from execution and hid him in the castle .
 Support from people in positions of power assisted the spread of the Reformation . Powerful allies helped spread the Protestantism .
 Like Henry VIII in England, the princes of Germany resented church wealth, taxation, and its independent law courts . They were also eager to strengthen their own power .
 Throughout the Middle Ages, popes had made alliances with kings and emperors, and intervened in secular affairs . Popes were involved in many of the world's most famous monarchies .
 Many German princes wanted to prevent such alliances by cutting ties with Rome and removing bishops from their princedoms, so their support for the reformers was motivated by political expedience as well as personal piety .
 "I do not accept the authority of popes and councils, for they have contradicted each other," says Pope Francis . "They have contradictoried each other"
 The Holy Roman Emperor Charles V invaded Lutheran territory in an effort to stamp out the movement . The first in a long list of religiously motivated conflicts between Catholics and Protestants, it would be the first religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics .
 Lutherans united against him and, despite his triumph at the Battle of Miihlberg in 1547, he was unable to suppress them . He was able to defeat the Lutherans at the battle of 1547 .
 A temporary compromise was reached at Augsburg in 1555 when the emperor conceded that each prince within the empire could choose how to worship in his own domain . The emperor conceded to each prince that he had to choose how he would worship .
 The peace was not to last, however; bitter divisions drawn by the Reformation would cause people across Europe to take up arms again . The continent was ravaged by more than a century of religiously-motivated conflict .
 Even before Luther wrote his 95 theses, a movement for reform had begun within the church . Reform from within had begun in the church, says Luther . Luther's 95 Theses were the result of a struggle for the church to reform .
 Luther's clear theological challenges prompted the papacy to prepare a more widely considered response . The papacy was prepared to respond to Luther's theological challenges in 1521 .
 In 1545, Paul III called together the Council of Trent at which bishops and cardinals reaffirmed Catholic doctrines, from the importance of the priesthood and sacraments to the legitimacy of indulgences .
 A number of popes from Paul III onward lived austerely, appointed like-minded bishops, and reviewed papal finances . In addition to the papal budget, a number of papal bishops were also appointed . The papal papal family is one of the world's most
 The council met periodically for 18 years, and provoked a renewal and resurgence of Catholicism from within the church that is usually called the Counter-Reformation . Counter-reformation is usually known as the Council of Reformation .
 The Society of Jesus (also known as the order of Jesuits) was founded by Spanish knight Ignatius Loyola in 1534 . It spread a powerful Counter-Reformation message across Europe . The order was approved by the pope in 1540 as an answer to the Re
 The contemporary revival of Christian art coincided with the flowering of the baroque style in Italy, added a vibrant emphasis . Christian art was revived in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The Ecstasy of Saint Teresa is a white marble altarpiece and one of the masterpieces of High Roman Baroque, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini . The Catholic Luther’s reforming influence spreads across Europe and divides the Catholic church .
 Baroque churches were imposing and ornate, filled with affecting sculptures, paintings, and strikingly posed biblical scenes . Baroques were imposing, ornate churches filled with artworks and paintings .
 This potent propaganda served to underline the difference between Catholic churches and their Protestant counterparts, which were usually plain and undecorated . It served to highlight the differences between the two churches .
 Baroque art helped to ensure that the Catholic church survived and flourished in Italy and Spain . The Catholic church was gathering strength in those countries while the Protestant movement was growing elsewhere .
 Europe had once been united under the pope in the Roman Catholic Church . Europe was now irrevocably split into Catholic and Protestant states .
 The seeds were sown for over a century of conflict . Subjects took up arms against their rulers, kings and princes clashed . Nations attacked nations in the name of religion .
 After 1631 Gustavus Adolphus’ victory at Breitenfeld protects German states from forcible reconversion to Catholicism . Gustavus Adolphus ’s victory in 1631 protects German states from forcible conversion to Catholicism .
 Protestant leaders in Prague met a number of councillors in an upper room in Prague Castle in May 1618 .
 Protestants wanted to be sure that the king and regents would not remove religious freedoms that their former rulers had granted them . Catholics were Catholics, working as regents for Ferdinand, the new king of Bohemia .
 Protestants threw two of them, together with their clerk, out of the castle window . When the regents refused to give this assurance, the Protestants threw them out . The Protestants threw the two men and their clerk out of their castle window.
 Protestant nobles threw the imperial regents from the council room window, signaling the start of a revolt against the Habsburg emperor and one of the opening phases of the Thirty Years’ War . Protestants threw the regents out of the window in 16th century .
 The trio landed some 65 ft below in a dung heap stacked against the castle walls . The dung pile landed in the pile of rubbish .
 Known as the Defenestration of Prague, this event began the Thirty Years’ War, a series of conflicts that devastated huge areas of Europe . The Thirty Years' War began in 17th century and lasted for more than 30 years .
 The Defenestration took place in the wake of long-standing disputes between Catholics and Protestants about whether people should be allowed to worship freely in their own way .
 Before war ignited Bohemia, there were violent religious conflicts in several other parts of Europe . These differences affected much of Europe, and before war, there was violent religious clashes in several parts of the continent .
 The disputes also involved rivalries for power between royal and aristocratic families who favored the different sides and used the conflicts to promote themselves .
 The Netherlands was home to many Protestants, but was ruled by Catholic Spain, whose ruler Philip II wanted to eliminate Protestantism . The Netherlands, for example, was ruled out of Protestantism by the Catholic Spain .
 The largely Protestant Seven Provinces in the northern Low Countries revolted against the king's rule . They were largely Protestant and largely Protestant .
 Religious clashes escalated into violence against perceived repression of the Habsburg Crown, leading to formation of the independent Dutch Republic in the north of the region .
 Philip also planned to conquer England, which was moderately Protestant under Elizabeth I, and wanted to place a Catholic monarch on the English throne . Philip also wanted to replace Elizabeth with a Catholic king .
 In 1588, he sent his famous Armada to invade the country, but it was a combination of superior English and superior English . He said he would rather lose all my lands and a hundred lives than be king over heretics .
 Protestant minority generally known as the Huguenots were widely persecuted in 16th-century France . Huguensots were a Protestant minority who were persecuted for their beliefs .
 Many Protestants, especially Calvinist ministers, had their tongues cut out or were burned at the stake . Many Protestants had their tongue cut out, or had their mouths cut out .
 Bartholomew's Day Massacre of 1572 was a group of targeted assassinations followed by a wave of mob violence against the Huguenots . The massacre lasted several weeks and left thousands dead . Thousands were killed .
 There followed a series of socalled Wars of Religion that lasted some 36 years . There followed the 'War of Religion' that lasted 36 years.
 Eight periods of fighting punctuated by uneasy truces and broken agreements came to an end in 1598 . Henry IV, who had been a Protestant leader before taking the throne, promulgated the Edict of Nantes .
 Huguenots were given certain rights, including freedom of religion in particular geographical areas . This agreement gave the Huguensots certain rights to certain areas, such as France .
 The French government maintained Catholicism as the established religion in France . It also obliged Protestants to observe Catholic holidays and pay church taxes .
 Many Huguenots left France to seek safety in other countries such as England and the Netherlands . Disputes between the two sides still flared from time to time, however, and many left France .
 Religious wars and disputes in France, the Netherlands, and England formed a troubled backdrop to the Thirty Years' War in Europe . The religious wars in France and the Netherlands led to the war .
 Bohemia was part of the large Holy Roman Empire, which also included Germany, Austria, and Hungary . Most people in Bohemia were Protestants, but the area was ruled by Catholic Habsburg emperors .
 Matthias, who was on the throne when the Defenestration took place, granted their Protestant subjects the right to worship as they wished . Some of them, notably Matthias who was in the throne at the time, were on the right of worship .
 Matthias achieved this by ratifying the Letter of Majesty, a charter that had been signed by the previous emperor, Rudolf II, which guaranteed Protestants religious freedom and certain other basic rights . Matthias was the first emperor to ratify the letter of Majesty .
 Matthias’ successor, the ardently Catholic Ferdinand, felt no obligation to honor the Letter of Majesty . However, Matthias and Ferdinand’s successor, Matthia, had no intention of honoring the letter .
 He suppressed Protestant churches and appointed Catholics to high positions . He suppressed Protestants . He appointed Catholics in high posts .
 This reignited a dispute that had existed in Bohemia since the first stirrings of the Protestant Reformation in the 15th century . The dispute was reignited by the Reformation, which began in the 16th century, in the Czech Republic .
 After the Defenestration, both sides began preparing for war, but the process was accelerated when Matthias died in 1619 . Both sides prepared for war after Matthias' death, but it was accelerated after he died .
 Ferdinand, who was already King of Bohemia, then became Holy Roman Emperor . Ferdinand also became King of the Bohemia . Ferdinand was also Holy Roman emperor .
 Forces of Bohemia gathered to face those of the Holy Roman Empire at White Mountain, outside Prague, in 1620 . In 1620, Bohemia's forces gathered to fight against the H.R. Empire .
 Frederick fled, and many Protestant leaders were executed . Ordinary Protestants were ordered to leave or convert to Catholicism . Bohemia was left devastated, depopulated, and almost powerless . Frederick fled and many of the Protestant leaders executed .
 What happened in Bohemia was a symptom of the instability of the wider Holy Roman Empire . A destabilizing reform was the result of a destabilizing change in the system, says the historian .
 In its history there had often been power struggles between emperors and local rulers . But the emperor resolved to respect the rights of the individual states that made up the empire .
 Fernando Alvarez, 1560s 99 Most of the battles were in the German and central European lands . Fernando Alvarez was the Spanish conqueror of the 1560 .
 In a few years the Habsburg imperial army had crushed its rivals in Germany, and gone on to overwhelm Denmark . In the 17th century, the imperial army was raised for Ferdinand and led by skilled military leader Albrecht Wallenstein .
 By 1629, Ferdinand was in a position to reclaim the lands that had passed into Protestant hands . Ferdinand was able to reclaim some of the lands in 1629 .
 Sweden, under King Gustavus Adolphus, was able military leader; the other was France, a Catholic country that wanted to curtail imperial power . France wanted to curb imperial power; Sweden was able to do so .
 Gustavus Gustavus arrived in Germany in 1630 with a large army and won a significant victory at Breitenfeld in 1631 . Gustavus won the battle with financial assistance from France, with financial help from France .
 The conflict had now become an all-encompassing war involving virtually every one of Europe's major countries in a struggle for power . The conflict was now becoming a war involving Europe's most powerful nations .
 Gustavus achieved his decisive victory at Breitenfeld with a new, combined-arms approach in which infantry, artillery, and cavalry worked together in self-supporting units . Gustavus wanted to win Gustavus' victory .
 Austria invades Bohemia and Frederick V's territory in Germany . Frederick V was killed in the Battle of the Danube .
 Denmark intervenes to help Lutherans in northern Germany . Sweden begins a campaign against Catholic forces in Germany .
 The Spanish wanted their allies the Habsburgs in power so that they could cross Europe with ease in their hoped-for attack on the Netherlands . Rome wanted his lands in Germany, while the Spanish wanted his allies to be allies with the .
 France, fearful of being surrounded by the Habsburgs and their allies, continued to try to reduce imperial power . France tried to reduce the power of the French empire .
 By the 1640s, anti-imperial forces were regaining the upper hand . The end and the aftermath were the end and aftermath .
 France defeated Spain at Rocroi in the Oise valley in 1643, while Sweden met the imperial army at Junkau, southeast of Prague, in 1645 . Sweden defeated Spain in 1644, 1645, 1644 and 1646 .
 Around half the 16,000-strong imperial army was killed in this bloody battle . It looked as if the Swedes would march on Prague or Vienna . Around half of the imperial army died in the battle .
 Both sides exhausted, and no advance was made on either city . However by this point, both sides were exhausted and no progress made .
 Forces of thousands came together in cavalry charges backed up by firearms, and large numbers of mercenaries were employed . Forces were joined by thousands of mercenaries .
 The battles were fought with professional speed and ruthlessness, but what came after was sometimes even worse . The battles are fought with professionalism, but they were often brutal .
 Vast armies committed infamous atrocities as they pillaged huge areas of country to find food, and removed anything that might be useful to their enemies . The armies pillaged vast areas of the country, pillaging food and removing anything useful to enemies .
 Rural areas suffered particularly badly at the hands of the scavenging troops . Germany lost around 20 percent of its population . Trade and manufacturing were also affected .
 Central Europe took decades to recover from the war, although countries with strong trade networks and sea power fared better . England and the Netherlands fared better than the Netherlands .
 Peace of Westphalia was agreed in 1648 in two northGerman cities, Osnabriick and Munster . Representatives of the empire, Spain, France, Sweden, Sweden and the Dutch Republic gathered in the cities .
 Peace talks could not resolve basic differences between political and religious interests . Peace established overall balance of power among independent nations .
 Europe was now permanently divided into states that were predominantly Catholic or predominantly Protestant . They had agreed to learn to coexist with one another . Europe had agreed that they would coexist peacefully .
 The Peace set the precedent of creating agreements between nations by means of highlevel diplomatic meetings . The like of the like of which have played a key part in international relations ever since .
 The Taj Mahal, the crowning glory of Mughal architecture, is commissioned in 1632 . After 1632 it is commissioned .
 Akbar’s father, Humayun, develops close ties with the Safavid court, who help him recover some of his territories in India . Akbar wins the Second Battle of Panipat and the Mughal dynasty goes on to become the dominant power on the Indian
 Persian culture influences northern Indian literary, architectural, and artistic traditions, resulting in a distinctive Mughal style . Akbar strengthens the Persian artists .
 Abu Akbar became the new ruler of the Muslim Mughal dynasty in northern India in February 1556 . The dynasty was founded by Turkic-Mongol invaders from Central Asia 30 years earlier .
 The emperor's forces confronted Hemu, a rival claimant to the throne of Delhi, at the Second Battle of Panipat . Hemu's army was defeated by the emperor's troops in the battle . The battle was the second battle of the Delhi dynasty .
 The Mughals inflicted a crushing defeat on Hemu, and regained territory lost by Akbar's father, Humayun . Hemu's defeat was a humiliating defeat for the Mughal Empire .
 Akbar gradually consolidated and extended his authority, annexing all of northern and part of central India . Akbar then gradually expanded his authority and annexed the region .
 Rulers were deposed and killed and citizens massacred as once-independent kingdoms became provinces of his empire . Once-independent . kingdoms became . provinces of . His empire was deposed .
 He created a network of highly paid nobles who served as provincial governors, or were employed as commanders of field armies or as part of the central military—the backbone of the empire .
 He also recruited talented men from across India into his government, remunerating them with money or land . Both Muslim and Hindu men were recruited into the government . He recruited talent from across the country .
 This system rewarded individual merit and loyalty, but kept the administration from becoming too centralized . This system was a distinct advantage in an empire that was difficult to hold together from a single center .
 In this miniature painting, the Mughals are seen battling their Hindu enemies at Panipat . The emperor is seen battling his Hindu enemies in the painting .
 Later conquests added money, men, and weapons to the imperial army . Emperor was often on the move, traveling with his court and harem in well-appointed tents .
 Akbar believed in religious freedom and allowed the empire’s non-Muslim populations to live by their own faiths, laws, and customs . Another unifying factor was the spread of Islam, together with its arts and culture . Akbar's empire included a large Hindu majority .
 Akbar set up studios to produce illustrated books in the cities of Fatehpur Sikri and Lahore . Persian architects and artisans were brought to India to design and construct palaces, forts, mosques, and public buildings, including Humayun’s tomb in Delhi
 This domed structure inspired major architectural innovations, and a unique Persianinfluenced building style developed across the Indian subcontinent . The domed building style was Persian influenced across the world .
 The Mughal Empire continued to prosper under Akbar's son Jahangir, but later in the 17th century it declined amid religious conflict and economic problems .
 The emperors were defeated by Afghan invaders, then came under the control of the Marathas, Hindu warriors who dominated Indian affairs in the second half of the 18th century . They were finally taken over by the British after Britain defeated the Maratha in 1818 .
 Painting and literature blossomed under the emperor’s patronage . Although he himself was illiterate, he acquired a library of 24,000 books . He acquired a collection of paintings and paintings .
 His capital at Fatehpur Sikri also became a center for religious debate . His court was a place of culture and learning . His capital became a cultural center .
 Akbar was open to the ideas of other faiths . He invited Hindu, Christian, and Buddhist philosophers to debate with Muslim theologians at his court .
 He even conceived a new religion, which combined elements of all faiths, with himself as the deity . He even created a religion, combining elements of each faith with himself .
 1629 English settlers found the Massachusetts Bay Colony on North America’s east coast . 1629 settlers found Massachusetts Bay in Massachusetts Bay, Massachusetts .
 They set off on two ships, but one proved unseaworthy so they had to continue in just one . The Mayflower was the Mayflower, the first ship to set sail on the New England coast .
 Winter storms ravaged the 66-day crossing and the ship’s main beam fractured . The ship's main beam was fractured during the voyage .
 Pilgrims drew up the Mayflower Compact while still aboard . The Compact pledged loyalty to the Crown but asserted their right to make their own laws within the English legal framework . It was signed by the Pilgrim on Mayflower in 17th century .
 They settled at Plymouth and although many died that first winter, their community endured . Many died that winter, but the community endured, and many died .
 England, like other countries, was competing to establish colonies in North America . At that time, England was competing with other countries .
 Jamestown had been founded thirteen years before the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth, but it was not a religious community . It was founded in 17th century, but was not religious .
 The Colony of Virginia, centered around Jamestown, was established by English colonists in 1607 . English Protestants seeking religious freedom sail to North America on the Mayflower .
 In 1613 the Dutch established a trading post on the western shore of Manhattan Island . The Dutch and Swedish colonists arrived in North America in the early 17th century .
 Plymouth and Jamestown developed representative institutions in which colonists elected officials to govern their own affairs . The colonies' representative institutions were established in Plymouth and the settlement of Jamestow .
 Early developments established a model of self-rule that came to characterize English colonization in North America . Inspired by the English parliamentary model, the Mayflower Compact was established in England .
 Each colony had a governor, appointed by the British monarch, and a legislature, elected by the colonists . Each colony's legislature was elected by colonists, and the governor was appointed by monarch .
 The legislature had to work within the framework of existing English law . There was often tension between the two, because of the tension between them . The British Parliament was often in conflict with the law .
 London saw colonies as a resource rich in raw materials that they could exploit to their advantage . However, the king and government in London, working with the governor, saw the colonies as an resource .
 The English were legally obliged to worship as prescribed by the Church of England . To ensure America remained a ready market for British industry, colonial trade was restricted by the Religious persecution .
 Many people still felt that its hierarchical priesthood and set rituals, hymns, and prayers were Catholic features that should be swept away . The English church had already broken from the Catholic Church .
 Puritans, so-called because of their desire for religious purity, hoped to reform the church from within . Puritans believed to have been religious puritans .
 Navigation Acts required that all commodity trade take place in British ships crewed by British sailors . Navigation Acts, which required British ships to take part in commodity trade, were passed into law in 1877 .
 The colonists came to see these measures as a willful suppression of their trade and manufacturing . The colonists saw the measures as an attempt to suppress their trade .
 Tensions arose on both sides of the Atlantic as British and colonial merchants sought to protect their interests . Tensions between British and British merchants sought the protection of their interests in Europe .
 Relations between the colonists and the indigenous peoples of the East Coast were also starting to strain . Relations between colonists and indigenous peoples were also beginning to strain. Colonial growth was a major problem in colonial times .
 The increasing colonial population put pressure on land and resources, pushing people west to settle on land belonging to American Indians . People west settled on land owned by Native Americans .
 Settlers and U.S. Indians lived in the Netherlands for many years . Separatist groups, known as Separatists, set up their own ‘separate’ congregations . When leaders were imprisoned or even executed, they moved to the more tolerant Netherlands .
 It was very hard to earn a living because the country's professional guilds were closed to them . Here they could adopt the simpler form of worship they preferred, but it was hard for them to earn .
 Pilgrims, and later others, decided to seek a new life in North America . This is part of the reason that they decided to come to North America to live in America .
 The king is executed and an English republic is instituted . We will cut off his head with the crown on the execution of Charles I .
 England was plunged into a series of wars, fought to decide the future of the country . Known collectively as the English Civil War, the war was fought in 1640s and 1650s .
 On one side were the Royalists—predominantly landed gentry and aristocrats who supported King Charles I and his right to rule independently of parliament . The Royalists were the supporters of Charles I, who ruled independently of Parliament .
 Parliamentarians were smaller landowners and tradesmen, many of whom held Puritan beliefs and disliked Charles's autocratic stance . On the other were the Parliamentarians—mainly smaller landowners .
 Charles was tried for treason against England and was beheaded in 1649 . England began an 11-year period as a republic after he was executed . Charles was the last monarch to be executed in England .
 King Charles I and parliament were natural opponents of each other . The causes of the war were the reasons for the conflict .
 Charles was sympathetic to Catholics while parliament was Protestant . Charles believed in the idea that the monarch's appointment is approved by God and so he or she has absolute power .
 The clash first came to a head over the king's repeated attempts to raise money for a war in France . The king was trying to raise funds for the war, but the war was never won .
 Parliament tried to curb his power to do so by introducing a Petition of Right in 1628 . Parliament made it a necessity for its members to approve taxation . Parliament introduced a petition of right, making it necessary to approve tax increases .
 Charles got around this by levying taxes using antiquated medieval laws, selling trading monopolies to raise cash, and ruling without parliament . Charles ruled without parliament and used antiquated laws to raise money .
 In 1640, King Charles I of England was forced to call parliament for the first time in 11 years to raise money to quell a Scottish revolt . Charles I called parliament in 1640 to try and quell the Scottish revolt in Scotland .
 Once called, parliament tried to bring in further measures to limit his power, such as making it illegal for the king to dissolve parliament, but he responded by trying to arrest five MPs .
 Royalists gained the upper hand in 1644 . Parliamentarians reorganized their troops under Oliver Cromwell . The Parliamentarians took over from the Royalists in 1643 .
 With their disciplined, professional approach, this ""New Model Army" forced Charles to surrender in 1646 . With their discipline, the 'New Model army' forced the king to surrender .
 The Second Civil War ended in a Royalist defeat at the Battle of Preston in 1648 . However, the king restarted the war two years later, and this war began the chain of events that led to his execution in 1649 . The formation of a republic under Cromwell called
 Like Charles, Cromwell found relations with parliament difficult, but he tried to bring in reforms . Cromwell tried to reform the British parliament, but found it difficult to do .
 Charles was the son of Stuart King James I of England (King James VI of Scotland) and Anne of Denmark . Charles was born in 1600 and became king in 1625 . He became king of England in 1600 .
 From the start, he alienated both subjects and parliament with his demands for taxation (mostly to fund wars in France) and his assertion of his divine right to rule . His demands for taxes were mostly to fund war in France .
 He ruled with stern Puritan authority, imposing it ruthlessly on the Scots and the Irish . He was unpopular in Scotland, where he tried to replace the prevailing prevailing .
 Charles I’s exiled son came home to reign after his exile . Charles I's exiled son was king of England in 16th century . He ruled the country for more than a century .
 Charles II agreed to limitations on royal power and uphold the Protestant faith . His Catholic brother James II clashed with Anglican bishops and offended Protestants by offering prominent positions .
 Fears of having another Catholic king mounted until, in 1688, in what became known as the Glorious Revolution, James was deposed . James was the first Catholic king to be deposed in England .
 The king was sent into exile and replaced by his Protestant daughter Mary, who ruled with her Dutch husband William of Orange . The king and his daughter Mary ruled with their Dutch husband .
 In 1689, William and Mary accepted a Bill of Rights, which ensured their subjects had basic civil liberties, such as trial by jury, and made the monarchy subject to the law of the land . The monarchy was made subject of the law and subject to trial by juries in 16
 During the English Civil War, he took an active part in leading the Royalist armies until he was captured . Initially, he was put under house arrest, then he was imprisoned before his execution .
 I n 1660, the Company of Royal Adventurers Trading to Africa was established in England . It was established by 1660 . The Company was set up to trade in Africa .
 Its charter, endorsed by the king, gave its ships the exclusive right to trade on the West African coast, and permitted its members to set up forts there .
 American ship, the Wild&ie, bound for Cuba in around 1860 . Captured captives aboard ship bound for the island in around 60 years .
 The company built a trade that lasted even after the company disbanded in 1752 . It transported many thousands of Africans to a life of slavery . Millions of Africans were displaced to lives of toil in the Americas .
 Company became involved in the Second Dutch War, a trade conflict between the Netherlands and England during which the Dutch took many English forts, excluding them from the slave trade during the war .
 Involvement in the war almost brought the Company of Royal Adventurers to bankruptcy . In 1672, with a new charter from the king, the company re-emerged, renamed, restructured and granted the right to carry slaves for sale in the Americas .
 It prospered, transporting some 100,000 slaves between 1698 and 1698 . Royal power having been restricted by the Bill of Rights, it lost its monopoly over the trade .
 After 1698, other merchants were allowed to join the trade but had to pay a levy to the company of 10 percent on all their African exports . Other merchants were also allowed to enter the trade after 1698 .
 The involvement of other merchants strengthened the trade to the point that it became part of the fabric of British mercantile life .
 English Crown needs revenue. Portuguese traders in the late 14th century were the first to trade with the English Crown . Portuguese traders were among the first Europeans to trade in England .
 African Millions of Company is English merchants formed to organize trade to enrich displaced and enslaved in the growing merchants and transatlantic slave trade . Hr the Crown is a potential source of slaves .
 Diogo Gomes, Portuguese explorer 99 Europeans to ship slaves from West Africa . Gomes was one of the first Europeans to discover West African slaves . He was also the first to discover the slave trade .
 By the 16th century, the Portugese were bringing slaves to Brazil to work on sugar cane plantations . The Portugese brought slaves in huge numbers of slaves to the country .
 Brazil remained biggest destination for the import of African slaves until the outlawing of the trade . Brazil remained the biggest destination to import African slaves .
 The first English slaving expeditions took place in the 1560s, when merchants bought captured slaves from African rulers .
 During the 17th century, with the increase of English colonization, the market for African slaves grew . The Royal African Company took full advantage of it .
 The transatlantic slave trade soon became part of a larger triangular trading network . Ships took slaves from Africa to the Americas; refilled the holds with goods to transport to Europe . Then took European manufactured goods on to Africa for sale, completing the triangle .
 Ships carried commodities such as sugar, molasses and coffee from the Caribbean to England . Rice, indigo, cotton, and tobacco from the southern colonies in North America . Furs, timber, and rum from the northeast .
 On the Englandto-Africa leg, the team carried a range of items including cloth, guns, iron, and beer .
 Goods such as ivory and gold were carried directly from Africa to Europe, not as part of the triangular trade but still bolstering the system .
 Trade network brought huge profits to plantation owners in the Americas, and to English manufacturers, as well as the merchants who dealt in the slaves and other goods .
 Port operators, West African leaders who sold slaves, bankers who loaned money for expeditions, and even English factory workers whose jobs depended on raw materials imported from abroad, all benefited from the money .
 Slave trade made possible the rapid rise of Western capitalism in the 18th century . Slave trade was a key part of this trading network, making possible the rise in Western capitalism .
 Even factories some distance away from England's trading ports became involved in the crisis . Even factories in England's factories became involved .
 Business of arms manufacture was based in the English Midlands at population centers such as Birmingham, conveniently close to supplies of iron .
 Some 150,000 guns, mostly made in Midland factories, were exported to West Africa every year . Almost all of the guns exported to Africa were made in these factories . The shrieks of the women, and the groans of the dying, rendered the whole scene of horror almost
 99 Tobacco from Virginia was in great demand in Europe . 99 Tobacco was a popular tobacco product from Virginia . Olaudah Equiano was an African writer and freed slave .
 Planters shipped their products directly to their home countries and used the profits to buy African labor and European goods . The profits were then exchanged with African merchants for slaves .
 English cutlery from Birmingham and Sheffield was also traded in the same way . Cutlery was traded from Birmingham to Sheffield and Sheffield .
 So many people had vested interests in the triangular trade that it became difficult for European politicians even to criticize the system, let alone abolish it . The triangular trade trade is a form of economic and political power .
 It has been estimated that by the time the slave trade was outlawed in Britain in 1807, some 3 million Africans were forced into lives of slavery in the Americas .
 Unknown numbers of people did not even reach America, but died en route en route in the appalling conditions on board the slave ships . Unknown number of people do not even reached America, as well as many who died en-route .
 More were likely to have been carried by Portuguese traders bound for Brazil . Ships from other nations carried smaller numbers .
 Historians have estimated the total number of people killed by the Holocaust . Some historians estimate the figure at around 10 million; others put the figure still higher .
 The profits it generated accelerated the development of European economies . But the trade also displaced millions of Africans . The profits were also displaced by millions of African people .
 Manufactured goods and textiles were taken to Africa and used to barter for slaves . Manufactures goods ' and texts were used to . barter . for slaves in Africa . Manufacturers goods were sent to Africa to trade in slaves .
 European colonies pioneered the plantation system in the Caribbean . Spanish, Dutch, and French settlers pioneered the plantations system .
 The use of slave labor on these plantations generated substantial profits for owners . Owners used slave labor to generate substantial profits .
 Britain’s most successful colony was Barbados, where there were 46,000 slaves by the 1680s . The British presence in the area increased in the 17th century .
 Most of the native populations were wiped out in the European conquests . European workers did not fare well in the local conditions, so plantation owners relied on merciless exploitation of slaves .
 Slavery was also prevalent in the colonies of North America, especially the southern areas where crops such as tobacco were grown on plantations . Slavery also was prevalent in colonies such as the colonies .
 Slaves were often treated as nonhuman objects, forced into labor and subjected to cruelties such as beating, branding, and worse . Slaves are often treated inhumanely and often subjected to cruel treatment .
 Colonists from Europe also practiced slavery beyond the Atlantic trading triangle . Slavery beyond the triangle was practiced in Europe and beyond .
 The Dutch pioneered slave trading in Southeast Asia . The Dutch also traded across the Indian Ocean with areas such as Madagascar and Mauritius .
 Most of this trading was conducted under the auspices of the Dutch East India Company . The company had its eastern headquarters on the island of Jakarta, known to the Dutch as Batavia .
 From these points they sent slaves around the Indian Ocean, from eastern Indonesia to southern Africa . The slaves were sent around the world, from east Indonesia to south Africa .
 Once the Portuguese and English had set up bases, there was also further slave trading along the Indian coast .
 Muslim merchants transported slaves from East Africa for sale elsewhere in the Muslim world . Muslim merchants also transported slaves to other Muslim world for sale .
 The triangular trade was a crucial element in the creation of a global economy run by Europeans and their colonial offshoots for their own profits . However, the triangular trade is a crucial part of the global economy .
 Trade allowed a phenomenal growth in the wealth of countries that ran the trade . It permitted a . phenomenal growth of the wealth in the . countries that run the trade. Countries that ran it .
 In Britain, the value of foreign trade rose from £10 million at the beginning of the 18th century to £40 million in the end of the century .
 The human cost of the trade in slaves, which influenced patterns of thought and behavior for centuries, remains incalculable today . But the human cost is incalculated today . The slave trade is still incurable today .
 The company was created to facilitate trading expeditions to Asia . It was the first international corporation to be created .
 Dutch government granted company the power not only to trade, but also to build fortifications, establish settlements, raise armies, and enter into treaties with foreign rulers . Unusually, the Dutch government had granted the power to build settlements, establish fortifications and establish settlements .
 Since the organization had a huge network of ships, ports, and personnel, it required considerable funding and many investors . The organization needed considerable funding .
 In the 17th century, the Netherlands was growing economically despite being involved in a long war with Spain . The Netherlands was involved in the war between Spain and the Netherlands .
 The northern part of the Dutch Republic (the Dutch Republic, which was Protestant) had split from the southern half (Flanders, who was Catholic) in the late 16th century . The southern half of the region was Flanders, Flanders .
 Republic consisted of seven separate northern provinces, each with a great deal of independence but under the umbrella of a federal government called the StatesGeneral . The Republic was formed from a federation of seven northern provinces .
 Protestant merchants who had lived in Catholic cities, such as Antwerp, moved north to escape persecution, taking with them their capital and trading links . Protestant merchants moved north, taking their capital with them .
 Flemish artisans who were skilled in textile production emigrated to the northern cities of Haarlem, Leiden, and Amsterdam, boosting the Dutch Republic’s economy further . Also, many artisans emigrated in the Netherlands .
 Most importantly, the nation had a strong tradition of seafaring, giving it a huge advantage over many other countries . The nation's seafaring tradition is a huge part of its seafaring heritage .
 The expanding population of the Dutch Republic in the 17th century encouraged farmers to make agriculture much more productive . In addition, its citizens had a strong work ethic—largely due to the Protestant belief that that work ethic .
 In large part, this was achieved through continued land reclamation . Land reclamation was already well underway by the late Middle Ages .
 Dutch East India Company ran its own shipyards, the largest being in Amsterdam . Instead of growing grain one year and letting the land lie fallow the next, farmers began planting certain nitrogen-producing crops (such as peas)
 Very powerful in the 17th century, the company went bankrupt and was dissolved in 1800. worldly work was a duty and a route to salvation .
 There was also a growing population (especially of the urban middle classes) and an expanding major city (Amsterdam) Amsterdam proved an ideal center for trade .
 The Dutch economy is moving increasingly toward shipping, trading, and finance . All these contributing factors resulted in the Dutch economy moving toward finance and shipping .
 As a coastal nation, the Dutch Republic produced notable sailors and explorers . Long-distance trading was a natural consequence of the country’s maritime history .
 By 1670, the Dutch had more merchant ships than the rest of Europe put together . The Dutch used turnips, clover, and clover as animal feed to improve the soil ready for the next corn crop .
 Growing fodder meant that farmers could keep larger herds, thereby increasing production of meat and milk as well as manure, which could be used as fertilizer . Growing fodder means that farmers can keep bigger herds .
 Some wheat still had to be imported to make up the shortfall . This greater productivity helped to sustain a growing population .
 It freed up larger segments of the population to work in trade or finance rather than agriculture . It also freed up large segments of those working in finance or trade .
 In 1596, the Dutch explorer Willem Barentsz tried to find a northern passage to Asia . In the process, he discovered Svalbard, which later became a destination for Dutch whalers . The island is now home to a large population of people .
 From 1595 the Dutch began to make regular journeys to Southeast Asia to trade in spices, particularly pepper, nutmeg, cloves, and cinnamon . Most importantly for their prosperity was the Dutch trade in pepper and nutmeg .
 They established colonies in the region and founded the city of Batavia, later renamed Jakarta . The city was founded by the Dutchmen in 18th century .
 Batavia was the headquarters of the Dutch East India Company in Asia . With this permanent base, Batavia became a permanent base of the company .
 The port city was founded by the Dutch in 1619 after razing the existing city of Jayakarta to the ground . The Dutch had the ability to trade long-term, producing a massive boost to their economy .
 Dutch exploration and trade was injected back into the Dutch economy . But at the same time investment was required to cover the considerable costs of overseas expeditions .
 A trading voyage to Asia in the 17th century was a very risky venture . Storms at sea, pirates, warfare, or an accident could lead to the loss of a ship, crew, or cargo .
 It therefore made sense for many people to invest in each voyage and spread the risk, rather than one entity shouldering all the costs and responsibilities . It made sense to many people invest into each voyage, not just one individual .
 Private trading companies were set up, each investing a small amount in a larger whole, and all being well they would then receive a commensurate share of the profits . Private trading firms would invest small amounts in larger whole .
 Confusion of Confusions 99 enterprise were allocated at the new Stock Exchange in Amsterdam . Confusion 99 enterprise was allocated to the new stock exchange in Amsterdam, Amsterdam .
 Owners could buy and sell shares on the Stock Exchange in order to raise money . It was established at the outset that the owners could purchase and sell these shares . Very quickly other companies were listing their own shares .
 The ease of buying and selling shares meant that the Stock Exchange became very busy indeed, fueling the growth of capitalism in Europe . Increased investment resulted in more industry, which then led to further investment and the generation of wealth .
 Amsterdam Stock Exchange did not develop in a vacuum . Amsterdam has a long history of trading . The Dutch Stock Exchange has been trading for decades .
 Buying and selling securities -- tradable financial assets -- has a long history in Europe . Buying, selling securities already has a history of trading in European currencies .
 By the 14th century, possibly earlier, merchants in rich Italian trading cities, such as Venice and Genoa, had traded in securities . The 14th-century trading began in Venice .
 The Dutch market was especially buoyant in the 17th century . However, the prevailing conditions in the Netherlands in the 16th century were particularly buoyant .
 The Dutch East India Company is set up to share the financial risk of voyages between multiple investors . The company was set up in 17th century .
 The Amsterdam Stock Exchange is formed to allow shares in the East India Company to be traded . Rapid buying and selling creates a fluid financial market, encouraging speculators to take more risk .
 The idea of buying and selling shares appealed in this entrepreneurial society, especially as there was a good prospect of healthy profits from the Asian trade . The idea was appealing in the entrepreneurial society .
 The unique way in which the exchange traded—opening for limited hours only—encouraged rapid buying and selling and produced a very fluid market . In addition, the unique way of trading in the U.S. was also encouraged by the way the market traded .
 The opening of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange was followed in 1609 by the foundation of the Bank of Amsterdam—the forerunner of modern national banks . The opening was followed by the opening of Amsterdam's first stock exchange in 1607 .
 The bank provided a secure place to keep money and bullion, and it assured that local currency kept its value . The bank also provided a safe place to store money .
 Dutch Republic helped make the Dutch Republic more financially secure, underpinning the vigorous and often risky trading activity that went on in this burgeoning market .
 Dutch East India Company negotiated a new charter in 1623, paying investors a regular dividend and allowing those who wanted to leave the company to sell their shares on the Stock Exchange .
 This action further increased trade on the Stock Market, which was also pioneering other lucrative activities such as futures trading .
 The insurance business was also thriving in Amsterdam during this time . Marine insurance was created in 16th century to protect ship owners and investors against the risks of long-distance voyages .
 When the Stock Exchange opened, a special area was set aside for the buying and selling of insurance . When the stock exchange opened, it was set up for the insurance market .
 Dutch middle classes were encouraged to buy fine furniture and oil paintings in Amsterdam in the 17th century . The very buoyant financial activity prevalent in Amsterdam encouraged the expanding middle classes to buy consumer goods, including fine furniture .
 A particularly strong art market developed, allowing major painters to flourish . Vermeer and Rembrandt, as well as numerous lesser followers, flourished .
 Many artists were specialists, satisfying a growing demand for portraits, landscapes, seascapes, and still lifes . Great artists like Rembrandt excelled in all genres and art forms, including painting, drawing, and printmaking .
 The increasing wealth also led to the expansion of towns, with new town halls, warehouses, and merchants' homes springing up .
 Numerous brick houses, owned by the middle classes, survive in cities such as Amsterdam and Delft . Many of them are set on the banks of the canals that were built during this period of economic boom .
 After VICTORY, TIGHTEN THE CORDS OF YOUR HELMET . Unrest is widespread throughout Japan . After victory, Tighten the CORDS of your helmet .
 October 21, 1600 was a momentous battle in Sekigahara, central Japan, between two warring factions . Eastern and Western armies were fighting for control of the country .
 The Eastern Army, under the leadership of the lord Tokugawa Ieyasu, won a decisive victory in the war .
 The Emperor of Japan awarded Ieyasu the title of shogun, granting him the power to rule the country on the emperor’s behalf . Three years later, the Emperor gave him the title to rule Japan on behalf of him .
 Ieyasu brought stability and peace to Japan and transferred the nation's capital to Edo . Edo created a new focus for Japanese culture as well as a central power base . The Edo period was one of the most important periods of Japanese history .
 Since 1192, the Emperor of Japan had been little more than a figurehead . Factional struggles since 1192 led to the Emperor's death .
 Japan had endured bitter factional struggles between its ruling classes for over a century . The Battle of Sekigahara took place at the end of the First World War .
 Ieyasu’s victory at the battle put an end to this Warring States Period . The victory in the battle ended the warring States period .
 His steady rule, followed by that of the Tokugawa shoguns who succeeded him, ushered in a 250year period of stability . He ruled Japan for 250 years .
 In many respects, the Tokugawa shoguns modeled themselves on earlier rulers . Toyotomi Hideyoshi was one of the most influential shogun rulers .
 Hideyoshi (who ruled under the lesser title of imperial regent) had brought unity to Japan in the 1580s by imposing a military, feudal style of rule . He wielded great power through the daimyos and their samurai warriors . Although he was not sufficiently high-
 The samurai leader Tokugawa Ieyasu was the son of a minor Japanese warlord from Mikawa in central Japan . He was born in Mikawa, central Japan, and died in 1883 .
 Ieyasu learned the key values of loyalty and military power that Tokugawa shoguns decided to govern in the same way . Nobunaga and Hideyoshi built up large personal landholdings, but he also learned the same values .
 Ieyasu made the daimyos spend alternate years in Edo to ensure they would not build up local power bases . He also suppressed rivals ruthlessly . As an extra precaution, he made alternate years of Edo years in order to avoid local power .
 Shoguns encouraged an ethic of loyalty and developed an elite bureaucracy . The shoguns were known for their loyalty ethic and developed a bureaucracy .
 They improved Japan’s road network, promoted education, and standardized the currency . They improved the road network and promoted education . They also improved the currency and improved the economy .
 Shogunate tried to reduce foreign influence in Japan by expelling foreigners and limiting contact with the outside world . The shogunate also expelled foreigners and limited contact with outside world.
 All other Europeans were distrusted, as the shoguns believed they had plans to convert the Japanese to Christianity and gain political power . Exceptions were made for strictly controlled trade with the Chinese, Koreans, and the Dutch East India Company .
 Japanese people were forbidden to travel and build ocean-going ships . They were also forbidden to build ships and travel .
 Hideyoshi's policy of isolation virtually cut off Japan from Western influence until the mid-19th century . This policy was used to bring a brief period of unity to Japan . Hideyoshoto was able to bring the country back to unity .
 As shogun, he was able to impose stability on his country . He formally abdicated after only two years in favor of his son, Hidetada .
 Ieyasu remained the effective ruler of Japan until his death . Although Hidetada had officially become shogun, Ieyas remained the effective ruler .
 The capital Edo became the center of a thriving urban culture during the Tokugawa shogunate . Edo was known as the "floating world" of Edo .
 Japanese literary forms, such as the haiku and kabuki, flourished .
 It was also a time of major achievements in the visual arts, particularly landscape painting and woodblock printing .
 Originally, Buddhists had used the term ukiyo to mean ""sorrowful world," reflecting their opinion that life on earth was transitory and expressing a desire to reach a more permanent place, free from suffering and all earthly desires .
 In the Edo Period the homonym ukiyo was used to describe the joyful aspect of the ephemeral material world, reflecting the pleasure-seeking mood of the day .
 The Qing destroy all Ming resistance and establish their rule across China . After 1683 The Qing establish the Qing rule in China .
 Qianlong employed the Italian Jesuit Giuseppe Castiglione as court painter . His imperial portraits fused elements of Chinese scroll painting with Western realism and perspective .
 I n 1644, the Manchu—a seminomadic people who had built a large state to the northeast of China's Great Wall—seized Beijing from the crumbling Ming regime and established their own dynasty, the Qing, as the rulers of northern China .
 The Qing had overcome the determined resistance of Ming loyalists, and extended their power across mainland China . Seventeen years later, after fierce fighting on an epic scale, the Qing had defeated the Ming loyalist .
 Kangxi, the second emperor, was forced to confront a major uprising in 1673, known as the Revolt of the Three Feudatories . The dynasty was still not secure, and Kangxi faced a major revolt against his dynasty .
 The Three Feudatories were vast areas of south China that had been granted as semi-independent fiefdoms to three turncoat Ming generals who had assisted the Qing in their conquest of China .
 Kangxi declared that the generals would not be hereditary the generals rebelled . Over time, the fiefdoms became increasingly autonomous, but when he declared that they would be hereditary they rebelled against him .
 The ensuing struggle was hugely costly in terms of loss of life and economic disruption . For a while, it seemed that one general, Wu Sangui, would topple the Qing, but it wasn't .
 In 1683, the Qing eliminated the last stronghold of Ming support on Taiwan, which they then occupied . However, he was finally defeated by Kangxi’s supporters .
 Kangxi embarked on military campaigns that added parts of Siberia and Mongolia to the Chinese empire, and extended its control over Tibet . Kangxi was Kangxi's first ruler of the Qing dynasty .
 Qing emperors legitimized their foreign rule by adopting Chinese ways . The first three Qing . emperors . legitimize their foreign . rule by taking up Chinese ways.
 In the stability that follows, China triples in size and the economy expands rapidly . In the past, China's stability followed by rapid economic growth, the economy triples .
 In the 18th century, China becomes the biggest manufacturing power in the world . China is now the world's largest manufacturing power .
 By the end of the 19th century, the Qing are a power in name only, as the pressures of European imperial expansion and growing internal dissent fatally weaken the regime . China enjoyed a golden age of peace, economic prosperity, and political stability that lasted until the late 18th century .
 Kangxi won the cooperation and loyalty of his native Han Chinese subjects by preserving and honoring China’s cultural heritage . During his 61-year reign, Kangxi became a global superpower . Kangxi was once viewed the Manchu as barbarians by his Han subjects .
 Ming officials were allowed to retain their provincial posts alongside Manchu appointees, although the latter supervised most of the work . He continued the preceeding dynasty’s form of government, and allowed Ming officials to retain provincial posts .
 Qing China became immensely powerful during the reigns of the next two emperors—Yongzheng and Qianlong . The empire's borders reached their greatest extent and the population boomed .
 Qianlong was an avid patron of the arts who wrote poetry and sponsored literary projects that enhanced his people’s reputation . Qianlong banned or destroyed books that were judged to be anti-Qing .
 Ignatius of Loyola, a Catholic theologian from Spain, founded the Society of Jesus in 1540 . The Jesuits spread the faith through the teachings of Jesus . Jesuits in China were the first to arrive in China .
 The Catholic Church sent Jesuit missionaries to China during the Ming and early Qing periods, and initially they were welcomed . Initially they were initially welcomed .
 Han Chinese men were required to wear the Manchu hairstyle, in which the front and sides of the head were shaved, and the remaining hair plaited into a braid . Society was rigidly hierarchical, and there were strict conventions regarding the conduct of women, laws against homosexuality
 China's economy grew substantially in the early part of the Qing period, thanks to a strong demand in the West for luxury products such as silk, porcelain, and tea . Yet the country's economic growth was largely due to demand for silk and tea in China .
 By the beginning of the 19th century, the regime's repressive treatment of the Han Chinese people, together with famine and widespread addiction to opium, had sent the country into decline . However, by the end of the 1800s, the country had been in decline .
 Jesuits were appointed to the imperial board of astronomy . Jesuits made the first accurate map of Beijing .
 Kangxi expelled Jesuit missionaries who opposed ancestral rites . The pope followed suit, and the pope also followed suit . When a visiting Vatican envoy ruled against the ancestral rites, the pope followed them .
 After 1690 Christiaan Huygens publishes his theory of the wave motion of light, Traite de la lumiere .
 Isaac Newton published the first edition of his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, or Principia, in 1687 . Newton published his first edition in the Mathematical Principle of Natural . Philosophy .
 The book examines the way objects behave in motion, describes gravity, and explains the movements of planets and satellites .
 Galileo's work was revolutionary . It built on the work of earlier scientists such as Galileo, Huygens, and Kepler .
 By illustrating how the same force is responsible for movements both on Earth and in the heavens, it united two scientific realms that had previously been thought separate .
 Newton's use of mathematics-based theory to explain phenomena was part of a wider scientific revolution . Newton's work in mathematics helped him develop a long-standing scientific theory .
 English essayist Francis Bacon insisted that scientists test their observations using reasoned argument . French philosopher Rene Descartes championed the use of mathematics and logic to address scientific questions .
 By emphasizing ** spread the light of mathematics on a science which ... had remained in the darkness of conjectures and hypotheses . By emphasizing the importance of mathematics, it spread the . light of math to spread the ... science which... had remained . in the dark .
 Alexis Clairaut was a French mathematician and astronomer . He argued that explanations of the physical world depended on Christian faith and church doctrine . He was the first French philosopher to argue for the importance of reason .
 This paved the way for the intellectual movement called the Enlightenment, and even for the work of later scientists such as Albert Einstein, who modified and refined Newton’s theories . The Enlightenment, the Enlightenment and later scientists like Albert Einstein refined Newton's theories .
 The first convicts from Britain arrive at the Port Jackson penal colony in 1788 . After 1788, convicts began to be sent to the colony .
 British navigator James Cook sailed to Tahiti to make scientific observations of the Transit of Venus across the Sun, a rare event that could be seen only from the southern hemisphere . The transit of Venus was only visible from the south of the planet .
 He mapped the New Zealand coast, and then traveled northwest, discovering the eastern coast of Australia in the process . He traveled to New Zealand, then traveled to the east coast, discovering Australia . He discovered the eastern side of Australia .
 He produced unique records of indigenous peoples, flora, and fauna . He also produced work with botanists Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander .
 Cook's voyages were part of a wider tradition of European exploration of the Pacific by navigators such as Abel Tasman . Tasman, after whom Tasman is named, explored the Pacific in the early 1800s .
 Richard Pickersgill, Third lieutenant on the Resolution ff of British convicts into exile, and the founding of cities such as Sydney and Melbourne . He was part of the First Battalion of the New Zealanders in the First World War .
 In his later voyages, Cook used the chronometer, newly developed by Englishman John Harrison . Cook's chronometer was developed by the Englishman in the early 1800s . The chronometer is now used in Cook's final voyage .
 It facilitated accurate timekeeping at sea, and so the calculation of precise longitude, which was invaluable to Cook in charting his discoveries . It also enabled accurate time keeping at sea and helped him chart the world .
 After 1685 Louis XIV revokes the Edict of Nantes, which had granted Huguenots the right to practice their religion . The Edict was revoked in 1685 .
 Louis XIV of France declared that he would now rule alone, as an absolute monarch . I am the state LOUIS XIV BEGINS PERSONAL RULE OF FRANCE .
 During his 72-year reign, Louis dominated his subjects . He cultivated the image of a ‘Sun King’ around whom the country orbited . Louis was known as the "Sun King" of France .
 Louis saw himself as the embodiment of the state, with the nobility, the middle classes, and peasants dependent on him for justice and protection . Louis saw his power as God-given, and himself as a god-given man .
 Louis controlled the historically unruly aristocracy . To maintain this position, Louis controlled an unruly aristocrat .
 He compelled them to attend his court, where he dispensed privileges and positions via a system of etiquette . The court was set up by an etiquette system that dispensed positions and privileges .
 He filled the treasury’s depleted coffers by appointing members of the uppermiddle classes to collect taxes in the provinces . The former prime minister filled the country's depleted coffers with the help of upper middle classes .
 Jean-Baptiste Colbert overhauled France's trade and industry helped to make the country Europe’s leading power . Colbert increased the efficiency of the revenue system .
 Louis's tax income paid for his court at the dazzling Palace of Versailles . An old hunting lodge extended into a royal palace, the venue for extravagant entertainments .
 From 1682 it became the permanent base of the royal court, and the seat of government . It was also the capital of the Spanish monarchy from 1682 to 1688 .
 Louis also waged a series of costly dynastic wars to make some territorial gains along France’s frontiers, leading the other European nations to form coalitions against him . Louis also fought to make territorial gains .
 Peace was finally achieved at the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, but brought few gains for France . Peace was reached at the end of the 17th century .
 The country was plunged into debt and opinion turned against the Crown . The country's debt was so high that it was plunged to bankruptcy .
 Louis established a pattern of absolutism in France that lasted, in a more enlightened form, for most of the 18th century . Attempts to reform the system resulted in the overthrow of the monarchy in 1792 during the French Revolution .
 24 British men scaled the cliffs below Quebec on September 13, 1759, opening the way for British forces commanded by General James Wolfe to capture the city .
 The war involved most of the chief European nations in a struggle for territory and power . Most of the European nations were involved in the conflict .
 Overseas colonies also became involved in the conflict, making it the first true global conflict . This was the first ever global conflict between the colonies .
 A French invasion attempt on Britain was thwarted by Britain's superior navy . Britain scored colonial victories over France in West Africa, the Caribbean, and the Caribbean .
 Frederick the Great, 1747, was the first king to conquer North America . He led a series of successful military campaigns in Canada . Frederick's success in Canada was a major success in Europe .
 Britain forced France to cede all of their territory east of the Mississippi River . The move effectively ended the threat France posed to Britain’s North American colonies . France was defeated by Britain in the 17th century .
 British general Robert Clive wrongfooted the French by defeating the Nawab of Bengal at Plassey in 1757 and acquiring his territory for Britain . The victory paved the way for the British domination of India .
 The end of the Seven Years' War left Britain the leading colonial power . Britain was the most powerful colonial power in Europe .
 Denis Diderot invited some of his country’s leading intellectuals to write articles for a huge “Classified Dictionary of Sciences, Arts, and Trades" for which he was both editor-in-chief and contributor . The French philosopher invited scientists, scientists, scholars,
 The first volumes of his Encyclopedic appeared in 1751, and the full work was completed 21 years later . It is made up of 17 volumes of text and another 11 volumes of illustrations . It was published in 1783, with an estimated 4,000 pages of text .
 They sought to apply reason and logic to explain the phenomena of the natural world, and humankind’s existence, rather than religious or political dogma . They sought the application of reason to explain natural phenomena rather than dogma .
 The work challenged both the Catholic Church and the French monarchy, which derived their authority from traditional ideas such as a divinely ordained, unchanging order .
 The mission of the Encyclopedie was to catalog the collective knowledge of the Western world in the spirit of the Enlightenment . A revolution in thought was the first of its kind .
 This was a multifaceted intellectual movement that took root around 1715 . Its origins lay in work done by the pioneers of modern scientific and philosophical thought in the previous century .
 The work's multidisciplinary articles, which numbered around 72,000, distilled the ideas and theories of France's key Enlightenment thinkers . Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Montesquieu were among the key thinkers .
 Religion, like magic and superstition, was treated as part of philosophy . Controversially there was no special category for God or the divine .
 The Encyclopedie became the most influential and widely consulted work of the period . It was the work of its editors, despite efforts by the authorities to censor some articles .
 The ideas that it transmitted inspired the revolutions that exploded in France and the U.S. at the end of the 18th century . The ideas were transmitted by the ideas of the revolution .
 Enlightenment was characterized by a focus on the power of human reason and skepticism of accepted knowledge . The Enlightenment movement was characterized as a belief in science and skepticism .
 This marked a break from earlier generations in which beliefs about the world derived from religious teachings and the doctrines of the Church . This is the first generation of people to reject religious teachings from the Church.
 These governed everything from the laws of marriage to the way people understood the movement of the planets and the creation of the universe .
 He was born in Paris in 1694, and spent much of his long life there . He traveled widely and spoke several languages .
 Voltaire was an outspoken supporter of social reform, including the defense of civil liberties and freedom of religion and speech . Voltaire also denounced the hypocrisy of the political and religious establishment .
 Candide wrote Candide in Geneva, Switzerland, where he wrote his most famous work . This led to the censorship of some of his work, and also to short spells of imprisonment and exile .
 They argued that “truths"" about the tangible world, which had been set down in antiquity by Aristotle and others, should be tested through experimentation and observation, checked, and then discussed in a rational way . They argued .
 This radical mode of thinking had its origins in the scientific revolution of the 17th century . This radical form of thinking was first developed in the early 1800s .
 Scientists and philosophers including Francis Bacon, Johannes Kepler, Isaac Newton, and Galileo Galilei had transformed the study of nature and the physical universe into observational .
 They conducted careful experiments and subjected their results to mathematical analysis . In the process they drastically updated and expanded the fields of physics, chemistry, biology, biology and astronomy .
 Enlightenment scientists took this investigation of reality further, making possible, for example, the development of a proper, rational biological classification in the early 18th century .
 The inquiring, reason-based approach of the Enlightenment also triggered dramatic technological advances . The Enlightenment was also the impetus for technological advances in the world .
 In the 1760s, the Scottish physician Joseph Black discovered carbon dioxide . In 1769, Scotsman James Watt made improvements to the steam engine that increased its efficiency .
 The Encyclopedie helped publicize the achievements of 18th-century scientists, as well as those of their precursors . It helped to publicize these, and other, achievements of the 18th century .
 The work also found an audience in the learned societies, academies, and universities that flourished in the Enlightenment period .
 Many teachers and scholars at Europe’s older, Church-dominated universities remained deaf to the new scientific way of thought . More progressive ones helped to teach and promote it .
 The scientific revolution and the Enlightenment also encouraged the belief that reason could reveal natural laws in human affairs . Equality and freedom were the focus of the Enlightenment .
 Enlightenment thinkers believed that politics should be separated from religion, that neither should curtail the rights of the individual . People should be free to express their opinions, worship in their own way, and read what they want to .
 This political doctrine, which is often labeled liberalism, had roots in the work of 17th-century philosophers such as Englishman Scepticism .
 Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract 99 . John Locke was the father of liberalism . Rousseau was a French philosopher and philosopher .
 Locke asserted that there are certain intrinsic human rights that are not dependent on law or custom . Locke asserts that these rights exist separately from what the Church or monarch might decree .
 These rights could be expressed in different ways, but included the right to life, liberty, and the freedom to own what one has produced . These rights were expressed by different ways of expressing different ways .
 Enlightenment thinkers felt natural rights should form the basis of any system of government . These ideas were central to Enlightenment thinkers, following Locke, who felt that such natural rights must be a basis for government .
 Liberal ideas also found expression in the work of Enlightenment writers . Liberal ideas found expression by Enlightenment writers.
 Voltaire, in books such as the Philosophical Dictionary, highlighted the injustices and abuses of the Catholic Church . Voltaire espoused values such as tolerance, freedom of the press and the promotion of reason over doctrine .
 Montesquieu advocated the separation of governmental powers (legislature, executive, judiciary) and pressed for an end to slavery . In his Spirit of the Laws, he advocated a separation of government powers . He pressed for the end of slavery .
 In The Social Contract, Jean-Jacques Rousseau rejected the power of the monarch in favor of that of the people . Rousseau said that people must balance rights with duties, and should be able to decide laws that govern their lives .
 The contributors to the Encyclopedic also promoted liberal values in economics . They also promoted the liberal values of economics .
 They were critical of fairs where goods were sold by visiting dealers at the expense of local traders, who often had to close their businesses for the duration of the duration . Fairs allowed local traders to meet the needs of the local population, which allowed local markets to meet local needs .
 Conversations and debates on philosophical, political, and scientific subjects took place in coffee-houses . Coffee-houses had sprung up in English, French, German, and Dutch cities a century earlier .
 These coffee-houses now served as information-sharing hubs where men from all walks of life could congregate to exchange views . Writers, politicians, philosophers, philosophers and scientists could gather to discuss ideas .
 In Europe, the Enlightenment movement, and the Encyclopedic itself, had a profound impact on social, political, and intellectual life . The Enlightenment movement helped promote its ideals .
 Its proponents believed that they were sweeping away an oppressive medieval worldview and ushering in a new era that they hoped would be characterized by freedom of thought, openmindedness .
 The Enlightenment’s questioning, rational approach, and urgent demand for liberty, paved the way for the granting of new civil rights . The Enlightenment's questioning and rational approach paved the . way for civil rights, the author writes .
 The movement affected the policies of monarchical rulers, such as the freeing of serfs in the Holy Roman Empire in the 1780s .
 Monarchs who accepted Enlightenment values took on the movement's name, titling themselves Enlightened Despots . Monarchs accepted the Enlightenment values and became monarchs of the Enlightenment movement . Monarchies who accepted those values were known as Enlightened Monarchs .
 Enlightenment thought provided the intellectual fuel for the French Revolution and the campaign to abolish the Atlantic slave trade in the 19th century . Enlightenment thought also provided the . intellectual fuel to the . French Revolution of 1787-99 .
 Liberalism and other aspects of Enlightenment political philosophy began to influence leaders in many parts of the world when they came to draw up legal systems . Montesquieu’s idea of the separation of power into branches of government .
 The movement promoted the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake . It recognized that one person's quest for understanding could benefit the entire human race . More generally, the movement promoted knowledge .
 The rise of Russia before 1584 was the rise of Ivan the Terrible in Russia . The emperor Ivan died in 1584 . Russia's rise of the Russian empire began in Russia in 1583 .
 After 1709 Russia wins a decisive victory over Sweden at the Battle of Poltava .
 This new city, fortress, and port by the Baltic gave Russia direct sea access to Europe, opening new opportunities for both trade and military conquest . The new city gave Russia access to the Baltic Sea, opening opportunities for trade and conquest .
 In 1712, Peter made his new city Russia's capital, stripping the title from the ancient seat of Moscow . Peter's new city was Russia's new capital, stripped the title of the ancient city .
 Peter employed European architects to design government buildings, palaces, university, and houses in the fashionable baroque style . Peter was an admirer of Western palaces and used European architects .
 He pressed 30,000 peasants each year into construction gangs, along with Russian convict laborers St. St. Peter the Apostle . St. Apostle pressed the peasants to join construction gangs .
 Its strategic location facilitated trade, its ethos encouraged education . Its architecture provided a showcase for Russian achievement. and Swedish prisoners of war .
 He founded the Russian navy and reformed the army, which until then had relied on bands of men led by untrained village elders . Until then, the Russian army was led by village elders and relied on untrained men .
 He reorganized the army along European lines . He developed new iron and munitions industries to equip it . The army was reorganized in Europe .
 A new and modern culture Peter transformed his court, making his courtiers adopt French-style dress instead of traditional robes, and ordering them to cut off their long beards . Peter's courtiers adopted French style dress, and ordered them to change their beards to French style .
 He founded colleges, forced the nobility to educate their children, and promoted people to high rank according to their merit rather than their birth . He also made the nobility be educated by their children .
 Emperor was also known for his aggressive foreign policy . His successful war against Sweden gave him control of the Baltic Sea . Emperor was known for harsh treatment of rebels and aggressive foreign policies .
 Contemporary theories of rulership provide a model of enlightened despotism . This style of rule was continued under later monarchs, notably Catherine II, also ""the Great," who extended - ■ ■ ■ Peter I visits Western Europe, absorbing ideas and influences .
 St. Petersburg as the capital of a Westernized Russian empire . The modernizing trend Peter had begun had begun .
 Influenced by the ideas of the European Enlightenment, she promoted education and the arts . She sponsored translations of foreign literary works, and wrote books herself .
 She too increased Russia’s imperial strength, gaining military victories over the Ottoman Empire . She also gained military victories against the Ottoman empire .
 Between Prussia and Russia lay Poland, whose territories were carved up and took over in a series of partitions . The two powers and Austria carved up their territories, taking over the Polish territories .
 This left Russia with influence over an area stretching from Eastern Europe to Siberia that it still largely retains today . Russia still retains influence over the area that it now largely retains .
 Peter travelled to the Netherlands and England to learn about Western life, government, and architecture . Well educated and constantly curious, Peter is fascinated by Western life .
 He also studied disciplines such as shipbuilding and woodworking, and practised many with distinction .
 His rule was greatly influenced by these travels and by Western advisers, leading him to carry out military reforms and adopt a dictatorial style of rule . He was influenced by his travels and Western advisers .
 The position and grand architecture of his new city illustrated how his focus had been directed towards Western European culture and power .
 Peter forged lasting diplomatic ties with Western Europe, but failed to form a European alliance against the Ottomans . Peter failed in his attempt to form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire .
 He was more successful in his war against Sweden, his reforms, and in establishing himself as emperor of a vast empire and monarchy that survived until the revolution in 1917 .
 Shah Ismail conquered Persia and areas of Iraq in the name of Shia Islam in 1509 . In a series of military campaigns lasting until 1509, he conquered Iran and parts of Iraq .
 His son, Shah Tahmasp, defended these lands against the neighboring Ottoman empire . His rulers followed the opposing Sunni School of Islam . The Sultan's son defended his land from the Ottoman .
 The Safavid dynasty established strong Shia rule in Persia, created an efficient government and bureaucracy, and lasted until 1736 . Safavid rule in Iran lasted until the end of the Safavid era in 1736.
 Charles V was the Hapsburg king of Spain and ruler of Burgundy and the Netherlands . He was elected Holy Roman Emperor in 1519, bringing much of central Europe and northern Italy under his rule .
 This gave him unprecedented power but also brought challenges from the empire's neighbors . France and the Ottomans were on one flank and the Protestants within his territories . He also faced challenges from France on one of his territories and from Protestants within those territories .
 When Charles abdicated, the Spanish crown passed to his son Philip and the title of emperor was given to Ferdinand . Ferdinand was the emperor of Spain and the Spanish king of Spain .
 Henry wanted to divorce Catherine, but the Pope refused him permission to do so . The Pope refused to grant Henry permission to marry Catherine . Henry wanted Catherine to divorce him .
 Henry cut off ties with Rome and declared himself head of the church in England . In response, he cut off relations with the Roman Catholic Church in England, cutting off ties .
 Under Henry the English church remained largely Catholic in doctrine and practice . The king's move paved the way for England’s later acceptance of Protestantism .
 Henry dissolved the monasteries, which brought him a new source of land and wealth, and removed a key link with the Roman Catholic church . In addition, Henry dissolved . Henry also removed a . key link . with the Catholic church, removing a key . link to the church .
 French navigator Jacques Cartier explored the northern coast of Canada and Newfoundland . Cartier sailed up the St. John's, sailing up the north coast of Newfoundland .
 Cartier's explorations were crucial when French travelers began to found settlements there and make claims on the land in the 17th century . Cartier did not establish a colony there, but his explorations sparked the French interest in Canada .
 In 1568, the Protestant northern provinces of the Netherlands rebelled against their Catholic ruler, Philip II of Spain, and declared their independence . It began an 80-year period of war before their Republic was recognized . The Dutch Republic was never recognized .
 Philip had imposed his Catholic beliefs uncompromisingly on his Dutch subjects . So many Protestants from the southern Netherlands, which remained loyal to the crown, moved north .
 The Republic soon grew into a financially and culturally stable nation thanks to sea trade, scientific progress, and artistic achievements .
 In 16th-century France, violent clashes, and, from 1562, civil war, erupted between Catholics and Protestants . Civil war erupted between Protestants and Catholics in France between 1562 and 1562 .
 Protestant claimant to the French throne, Henry of Navarre, was married in Paris in 1572 . Several thousand Protestants were massacred in the French Revolution .
 After Henry became king of France, he issued the Edict of Nantes in 1598, ordering religious tolerance . The Edict was issued by Henry VIII of France after becoming king .
 Defeat at Gravelines sent the remains of the Spanish Armada retreating northward toward Scotland, where many more ships were wrecked by storms .
 Toyotomi Hideyoshi launched attempts to conquer Korea in 1592 and 1597 . The defeat was a blow to Spain and confirmed England's status as a secure Protestant nation under Elizabeth I .
 Both times, Japan made major advances, but the Koreans managed to fight back . The Koreans, with the support of Chinese forces, fought back .
 Korea's Admiral Yi inflicted frequent naval defeats on Japan . However they were unable to expel the Japanese completely, which led to a stalemate on land .
 Beaten at sea and confined to a few fortresses on land, Japan abandoned its attempts to invade . Beaten in sea, Japan was confined to only a handful of fortresses .
 Korea remained independent until 1910, after which there was a 35-year period of Japanese rule . Korea was ruled by Japan for 35 years until 1910 .
 Oliver Cromwell launched his campaign to conquer Ireland in 1649 after Irish Catholics took control of the country from its English administrators in 1641 . Cromwell's campaign was launched after the country was taken over by the Irish Catholics in 1642 .
 Once Cromwell had taken Dublin, Drogheda became a base for Irish Catholic leaders .
 Cromwell laid siege to the town, massacring the people inside its walls when they refused to surrender . Cromwell's people were massacred inside the walls of the town . He massacred the people in its walls after refusing to surrender, Cromwell said .
 Most of the garrison of about 2,500 men, plus many civilians, were killed . Most of them were killed, including many civilians .
 Although the killings did not break the military code of the time, their ruthlessness and the sheer number of victims were both unprecedented . The killings embittered future relations between the English and the Irish Catholics .
 Portuguese explorers were the first Europeans to discover the Cape of Good Hope in the 15th century . The Dutch founded Cape Town and established a colony in the city .
 In 1652, a group from the Dutch East India Company under Jan van Riebeeck established a colony there . The colony created a stopping point for Dutch ships on their way to and from Asia .
 The settlement became the center of a large community of people of Dutch origin . They dominated trade and agriculture in the region and evolved their own language . Afrikaans played a central role in the history of South Africa .
 By 1683, the Turkish Ottoman Empire was at its greatest extent and included large areas of North Africa, the Middle East, and Eastern Europe . The Ottoman Empire included large parts of the Middle Eastern and North Africa . The Ottomans ruled the Ottoman Empire until 1683 .
 Austria was on the empire's western border, and the Turks had already attempted to conquer Vienna . The Turks had tried to take Vienna, but Austria was already on its western border .
 No longer a threat to Christian Europe, they steadily lost their European territories . They steadily lost control of European territory .
 At the Battle of Culloden, Scotland, an army being led by the Duke of Cumberland defeated a smaller force of Jacobites (including many from the Highland clans) under Prince Charles Edward Stuart . The battle took place in 17th century .
 Stuart prince had hoped to restore his bloodline to the British throne . Culloden effectively put an end to his campaign . The Stuart prince was killed by the Battle of the Meddine in 1777 .
 Jacobite support was strongest in the Scottish Highlands . It led to the disarming of the clan system and the suppression of Highland culture .
 Slave Trade Abolition Act is passed in Britain, outlawing trading in slaves . However, slavery itself was not banned until 1833 . Slave trade was banned in 1833, but slavery itself itself was banned .
 Simon Bolivar establishes Gran Colombia, a new South American republic independent of Spanish rule . Gran Colombia lasts until 1830, lasting until 1830 .
 Revolts occur all over Europe as demands for liberalism, socialism, and national selfdetermination grow . All of these demands are suppressed by force . All are suppressed .
 The storming of the Bastille signals the start of the French Revolution . Napoleon is defeated at the Battle of Waterloo by the British, Dutch, and Prussians .
 Rocket steam engine powers the world’s first commercial rail service, which links Liverpool and Manchester . George Stephenson's Rocket steam engines powered the world's first train service .
 The world population exceeded 1 billion in 1804 and was approaching 2 billion by 1914 . World population reached 2 billion in 1914, reaching 2 billion .
 This growth was made possible by tremendous increases in economic output, says President Obama . This growth is made possible because of the country's economic growth .
 Agriculture became more efficient and large areas of new land were put to productive use . Agriculture was more efficient in the early 1900s .
 The exploitation of new sources of energy, especially steam power, revolutionized the manufacture of commodities . New technology and organized industrial production in factories revolutionized industrial production .
 Railways made it possible for humans to travel faster than a horse for the first time and cities expanded . London population increased from 1 million in 1800 to 7 million in 1910 .
 Improvements in public health and medicine increased life expectancy in the most advanced countries . Life expectancy in advanced countries has increased in recent years .
 Despite these advancements, it is debatable whether progress was detectable in the quality of life . It is not clear whether progress has been detectable in quality of the life .
 At the start of this period, political revolutions in America and France enunciated principles of human rights and equal citizenship that radically challenged the existing order of society . The revolution in France and the U.S. was the beginning of the revolution .
 By the early 20th century, liberals and democrats in Europe and North America could look with some complacency upon successes such as the expansion of voting rights, the abolition of slavery, and freedom of speech .
 Women remained mostly excluded from voting, and there was no economic equality . However, women remained largely excluded from the voting system .
 Extremes of wealth and poverty polarized the world's wealthiest and most advanced societies . Conditions of life for industrial workers were often very miserable .
 Romantic movement criticized the impact of mechanized industry on people and the environment . Socialist movements looked forward to further revolutions that would end the exploitation of man by man .
 The most obvious losers in the new world order created by industrial capitalism were the inhabitants of countries at the periphery of the global economy . Western imperialism is the result of industrial capitalism, writes David Cameron .
 The Suez Canal opens, linking the Red and Mediterranean seas . It will dramatically reduce sailing times between Europe and the East .
 A coalition of various reform groups, known collectively as the Young Turks, overthrow the authoritarian Ottoman sultan and attempt to rule . The Young Turks overthrown the authoritarian sultan .
 Giuseppe Garibaldi led 1,000 volunteers to overthrow the French Bourbons in southern Italy and Sicily in 1913 . Italy was unified one year later .
 Emily Davison steps out under King George V’s horse at the Derby and is killed . The death raised the profile of women's suffrage worldwide . She was the first woman to be allowed to vote for the first time .
 They sought land for their expanding populations to settle in thinly populated zones such as the North American plains and Australia . They also sought land to settle for their growing populations .
 The Europeans started expanding the areas under their direct rule or control . The Europeans began expanding the area under their control .
 The British takeover of the Indian subcontinent was the most spectacular example of imperialism in action . SubSaharan Africa was divided among European powers as if the local population did not exist .
 Resistance was widespread in the form of wars and uprisings against European dominance . Resistance to European dominance was widespread throughout Europe's history .
 Growing superiority of the West in technology, science, military power, and social organization led several non-European governments to try to modernize based on the Western model . On the other hand, the growing superiority of Western technology led some countries to try and modernize .
 In the Muslim world, Egypt, Turkey, and Iran have attempted, with only partial success, to pursue a modernizing agenda . Egypt, Iran, Egypt and Turkey have attempted to modernize the Middle East, but failed .
 Japan successfully transformed itself into an efficient modern state, becoming an imperialist power in its own right . In East Asia, Japan transformed itself .
 China experienced turmoil and invasion, and imperial rule collapsed in the early 20th century . China, by contrast, experienced turmoil, invasion and the collapse of imperial rule .
 Most Europeans gloried in a sense of their own racial and cultural superiority to the rest of the world . Europe remained a deeply divided continent, but Europe remained deeply divided .
 Militant nationalism, unleashed by the French Revolution, was a threat to stability . Militant nationalists unleashed by French Revolution was a problem to stability, he says .
 By 1815, the Napoleonic Wars had generated battles of unprecedented scale . The French Revolution was the first major battle to take place in France and France .
 After the wars of the mid-19th century that created a unified Italy and Germany, the great powers maintained large conscript armies and formed mutually hostile alliance systems . Great powers maintained conscripts and alliances with each other .
 These armies were equipped with high-explosive shells and rapid-fire weapons . High-explosion shells were used by armies equipped with rapid-fired weapons .
 European military power, supported by highly organized state systems and economies, was certainly one of the key elements in European world domination . European state systems, economies and economies were key to European domination .
 There would be disaster when European states turned this power against one another, says Simon Tisdall . European states should not turn power against each other, he says .
 After 1777 British defeat at Saratoga persuades France to support the American rebels . British defeat in 1777 persuaded France to join the American rebellion .
 T here has been no more daring assertion of statehood than that proclaimed by the Declaration of Independence . The Declaration was adopted by the Second Continental Congress on July 4, 1776 and signed by all 56 delegates .
 What would become the United States consisted of 13 British colonies, established since the 17th century . The colonies were scattered along the east coast of North America . The U.S. was established by the British Empire in 17th Century .
 They were not just geographically remote from their mother country; most were also remote from each other . Most of the children were born in the same place as their mother .
 American victory in the war with the British government leads to the recognition of independence . Virginia considered themselves to be Virginians, for example, not Americans, not American .
 The colonies were concerned that their freedom would come under threat as a result of British rule . However, they were remarkably self-aware and acutely conscious of Enlightenment notions of political liberty .
 The colonists questioned why a distant parliament and a distant king should impose their will on them . The colonists were unable to assert their own natural rights, and subjected to what they considered unfair taxes .
 This explosively novel idea would lead to the creation of a new and enduring republican government . The idea would be an idea for a new republican government.
 Support for a formal assertion of American independence was far from universal in the colonies . Support for the assertion of independence was not universal among the colonies.
 As many as 500,000 of a population of 2. million remained loyal to the British crown to the end of the conflict . Many subsequently settled in Canada .
 It would take a drawn-out and bitterly fought war to make independence into reality . The conflict takes shape in the early stages of the conflict .
 Britain was determined to assert what it saw as its legitimate rule . The nascent U.S. was no less determined than Britain to assert their right to independence .
 The two modest armies confronted each other in a series of minor engagements over six years . The colonists' lack the means to raise and equip any substantial fighting force .
 At their peak, the American forces numbered scarcely 40,000 and had almost no navy at all . The U.S. Navy was virtually nonexistent at its peak in the 1930s .
 Britain deployed about the same number of soldiers but in addition had a vastly greater number of ships . Britain deployed more soldiers than the UK did in the Second World War II .
 In 1778, France declared support for the colonists and sent 5,000 troops and a substantial fleet . France sent a large fleet of troops and ships to the colony .
 ** These United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States. Facing certain » » » .
 The war would not formally end for another year, but in every important respect, the colonists dealt a huge blow to their British masters . The colonists, and their French allies, had dealt a massive blow to the British government .
 French involvement in the creation of this new nation owed everything to a desire to reverse the humiliations of the Seven Years’ War . The French were determined to reverse their humiliation by the humiliation of the war .
 The debts incurred would, ironically, be among the many causes of the bankruptcy of the French crown that led to the French Revolution in 1789 . The French crown was bankrupted by its debts .
 There was a profound irony, too, in absolutist France seeking to win Americans the freedoms that it was unwilling to accord its own citizens . There was the profound irony of France seeking freedom for its citizens .
 At the heart of the American Revolution was the new political philosophy encapsulated by the Declaration of Independence . Revolutionary ideals were at the core of the Revolution .
 Thomas Jefferson was a haughty, wealthy slave-owner named Thomas Jefferson . He was the work of a distinctly patrician Virginian, a wealthy slave owner named Jefferson .
 He was one of a committee of five charged with writing the Declaration . The two drafts it went through in June 1776 were almost entirely his own .
 It is hard to overstate the importance of the Declaration of Independence, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 These were actively seditious sentiments that neither George III of England nor Louis XVI of France could have any sympathy with . George III and Louis XVI could have no sympathy with the sentiments of Louis XVI .
 The U.S. and liberal political systems across the Western world formed the bedrock of what would become the United States . They nonetheless formed the foundations of the modern Western political systems .
 These political creeds are derived from the work of In Declaration of Independence by John Trumbull . The drafting committee is shown presenting its work to Congress .
 British and French Enlightenment thinkers, led to the creation of the first modern state and, in doing so, changed the world .
 He loathed monarchy yet loved pre-Revolutionary France, where he was the United States’ first ambassador, delighting in its civilized elegance . He was the U.S. first ambassador to France .
 He claimed to despise high office yet served two terms as President of the United States . He claimed he hated high office but served two .
 In 1803 he drove through the Louisiana Purchase, which saw a vast area west of the Mississippi transferred at a bargain price from France, its nominal ruler, to the US .
 Thomas Jefferson understood that the destiny of the U.S. lay in its colonization of the vast lands to the west . He assented to the notion that its indigenous inhabitants should be driven off, and he owned slaves .
 George Washington, also a patrician Virginian, freed his slaves, but Jefferson opted not to . George Washington freed slaves in 17th century; Jefferson did not .
 Jefferson’s significance in articulating notions of liberty that resonate today . Jefferson's significance can diminish his significance, but he can still be a hero, says historian .
 Even though he felt slavery was wrong, his personal belief was that emancipation would George Washington be bad for both slaves and white Americans . And even though he thought slavery was right, he felt it would be bad to George Washington .
 The United States was legally able to assert its independence from Britain in 1783 . The U.S. was able to claim independence from the British Empire in 1883 .
 There were serious reasons to believe the new nation might fail, torn apart by those arguing for the primacy of the rights of the individual states . Those in favor of a strong central government or even the creation of an American monarchy might fail .
 In the spring of 1787, a Constitutional Convention took place in Philadelphia . The Convention was held in the spring and spring of that year .
 The written, formalized Constitution proposed would not be provisionally ratified . George Washington served the British crown with distinction during the Seven Years’ War .
 He represented Virginia in the House of Burgesses and in the Continental Congresses of 1774 and 1775 . He served in the 17th and 20th Congresses .
 It was both a bill of rights and a blueprint for an ideal government . The three branches of government would keep each other in check . The Constitution was a model for a better government .
 It would have a profound influence on that issued in Revolutionary France in 1791 and remains a model of its kind . It would be a model for the future of the French Revolution .
 These radical statements were later dropped to placate the slave states of the south and the slave traders of the north . However, they were later later dropped by slave states .
 Almost 90 years later, it would take a civil war and 620,000 dead to end the practice and complete what Abraham Lincoln saw as the “unfinished business” of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution .
 From 1783, Washington sought to establish a constitutional government for the new nation . Washington's first president was assassinated in 1783 .
 The nation's first president, he served two terms, retiring in 1797 . He served in the face of increasing disputes between Jefferson's Democratic Republicans and the Federalists . Alexander Hamilton was the Federalist president of the 17th century .
 Washington died in 1799 and was buried at Mount Vernon, Virginia, overlooking the Potomac River .
 In June, the commons forms the National Assembly, taking effective power in the name of the people . The Commons will take over from the Commons in June 2014 .
 After April 1792, the Legislative Assembly declares war on Austria and Prussia . The Legislative Assembly declared war on the two countries .
 An enraged Parisian mob stormed the crumbling fortress known as the Bastille on July 14, 1789 . The governor and guards were murdered by an enraged mob .
 This violent defiance of royal power has become the symbol of the French Revolution . The movement not only engulfed France but also reverberated around the world . The French Revolution was a movement that engulfed France and reverberated .
 The ideas articulated in the revolution spelled the beginning of the end for Europe’s absolute monarchies and inspired their eventual replacement by more democratic governments . The ideas of the revolution were articulated in France's revolution .
 French Revolution originally set out to sweep away aristocratic privilege and establish a new state based on the Enlightenment principles of liberte, egalite, and fraternite . The French Revolution was originally intended to sweep in aristocratic .
 Although it was introduced by a surge of optimism, the revolution soon degenerated into violence that played out over several years . The revolution was brought to an end only by the dictatorship of Napoleon Bonaparte .
 The French Revolution was the greatest step forward in the history of mankind since the coming of Christ . It remains a story of confusion and chaos, of a collision between a privileged old order and the ancien .
 Les Miserables 99 regime was a new world that struggled, often violently, to create a coherent new order . Victor Hugo was a French dictator who died in the war of World War II .
 The French king, Louis XVI, was hardly the man to confront any crisis, let alone one as grave as that facing France in 1789 . Louis XVI was well meaning but indecisive, but not the man who was to confront the crisis . France was in disarray at the time
 In the previous century, Louis XIV established France as an absolute monarchy, with all power concentrated in the king's hands, and his palace at Enlightenment thought establishes a belief in a new political order based on liberty . A political crisis arises in France, and the overthrow of the old order seems
 The underpinning belief in liberte, egalite, fraternite changes not just France, but the world . France's belief in free speech and fraternity changes the world.
 France had not had an agricultural revolution and remained particularly vulnerable to any failure of the harvest, as happened in 1787 and, again, in 1788 .
 These desperate summers were followed in 1788-89 by a bitterly harsh winter, leading to mass starvation . The harsh winter led to the deaths of millions of people across Europe .
 Louis was desperate to raise further funds while preserving his authority . He summoned what was called the States General, a semi-parliamentary body that had last assembled in 1614 . The States General was last assembled by Louis in 1615 .
 It consisted of clergy, the first estate; nobles, the second; and the commons . The commons (essentially a kind of bourgeoisie, lawyers predominating), the third . The first estate was clergy, nobles, nobles and the second estate .
 Almost instantly, the nobles and clerics tried to assert that their votes should be worth more than those of the commons . Almost immediately, the clerics and nobles tried to . assert that . their votes . should be . worth more .
 On June 17, the commons declared itself a National Assembly, vesting power in itself instead of the crown . In response to the declaration, the Commons declared itself an Assembly . The assembly is now known as the Commons .
 In August, with peasant uprisings across rural France, the Assembly abolished feudal taxes and aristocratic privileges . The Assembly issued what it called the Declaration of the Rights of Man, a statement asserting fundamental freedoms .
 The storming of the Bastille symbolized the start of the French Revolution . In October 1789, a vast crowd, outraged by the lack of bread in Paris, descended on Versailles and forcibly removed the French capital .
 The prison held only seven prisoners in July 1789, but its fall had great importance . The fall of the royal family to Paris ransacked the palace for good measure .
 The severed heads of the guards at Versailles were paraded on stakes as Louis and his family were escorted to the capital . In what would become an unnerving foretaste of the violence to come, the severed heads were parades on stakes .
 It had been comparatively easy to overthrow the existing royal government, but it would prove infinitely harder to establish a new government . It was comparatively easy for the royal government to overthrow but it was infinitely harder for the rebels .
 It was presumed that a kind of constitutional monarchy would be the most obvious solution to the crisis . But it was assumed that a constitutional monarchy was the obvious solution . It has been assumed that such a solution would be an obvious monarchy .
 France found itself wrenched between those arguing for a more or less moderate option, and those in favor of a much more radical republican alternative . In the event, France has been wrenched by both sides of the debate .
 Terror is nothing more than speedy, severe, and inflexible justice; it is thus an emanation of virtue . Louis's reign seemed by now to be doomed, but the king had not entirely abandoned the country . The First Republic .
 Large numbers of French aristocrats had already fled France, fearing the revolution had made it unsafe . Many of the aristocrats fled the country fearing it was unsafe .
 In trying to persuade other European regimes, Austria stirred up opposition to the revolution, but their principal impact was to reinforce a determination in France to see the revolution succeed . Austria's emperor was the brother of the French queen Marie-Antoinette .
 In June 1791, Louis attempted to escape, but was intercepted near the border with the Low Countries . He was brought back to Paris to jeers of the increasingly violent, politicized common folk, the sansculottes .
 There was an increasingly hostile stand-off between political factions in Paris . The Girondins and more extremist Jacobins attracted the support of the sans-culottes and the French government .
 Whatever the obvious instability, progress toward a new social order was being made . An external threat was an external threat to the West . The West was in the midst of instability, but progress was made .
 Similarly, the church's privileged position was forcibly ended, though this, too, provoked lasting upheaval and violence . The church was forced to give up its privileged position in order to end its privileges .
 Austria and Prussia were determined to reassert the primacy of hereditary monarchy . At the same time, revolutionary France faced an external threat from the two countries .
 In April 1792, France declared war on both France and Russia . The war would continue, in different guises, for 23 years . France declared a war on Russia and Russia in 1792 .
 A mob stormed the Tuileries, where the royal family was held, slaughtering its Swiss Guards . The Swiss Guards were killed by a mob in the French capital .
 The September Massacres was unleashed against anyone suspected of royalist sympathies . The following month, a further round of killings were unleashed against those suspected .
 September 1792 also marked the establishment of the directly elected National Convention and of the First French Republic . The first French Republic was established in 1792 .
 Committee of General Security, September 1793 99 its first act was to put Louis XVI on trial as a traitor . Committee of general security was put on trial in 1793 as a result of the fall of Louis XVI .
 In January 1793, he was executed, an early victim of the guillotine, championed as a humane and egalitarian means of death . He was executed in 1793 by the French Revolution .
 Committee of Public Safety was created in April 1793 to safeguard the revolution . Committee was created to protect the revolution from the start of the revolution in 1793 .
 For a year or more, under the chairmanship of a provincial lawyer, Maximilien Robespierre, the most influential of the now-dominant Jacobins, it would effectively become the government of France .
 Counter-revolutionary movements across the country were ruthlessly suppressed, most obviously in the Vendee region of the southwest . Up to 300,000 people died in the region, most of them in Vendee .
 The Terror's victims were less likely to be remaining aristocrats and more anyone Robespierre suspected of impure thoughts, including almost all of his political opponents . The terror's victims included almost all political opponents, including aristocrats, aristocrats .
 Using the guillotine as the only means of execution for all people,royals and paupers alike, was meant to reinforce the revolutionary principle of equality . The French Revolution was inspired by the idea of equality in France .
 Liberte Egalite asserted that . all were free to behave as under the law and . chose if they did . If they did 1 ended aristocratic no harm to others . privilege .
 This was the hope that the revolution would usher in a newfound, rational spirit of brotherhood . Fraternite was a Fraternity of Brothers . The Fraternityite is a fraternity of brothers and sisters .
 II Robespierre's single-minded pursuit of revolutionary purity reached an improbable climax with his creation in 1794 of a new religion, the Cult of the Supreme Being . The cult of the supreme being was created by the French revolutionary leader .
 It was intended as a focus of, and spur to, patriotic and revolutionary virtues . The superstition of the Catholic Church replaced by a belief dedicated to reason celebrating the natural laws of the universe .
 Robespierre was put to the guillotine at the end of July 1794 . The megalomania it suggested contributed significantly to his sudden downfall .
 With the end of the killings, order of a sort was restored . Order restored with the establishment of yet another government, the Directory, in 1795 .
 The Directory's willingness to use force against the Paris mob was ordered by Napoleon Bonaparte, then a young general in the revolutionary army . Tellingly, it was achieved in part by the Directory’s willingness to fight back .
 France’s armies, boosted by mass conscription, were reversing early defeats . The revolution was apparently poised to carry the revolution into new territories . France's armies were reversed early defeats, and were apparently poised .
 France reinforced its assertion of what it claimed were its ""natural frontiers” on the Rhine, which in reality meant an audacious extension of French rule into Germany . Emboldened, France reinforced .
 By 1797, it had inflicted crushing defeats over Austria in the Low Countries and northern Italy . In 1797 it was able to inflict crushing defeats on Austria and Italy .
 France was ready to re-assert what it saw as its natural primacy in Europe . France wanted to reassert its primacy as Europe's most powerful country .
 Whatever the importance of the French Revolution, it remains the subject of continuing and intense historical debate . The French Revolution was the birth of the modern French Revolution .
 The revolution's consequences reverberated well into the 20th century . Yet the revolution's . consequences reverberate well into . 20th Century .
 "It remains a pivotal moment in the belief that freedom should underpin the civilized world," says David Cameron .
 He was a consistent champion of the dispossessed, as well as a remarkable orator . He was able to electrify his supporters and opponents alike .
 He was also a fierce opponent of the Revolutionary Wars, believing that a strengthened army risked becoming a source of counter-revolutionary fervor . He believed that a stronger army would be a source .
 When persuaded that terror was the most effective means of preserving the revolution, he embraced it implacably . He argued that it was the natural handmaiden of the virtue he felt should drive the revolution .
 He remains the original, chilling model for all those who have since championed state violence in the interests of a supposed greater good . He remains a chilling example of the chilling model .
 After 1815 Napoleon is exiled for the final time, and the Bourbon monarchy is restored . Napoleon was exiled from France in 1815 . The Bourbon monarchy was restored in 1883 .
 France institutes Napoleon becomes mass conscription, emperor and vows creating armies of an to restore France’s unprecedented size in Europe . I MUST make of all the PEOPLES of Europe ONE PEOPLE, AND OF PARIS THE CAP TAL OF THE WORLD THE BATTLE OF W
 Napoleon created the largest overextended and French European empire since manpower depleted . The invasion of Russia leaves Napoleon create the largest . French European . European empire .
 Napoleon's defeat at the Battle of Waterloo, south of Brussels, on June 18, 1815, marked his final overthrow as Emperor of the French .
 118,000 British, Dutch, and Prussian forces prevailed over a French army of 73,000, hastily assembled by Napoleon . It was an epic encounter, fought on rain-soaked ground in the rain-slammed battle .
 France's Revolutionary Wars, which began in 1792, had been launched to extend Revolutionary principles to neighboring states and defend France against its enemies . France's revolutionary Wars began to extend revolutionary principles to neighbouring states .
 During the Revolutionary Wars, France had established sister republics in northern Italy and the Low Countries . Under Napoleon, many of these were reformed into kingdoms, whose monarchs came from the Emperor’s family .
 From 1807, much of Poland was controlled by the French as the Grand Duchy of Warsaw . Much of the French ruled the area from 1807 to 1807 .
 Napoleon's conquests were the result of greatly enlarged French armies . Napoleon's success was due to the strength of the French army, not just his military genius .
 Conscription, introduced in 1793, swelled the French army from 160,000 men to 1. million . The French army now has 1.2 million men .
 Napoleon Bonaparte was born in Ajaccio, on the island of Corsica, to a family with claims to minor Italian nobility . He was commissioned in the French army in 1785 and was an enthusiast of the Revolution .
 In 1796, at the age of 26, he was appointed to command the Army of Italy, winning a series of impressive victories . He was appointed in 1796 as a result of his success in Italy .
 Napoleon led an unsuccessful French invasion of Egypt in Egypt in 1877 . Napoleon led the French to Egypt two years later, Napoleon led a failed invasion .
 Only Britain, protected by the English Channel, remained undefeated . Britain's position as the world's leading maritime power underscored by victory at Trafalgar .
 Britain's most significant role was financing the endlessly shifting alliances confronting the French . Britain played a key role in financing the constantly shifting alliances facing France .
 Napoleon imposed the Continental System, which forbade trade between continental Europe and Britain . In response, Napoleon imposed a ban on trade between Britain and continental Europe .
 Portugal and Russia continued to trade with Britain, prompting Napoleonic invasions in 1807 and 1812 respectively . Portugal, Russia and Portugal continued trade, prompting invasions by the French .
 Napoleon had bred a sense of French invincibility, and this made his eventual defeat all the more as he would subsequently dominate Europe . Napoleon's final defeat in the final defeat made him feel invincible again .
 His most enduring reform was the introduction, in 1804, of the Napoleonic Code, which is still the basis of French law . He introduced the code in France, which was the basis for the Code .
 Napoleon was exiled to the island of Elba in the Mediterranean, from where he escaped before his final defeat at Waterloo . Forced to resign in 1814, Napoleon was forced to resign and exiled to Elba .
 He died six years later at the base of St. Helena in the South Atlantic, where he died .
 Of 450,000 men he led against Russia in 1812, barely 40,000 survived . Of the 450,500 he led, only 40,500 survived the conflict .
 At Leipzig, Germany, in 1813, he was outnumbered three to one by forces from Austria, Prussia, Russia, and Sweden . He suffered his first major defeat .
 Napoleon's military genius failed to redress the balance and his imperial ambition ended in the Waterloo mud . By Waterloo, his forces had recovered slightly, and the ratio was only two to one . Napoleon's imperial ambitions ended in Waterloo mud.
 Napoleonic invasion of Iberia leads to governmental crisis in the Iberian colonies of South America . To HESITATE IS TO PERISH BOLIVAR ESTABLISHES GRAN COLOMBIA .
 After 1822 Portugal assents to Brazil becoming a constitutional monarchy under Pedro I 1824 . The Spanish capitulate in Peru, and their New World empire ends .
 The establishment of the Republic of Colombia in 1819 marked a pivotal moment in the emergence of an independent Latin America . Simon Bolivar, the self-styled Libertador, founded Gran Colombia .
 In Brazil, the process was relatively easy and also largely bloodless . Brazil won its independence in 1822 . The process was also bloodless in Brazil's history .
 Spanish colonial powers in South America lead to the creation of a newly independent Gran Colombia . These ideas destabilize the Spanish administration on the continent .
 South America consistently struggles to assert itself economically and politically . Hopes of unity are undermined by political infighting . xJ7
 The short-lived republic of Gran Colombia would break up in 1830 . Gran Colombia was plagued by bitter disputes, but it would never end .
 The drive to independence in South America was seldom the product of a desire for social justice or representative government . Though partly influenced by the liberal doctrines of the American and French revolutions, the drive for independence in Brazil was seldom .
 Aside from two abortive Mexican revolutions in 1810 and 1813, it was a struggle for supremacy between ruling elites . None of which had much interest in the kind of social change that underpinned the French Revolution .
 The drive was significantly affected by the Napoleonic Wars . That said, this drive was also significantly affected in the early years .
 Napoleon’s invasion of Portugal in 1807 forced the Portuguese king, Joao VI, and his court to flee to safety in its Brazilian colony . The Portuguese king was forced to flee the invasion of his country to Brazil .
 Joao remained there even after the fall of Napoleon in 1815, returning to Portugal only in 1821 . Joao returned to Portugal even after Napoleon's defeat in France .
 As in Spain's Latin American colonies, Brazil was dominated by a land-owning elite . Many of Brazil's great-grandfathers had been born in South America .
 His education was completed in Europe, where he absorbed the republican ideals of the U.S. and French revolutions . He was born in France and Italy .
 The idea of independence for Hispanic America took root in his imagination . He was inspired by the idea of Hispanic America .
 His revolutionary career began with an abortive uprising in Caracas in 1810 . He was involved in an uprising in the city of Caracas .
 In 1814, the charismatic Bolivar declared himself “liberator"" and head of state of the new republic of Venezuela . In 1816, the Venezuelan leader declared himself "liberator" and head-of-state .
 In 1817, he staged a daring invasion of Colombia and went on to complete the conquests of Ecuador and Peru in 1824 . In 1824, he completed the conquest of Peru and Ecuador .
 Bolivar’s dream was to unite all of South America, except Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, in a single great republic . Argentina, Chile, Brazil and Chile were the only South American republics .
 His dictatorial tendencies and the brutality of his armies eventually led to dissent and the fracturing of Gran Colombia in 1830 .
 While in North America it was the fundamental liberties of freeborn men that were disputed, in Brazil the issue was narrower . The issue was simply a question of who would govern. In Brazil it was simply the question of whether the government would govern .
 Pedro declared Brazil an independent constitutional monarchy and himself its emperor in 1822 . In 1822, Pedro declared himself emperor and declared Brazil a constitutional monarchy . Pedro declared the country an independent monarchy and became its emperor .
 This was a revolution only in the sense that it produced Brazilian independence in the interests of those already ruling it . This was the only revolution in the way it produced independence in Brazil's interests of the already ruling nation .
 Slavery remained legal in Brazil until 1888, later than anywhere else in the Western world . With no change to the social or economic order, slavery remained legal until 1888 .
 In Spain's colonies, the drive for independence stemmed partly from the desire of the native-born ruling class . Spain’s restrictive control of South American trade and punitive taxation policies were both to the disadvantage of the colonies . Spain's restrictive controls of trade and tax policies were to the
 Napoleon's invasion of Spain in 1808 was a reaction to his brother's deposition of the Spanish king, Ferdinand VII, in favor of Napoleon's brother, Joseph . In the short term, however, it was a response to Napoleon's invading of Spain and deposition of Ferdinand VII .
 In effect, Spain’s colonies no longer had a legitimate ruler of their own, so it was their plain duty to become rulers themselves, at least until the monarchy could be restored . Spain's colonies were ruled by the Spanish monarchy until the end of the war .
 While South American liberals saw Joseph as the harbinger of a new, more just social order in place of the absolutism of Ferdinand VII, monarchists in the colonies saw any such liberalizing tendencies as destabilizing .
 At the time, Mexico was known as the Vice-Royalty of New Spain . The area extended almost from present-day Wyoming to Panama and that included most of Texas .
 In 1810, Pedro I of Brazil was the son of the king of Portugal . His coronation was illustrated by Jean-Baptiste Debret, who painted him in 1810 .
 Miguel Hidalgo, appalled at the obvious inequalities of Mexico, led a popular revolution that ended the following year in its brutal suppression and execution . The following year, the brutal suppression of the revolution ended in a bloody year-long suppression .
 A second popular uprising led by a second Catholic priest, Jose Morelos, between 1813 and 1815 was similarly put down . Another popular uprising in Mexico in 1813 was also put down by a Catholic priest in 1815 .
 When Mexico gained independence in 1821, it was by force against more or less token Spanish resistance . Augustin de Iturbide, a Mexican general who proclaimed himself emperor of Mexico the following year .
 By 1838, Mexico had lost all its Central American territories, and by 1848, it had lost its North American territories . By 1848 Mexico had all of its territories in North America .
 Events in Spanish South America included the triple ViceRoyalties of New Granada, Peru, and Rio de la Plata . Gran Colombia was one of Spain's most successful cities .
 For my blood, my honour, my God, I swear to give Brazil freedom . Born in modern** Brazil, Brazil is one of the most powerful nations in the world .
 Jose Morelos was the leader of the failed Mexican Revolt of 1813-15 . He was a creole, aristocratic, and highly educated aristocrat .
 He was an enthusiastic supporter of modern nationbuilding on the model established by the French Revolution . He had visited Europe several times and was an enthusiast of modern nationalbuilding .
 He believed that the diverse peoples and interests of South America could be brought together by the assertion of a shared South American identity .
 Gran Colombia embraced an immense area of northern South America, essentially the modern states of Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama . Gran Colombia was to be Gran Colombia, which embraced an area of . northern South . America .
 Bolivar’s vision of an independent South America fell foul of a series of political realities . His vision of a free South America was often met with political obstacles to its success .
 The Battle of Ayacucho saw the defeat of the Spanish army at the hands of the South American liberation troops . His military successes include the routing of the remaining Spanish strongholds in Peru, when his armies attacked from the north and south in a pincer .
 Spanish rule in Peru and in South America proved impossible to translate into enduring and stable states . It marked the end of Spanish rule and the beginning of independence .
 He considered that so disparate a land and a people could only be ruled by a strong central government . He considered the disparate land and people could be ruled only by a central government.
 He proposed himself as the lifelong president of Gran Colombia . Seeing himself as its natural leader, he proposed himself to be its leader .
 Gran Colombia had already broken up by 1830 . Bolivar died, aged 47, of tuberculosis . Gran Colombia was one of the richest countries in the world .
 It was the result of the kind of nationalism already surfacing in Europe, with the independence of Greece and, the following year, of Belgium . Arguably, it was the end of the sort of nationalism that already surfaced in Europe .
 A failure to agree on the future of Gran Colombia was due to a failure to reach a deal . Gran Colombia's future was also due to an agreement on a future deal with Colombia .
 There were disputes over whether the government was to be liberal, conservative, or authoritarian . The country's government was divided over whether it should be liberal or conservative . There were also disputes over who should be allowed to run the government .
 Venezuela, Venezuela, was subjected to bitter wars throughout the 19th century that cost an estimated 1 million people . Venezuela, in particular, suffered bitter wars that cost the lives of around 1 million .
 This lack of direction resulted in instability and social inequality that would persist for a century or more . The social inequality would persist in the U.S. for decades or more, historian says .
 It would produce a series of authoritarian military leaders acting in the interests of the landowners . It would also produce an authoritarian military leader .
 An inevitable consequence was a persistently oppressed underclass, urban and agricultural, black and white . An inevitable result was the oppression of the urban, agricultural and black .
 The hacienda —vast acres inefficiently worked by armies of peasants in the interests of a . complacently cruel, land-owning elite—dominated . The land-owned elite dominated .
 This was partly a result of being wrenched between ineffectual liberal regimes that sought to alleviate the obvious suffering of the poor but did little to address fundamental economic weaknesses . Self-serving authoritarian regimes that cared more for bombast than real reform, such as authoritarian regimes .
 Bolivar’s visions of a recast, independent South America could never contend with the reality of an unequal society that shared no common belief in its own destiny . South America was consistently the victim of competing, mostly violent efforts to assert special interests .
 A scientific revolution in the West creates a sense that the world can be better understood and better exploited . The West has created a sense of a greater sense of understanding the world and its potential .
 Stephenson’s Rocket heralds a new form of faster, more reliable transport . The West imposes itself across the rest of the globe, creating interlocked global markets .
 The industrialization process started in Britain around the midto late 18th century . Industrialization was initiated by the scientific revolution in Europe in the late 17th century. Industrialization started in the mid-18th century in Britain .
 It had never been easier for members of the increasingly wealthy middle class, looking for ways to invest their money, to support new inventions and technologies .
 A third factor was an agricultural revolution, which began in the Netherlands and Britain, where farmers realized that crop rotation made it unnecessary to leave land fallow every third year . The Dutch and British agricultural revolution was also a factor .
 Selective breeding produced larger and more profitable domesticated animals . Crop yields were boosted, just as selective breeding produced bigger and profitable animals . Selection also boosted yields of food and wool .
 Between 1750 and 1800, the population of Britain grew from 6 million to 9 million . The population grew, between 1750 to 1800, from 6. million to over 9 million, with any likelihood of famine receding .
 In Britain, an improved transport network allowed goods, produced on an ever-larger scale, to be transported faster and more reliably . Finally, in Britain, improved transport networks allowed goods produced on a larger scale .
 Between 1760 and 1800, as many as 4,250 miles of canals were built in England . The canal network was built in 1760-1800 .
 Thinkers sought to understand the impulses behind these societal changes . Thinkers seek to understand why society has changed dramatically .
 Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith in 1776 . Adam Smith's work underpinned what was becoming known as political economy . The central role of the profit motive and competition in increasing efficiencies and lowering prices .
 This economic transformation also contributed to and was, in turn, boosted by the emergence of global markets . European colonial empires, which offered greater access to raw materials and also provided markets for finished goods, helped .
 A better-mapped world, and improvements in ship types and position-finding at sea, also facilitated global trade . A better map of the world and improved ship types also facilitated trade, experts say .
 The overriding force behind the economic transformation was the development of the steam engine . The steam engine was the main source of economic growth in Britain .
 A hundred years ago business was limited in area, now it is world-wide . In an astonishingly short short A 100 years ago, business was only limited to area . Now it has spread around the world, with the world now a thriving business .
 Modern Industrialism would revolutionize Britain, making it the world's first industrial power, and ultimately transform the world . Frank McVey: Modern industrialism would transform Britain and the rest of the world.
 The replacement of wood as the prime source of fuel was critical to industrial development . Wood replaced by wood as an alternative fuel source for industrial development, experts say .
 The development of coke (processed coal that burns at much higher temperatures than coal) at the beginning of the 18th century would make the production of iron—the indispensable core material of the new technologies— faster and simpler . In exactly the same way, the development of cke
 Stephenson's Rocket was the steam engine on the world’s first passenger railway, which linked Liverpool and Manchester . But it was only with James Watts's first rotating steam engine in 1781 that the extraordinary potential of machine was realized .
 When Watts’s patents expired in 1800, others started producing their own steam engines . Others started producing steam engines in the 1800s .
 The textile industries in the northwest benefited in particular from the increased availability of steam power . Large-scale, almost entirely mechanized, factory production soon replaced small, home-based manufacturing .
 No longer dependent on rivers as power sources, factories could be built anywhere . They came to be concentrated in towns in the north and Midlands of England that rapidly grew into major industrial centers .
 Brunei became synonymous with poor living and working conditions for Isambard Kingdom Brunei workers . Many of the workforce, many of whom were children, were children . Brunei's new cities became synonymous for poor living conditions .
 It took a long time before the workers saw any improvement in their lives, and the realization that they should share in the rewards of this social and economic transformation, came slowly slowly .
 In the meantime, however, the increasingly wealthy factory owners have emerged as a significant political voice . The factory owners are increasingly influential in politics .
 As late as 1860, Britain was, by some way, still the world's leading industrial and mercantile power . Other Western nations were quick to see how they too could benefit from the British trade .
 In continental Europe, industrialization was initially uncertain, inhibited by political instability . Britain avoided the kind of political instability Britain had managed to avoid, such as the revolutions of 1848 .
 Pig-iron output from each rose from 125,000 tons in 1840 to 1 million tons in 1870 . Similarly, pig-iron production from each of the two countries rose from about 125,00 tons in 40 years .
 In 1827, still only 21, he was appointed chief engineer of the Thames Tunnel . He was still 21 when he was given the job in 1827 .
 The Besmer process was devised by the English engineer of the same name to convert iron into steel . In 1833, he became engineer to the newly created process . The process improved the efficiency of all industries, from transport to the military .
 There were around 3,300 miles of railway in the U.S. in 1840, almost all in the northeast . The most startling developments came in the United States, where there were more than 3,000 railway lines .
 Great Western Railway by 1841 linked London directly with Bristol, whose docks he had rebuilt from 1832 . By 1860, this had increased to 32,000 miles, and by 1900 it had soared to 193,000 . Great Western railway was formed in 1900 .
 Despite his great vision, delays and cost overruns dogged many of Brunei’s projects, but his works include some of the grandest feats of engineering the world had yet seen . The country is now home to the most of the world's most famous engineering projects .
 Oil, chemicals, electricity, and steel became increasingly important in 1870s in Europe and U.S. Second wave of industrialization began, in both Europe and the United States, in which oil, chemicals and electricity were important .
 The production of steel had been transformed after 1855, when English engineer Henry Bessemer devised a way to make the metal lighter, stronger, and more versatile . From that point forward, steel would prove the linchpin for industry .
 In 1870, total world steel production was 540,000 tons, but within 25 years it had risen to 14 million tons . Railways, armament production, and the shipbuilding industry all benefited from its ready availability .
 Germany was beginning to threaten Britain’s industrial preeminent position in Europe, quadrupling its industrial output between 1870 and 1914 . The U.S. was rapidly becoming the world's largest industrial power .
 In 1880, Britain was still producing more steel than the United States . By 1900, the U.S. was producing more . than Britain and Germany together .
 Sailing times, no longer dependent on the vagaries of the wind, became more controllable, and journey times were shortened . Sailing time is no longer dependable and sailing times are shortened .
 The Great Eastern, launched in 1858, was 689ft long . While wooden ships rarely exceeded 200ft in length, the largest wooden ship was the Great Eastern .
 The benefits of industrialization were unevenly spread in the early 1900s . Industrialization was a boon to the U.S. economy, but it was also a problem .
 Southern Europe was slow to react to it, and Russia also struggled to catch up . Southern Europe struggled to react, but Russia and Europe were slow to respond to it . Russia has struggled to cope with the impact of the crisis .
 The Chinese and Indian empires proved unwilling or unable to industrialize . Latin America did so only intermittently, and Africa was dominated by technologically superior powers .
 After 1868, Japan's single-minded pursuit of industrialization made it a world power . The country's singleminded pursuit to industrialization led it to become a global power .
 Industrialization made possible a new kind of warfare, one capable of bringing death on a scale never seen before . Industrialization also made possible the creation of a new type of warfare .
 An enduring irony of industrialization is that the nations that benefited most from it turned it against themselves in two world wars, deploying weapons of extraordinarily destructive power . Industrialization is an enduring irony that it turned against itself in two wars .
 In some places it raised living standards across all sections of society in ways unimaginable in earlier ages . Fueled by an enormous sense of new possibilities, in some places, it raises living standards .
 Steam-powered ships were bigger and faster, and they made a genuinely global market a reality . However, in the wealthy West, it also produced a sense of material superiority . Material superiority was equivalent to a kind of moral superiority .
 Industrialization was made possible by a scientific revolution that began in the late 1600s and transformed N Improved crop yields wiped out famine in much of Europe and contributed to the growing populations .
 Mass production cost companies less, and the ability to produce more goods also meant higher potential sales . Mass production costs companies less and means more sales for them, analysts say .
 Britain campaigns to abolish slavery in vigorously to persuade other nations to oppose it . It does not finally end in the shipping of slaves r the United States until 1865 .
 The passing of the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves in the United States and the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act in Britain marked a radical shift in Western thinking .
 Even as late as the 1780s, the trade in slaves was still regarded as a 'natural' economic activity .
 Both the newly created United States, ""conceived in liberty,"" and the European colonies in the Caribbean depended on slave labor that was relatively easily obtained in West Africa . The newly created U.S. and the . European colonies depended on . slave labor .
 The Somersett case in 1772 ruled that any slave was free once on British soil . Not only had slavery never been legal in Britain, but Britons also defended themselves on their robust defense of such fundamental freedoms .
 The revolt, led by freed slave, Toussaint L’Ouverture, was inspired by the American and French revolutions . The revolt was led by a freed slave led by the freed slave .
 Britain was by some margin, the West’s leading slave-trading nation . The United States was concerned it might inspire similar revolts in its slave revolts .
 This contradiction offended both religious and Enlightenment sensibilities alike . It was this contradiction that offended both sides of debate .
 William Wilberforce and Thomas Clarkson were prominent abolitionists . The abolition of slavery became an imperative for the abolitionist movement .
 A remarkably effective campaign launched that, despite entrenched opposition, rapidly won wide public and parliamentary support . Despite entrenched opposition the campaign was launched, it won wide support .
 For much of the 19th century, the Royal Navy was at the forefront of the campaign to intercept those still engaged in slave trading .
 While Britain took the lead, the movement had important supporters elsewhere . While Britain led the movement, it was not all about the UK .
 Brazil aside, slavery would not be banned until 1888 . France, despite its pledge to abolish slavery, was wary of the damage to its trade .
 Spain, which ruled the eastern half of the island, also opposed it, as did Britain . Britain feared it would spread to its own colonies . Spain and Britain opposed it .
 Even the South American colonies seeking independence refused to back it, fearful of its impact among their substantial slave populations .
 The combined resources of all these states were unable to quell the uprising . Yet the combined resources were not enough to stop the uprising, says the historian .
 The state of slavery is repugnant to the principles of the British constitution and of the Christian religion . This was the only slave revolt to result in the emergence of an independent state .
 99 newly independent states that emerged in Latin America after 1810 likewise outlawed slavery . 99 newly-independent states . emerged from Latin America in 1810 to outlaw slavery .
 It wasn't until 1833 that slavery itself, as opposed to the trade, was made illegal in the British Empire . Slavery was made legal in the UK in 1833, but slavery itself was illegal in 1881 .
 Whatever the efforts of a new set of campaigners, not . least Elizabeth Heyrick, the motive was not entirely humanitarian . Whatever the . efforts of the campaigners, it is not entirely . humanitarian, it was not .
 The Haitian slave revolt began in 1791 and led to the emergence of an independent Haiti in 1804 . The West was aware that any such uprisings might prove difficult to suppress .
 The United States, forwardlooking and expansive, remained the great troubling sore. The U.S. remained a troubling sore .
 The more abolitionists in its industrializing northern states denounced slavery, the more its southern states, their agrarian economies dependent on slave labor, were determined to retain it . The more . abolitionists . denounced slavery .
 It would take a four-year civil war and 670,000 dead to settle the question . The question is still unanswered, and it would take four years to settle .
 The Second French Republic, established in 1848, is dissolved in 1852 . After 1852 The French Republic was established in France .
 LouisPhilippe of France abdicated as Paris erupted in protest at the government's refusals to initiate reforms . The middle and working classes alike demanded political liberalization and to end inequalities . The 1848 Revolution was the culmination of the French Revolution .
 In June, fearful that one authoritarian government had been exchanged for another, the Parisian working classes rose again, but the uprising was savagely put down . In June the working class rose again but was brutally gunned down .
 In December, LouisNapoleon Bonaparte—nephew of Napoleon, who had died in December, died in Paris . This painting by Horace Vernet shows the barricades at Rue Soufflot, Paris .
 In June 1848, fighting erupted between the liberal republican government and Parisian workers seeking social reform . The president of France in 1848 was elected president .
 France was plagued by political instability throughout the 19th century . The French state was plagued with political instability during the period .
 The 1848 revolution came after a similar upheaval in 1830, and it would be followed by an even more violent uprising 23 years later, in 1871 . The revolution was followed by a similar uprising in 1830 .
 The spark for the revolution of 1848 was a famine during the previous two winters . The spark was the result of a famine in 1848 . The revolution was sparked by a famine that had occurred in previous years .
 This provoked widespread unrest among the dispossessed urban poor, along with demands from the burgeoning bourgeoisie for liberal political reforms . This provoked unrest among urban poor and demands from burgeoning bourgeoisie .
 The ardor of the revolution sparked similar revolts across continental Europe, most obviously in the German Confederation, in multi-ethnic Austria, and in Italy . The revolution was inspired by the French Revolution in France .
 Europe's statesmen met in Vienna in 1815 to try to create a political order that would stifle such an occurrence . The rise of socialism was the result of the defeat of Napoleon .
 The Communist Manifesto 99 . Their goal was the preservation of aristocratic ruling elites, sustaining the old order, and holding frontiers .
 The French Revolution was to be countered by a new political reality informed by a number of factors, including the desire to ensure that the liberties championed by the French Revolution were upheld . This desire, however, was countered by the need to ensure the liberties were upheld, he says .
 Socialism sought to end the inequalities accelerated by the Industrial Revolution and led to impoverished workers being exploited by factory owners . Just as important was the emergence of a new political creed --socialism .
 In the feverish atmosphere of 1848, these aims would prove irreconcilable . The old order is restored .
 As chaos threatened, the liberally minded middle classes sided with existing political elites in restoring order than with the radicals seeking to rebuild societies and create new nations . The middle classes were more likely to side with the political elites rather than radicals .
 The ultimate beneficiaries of the revolutions were the monarchies in Italy and Germany, which would exploit a kind of popular nationalism to unify their countries . The ultimate beneficiary of the revolution was the monarchs in Italy, Germany .
 Trade unions led to improving standards of living for the previously dispossessed . But at the same time, as economic shifts brought social change in their wake, the emergence of trade unions was slow .
 Although its impact on social upheavations was negligible, its resonance in years to come on social thought almost everywhere would be overwhelming . The impact on those upheavals was negligible but its resonance was overwhelming, says author .
 Friedrich Engels was son of a textile manufacturer, and the similarly privileged Jewish academic Karl Marx . Engels was the son of textile manufacturer and academic .
 In 1847, both men had joined a semi-subversive French group, the League of the Just . It later re-emerged, in London, as the Communist League .
 Engels financed Marx's seminal work, Das Kapital , its first volume published, again in London, in 1867 . Engels subsequently financed the work, which was published in London .
 Marx tried to demonstrate how capitalism contained the seeds of its own downfall, and the inevitability of the proletarian revolution that would create a classless society free of exploitation or want .
 The promise of liberalism proves impossible to extinguish . The Congress of Vienna attempts to stifle nationalism and the threat of future revolt . The promises of liberalism prove impossible to extinguished .
 The French Revolution of 1848 spawns rebellions in Germany, Austria, and Italy . The revolution was inspired by the French Revolution in France .
 After 1869 The Suez Canal opens, slashing travel times between Europe and the East . The canal was the first to open the canal in the world's history .
 Developed countries build empires and use colonial muscle to feed their industries . Developed nations build empires with colonial muscle .
 The Suez Canal is constructed, facilitating global trade by shortening shipping routes substantially . The canal was constructed in the 1950s to facilitate global trade .
 The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 was an emphatic declaration of European technological and financial means . The canal was the first to connect the Mediterranean and Red seas .
 It was also a significant illustration of a rapidly emerging and increasingly interdependent global economy . Goods from all parts of the world are being traded on an ever-larger scale .
 This was a process dominated by Europe's colonial powers and the United States, overwhelmingly its principal beneficiaries . The process was dominated by the colonial powers, including the U.S.
 The Suez Canal reduced the sailing route between London and Bombay by 41 percent . The route from London to Hong Kong was reduced by 26 percent . Sailing routes between London to Bombay and Hong Kong were reduced by 41 per cent .
 Reduced sailing times greatly simplified the defense of India and its crucial markets, Britain's key imperial goal . However, reduced sailing times also greatly simplified .
 By the end of the 19th century trade in the Indian Ocean had become almost a British monopoly . Britain gained control of the Suez Canal in 1888 after having invaded Egypt .
 This ‘gunboat diplomacy’ proved to be a remarkably effective means of protecting British interests . This “gunboat . diplomacy” proved a remarkably successful means of . protecting Britain .
 The Panama Canal was just one of a number of similar massive engineering undertakings in the interests of imperial trade . The Suez Canal was one of many of the world's largest engineering projects in the past .
 22,000 laborers died during the French labor camp . The French initiative was a French initiative, but was dogged by controversy and a hostile climate .
 The U.S. completed the Panama Canal in August 1914, stepping in when the French finally admitted defeat . The United States eventually completed the canal in August .
 It 44 May the Atlantic telegraph prove to be a bond of perpetual peace and friendship between the nations .
 This had begun in 1898, when the United States itself became a colonial power, taking over the Philippines from Spain . The Philippines was taken over from Spain in 1898 .
 He actively advocated U.S. military involvement, above all, in Latin America, to ensure stability as a means of advancing American interests .
 One consequence of this was strengthening of the U.S. Navy, the Great White Fleet . One consequence was strengthening the United States Navy .
 The Suez Canal opened in 1869 and dramatically cut sailing times between Europe and Asia . The canal was the first to open the canal in the world's history . It was also the first time the canal was opened to allow ships to sail over the world .
 This provided a massive boost for trade, which, in turn, spurred technological advances . It also provided a boost for technological advances, which led to the development of new technologies .
 Roosevelt's successor, William Taft, pursued a more legalistic variant of the policy . American commercial interests, chiefly in Latin America and East Asia, were to be secured by the full backing of the U.S. government .
 At the same time, major new railways were constructed in both the U.S. and Europe .
 The east and west coasts of the U.S. were first linked by rail in 1869, with the opening of the Central Pacific Railroad . The 1,907-mile Central Pacific railroad was the first rail link between the two coasts .
 By 1905, there were eight more transcontinental rail lines across the U.S. and one in Canada . The first transcontinental railroad was established in 1903 .
 The building of the TransSiberian Railway in Russia, between 1891 and 1905, was undertaken in Russia . The project is the cutting of a canal through Suez .
 A remarkable 4,600 miles long and spanning seven time zones, it remains the longest continuous railway in the world . The railway is also known as one of the world's longest continuous railways .
 It played a key role not just in the settlement of Russia’s vast Siberian territories, but also in Russia's encroachment on parts of northern China, too .
 The impact of the telegraph was just as significant, allowing messages to be communicated along electrical lines . The impact was similar to that of the telephone in the 1930s .
 Samuel Morse devised the system in the U.S. in the 1830s . The first telegraph line was inaugurated in May 1844 . Morse invented the system .
 The first telegraph cable across the Atlantic, laid in 1858, worked for only two weeks . It was laid in the same place as the Great Barrier Barrier Barrier, built in 1859 .
 By 1870, a telegraph link had been established between London and Bombay . This was then extended to Australia in 1872 and New Zealand in 1876 .
 The RMS Mauretania was the largest and fastest ship in the world . It was built at Wallsend, Tyne and Wear, UK, in the 1930s .
 In 1909, it set a record, sailing across the Atlantic in less than five days . The ship set a new record for sailing in the Atlantic .
 The Great Eastern was designed by the most visionary engineer of the first phase of the Industrial Revolution, Isambard Kingdom Brunei . It laid the transatlantic cable in 1866 .
 Designed to carry 4,000 passengers from England to Australia non-stop (and to return to England without refueling) The ship was overly ambitious in concept and a commercial failure .
 It was indicative of a trend toward larger, faster, and safer ships . However, it was not the first time a ship had been hit by such a large ship .
 Later, steel-built, propeller-driven ships would prove more versatile . Unlike the Great Eastern, it was built of iron .
 Their introduction coincided with the development of more powerful and efficient steam engines . The introduction of steam engines in the 1930s coincided with their introduction . The steam engines were the first steam engines to be developed .
 The decline of the sailing ship further transformed imperial trade . Steamships and trade have transformed the world of trade .
 One notable result was the introduction of a series of ever-larger passenger ships . The ships were built in the 1930s .
 In 1874, the British steamer Britannic set a new east-west Atlantic record of just under eight days . The Britannic was capable of generating 5,500 horsepower, and set a record of 8 days .
 New types of merchant ships, mainly refrigerated vessels, were also being built . The ships were being built in the 1930s .
 Such developments show how technology helped drive trade, making it possible to reach global markets . Such developments are examples of how technology helps drive global trade .
 Gold and silver is not by nature money, money is by nature gold and silver . The cattle and sheep farms in South America and Australia were growing in New Zealand .
 At the same time, the number of people in Europe was also increasing . Britain swelled from 28 million to 35 million between 1850 and 1880 .
 80 tons of frozen beef shipped from Argentina to France on board the world's first refrigerated ship . Wool could be easily transported, but lamb and beef could not be shipped because it would rot en route .
 By 1881, regular shipments of frozen meat were traveling between Australia and Britain . The meat was shipped from Australia to Britain in 1881 .
 The first shipment of lamb from New Zealand was made the following year . First shipment was made following the arrival of the lamb in New Zealand .
 There was a vast increase in the export of meat from all three countries . New Zealand exported 2. million frozen sheep in 1895, 3 million in 1900, and 5. million in 1910 .
 By 1850, the northwest of England was producing up to 50 percent of the world’s cloth . The demand for cotton led to an enormous surge in cotton growing in cotton .
 The distance of 10,800 nautical miles was cut by more than 40 percent, to just 6,200 nautical mile . That distance was cut to just six,200 miles .
 100,000 bales in 1800 to 4 million in 1860 . I— Suez Canal Route via Suez canal . Previous route: London Mumbai to Mumbai .
 Confederate states restricted exports of cotton in an attempt to force European intervention in the war . During the American Civil War, the southern, Confederate states tried to restrict export of cotton to force intervention .
 The ploy failed, since Britain merely increased its imports of raw cotton from India . However, the ploy failed since it merely increased the imports .
 After weaving the cotton, it then exported it back to India at substantial profits .
 Working conditions in South Africa’s gold mines were harsh, and the work force was exploited and underpaid . The work force, mainly young black men, was exploited .
 This complex trading network could not have grown without developments in banking and financing . Global finance is a key part of the world's trading network .
 Throughout the late 19th century, new banks were established . Their capital was used to support enterprises across the world .
 The search for new sources of minerals, both precious and industrial, reached new heights toward the close of the 19th century . By the end of The Great Mineral Rush, the search for minerals reached new levels of mining .
 Discoveries of diamonds and gold in the US, Canada, Australia, Australia and South Africa sparked a frenzy of development . Discoveries in the U.S. and Canada led to a flurry of development in South Africa .
 Diamonds were discovered in South Africa's Orange Free State in 1867, and gold in the Transvaal in 1886 . Gold was discovered in the Orange Free state in 1868, and in 1886, gold was found in the transvaal .
 By 1914, the U.S. had overseas assets worth $3. billion, Germany $6 billion, France $8 billion, and Britain almost $20 billion . The United States had $3 billion in assets overseas .
 North America and northern Europe's share of world income in 1860 was about $4. billion a year, 35 percent of the world’s total . Between them, the U.S. and Europe had 35 percent income .
 In the British Empire, distinctions were drawn between colonies governed by Europeans and those capable of self-government . Canada, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and New Zealand were among the colonies to have self-governors .
 The privilege was not extended to a single British colony or to India . It was not a privilege extended to any British colony .
 Britain could only annex the South African Republic after the bitter Boer War (18991902) Their heightened economic importance reinforced Britain's determination to annex them, which they could do only after the war .
 The exploitation, both before and after the conflict, of the mineral resources of what in 1910 became the Union of South Africa by armies of underpaid black workers would later prove to be critical in the institutionalizing of Apartheid .
 After 1860 Thomas Huxley defends Darwin from an attack by the established Anglican church . After 1860 he defends Darwin against the established church .
 Darwin's book explains the diversity of Charles Darwin animal species and posits that all life on the Earth is related to a 1 V Origin of Species common ancestor . Geologists begin to understand that the scientists that the Earth Earth has existed for had undergone a series of previously unimaginable changes and e
 Charles Darwin originally intended to follow his father into medicine and was subsequently sent to Cambridge to train as an Anglican cleric . Charles Darwin's landmark text erhaps the most important scientist of the 19th century . V
 Endlessly curious, he was interested in almost any scientific question . He was fascinated by almost any aspect of science .
 His book On the Origin of Species introduced a new scientific understanding of evolution . The publication of his book on evolution was published in 1903 . Evolution came to be known as evolution .
 Darwin's idea was his contention that all animal life was derived from a single, common ancestor . The ancestors of all mammals, humans included, were fish, for example .
 Only those most able to adapt would survive, in the process evolving into new species . And in a natural world that was never less than relentlessly violent, only those most can't adapt survive .
 The naturalist spent most of his time on HMS Beagle between 1831 and 1836 in South America . His views were formed by the around-the-world voyage he made as a naturalist .
 It would take 10 years to work up his voluminous notes and go through all the samples he collected on his voyage .
 Darwin's book inevitably generated controversy, outraging Christian views that the world had . The finches on the Galapagos Islands were key to Darwin’s work . Darwin's work generated controversy .
 The 13 species he found there all had different types of beaks, which had evolved to deal with the food available to the birds . been created intact and unchanging by a benevolent deity, he said .
 Darwin made a decisive contribution to the understanding of the world . Darwin’s views were met with widespread acceptance of his views . Darwin's views were widely accepted in Darwin's lifetime, but he died in 1903 .
 Despite everything, it was possible for Darwinism to be warped . The primacy of science is still a vital part of the Darwinism .
 What came to be called ‘the survival of the fittest’ would later prove to be influential in justifying imperialism, racism, and eugenics .
 On the Origin of Species was published at a time when a growing understanding of the natural world and rapid technological progress meant scientific study had a greater practical worth than ever before .
 Darwin was one of the last amateur gentleman scientists in a discipline that was becoming professionalized as society came to view science more highly . Darwin was an amateur gentleman scientist .
 By the end of Darwin’s life, continual progress in scientific knowledge had become an almost standard expectation . Darwin's life was marked by constant scientific progress .
 Darwin proved himself himself an assiduous observer of the world around him . Darwin was constantly seasick during his time aboard the craft . Darwin survived his voyage in the Darwin era .
 He would take as much amazed delight in the jungles of Brazil as he would in the pampas of Argentina or in the arid wastes of the Galapagos Islands .
 The model high-Victorian scientist, aided by considerable private means and a notably happy family life, despite the deaths of three of his ten children . Upon returning to England he settled into a life of persistent hard work .
 His own health may have been severely damaged by the time he spent on the Beagle . His output remained prodigious, as did his level of intrigue at almost any subject in the natural world .
 In the absence of the exotic, he was as fascinated by pigeons as by parasites, barnacles as much as earthworms . He was fascinated by pigeonons as well as parasites as well .
 Before 1830 Greece obtains its independence from the Ottomans . Let United States fight for our BROTHERS . Let U.S. fight for the United States .
 Their goal was to overthrow the Bourbons, but there was much uncertainty as to what government would replace the ruling family . The French Revolution was a major success for the French Revolution .
 He was driven by the goal of ending Austrian rule in the north of the country . He was also driven to the idea of a united Italy and by the end of Austria's rule .
 The desire to form new political entities based on common national elements such as geography and history came to be known as nationalism . The desire for national unity is known as nationalism .
 In 1859, much of Italy had already been united under the state of Piedmont-Sardinia, in the northwest of Italy . The process was directed by its shrewd and pragmatic prime minister Camillo Cavour .
 Cavour: Unification meant the creation of a centralized state under a constitutional monarchy . Cavour wanted a republican Italy, not a republican state, but a centralized monarchy .
 Giuseppe Garibaldi believed this was the only way he managed to overthrow Bourbon rule in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies . The red shirt symbolized his makeshift army, but had to compromise on form .
 Italy could realize its potential, above all, to press ahead with industrialization and compete with the leading powers of Europe . Italy could also compete with Europe's leading powers, says Giroiroiro .
 The Redshirts' forces soon overcame the ineptly led armies of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies . The Redshirt's forces, swelled by locals flocking to join them, soon overcame .
 Venice and Rome excepted, though both would subsequently be incorporated, in 1866 and 1870 respectively . Garibaldi recognized the inevitability of Piedmontese domination in Italy .
 In November 1860, with Garibaldi at his side, Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia entered Naples . In November 1859, he entered Naples with the help of the Italian army .
 The difference between Garibaldi's and Cavour's goals illustrates the contradictions at the heart of nationalism in 19th-century Europe . Cavour’s goals illustrate the contradictions in nationalism in Europe .
 nationalism developed an idealistic view of a more just society . It was inspired by the notions of liberty and equal rights promised by the French Revolution .
 National groups oppressed by alien rule believed they should be able to assert their independence as a natural right . National groups were oppressed by . rule .
 Loyalties to national groups defined by language, culture, history, and self-identity were formulated . In place of loyalty to an established ruling dynasty, new loyalties were formed .
 The idea of the nationstate became increasingly common, and likewise a belief in the right to national self-determination was also common . The idea was increasingly common in the early 20th century .
 The failure of the revolutions of 1848 in central Europe and Italy made plain the resolve of Europe's ruling elites to oppose such initiatives . Europe was created by the Congress of Vienna in 1814-15, after the defeat of Napoleon . Europe of monarchs, multinational empires, and pre
 By 1830, Belgium had revolted against the Kingdom of the Netherlands, of Belgium . A people destined to achieve great things for the welfare of humanity must one day or other be constituted a nation .
 Italy secured independence with British support in 1861 . The next year, it secured its independence with support from the UK .
 Similar nationalist uprisings followed in Poland in 1831 and in 1846, both savagely repressed by Russia . Similar nationalists were repressed in both countries .
 Rising nationalism had momentous consequences, especially in the various states across Germany . Rising nationalism was a major factor in the rise of nationalism in Germany .
 The country's unification under the chancellorship of Otto von Bismarck of Prussia in 1871 . The declaration of a German empire jolted Europe into a new era . The unification of Germany and the declaration of the German empire in the early 1900s .
 For Bismarck, much as they had been for Cavour, the benefits of unification were clear . The benefits were clear, but the benefits were not clear .
 It would be the means by which a common German nationality could be expressed . It would allow the country to fill the need to underline an overarching German character that the philosopher Georg Hegel identified .
 It would break the dominance of Habsburg Austria over the Germanspeaking world . It would also lever the southern Catholic German states, Bavaria above all, away from Austrian influence .
 Bismarck pressed into service a kind of conservative nationalism, says historian . He says the German leader was trying to build a great German state with conservative nationalism . Germany has a long history of conservatism and nationalism .
 The goal was not social or democratic reform to establish a more just or liberal state, it was the creation of a country to challenge the world . The goal of the country was to create a country that could be a nation that challenged the world, he says .
 German nationalism under Bismarck translated into a determined adoption of industrialization and the creation of ever larger and more efficient armed forces . The rise in industrialization in Germany led to a larger and better armed force .
 Bismarck single-mindedly deployed military means to create this new Germany . And it was military means that he deployed to create the new Germany, he says .
 The Ottoman army’s brutality in suppressing Greek revolts led to increased support for the Greek cause of Schleswig and Holstein, with Austrian support . The first, against Denmark in 1864, saw Prussia subsuming the southern Danish territories .
 In 1866, Prussian troops routed Austria itself . In 1870-71, an army from across Germany defeated France, toppling Napoleon Ill’s government, and starving Paris .
 The Habsburg Austrian Empire was an immense patchwork of ethnic groups across Central Europe under the nominal rule of Vienna . Nowhere were the conflicting impulses of nationalism more tangled than in the Empire . The resulting result was a unified German empire under the Prussian king, Wilhelm I .
 In 1867, Hungary was able to secure almost complete independence from Austria . Austria's defeat by Prussia the previous year led to Hungary's independence . Hungary became independent in 1867 .
 Hungary secured significant territorial concessions from Vienna, notably in Transylvania and Croatia . It was heralded by a series of military campaigns, including one against France, which greatly boosted an assertive .
 Austria and Hungary warily preferred to remain united precisely for fear of further nationalist agitations from their own splintered ethnic populations . Yet the two warily prefer to remain together precisely because of the tensions between the two .
 Hungarians were notably reluctant to concede political rights they demanded for themselves to their substantial Slovak, Romanian, and Serb populations . The Hungarians, for example, refused to concede the same rights to their significant Slovak and Romanian populations .
 At the same time, waning Ottoman control of the Balkans also encouraged nationalist aspirations . Serbia emerged as a more or less independent state as early as 1817 .
 Wallachia and Moldavia, essentially modern modern Romania, could lay similar claims to independence by 1829 . Wallachian and Moldavia could lay claims to similar claims of independence in 1829.
 The Greeks portrayed themselves as the legatees of ancient Greek civilization, a role that won them support from liberals across Europe . The Greeks secured their independence by 1830 after a nine-year war .
 Both Austria and Russia competed to fill the void left by the Ottomans . Both countries were victorious in World War II . Austria and the Russian Empire were victorious .
 Austria's provocative occupation of Bosnia in 1878 would create tensions that led directly to the outbreak of World War I in 1914 . Austria peremptorily annexed Bosnia in 1908, which led to the death of the Bosnian War .
 The Balkan Wars of 1912-13 were further evidence of the destabilizing effect of nationalist-driven state building . Serbia, Bulgaria, and Greece were involved in a bitter squabble for supremacy between Serbia and Bulgaria . Nationalist-led state building has destabilized the region .
 The notion that social justice could be secured by peoples pursuing the right to self-determination would rarely be realized in the 1800s . Vienna would continue to rule over its multi-ethnic empire until its defeat at the end of World War I in 1918, for example, . The consequences would
 The people of Poland were denied any means of exercising such nationalistic rights to selfdetermination . Likewise, the Polish people were denied the right to self-determination in Poland .
 The Jews of Europe remained persistently oppressed, whatever the promise of Zionism from the 1890s to create a Jewish nation in the Holy Land . And the Jews of European Europe remained persistentently oppressed .
 Bismarck's main goals were to ensure Prussian leadership of the German world at the expense of Austria . He also wanted to contain the threat of renewed French hostility from France .
 Bismarck started three wars, in 1864, 1866, and 1870, and thereafter worked tirelessly to maintain the balance of power in Europe .
 He committed Germany to a huge program of industrialization, oversaw the further growth of the German armed forces, and launched a program of colonization . He also oversaw the growth of Germany's armed forces .
 Despite being socially conservative, Bismarck introduced the world’s first welfare system . His motive was as much to outflank his socialist opponents as to protect the interests of workers .
 The British conquest of Burma was largely completed by 1886 . British rule in India before 1824 was largely complete by 1824 .
 First revolt by Indian sepoy troops against British rule occurs at Meerut . May 1857 The first revolt in India occurred against the British rule . The revolt was the first by sepoy soldiers to revolt against colonial rule .
 The rule of the East India Company in India was formally ended in 1858 . After 1858, the rule was officially ended in India .
 When the British began to restore order, the retribution was no less severe . It was no more severe than when the British restored order .
 The violence from both sides shocked the public and led to immediate calls for reform . The violence led the public to call for immediate reform .
 The mutiny began when the Indian troops became convinced that the cartridges of their new rifles had been greased with cow and pig fat . The cartridges were offensive to Hindus and Muslims alike .
 Many in India felt dislocation at British control . Many felt uprooting of traditional rulers, the apparent threat to local religions, and the aggressive assertion of alien rule .
 Britain's initial response after the mutiny was intended to reassure India of Britain’s peaceful intentions toward it, but in reality it underlined the fact that India was now entirely subservient to Britain, both economically and politically .
 As the number of Europeaneducated Indian elites grew, they would challenge Britain's rights over the subcontinent . The number of Europeans educated in India would challenge the British rule .
 Britain would continue to assert its imperial destiny, but increasingly had to confront the improbability that it could . Britain's imperial destiny would be confronted by the improbsability it could achieve .
 British rule in India was never as robust as it seemed, says historian . British rule was never more robust than it was thought, he says .
 After 1881 Tsar Alexander II is assassinated by the People's Will, an underground terrorist movement . Alexander II was assassinated in 1881 by the underground terrorist group .
 Russia's emancipation of Russia's 20 million serfs in 1861 was not a humanitarian act . A lexander II’s emancipation of Russian serfs was not an act of mercy . Russia's serfs were emancipated in 1861 . Russia was not humanitarian .
 Its goal was to modernize a Russia that, regardless of potential, was being left behind by the industrializing nations of the West . Russia's goal was a further attempt to modernise a nation that had potential, but failed .
 Russia adopted wide-ranging reforms across political, social, economic, and military areas . To take what it saw as its rightful place in the world, Russia adopted reforms . Russia's reforms include political and social reforms across the political and economic spheres .
 His reforms had raised hopes that a degree of political liberalization might follow . However, his reforms have raised hopes of a return to the streets .
 His assassination in 1881 provoked a predictably reactionary backlash . He was assassinated by President Lincoln Lincoln . Lincoln's assassination was a reaction to the assassination of Lincoln .
 Alexander III: We must give the country such industrial perfection as has been reached by the United States of America . His successor, Alexander III, was Alexander III . Alexander III was Alexander II, who died in childbirth .
 tsarist Russia was emerging into the industrialized world . The tsarist nation was emerging from the shadows .
 The country could lay claim to substantial, if not always efficient, military means . The country has a long history of using military means, including the CIA .
 Politically however, its unwillingness to reform would ultimately ensure its complete destruction in a Soviet revolution . Politically, however, it would ultimately be destroyed in the Soviet Revolution .
 An attempt is made, in the Missouri Compromise statute, to restrict slavery in the new states to a line south of the Missouri border . I mrTmmMwnmM^rnttnm tr [[mFTifflFrMrPFWFfmm'm
 President Abraham Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address on November 19, 1863, in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania . Lincoln's address was little more than halfway through the American Civil War . Lincoln gave what came to be known as 'The Address'
 In it, he characterized the Civil War as a struggle both for national unity and for equality . The Civil War was a struggle to guarantee equality for all people, he said .
 Lincoln was talking at the dedication of the Soldiers’ National Cemetery . 7,058 soldiers were killed at the Battle of Gettysburg, an encounter fought between July 1-3, the same year that had left 27,224 more wounded .
 The American Civil War was not simply about slavery . It was a war about whether so divisive an issue could be allowed to break up the U.S. The causes of the war were not slavery .
 The United States, as Lincoln said, was a nation ""conceived in liberty and dedicated Abraham Lincoln to the proposition that all men are created equal,"" yet its Southern states had a population of almost 4 million black slaves .
 Under the constitution of the United States, they were legally owned property . Under the Constitution of the U.S. they were owned property, they are legally owned .
 For abolitionists of the rapidly industrializing north, slavery was morally repugnant and an outrage against their Christian sensibilities . The abolitionists were a minority, but still exceedingly vocal .
 Abraham Lincoln was widely dismissed in political circles as an ignorant, socially awkward backwoodsman . However, slavery was not just the backbone of the agricultural prosperity of the Southern states; slavery was .
 By the time of his assassination just four years later, he had come to dominate America .
 Lincoln had established himself as a kind of irresistible political oracle . Lincoln had not just won the Civil War, but he had also established himself . Lincoln's victory in the 1860s was a triumph for Lincoln, but also for Lincoln's success .
 Lincoln was born in a log cabin in Kentucky . Lincoln qualified as a lawyer by his late 20s. Lincoln qualified for the job by age of 20s .
 The Battle of Gettysburg took place at Gettysburg in 1863 . He became an increasingly articulate champion in the Civil War .
 Confederate army was forced to retreat after three days of fighting and the death of more than 7,000 soldiers . Confederate soldiers were killed in the battle, but slave-owning Southerners, it was a right .
 The disagreement underlined the question over States' Rights— the extent to which the rights of individual states trumped the authority of the federal, or central, government in Washington .
 The 1820 Missouri Compromise stated that slavery would only be allowed only in new states south of a line extending westward from the southern border of Missouri . The line was the line from Missouri .
 It was later agreed that the settlers of new states should decide for themselves whether theirs would be free or slave states . The decision was reinforced by what would emerge as the anti-slavery Republican party .
 Lincoln proved an increasingly shrewd judge of how the Civil War should best be fought . Lincoln actively argued in favor of General Grant . Despite having no military experience, Lincoln proved to be a shrewd military judge .
 He pushed on with the war with unflinching determination, yet he understood what loss of life on the scale of the Civil War meant . The Civil War was one of the most bloody years of American history .
 Both Kansas and Nebraska were to the north of Missouri’s southern border . What followed, in Kansas above all, was a sudden inrush of proand anti-slavery settlers .
 Abraham Lincoln, with practically no support from any slave state, was voted into office in November 1860 . This conflict led to the founding of a new anti-slavery party, the Republicans . The South breaks away from the South .
 Lincoln's victory prompted the almost immediate decision by South Carolina to secede, to leave the Union . South Carolina became the first state to break away from the Union in 1861 .
 By May, when Richmond in Virginia was made the capital of the new country, four more states had joined them . Virginia was the first state to join the U.S. in the American Revolution .
 Five slave states, the so-called Border States, opted to remain within the original Union . However, five slave states remained within the Union . The Border States were part of the original South American Confederacy .
 The Confederacy argued that the Constitution had been freely adopted, and as such any state could legitimately break away from the Union if it felt oppressed . It argued that any state was able to break away if they felt oppressed by the Union .
 Robert E Lee On his resignation 99 1: "The United States is born as a beacon of liberty in which slavery is nonetheless permitted" Lee: The United States was born in slavery, but slavery was nonetheless permitted .
 The industrial Northern increasingly see slavery states as a key part of their extension of slavery into agrarian society any new states . T57] The industrial . Northern increasingly . increasingly see . slavery states are opposed .
 The South’s defeat results in political paralysis and institutionalized discrimination against its black population that persists well into the next century . The Southerners’ defeat means political paralysis .
 As free-born men, the citizens of the South had an ‘inalienable right to shape their own destinies,’s first lady writes . The South had a ‘right’ to shape its destiny, just as they rejected the tyranny of British rule
 In the minds of many Southerners, the U.S. government was guilty of precisely the same kind of tyranny in seeking to limit these freedoms . The United States government has been accused of trying to limit the freedoms of the South .
 As a supreme political operator, Lincoln realized the need to proceed with caution . Lincoln realized that he needed to proceed cautiously .
 Initially, his position was that he sought only to restrict the expansion of slavery while preserving the Union . Initially at any rate, he sought to restrict slavery while protecting the Union, he said .
 Lincoln felt the authority of the federal government overrode that of individual states . Lincoln was immovable on the second point, he said . Lincoln felt that the federal authority should be greater than individual states' .
 The U.S. was created as what Lincoln called “a great promise to the world,” so ensuring its survival was an absolute moral duty . The United States, the only fully democratic country on Earth, had been created as a great promise of the world .
 Civil War was fought to keep this “great promise" intact . Civil War fought in the short term, but in the long term, it was fought for the future of the nation .
 The outcome of the American Civil War was dictated ultimately by the human and material discrepancies between the North and the South . Eventual Northern victory was a Northern victory .
 There were 21 Union states with a population of 20 million, and 11 Southern states with 9 million . 4 million of whom were slaves, therefore not allowed to bear arms, were slaves .
 By 1864, 44 percent of males in the North between the ages of 18 and 60 were in military service, versus 90 percent in the Southern states . The North was still able to enlist 2 million men over the whole war, compared to the South’s 800,000 .
 The South produced 20 times more iron than the South, 38 times as much coal, and 32 times as many firearms . It produced 38 times more coal, 32 times more firearms, than the rest of the South .
 The only area in which the South exceeded the North was in cotton production, at 24 to 1 . The North and the South were at the highest levels of cotton production .
 The South was able to resist the Union forces for four years but also to come close to victory in 1862 and 1863 . It was a reflection of the Southern soldiers’ profound belief in their cause, the author says .
 It was also the result of its plainly superior generals—the Virginian Robert E Lee above all . The Virginian Lee was also a superior general .
 Ulysses S Grant and William Sherman were the two leading commanders of the Union forces . The North had been able to muster only a succession of timid and inept generals who frittered away the advantages they so abundantly possessed .
 Sherman's "march to the sea"" at Savannah, Georgia was followed by the razing of Atlanta in September 1864 . Sherman’s “march . to the . sea"" followed by Sherman's ‘march’ at Savannah .
 Grant stood by me when I was crazy, and I stood by him when he was drunk, and now we stand by each other . Completed in December, it left a 60-mile-wide swathe of destruction, deliberately targeting targets .
 The U.S. Civil War was the world's first major industrial war, the first to make widespread use of railroads, and the first widely reported in a new kind of popular press . The Civil War is the first major war to be widely reported and widely reported .
 The end of slavery, confirmed by the Thirteenth Amendment in 1865, represented an opportunity for the United States to be recast as a genuinely free land for all its citizens .
 The first transcontinental telegraph line was completed in 1861 . The Pony Express mail service closes two days later .
 Knowledge of the lands in the American West encourages an interest in settlement there . The American West is an important part of America's West .
 The gold rush in California sparks a global frenzy to share in the new riches . The settlement of the West Coast accelerated the gold rush, accelerating the settlement of California .
 Telegraph and railway lines help American Indians improve links between are forced away from the east and west coasts . Better communications spur the development of industry in the United States .
 The discovery of gold in a river in northern California in January 1848 boosted immensely by the discovery in 1848 . The United States' "manifest destiny" lay in its expansion to the west .
 Even allowing for the inevitable difficulties of communication and travel at the time, the find sparked a frenzied reaction . The find has sparked a frenzy since the discovery of the remains .
 The immediate consequence was both a wild lawlessness in the pursuit of instant riches and the confirmation of America’s Pacific coast as a promised land . It was the immediate consequence of the .
 A handful, mostly early arrivals, made fortunes, while some made modest profits, and most made nothing all at all . A handful of early arrivals made fortunes while others made modest profit .
 In reality, it was no more than an extreme instance of the determination to colonize North America by the U.S. by the United States that was underway long before the gold had been found . The discovery of gold was an extreme example of America's determination for colonizing North America
 In addition to the annexation of Texas in 1845, a further 13 states had been added by 1848 .
 New Mexico and California were also seized from Mexico in the same year .
 To reach California, the 49ers endured journeys of astonishing hardship . The 49ers traveled by wagon across the Great Plains or by ship around Cape Horn .
 An extraordinary resolution to link these vast new territories was being forged . It harnesses new technology in pursuit of nation-building on an epic scale .
 In 1861, the first telegraph line was established between the east and west coasts . It was established to connect the east coast to the west coast of England .
 The U.S. government authorized the settlement of the Black Hills of South Dakota after gold was discovered there . The settlement was authorized by the United States government in 1903 .
 By doing so, it broke a treaty with the Sioux of the Great Plains . The treaty was signed by the U.S. government in 1877 .
 John Gast’s painting Ameiican Progress depicts the concept of manifest destiny . The painting was commissioned by federal cavalry John Gast . Gast painted the painting in response to Sioux and Cheyenne refusal to move to reservations .
 Immigration was the fuel that powered these transformations, the new lands demanding a vast influx of new settlers . The new lands were the new land demanding the influx of immigrants .
 By 1861, it was 31 million; by the turn of the century, it had 76 million people . By 1861 it had 31 million people; by 1861, there had been 31 million .
 There were inevitable costs to such rapid growth, and American Indians paid the highest price . American Indians were the most at risk, and paid the most price .
 As many as 4. million people were driven off their tribal lands with relentless brutality, their numbers dropped from perhaps as many as 500,000 . The deaths of those who were driven from their lands were estimated to be as little as half a million . The death toll dropped to 500,
 Herded into reservations, their traditional way of life destroyed, they were helpless in the face of this seemingly irresistible expansion . They were sent to Montana to round them up. Herded .
 In just one hour, the combined American Indian warriors, led by Sitting Bull, killed Custer's entire force . Sitting Bull's Sitting Bull led the combined force to kill Custer .
 Their deaths renewed the government's determination to force the Sioux and Cheyenne into reservations at any cost . The deaths renewed the government .
 Industrialization, urban growth, and lower infant mortality boost European populations . America is God’s CRUCIBLE, the Great MELTING POT THE OPENING OF ELLIS ISLAND .
 In the mid-19th century, the world was experiencing an unprecedented boom in population, particularly in Europe . Political and religious freedoms and economic opportunities in young countries attract millions of immigrants .
 It was partly due to improvements in health, backed by more ready access to food as a consequence of improved agricultural methods .
 It was also a result of industrialization and urban growth, as well as the affluence and improved living standards that both produced .
 The population of Ireland in 1841 was 6. million; by 1871, it had dipped to 4 million . Ireland's population of 4 million was 4 million in 1871 . The population in Ireland dropped to 6 million by 1841 .
 A new urban underclass was being created, desperately impoverished and living in extreme squalor . Whatever the civic pride and bombast of the immense new urban centers of the Industrial Revolution, especially in Britain, a new urban class was created .
 For the citizens of continental Europe, the lure of new lands in which to be free and prosper would prove irresistible . The lure of a new land would be irresistible for the citizens .
 I had hoped that this land might become a safe and agreeable asylum to the virtuous and persecuted part of mankind, to whatever nation they might belong . Substantial numbers of Germans, Czechs, and Hungarians left central Europe after the suppression of the nationalist movement .
 From 1870, huge numbers of Russian and Polish Jews—1. million in 1901-10 alone—similarly emigrated, fleeing anti-Semitic pogroms . From 1870-1880s, many Russians and Poles emigrated to escape anti-Semitism .
 The numbers involved in this huge transfer of populations were remarkable . The numbers of people involved in the transfer of population were remarkable.
 From the mid-19th century to 1924, 18 million people emigrated from Britain, 9 million from Italy, 8 million from Russia, 5 million from Austria-Hungary, and 4. million from Germany . 18 million from Britain were emigrated to Italy, mostly from its deprived
 Over the same period, 3. million Europeans settled in South America, and 2 million in Australia and New Zealand . Over the next century, 3 million Europeans . settled in Australia, New Zealand and Australia .
 This process of relocation was not exclusively European . This process was not only European . It was also a process of European relocation .
 Indians settled in South Africa, Chinese migrants spread across the East Indies, and Japanese migrants settled in California . Many found themselves unwelcome in California and South Africa .
 Unknown numbers of black African slaves were still being shipped around the world . Unknown numbers still being sent to slave ships still exist in the U.S.
 By 1910, more than one in seven of the U.S. population had been born outside of the United States . By 1910 more than 1 in 7 of the population was born outside the country .
 Ellis Island opened on January 1, 1892, along with the Statue of Liberty, became a symbol of the vast stream of immigrants that poured into the United States . Ellis Island was opened in 1892 and is now a tourist attraction .
 As much as 40 percent of the immigrant population of the U.S. has at least one relative who was fed through this immense bureaucratic machine . This immigration center processed perhaps 12 million people, and it is claimed that 40 percent has a relative .
 The newly arrived immigrants, speaking a dazzling array of languages, would be processed . Here, shuffling forward, they would be processing the newly arrived .
 The players were examined medically before being subjected to a series of simple questions to establish their eligibility . They were then subjected to questions to prove they were eligible for the game .
 The great majority would then become accepted as citizens of the United States, with scarcely 2 percent turned away . The majority of those turned away would then be accepted into the U.S.
 Aggressive Western demands for trading rights in Japan highlight the weakness of its ruling elite . The Meiji Restoration aims to strengthen the country's military .
 Leading feudal barons reassert the authority of the boy emperor Meiji and oust the shogunate . Meiji was the son of a samurai aristocrat .
 The barons see the adoption of Western political and social methods as the best way to strengthen Japan . Military might is seen as an essential way of fulfilling Japanese ambitions .
 Modernization and Westernization encapsulate the Meiji period, and Japan emerges as an imperial power . Modernization, Westernization and modernization encapsulate Japan's rise as a power .
 The goal of the barons was not to take over and maintain Japan as it had existed under the shogunate . The barons were deliberately isolated and deliberately isolated from the wider world . The goal was to maintain Japan's rigidly hierarchical and hierarchical structure .
 There followed a transformation of a kind no society had seen before or has seen since . Japan transformed into a nation of people who had never seen before .
 In 30 years Japan became one of the most dynamic industrial powers in the world and the leading military power in East Asia . Modeling itself on the West, in 30 years it has become one of Asia's leading military powers .
 Almost no aspect of Japanese society was left untouched by this whirlwind of change . Almost all aspects of Japan society have been left untouched .
 In 1871, Japan Emperor Meiji abolished feudalism and established the yen as its currency . The yen was established as the country's currency .
 By 1872, the first railway was under construction; within 15 years, there was 1,000 miles of track . Within 15 years there were more than 1,800 miles of railway tracks in the world .
 In 1873, Japan introduced conscription, along with Western weapons and uniforms . The country's first conscription was introduced in 1873 .
 In 1877 Japan's first university was established in Tokyo, Japan . The same year saw an overhaul of the education system, and the same year was overhauled .
 Japan introduced a new legal code in 1882, and a new constitution seven years later . Japan also introduced new legal codes in 1881 and a constitution in 1982 .
 Cities similarly expanded, as did the population, swelling from 39. million in 1888 to 55 million by 1918 . Cities and population swelled from 39 million to over 55 million in 1872 .
 Emperor Meiji — whose personal name, never used, was Mutsuhito — was instead the symbol of the reborn Japan . Meiji was not as a statesman or as a ruler of Japan in the sense of exercising actual power .
 Until the restoration of Meiji in January 1868, the emperors of Japan were little more than a symbol . Until the restored of Meijiji, emperors were only a symbol of power .
 Under the shogunate, they were obliged to remain invisibly at the royal palace in Kyoto more or less permanently .
 Meiji had already become emperor . This image of Yokohama in 1874 depicts the modernity of Meiji-era Japan in the form of steam-powered trains .
 The spur to modernization had largely been the fear that Japan, like China, would become another Western colonial pawn . Japan's modernization spurs fear that it would become a colonial pawn in the West .
 In 1894, Korea had asked both Japan and China to help curb an insurrection there . Korea asked both China and Japan to help stop an insurrection in 1894 .
 The Japanese swept the Chinese aside, and then demanded and received possession of Taiwan, as well as rights in Manchuria . When both countries later sought to take over Korea, both countries were swept aside .
 The Japanese victory in 1905 over a disorganized Russian fleet at the Battle of Tsushima Strait was the first time an industrial European power had been defeated by an Asian power . The battle took place in Tsushima .
 Japan had the world’s attention in February 1867 following the sudden death of his father, Emperor Komei . The Emperor died in 1867, after the birth of his son .
 For those ambitious daimyo, who were determined to drive Japan into the modern world, elevating the emperor to a higher profile bestowed legitimacy on what was otherwise an act of usurpation . For those daimy , or feudal barons, the emperor was an emperor .
 One of the first acts was to force the emperor to move to Edo, which was renamed Tokyo in 1868 . Edo was the former residence of the shogun, and Tokyo is the current capital of Tokyo .
 The anti-Western Boxer Rebellion was put down by an eight-nation foreign force in 1899 . Eight-nation force was used to put down the uprising . The Boxer rebellion was the first of its kind .
 Western powers allowed very restricted access to Chinese ports . Despite China's great wealth, Western powers are allowed very limited access to China ports .
 Western merchants use opium to pay for goods, damaging China's economy . Western merchants also use opium as a way of paying for goods .
 The First Opium War is sparked by Chinese attempts to stop the opium trade . The war was the first opium war between China and the U.S.
 The Europeans burned down the emperor’s sumptuous Summer Palace . The point was underlined when the Europeans burned it down .
 British and French zones of influence extended in south China and along the fertile Yangtze River . The resulting Peking Convention increased the number of Treaty Ports open to Western trade . The Chinese agreed to talks, and the resulting treaty was signed by the French .
 Late 18th-century Qing China was the richest, most populous, and most powerful country in the world . It could afford its complacency .
 By the mid-19th century, the nation was effectively bankrupt, racked by famines and revolts . The nation was increasingly exploited and humiliated by the West .
 China's problems were internal as much as external. Uprisings and revolts were internal, as well as external . China had a history of internal problems.
 Its border provinces, conquered at huge expense in the 17th and 18th centuries, were in a nearpermanent state of unrest . The border provinces were conquered by the British Empire in the 16th and 17th century .
 Taiping Rebellion erupted across central China in 1850, resulting in the death of as many as 20 million people . In 1850, the Taiping rebellion erupted in central China, killing 20 million .
 When it was finally put down, in 1864, it was only after Western intervention . The Taliban was only put down after a decade of fighting .
 Qing dynasty, its administration increasingly ineffective, had essentially lost control of China . The Qing dynasty was essentially losing control over China .
 The West exploited growing turmoil in China, weakening China further in the process . It was this growing turmoil that the West exploited, weakening the country further .
 The first, modest trading concessions China had agreed to stipulated that all Chinese goods be paid for in silver . China agreed to the first of modest trade concessions stipulated in silver, the first .
 Canton, in southern China, was initially the only trading port open to Western merchants . However, from the early 19th century, European traders began trading in Canton . Canton was the first trading port to be open to European merchants .
 After the two opium wars, Europe was given exclusive access to many more by bribing officials . Europe was increasingly able to use opium, cheaply grown in India, to pay for goods .
 The Chinese attempt to end the opium trade led to a crushing defeat in the First Opium War of 1839-42 . European powers, Britain above all, extracted substantial trading concessions from China .
 Western insistence in 1856 that these concessions be extended that led to the Second Opium War, concluded in 1860 by the Peking Convention . Western insistence on extending the concessions led to a treaty that ended the war in 1860 .
 By 1900, a string of Western trading ports were scattered along the Chinese coast . Western trade ports scattered around the world were scattered around China .
 Britain, France, Japan, and Russia now all controlled what had been Chinese tributary states on its borders . Britain now controls what had previously been China's borders .
 The Militia United in Righteousness was a semi-secret society composed mostly of young men . The Boxer Rebellion was a last-ditch attempt at reform on Western lines . It came to a head in 1899 with the Boxer rebellion mounted by the Militia .
 Its goal, to be achieved in part thanks to their deluded belief that they were invulnerable to Western weapons, was the overthrow of all Western interests . Its goal was to achieve in part because they believed they were invincible to Western forces .
 The rebellion was variously supported and opposed by the imperial court . The imperial court was uncertain whether it represented a means of salvation or would merely provoke Western reprisals .
 An eight-nation military alliance, including Japan, was sent into China against the Boxers . By September 1901 the rebellion had been crushed amid scenes of indiscriminate violence .
 The Great Stink in London prompts the building of an extensive sewer system still used in the 21st century . London's sewer system is still used today .
 A variety theater in Berlin, the Wintergarten, becomes the world’s first cinema . After 1895, a variety theater becomes the first cinema in Berlin . Berlin's first cinema opened in 1895 .
 T he opening of the Eiffel Tower on March 31, 1889 was a startling assertion of Parisian bombast in the years between the humiliations of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870-71 and the outbreak of World War I in 1914 .
 This was the Belle Epoque, a time when Paris could—and did—confidently proclaim itself the City of Light, supremely cosmopolitan, the art capital of the world, and the epicenter of civilized living . This was a time .
 The Eiffel Tower was erected in time for the Universal Exposition of 1889 . Paris was the city reborn, Paris was a city reborn .
 Gustave Eiffel's tower is now the tallest structure in the world, at 984ft . It has since come to represent Paris to the entire world . It is a triumphant monument to technological progress .
 Beginning in 1853, the French emperor had whole districts knocked down, replacing medieval buildings and tangles of tiny streets with imposingly vast boulevards .
 Train stations were built, water supplies improved, sewers constructed, parks laid out, and stunning vistas created . Water supplies were improved, and parks were laid-out .
 The goal was a model city, one that would reflect not just the glory of France but also its mastery of the modern age . The city would reflect France's glory of the glory and mastery of modern age, the French city .
 By 1900, London was the largest city in the world, with 6. million inhabitants . Fifty years later, there were nine cities with populations larger than 1 million .
 Social reformers argue that living conditions for all must be improved . They say living conditions must be better for all .
 Better living conditions and higher wages in cities lead to the birth of mass consumerism . Between 1850 and 1900, the population of Chicago, for example, tripled from 560,000 to 1 million .
 The initial consequence of this population explosion was quite staggering urban squalor . The population explosion in the 1930s led to the creation of urban squalid conditions . The city was filled with people who lived in squalid housing conditions .
 It became clear that the infrastructure demanded by any modern city had to include adequate public transport and well-lit streets, for example, but major improvements in public health . Above all, sanitation must be improved, says the mayor of London .
 "The shift in the quality of life in these great metropolises was extraordinary," says the author of the book . "It was extraordinary. The shift in life was extraordinary."
 The rapid development of mass consumerism is the direct consequence of improved living standards, shorter working hours, and compulsory education . Basic literacy and numeracy is now increasingly commonplace .
 It was an age of music halls and popular theater, and subsequently of the cinema; of the phonograph; of mass-circulation newspapers; and of a growing interest in sports . It was also the age of cinema, music halls, theater and cinema .
 Just as central to this age of growing affluence and increased leisure—at least some—were the first department stores .
 Color posters were part of a retail revolution that was coupled with an advertising explosion, with color posters massproduced for the first time . These were a conspicuous part of the retail revolution .
 Just as the Eiffel Tower before them, they rapidly became symbols of the transformation in urban life . Just as as the . Eiffels Tower before they, they were symbols of . the transformation of urban life.
 A solution favored in the U.S. was an elevated railway— a train line raised above the streets on steel girders . A solution to the problem was a high-rise elevated railway .
 In the UK, the same space constraints led to the birth of the underground railway . The underground railway was the first underground railway in the UK .
 The first, using steam engines, was London's Metropolitan Railway, which opened in 1863 . It linked Paddington and King's Cross stations with the City of London . The first steam-powered train was powered by steam engines .
 By 1871 it had encircled almost the whole of central London . Soon extended and combined with the District Line, by 1871, it had almost all of the capital .
 The city’s first electric underground service was opened in 1890 . The service was faster, quieter, and much less dirty .
 First U.S. underground service opened in Boston in 1897 . Paris followed suit with the opening of the Metro, named after the London line, in 1900 .
 In 1890, London unveiled the world’s first electric underground railway . It was built in the heart of the city .
 The “scramble for Africa” before 1830 France begins occupation of Algeria . The ‘Scramble’ for Africa began in 1830 France began occupying Algeria . I would then discuss other planets and other topics .
 Europe's colonial of its financial and powers sparks a sudden military superiority “scramble for Africa.” to impose itself on Africa. Europe takes full advantage between Europe and Africa's colonial powers . Europe takes advantage of Europe’s colonial advantage .
 Berlin Conference confirmed Europe’s self-asserted right to impose itself on a continent deemed backward, ignorant, and savage . Berlin Conference did not precipitate the sudden European takeover of Africa .
 Called by Otto von Bismarck, Germany's chancellor, the conference was held over the winter of 1884-85 . Representatives from 14 countries attended the conference .
 It was intended in part to legitimize a more or less enforced subjection of Africa . It was meant to avoid conflict between Europe's colonial powers, France and Britain most obviously .
 At the same time, it paved the way for Germany and Belgium, two nations with no history of colonial rule, to become imperial powers .
 For Germany, this was little more than a logical next step in its challenge to Britain and France . For Germany it was a logical step to take on the UK and France, it's a step forward .
 If they could boast vast colonial possessions, Germany felt it should, too . Germany felt that it should have a strong position in Europe .
 Before colonization, Africa possessed a variety of states and territories, some quite precisely defined, some amorphously tribal . There was an extreme contrast between the sophistication of Egypt, for example, and the Congo in tropical Africa .
 The first European holdings in Africa were coastal trading forts, sustained by gold and the slave trade . European holdings were sustained by the gold and slave trade.
 The interior remained impenetrable, but as it was revealed from the early 1800s, European control of Africa gained momentum . The interior of the African continent remained the most secretive of the continent .
 The subsequent heightening of tensions resulted in the nearcomplete reduction of Africa to European rule . Cecil Rhodes was the founder of the Rhodes African Empire .
 African colonies were essentially artificial creations, lines drawn on maps to suit the colonizing powers . The colonies were created by African nations in Africa's first century .
 Any local resistance to colonization was invariably crushed by military means . They took no notice of local histories and cultures, and any local resistance was always crushed . Any resistance to colonialism was always met with military means, says historian .
 In 1885, Leopold II, the King of the Belgians, proclaimed the establishment of the Congo Free State, an area 76 times larger than Belgium . The Congo was then ruled by Belgian and German rulers .
 Presented as a model colony, dedicated to humanitarian ends and free trade, in reality it was anything but . The colony was presented as a colony dedicated to free trade and humanitarian ends .
 The Congo witnessed brutalities on a neargenocidal scale . Treated by Leopold II as his personal possession, the Congo witnessed atrocities .
 The exact numbers can never be known, but it is believed that between 2 million and 10 million Congolese died . Between 2 million to 10 million people are believed to have died in the Congo .
 There was no more ardent exponent of British imperial rule in Africa than Cecil Rhodes . Conditions in German southwest Africa, suddenly taken over after .
 He made his fortune mining and selling diamonds in South Africa . He dedicated the rest of his life to this audacious vision .
 Cecil Rhodes was a great believer in colonization for the benefit of the British Empire . He was able to carve out new British territories in Northern Rhodesia, now part of Namibia .
 The true price of Africa's riches produced by Africa for its European masters was extraordinary suffering . The real price of the riches produced for European masters is extraordinary suffering, the author says .
 His relentless scheming to topple Boer republics led to his political demise in 1895 . He was prime minister of Britain's Cape Colony from 1890 to 1895 . His efforts to topple the Boer Republics were unsuccessful .
 He remains perhaps the most striking example of the unashamed imperialist, not just permanently ready to extend British colonial control, but convinced that it was his duty to do so in the interests of what seemed to him a selfevident European fitness to rule .
 Ottoman Turkey suffers humiliating defeats in the Balkan Wars . After 1912-13 Ottoman Turkey suffered humiliating defeats . Ottoman Turkey was defeated in the Balkans .
 Ottoman sultanate attempts Westernizing reforms, but these efforts are half-hearted . Ottoman Turkey finds itself unable to keep control of its empire and match Western powers .
 Turkey is unable to offer any lasting solution to Turkey’s declining power, says Erdogan . Turkey is struggling to cope with its decline in power . The country has been hit by a wave of violence in recent years .
 Abdul Hamid II proves repressive and corrupt, ever more at the mercy of Western financial interests . The rule continues to be repressive, corrupt, and at the whim of Western interests .
 Defeat in World War I shatters the Ottoman Empire but leads to the formation of a secular republic . Defeat in WWI leads to formation of the secular republic of Turkey .
 The Young Turk Revolution of July 1908 instigated by nationalistic army officers dismayed by territorial losses of the Ottoman Empire . The revolution took place in July 1908 in Istanbul, Turkey .
 Ottoman ruler Abdul Hamid II had suspended constitutional monarchy in 1878 in favor of personal rule after only two years . It forced the sultan to reintroduce constitutional monarchy that he had suspended in 1879 .
 In 1909, he was forced to abdicate in favor of his brother, Mehmed V, who was merely a figurehead . In 1909 he abdicated after being forced to step down from power .
 In 1800, despite repeated defeats at the hands of the Russians, Ottoman Turkey still ruled over a vast multinational empire that stretched across the Balkans, the Middle East, and North Africa . Despite repeated defeats, the empire was still ruled by the Turks .
 From 1805, it lost control of Egypt, which became effectively independent under one of the sultan's generals, Muhammad Ali . Egypt became independent under Muhammad Ali's rule in 1805 .
 In 1830, the year that France began its conquest of Algeria, Greece won its independence . By 1878, Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Romania were similarly independent in all but name .
 Following the Young Turk Revolution, the relentless decline of Ottoman Turkey continued . Ottoman Turkey was ruled by the Ottoman Empire .
 In 1911, Libya was lost to Italy, while The Ottoman Empire became known as ‘the sick man of Europe” in the late 19th century, due to its inability to hold on to its lands . Libya was also known as Libya, while the Ottoman Empire was known as
 The Balkan Wars of 1912-13 saw the surrender of almost all of Turkey's remaining European territories . A defeat in World War I led to even more territorial losses for Turkey .
 Following the Balkan crisis, the Ottomans’ military government launched a drive to modernize the country along Western lines . Following the war, the Ottoman government began a drive for modernizing the country .
 Turkey entered World War I as an ally of the Central Powers, Germany and Austria-Hungary . In October 1914, Turkey entered the war as a result of German military aid . Turkey was convinced that German aid would allow it to reassert its potency .
 Defeat in 1918 saw Turkey reduced to its Anatolian heartlands, its remaining Middle East territories lost, largely carved up between Britain and France . This was a calamitous mistake .
 The Treaty of Sevres was largely a Franco-British imposition in 1920 . Turkey's defeat in World War I was underlined in 1920 by the Treaty . The treaty was largely an imposition of France and Britain .
 The Turkey that emerged under Kemal, subsequently styled Atatiirk, was exactly the centralized Western-style and secular state that nationalist reformers such as the Young Turks had argued for . Kemal's state was exactly what nationalists argued for in the 1950s .
 Born in 1881, he took part in the Young Turk Revolution as an army officer . He was born in Istanbul, Turkey, and died in 1915 .
 Later, he served with distinction in the Gallipoli campaign of 1915-16 . He repulsed a joint Franco-British attempt to conquer western Turkey .
 After the Turkish defeat in World War I, Atatiirk established a provisional government . Atatatirk established the provisional government of Turkey .
 As leader of the Turkish Nationalists, he played a central role in driving the Greeks from western Turkey . He played a key role in the drive to drive the Greeks out of western Turkey in the 1930s .
 Atatiirk launched a radical program of social and political reforms intended to transform the nation into a modern, Westernized republic . Turkey's borders were confirmed by the Treaty of Lausanne of 1923 .
 Turkey emerged as a coherent, secular political entity under Atatiirk . However painful the process of dragging Turkey into the modern world, it was painful . Turkey has emerged as coherent and secular state of secularism .
 Women's war work emphasizes their capabilities, says Emily Davis . The death of Emily Davis is the focus of this article .
 Emily Davison was knocked to the ground by a horse owned by King George V in 1913 . She died four days later .
 It is unclear if this was a protest that went wrong or an active attempt at martyrdom . It's unclear whether this was an attempt to martyrdom or a protest gone wrong .
 Davison joined the Women’s Social and Political Union in 1906 . Davison had joined the union in 1906 and was a member of the WSPU . The intended disruption was typical of Davison's role in the union .
 The suffragette was the only one to perish. be regarded as second-class citizens . Suffragettes were not only suffragettes but also sufferers of the death penalty .
 Extension of the right to vote to increasing numbers of men in countries such as Britain and the U.S. has left them asking why women should not be entitled to vote .
 Emmeline Pankhurst founded the WSPU in 1903 with the aim of using militant tactics to further this cause . The WSPu was founded in 1903 and is now based in London .
 The tactics of the suffragettes, as the vote-seeking women were by now mockingly known, became increasingly violent . Its slogan declared “Deeds not words,” and its tactics became violent . The suffragette's tactics became more violent and violent .
 Chaining themselves to public buildings and the disruption of meetings escalated into the smashing of shop windows, acts of arson, and bombings . They smashed shops windows, smashed cars, and bombed them .
 In 1909, the WSPU began to stage hunger strikes in prison; in response they were force-fed . In response, they were forced to stop hunger strikes . The hunger strike is a painful and degrading process .
 The Women's Christian Temperance Union campaigned peacefully for women’s rights . The union argued that women could not influence political decisions without having the right to vote .
 Alice Paul had been a member of the WSPU from 1907 to 1910 and had been sent to prison three times . Alice Paul was sent to jail three times and had served time in prison . She was jailed for three times in the early 1900s .
 NWP’s so-called Silent Sentinels, protesting outside the White House from January 1917, were also arrested and force-fed . The NWP's Silent Sentins were arrested and forced-fed in 1917 .
 At the outbreak of World War I, the WSPU stopped campaigning, mobilizing itself instead in support of the war effort . At the end of the Great Depression, the union was in full swing .
 The contribution made by women during the war clearly demonstrated just how much wider their role could be than that traditionally expected of them as wives and mothers .
 All British women aged 30 or over were granted the right to vote in 1918 . In 1918, all women aged over 30 were granted voting rights in Britain .
 In 1919, Congress approved the Nineteenth Amendment, which was ratified the following year, granting women the same voting rights as men . Meanwhile, in the United States, the NWP continued its protest .
 She was born into an eminently respectable, somewhat leftleaning middle-class world in the north of England, which only served to cement her desire to further the cause of women’s rights . She was also born into—and later remained in by marriage—a . eminently
 She was single-minded, exceptionally active, and wholly unflinching in her refusal to compromise . She was one of the world's most famous women, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Her leadership exhibited a determination to take the fight for women's suffrage into the heart of what she saw as the enemy camp . Her leadership of the WSPU exhibited a . determination to . take the . fight for . women's . suffrage .
 Her increasing readiness to use more violent methods to secure suffragette goals alienated many who may otherwise have been her natural supporters . Women as much as men as men .
 Her refusal to back down, coupled with the fervor she inspired in her followers, introduced a new mood of feminist militancy into a complacent masculine political world . Nonetheless, her absolute refusal to . back down and her fervor . inspired in . followers, she said .
 In 1772, Austria, Prussia, and Russia began annexing the commonwealth . In 1795, they absorbed it fully in a series of annexations . Austria, Russia, Austria and Prussia annexed it fully .
 Russia took over the eastern half of the country; Prussia, the north; and Austria, the southern and central parts . Prussia took over Prussia; Austria took over Austria and the rest of the nation .
 The elimination of the Polish state bolstered these three great European powers, leaving Polish patriots to struggle for independence . Poland achieved independence in 1918, which they achieved in 1918 .
 Maharaja Ranjit Singh brought together a group of Sikh states in and surrounding the Punjab region of northern India to create a powerful Sikh Empire in 1799 .
 For its creation and defense, it drew on the Khalsa, the powerful united army that had been created in the 1730s by Sikh leader Nawab Kapur Singh . The Khalsa was created by the Sikh leader in 1730, and was created in 1770s .
 Although not long-lasting, it helped to strengthen Sikh unity and confirmed the close identification of the Sikhs with the Punjab region .
 In 1812, the United States declared war on Britain over a number of issues, including trade restrictions, commandeering of United States merchant seamen and support lent by Britain to American Indian peoples who opposed U.S. expansion .
 The conflict took place on several fronts across North America and involved a failed U.S. invasion of Canada, the burning of the city of Washington by the British in 1814, and a major United States victory at New Orleans .
 After more than two years of fighting, the status quo is largely restored . The status quo has been largely restored in Iraq .
 The war gave the U.S. a stronger sense of nationhood and confirmed that Canada remained part of the British Empire .
 Shaka, ruler of a small Zulu chiefdom, was a dynamic leader who formed a Zulu state after 1816 . He conquered and uniting a large number of groups of the Nguni people of southeast Africa .
 The British invaded Zulu territory in 1879 and suffered initial defeat at Isandiwana . The Zulu army was defeated by the British in Isandwana .
 The British divided up their kingdom, eventually adding Zululand to their empire . The British added the kingdom to its empire .
 In 1830, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which granted Native Americans lands west of the Mississippi in return for surrendering their lands within existing state boundaries in the east .
 Tens of thousands of people were evicted from their homelands on a forced westward march that became known as the Trail of Tears . Although the removal was in theory voluntary, in fact it resulted in the eviction .
 The people forced to move were mainly Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole . They were forced to leave their homes .
 In the 1840s, the rapidly growing rural population of Ireland suffered a series of disastrously poor crops of their staple food, the potato . The potato was Ireland's staple food for many years .
 About 1 million people died of starvation, while another million emigrated either to Britain or North America . Potato blight led to about 1 million emigrating to North America or Britain .
 Ireland's population has never risen back to its prefamine level . bitterness about the British government’s poor response to the famine remains .
 By the mid-19th century, Qing rule in China had become corrupt, and there were many who wanted change . Many wanted change, and the Qing rule was corrupt .
 Among various antigovernment groups was one led by a religious leader . Hong Xiuquan was one leader of a religious group .
 The rebellion grew and spread across virtually all of China until it became a war with hundreds of thousands of fighters involved . Hundreds of thousands were involved in the rebellion . The rebellion was the largest in China's history .
 With European military aid, the Qings eventually managed to crush the rebels, and millions of soldiers and civilians were killed . Millions of soldiers, civilians died .
 Despite its failure, the Taiping Rebellion fatally weakened the Qing regime, which only survived for another half century . The Taiping rebellion was the first attempt to overthrow the Qing dynasty, which was weakened by foreign influence .
 France and Britain intervened in support of Turkey in the Crimean War in 1853 . They sent a joint force to invade the Crimea and besiege the Russian port of Sebastapol .
 There were huge numbers of casualties, particularly on the Russian side, before Russia agreed peace terms . Russia agreed to peace terms with the West before the war broke out .
 British cavalry's infamous Charge of the Light Brigade made the war notorious for the needless waste of human life . Blunders such as the Charge of The Light Brigade led to the death of many .
 The Crimean War also came to be associated with the efforts of health reformers such as Florence Nightingale . Nightingales worked to improve training for nurses in both military and civilian hospitals .
 Emperor Napoleon III of France surrendered at the Battle of Sedan, during the FrancoPrussian War, and he was taken prisoner . In 1870, France returned to a republican government . Napoleon III was captured by the Germans in 1881 .
 The French parliament declared a republic, expecting it to form an interim government until a new monarch was chosen . The new French government is expected to form a government until the monarch is chosen .
 It proved impossible to decide on a constitutional framework for a new monarchy, or on who should take the throne . However, it proved impossible for the British government to decide a new monarch .
 After elections in 1871, the Third Republic became permanent, with a president as head of state and a Chamber of Deputies, elected through universal male suffrage, to make the laws .
 In 1881, the Sudanese leader Muhammad Ahmad declared himself the Mahdi (a messianic figure in some Muslim traditions) and launched a revolt against the government of Egypt, which ruled Sudan . Britain effectively controlled both countries .
 Ahmad laid siege to Khartoum, which fell in early 1885, in spite of a defense by Charles George Gordon, the British Governor-General . Ahmad was one of the most successful Arab monarchs in the world .
 The Mahdists were finally defeated by Lord Kitchener in 1898 . Sudan was ruled jointly by Britain and Egypt after the defeat .
 The war of 1899-1902 was the second conflict between the Boers and the British . The Boers fought against the British in South Africa . The war was the first of its kind .
 After initial Boer victories, the British defeated their enemies by applying a ""scorched earth” policy in areas of the country where the Boers had fought successfully as Boers .
 Some 20,000 died in concentration camps, and the Boers lost their independence . The Boers were forced to leave South Africa .
 The war reduced many surviving Boers to poverty, but it also spurred on their nationalism . The war indirectly led to Afrikaaner dominance of South Africa’s government in the 20th century .
 The Mexican Revolution removed the dictator Porfirio Diaz, who had ruled for some 35 years . The revolution began in 1910 and was initially led by Francisco Madero . It was the first of its kind in Mexico .
 New republic could not prevent armed factional struggles and civil war . Civil war continued until the drawing up of a new constitution in 1917 . New government was elected in 1920 .
 The following two decades saw key reforms such as the redistribution of lands among peasants and Indian communities . In 1938, the nationalization of oil was nationalized, and the land redistribution was redistribution .
 Lenin calls for a revolution and the Bolsheviks seize power in November . Lenin called for the revolution in Russia . The Bolsheviks seized power in Russia in 1918 .
 The financial disaster plunges the world into the Great Depression . Billions of dollars are lost and the world plunges into the Depression .
 Hitler invades Poland, and Britain and France declare war on Germany . The war lasts six years and is the deadliest in world history .
 80,000 communists led by Mao Zedong head for the north on the perilous Long March . The Nazis meet at Wannsee to plan the annihilation of the Jews . Fleeing from Nationalists in southern China, the Chinese Communist Party fled the country .
 The Jewish state of Israel is established in Palestine, which had previously been under British rule for three decades . Israel was established in the region, which was previously under British control for decades .
 Historical perspectives on events close to the present day are inevitably shifting and uncertain . H istorical perspectives on historical events are inevitable and uncertain, as well as shifting .
 A historian writing in the mid-20th century might have characterized the modern era as a period of catastrophe, in which all the economic and political gains of liberal civilization had been squandered . But a historian writing today might have called it a catastrophe .
 By the early 21st century it was tempting to see continuity with the pre-1914 world, as a globalized capitalist economy and great technological innovation were combined with rapidly rising population and productivity . However, by the early 20th century, the world had become a world of its own
 Convulsions of the period from 1914 to 1950 were on an epic scale . The convulsions were on a massive scale . World War Two was the first of its kind .
 Both European civilization and science were tarnished by association with this slaughter . Both were the twin pillars of the traditional 19th-century idea of ‘progress’
 Germany, often considered one of Europe's most ""civilized" countries, descended into dictatorship and genocidal massacre . Germany was once considered a "civilized country"
 Science was used to create weapons of mass destruction, from poison gas to the atom bomb . Science has been used in the creation of weapons such as poison gas and the atom bombs .
 Even in the interlude of relative peace between the world wars, global capitalism failed to function effectively . The economic misery of the Great Depression was driving a retreat from democratic government and free markets .
 To revolutionaries inspired by a Marxist vision, these upheavals seemed the death throes of the capitalist order . The revolution was inspired by the Marxist vision of revolution .
 The building of alternative “communist’s societies, based on the model of a singleparty state and a state-controlled economy, proved to be a costly experiment . But the building of alternatives to singleparty societies, such as a single-party state, proved a costly
 In Russia, followed by China, communism succeeded in transforming undeveloped countries into major industrial and military powers . Millions died as victims of the state, and citizens were denied fundamental freedoms .
 World War II was followed by the Cold War confrontation between the "free world" and the communist bloc . The U.S. led the “free world” led by the United States, and the . communist bloc. The Cold War was the result of a battle of ideology
 Instead of disarmament, there was a potentially disastrous nuclear arms race . The U.S. faced a potential disastrous arms race in the 1980s . Instead, the U.N. went to war with the West .
 The East German government lifts travel restrictions and thousands of people tear down the Berlin Wall; communism collapses . Thousands of people still live in East Germany . The fall of communism is the end of communism .
 Kwame Nkrumah wins Ghanaian independence from Britain through peaceful means . A A, 1956 1962 1962 1962 As A 1989 2001 2001 1957 1965 'V 1991 1991 1991 2011 Kwame .
 The United States sends troops to South Vietnam to prevent the spread of communism . The U.S. is embroiled in the war for nine years . The war ended in 1968 .
 The newly independent nations became an ideological and even, at times, military battleground between the capitalist and communist systems . They became ideological, even, a . times, battlegrounds between capitalism and communism .
 Capitalism showed its ability to generate economic growth on a vast scale, creating a booming consumer society in more advanced countries . Capitalism showed it can create a boom in consumer society, according to the economist .
 By the 1980s communist countries confronted economic stagnation and rising popular discontent . In contrast, by the 1980's communist countries faced economic stagnation, rising discontent . By the 1990s, by contrast, communist countries were confronted by economic stagnation .
 communist regimes collapsed in the Soviet bloc, while communist China later became a powerhouse of capitalism . With great rapidity, communist regimes collapse in the . Soviet bloc .
 From the 1960s, hotly contested campaigns for civil rights had progressed liberal ideals in areas such as racial equality and gender politics . Progress and pessimism had progressed from civil rights campaigns to gender politics and racial equality .
 In Latin America and much of Asia, living standards had risen dramatically by the early 21st century . Living standards had also risen dramatically in Latin America, Asia and Latin America .
 World's population increased from under 2 billion in 1914 to over 7 billion one century later . Food supplies had not run out, as had once been predicted by many .
 Restricting environmental damage was recognized as a major challenge for the future . The problem is generated by humanity’s growth and success . Restricting the environment is a challenge for humanity's future .
 Human progress in the 20th century was remarkable, from rising literacy and life expectancy to the development of air and space travel and computers .
 History offers no solid ground for predictions, suggesting only that the unexpected was to be expected . History offered no solid grounds for predictions . The unexpected was expected, but the unexpected is expected .
 Secret meetings between Britain and France produce the Sykes-Picot Agreement, splitting the Ottoman Empire . After 1916 secret meetings in London and Paris, the agreement was signed in Paris .
 November 9, 1918 Kaiser Wilhelm abdicates, and his imperial government collapses . Kaiser Wilhelm's government collapsed in 1918 . The Kaiser's government was overthrown .
 P asschendaele was a largescale attack on the German front line around Ypres, Belgium, during World War I . Allies' aim was to advance into Belgium and free the German ports on the Belgian coast .
 The biggest challenge was to break through the defensive positions taken by the Germans on the West Flanders Ridge . The battle took place in Belgium in the early 1930s .
 Preparations for the battle began on June 7, 1917 with a heavy two-week bombardment of German positions . The battle took place on June 14, 1917 .
 The Allied forces were stuck in mud as torrential rain turned the area into a quagmire . Within days, the Allied forces had been trapped in mud .
 By the time the Allies captured Passchendaele on November 6, the village was in ruins . The Allies captured the village on November 4 .
 The conflict cost 300,000 Allied lives, with a gain of 5 miles . The Germans lost 260,000 of their troops in the conflict .
 At the outbreak of World War I, both sides anticipated fast-moving battles that would cover hundreds of miles . It was at the start of the war, and both sides were aware of the scale of the battle .
 None expected a static fight with their forces deep in defensive trenches . None expected to expect the battle to be a static battle .
 Early trenches were small furrows, but they grew more elaborate, fortified with wooden frames and sandbags . The trenches were first started in the 1800s .
 German trenches were more sophisticated and had electricity and toilets . German trenches had electricity, toilet facilities .
 Soldiers spent daylight hours avoiding enemy fire and endured periods of boredom and daily chores, broken up with spells in reserve and short rest periods . Soldiers were forced to spend daylight hours avoided enemy fire .
 Machinegunners are using bomb indentations as makeshift shelter . The British government hailed as a victory by the British government but became a byword for the futility of war .
 The long history of mutual antipathy between Germany and France came to a head in 1870 with France’s humiliating defeat by Germany in the Franco-Prussian war . The trenches sometimes filled up with rats and lice, as well as water, which turned to ice .
 Soldiers had a repetitive diet of canned food and few comforts . Life in such conditions was exhausting, and soldiers had to eat canned food . Soldiers were forced to live in a cramped camp camp in the Philippines .
 Snipers shot at any heads that appeared over the parapet, and raiding parties throwing grenades were a constant danger . Snipers fired at anyone who appeared over parapet .
 It was a relentless war of attrition— smelly, dirty, and riddled with disease. It was smelly and dirty, dirty and riddled . It was the relentless war .
 The war led to the annexation of most of the French provinces of Alsace and Lorraine . Sir Edward Grey was British Foreign Secretary during the war .
 In Eastern Europe, the AustroHungarian and Russian empires had a long-standing dispute over which of them had the strongest claim to power in the Balkans . The AustoHungarians and Russians were at the center of their dispute over the power of the Balkans in the early 20th
 Both depended on the area for access to the Mediterranean, and each eyed the movements of the other with intense suspicion . Both depended heavily on each other for access .
 Austria-Hungary, Germany, and Italy signed a Triple Alliance in 1882 . The alliance was meant to give each other military support in case of war . Each state needed allies .
 In the 1890s, Russia and France signed an agreement to protect one another in the event of a war against Germany . The agreement was signed in the same time as the pact to protect each other from a German invasion .
 By the turn of the century, Kaiser Wilhelm II’s provocative nationalistic speeches and naval expansion pushed Britain into closer ties with France . Britain became a major ally of France in the 1920s .
 Britain and France agreed an entente cordiale, or friendly alliance, in 1904 . The alliance was broadened into a triple entente, embracing Russia, in 1907 .
 The atmosphere generated by this international jostling led to an increase in military spending by European governments . European governments and the expansion of armies and navies have increased military spending .
 A spark was all that was needed to ignite the flame of enmity between these two alliances . War erupts after a spark was ignited by a spark .
 Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Habsburg throne, was assassinated in Sarajevo in June 1914 . Archduke Franz Ferdinand was the son of a Bosnian Serb who was killed in the assassination .
 Austrians suspected Serbia, their principal enemy in the Balkans, of the attack . The Austrians believed Serbia to be behind the attack, which took place in 2010 .
 Austria-Hungary presented Serbia with an ultimatum on July 23, demanding that the Serbs stop all anti-Austria-Hunary activities . After securing support from its ally Germany, the government secured support from Germany . The Serbs are now living in a state of war
 Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia on July 28, 1918 . Serbia accepted most of the demands, but the war broke out in Serbia . Serbia was defeated by the Austrians in the war .
 Britain called for international mediation, but the crisis quickly escalated into European war . Britain has called for mediation, which has since escalated into war in Ukraine .
 Germany declared war on Russia on August 1, and on France two days later . When Russia mobilized against AustriaHungary, Germany declared its war on France . The war began in August 1914 .
 Britain joined the war on August 4, after the Germans invaded neutral Belgium . The war began in August 1944 .
 A European arms race leads together in a complex to larger armies and more web of alliances . The relative equality of the armies means that neither side can score a decisive victory .
 The fighting on the Western Front becomes a bitter stalemate despite the enormous cost of battles like Passchendaele . With both sides exhausted, U.S. entry into the war on the side of the Allies facilitates a breakthrough in the conflict .
 It was deployed near the Franco-Belgian border, in line with pre-war military plans agreed with the French government . The French government has deployed the troops near the Belgian border .
 On the Western Front, the Germans invaded Belgium and France, but their advance was halted by the French and British at the Battle of the Marne . On the first weeks of the conflict, the German invasion was halted in France and Belgium .
 Germany dominated, scoring a great victory against the Russians at Tannenberg, but its Austrian allies suffered several defeats . Germany dominated .
 Two sides faced each other across the open space between their front lines . The two sides face each other in an open space .
 Barbed wire fronted the trenches fronting the trenches to slow the opposition . This area, no-man's-land, was no man's land .
 Continuous fighting from the trenches, punctuated by appallingly bloody battles, failed to break the deadlock . Continuous fighting continued from trenches in the trenches .
 More than 600,000 Allied troops were killed or wounded in the Battle of the Somme alone . The Somme was one of the most important battles of the Great Depression .
 At the start of the conflict, both sides had been convinced it would be a short, decisive battle . Both sides were convinced it was a short and decisive battle.
 Huge artillery guns such as the Howitzer cannon were transported by horses and tractors . No one was injured in the Great War .
 High-explosive shells fired in massive quantities were key to the war's high casualty rates . had anticipated a war of attrition, the U.S. had anticipated it would be an attrition war .
 Aircrafts were first employed for reconnaissance, later used for bombing . They were first used for reconnaissance missions .
 Horses were the backbone of logistical operations in the First World War . Railways and motor trucks were used to transport goods to the front of the war .
 Civilians brought into the front line by the bombing of London and Paris by airships and bomber aircraft . Civilians were brought in by the bombings of the cities .
 By 1917, German submarines were sinking one in four merchant ships headed for Britain . They were trying to starve the British into submission . German submarines sank one in 4 merchant ships heading to Britain .
 World War I is also known as the Great War, due to the unprecedented number of participants . Britain's naval blockade of Germany also led to the war, which is now known as WWI .
 65 million soldiers saw combat, almost a third of whom were wounded and half as many again were killed . 65 million troops saw combat in the U.S. during the Vietnam War .
 This was the first “total war,"" meaning not just soldiers but also civilian populations were involved . The first ‘total war’ was fought between soldiers and civilians . The war was fought in the early 1900s .
 Britain was forced to introduce conscription for the first time in its history . Conscription was introduced in 1903 after the outbreak of World War II .
 Britain and France assembled armies from their overseas colonies, such as India and Africa, and from the British dominions of Australia New Zealand and Canada .
 War brought many social changes, notably for women, who filled positions in factories and offices . Women filled positions for women in factories, offices and factories .
 Women were increasingly employed in the munitions industry as governments switched to large-scale production . Women were also increasingly employed as women were also employed in munitions industry .
 The key belligerent states brought their vast empires into war with them, and the conflict soon became a world war . The key countries involved in the conflict were the key states .
 German colonies in China and the Pacific were invaded by Japan, which entered the war on the side of the Allies . Japan invaded the German colonies and occupied the Pacific .
 One of the social changes brought on by World War I concerned the role of women . Germany’s one of the biggest social changes to come after the war .
 African colonies in Africa were overrun by British, French, and South African troops . The female population joined the war effort by working in munitions factories .
 In May 1915, Italy joined the Allies, fighting Austria-Hungary and Germany in the Alps . Italy fought in the war with the Allies in May 1915 . The war ended in a victory for Italy .
 In early November 1914, the Ottoman Empire declared a military jihad against France, Russia, and Britain . The Ottoman Empire, an Islamic power, abandoned its neutrality and declared its military jihad .
 Congress declared war in April 1917 after a German plot to persuade Mexico into an anti-US alliance was discovered . Congress declared the war against Germany in 1917 .
 Bolsheviks in Russia negotiated a peace treaty with Germany at Brest-Litovsk on December 22, 1917 . It seemed it seemed that Germany had won a significant victory .
 The Allies made gains on the Western Front in 1918, but then counterattacked in July and August, beginning an advance that would continue until November . They also made gains in 1918 but then, in July, in August, began to counterattack .
 Four million fresh U.S. troops helped defeat the Central Powers and bring the Germans to the peace table . Four million new troops were used in the defeat of Germany in the war .
 When the conflict ended, at 11am on November 11, 1918, the alliance led by France and Britain emerged victorious . At 11am, the British and French alliance was victorious .
 More than 65 million troops had been involved in the war, of which at least half were killed or injured . At least half died or injured in the conflict .
 After the war, the Treaty of Versailles redrew the map of Europe, leaving nations, particularly Germany, embittered . The treaty redrewed Europe's map after the war .
 A public assembly of countries, the League of Nations, was founded to help maintain peace . The League was founded in 1903 to help keep peace .
 The League proved toothless in the face of countries that chose to ignore it . However, the League proved to be toothless .
 When fascist Benito Mussolini came to power in Italy in 1922, he denounced the Treaty . The Treaty was signed by the League of Nations in 1922 .
 World War I had instead sown the seeds of future conflict . Far from being ‘the war to end all wars,’ it had sown seeds of another conflict . The seeds of WWI were sown by World War One .
 Russia was in turmoil after suffering huge losses in World War I . There were food shortages, and workers in the cities faced low wages and appalling conditions .
 The February Revolution had ousted the Tsar, but the Provisional Government that replaced him faced imminent collapse . The Russian Revolution was overthrown by the February Revolution .
 He was committed to a workers' revolution and set out a series of proposals to overthrow the government in what became known as his April Theses . He set out proposals for overthrowing the government and revolutionising the government .
 On October 24 (November 6, Gregorian calendar ), there were attempts by the government to curb the activities of the Bolsheviks to prevent a coup . The government was trying to stop a coup in order to prevent it .
 Orders were issued for the arrest of leading party members, and their newspaper, Pravda, was closed down . Orders were also issued for arrest of party members . Party members were ordered to be arrested .
 On October 25 (November 7, GC), the government tried without success to find armed support . The government tried unsuccessfully to find an armed support for the government .
 The Bolshevik paramilitary Red Guards occupied the main telegraph office, post office, and power stations . Red Guards took over the post office and the main power stations in 1918 .
 The small unit of military cadets guarding it surrendered to the revolutionary soldiers . Small unit of cadets who had been guarding it willingly surrendered .
 The regime was overthrown, and power passed to Lenin and his Bolsheviks . Lenin and the Bolsheviks were overthrown .
 The October Revolution was the culmination of the civil unrest that had rumbled on for months . Laying the groundwork for the revolution was laid in the ground .
 On February 23, 1917, in Petrograd, a riot had started, led by women frustrated at waiting hours for bread . The riot was the first of its kind in the Russian capital, Russia .
 This grew into a general strike, and the demonstrations took on a more political nature . The demonstrations grew to a political nature, and became more political . This is the first general strike in the history of the country's history .
 In February 1917, the monarchy is overthrown and replaced by the Provisional Government . Red flags began to appear, and statues of statues of the Revolutionaries .
 Lenin and the Bolsheviks demand total power for the proletariat, launching the October Revolution . Lenin was Lenin's first Bolshevik leader in Russia . The revolution was the birth of the Russian Revolution .
 Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov was the founder of the Bolsheviks and the first leader of Soviet Russia . He was a bold theorist and tireless organizer . He died in 1918 .
 Lenin became an active Marxist revolutionary after his brother Alexander was executed in 1887 for conspiring to assassinate Tsar Alexander III . Lenin lost faith in God and religion after the execution of his brother .
 Lenin's chief aim was to organize the opposition to the Tsar into a single coherent movement . Lenin wanted to organize opposition to Russia's Tsar to unite into a coherent opposition .
 Following the Russian Revolution of March 1917, he returned to Russia believing his moment had come . Following the revolution he returned home to Russia .
 Lenin led the Bolsheviks against the government then, suppressing all opposition, became dictator of the world's first communist state . He suppressed all opposition to the government, then became dictator .
 After two strokes, one of which deprived him of speech, he died on January 21, 1924 .
 Soldiers refused to obey orders to fire on the crowd, but police shot and killed 50 people . 50 people were killed in clashes between soldiers and police officers . Soldiers were ordered to fire back fire on protesters, but 50 people died .
 The Tsar abdicated in March, having relinquished power to the Provisional Government in February . Prince Georgi Y Lvov was the head of the provisional government . The Provisional government was overthrown in March .
 The government still represented only the middle classes and continued to back Russia’s involvement in World War I . Groups such as the Petrograd Soviet of Workers and Soldiers gained power within the Provisional Government .
 Lenin, in exile for revolutionary activities, was anxious to return to Petrograd . Lenin was convinced that the collapse of world capitalism was imminent . He was in exile from Petrograd, convinced that world capitalism would collapse .
 German government hoped that he could destabilize the political situation in Russia for their war effort, and arrived secretly in a sealed train . He received the help of the German government, which hoped to destabilize Russia for the war effort .
 Full of revolutionary zeal, he was determined to shape a new Russian government according to his ideas . He accused his associates of not doing enough to overthrow the current regime .
 Prime Minister Lvov resigned after the disastrous July Offensive on the Western Front . Lvov was the prime minister of the Soviet Union during the war .
 His successor, Alexander Kerensky, formed a new socialist government with the Petrograd Soviet, but he insisted on keeping Russia in the war . His successor formed a socialist government, but kept Russia in war .
 After mass demonstrations in Petrograd encouraged by the Bolsheviks, Kerensky banned them and arrested many of their leaders . Many of the leaders of Petrograd were arrested .
 General Lavr Kornilov, Russia's army commander-in-chief, orders troops into Petrograd . Russia's President Vladimir Putin ordered troops into the city of Petrograd on Monday .
 In desperation, he released the Bolsheviks, who armed those who wanted to prevent a counterrevolution . The Bolsheviks were armed to prevent the counterrevolution in Russia . In desperation he released them, he freed them and armed them .
 "They were able to represent themselves to the people as defenders of Petrograd," says Mikhail Gorchkovsky . Gorchovsky: "They are able to defend Petrograd from the people"
 Lenin seized the moment, returned to Russia, and renewed calls for revolution . Lenin seized a moment to return to Russia and call for revolution in Russia .
 Leon Trotsky handed responsibility for military tactics to Leon Trotsky, a fellow Marxist . He handed responsibility to Leon Leon Trotsky for his military tactics . Leon Trotsky was Leon Trotsky's successor .
 Peasants and farmers were revolting in rural areas, workers in the cities . Workers in cities and workers in cities revolted in the 1930s . Peasant, farmers and workers revolted .
 The Bolsheviks took government buildings and the Winter Palace, where Kerensky’s cabinet had sought refuge . The Winter Palace was taken by the Bolsheviks in 1918 . The government was overthrown by the Bolshevik revolution .
 Lenin was compelled to hold democratic elections, but the Bolsheviks received only a quarter of the vote . Lenin was forced to hold elections after the initial triumph . The Bolsheviks were forced to return to Russia .
 Lenin dissolved the elected government and sent armed guards to prevent it meeting again . Lenin dissolved his government in order to stop the government from meeting again. Lenin's government was overthrown in 1903 .
 In February 1918, he signed a peace treaty with Germany, but the terms were extremely harsh . He signed a treaty with the world's most powerful ally .
 Russia ceded the Baltic States to Germany, while Ukraine, Finland, and Estonia were transformed into independent states . The Baltic States were ceded to Germany .
 This move freed the Bolsheviks from the German threat, but the terms of the treaty were deeply unpopular . The treaty was deeply unpopular with many Russians and Germans . It freed the Bolshevik from the threat of Germany, but it was unpopular with Russians .
 Bolsheviks had gained power, but now they had to keep it . The Bolsheviks were fighting for their very first time in a civil war .
 Painting of the storming of the Winter Palace portrays the moment in the October Revolution . Lenin established a highly centralized government system, banned all dissenters .
 The Bolsheviks were a minority in Russia, and their opponents marshalled their forces against them . Whites, made up of former tsarists, army officers, and democrats, marshalled forces against the Bolsheviks .
 Russia's civil war ran from 1918 to 1921 . Civil war characterized by extreme violence erupted in Russia .
 The Whites received help from Russia’s former allies, Britain, France, the US, and Japan, which feared the spread of communism . The Whites were helped by the White House, US and Japan .
 Trotsky proved to be a brilliant military tactician . However, he was badly coordinated, and his actions were badly coordinated . Trotsky was a brilliant tactician, but his actions in Russia were poorly coordinated .
 In 1920, Lenin ordered a war against Poland to liberate the workers of eastern and central Europe, but at the Battle of Warsaw, after a magnificent counterattack, the Red Army was driven back .
 Lenin could finally turn his attention to rebuilding the Russian economy . The Whites had been defeated, and Lenin was able to rebuild his country .
 In the countryside, around 6 million peasants had died of starvation, and there was rioting in the cities . In the cities, riots broke out in response to the hunger crisis .
 The Kronstadt naval rebellion in March 1921 further undermined the regime . Kronstadt was the first city of Kronstadt to break up the Soviet Union in 1921 .
 The Reds executed several hundred ringleaders and expelled over 15,000 sailors from the fleet . The Reds reacted ruthlessly to the execution, executing several hundred .
 In December, the Soviet government declared the establishment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . The union was a federal union consisting of Soviet Russia and neighboring areas that were ruled by branches .
 From its inception, the USSR was based on a premise of oneparty rule, prohibiting all other political organizations . From the inception of the USSR, one party was banned from all political groups .
 Lenin was disheartened by political infighting and worried about how the USSR would be run after his death . Lenin worried about the future of the USSR after he died . Lenin died in 1918 at the age of 55 .
 In late 1922 and early 1923, he dictated what became known as his “testament,” in which he expressed regret at the direction the Soviet government had taken . The Soviet government was overthrown in the early 1920s .
 The victorious socialist revolution inspired workers with an alternative to capitalism and old imperialist regimes . Workers were inspired by the victory of the socialist revolution . The victory of workers was inspired by workers' struggle against capitalism .
 After 1920 The Treaty of Sevres carves up the Ottoman Empire to remake the Middle East . After 1920, the Ottoman empire was carved up into a single nation .
 September 3, 1939 World War II begins with the German attack on Poland . September 3 is September 3 when the first World War War I begins . September 4, 1939 is September 4 .
 October 24, 1945 The League of Nations, having disbanded, reforms after World War II as the United Nations . The United Nations was formed after the war .
 16 million people died in four years of global conflict . 16 million died and centuriesold empires and dynasties had collapsed . This is an ARMISTICE FOR 20 YEARS .
 In January 1919, the victors of World War I met to discuss the terms of peace . The peace talks took place in January 1919 in Paris .
 Woodrow Wilson had devised a plan that he believed would bring a new order to Europe based on democracy . Wilson's plan was based on a plan to bring an order to the continent based on democratic principles .
 Wilson pushed for the League of Nations to act as arbiter and peacemaker in national disputes . Wilson was assassinated in 1918 . Wilson died at the age of 92 .
 Britain and France wanted to ensure that Germany would never again be able to threaten European peace . France and Britain wanted to stop Germany from threatening European peace again .
 Germany was asked to give up lands to France on its west and to Poland on its east and north . Germany was also asked to . give up land to France, Poland and France .
 Austro-Hungarian empires were to be split into new nations such as Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia . The Ottoman Empire was also to be carved up, to the advantage of the British and French . In addition, the Austropomans and the Austrians empires were also to
 The Germans had to admit to starting the war and also pay £6.7 billion in reparations .
 In 1923 France occupied Germany’s industrial Ruhr Valley . They signed the Treaty of Versailles on June 28, 1919 but stalled in paying compensation .
 Neither nation did anything to deter aggression by Nazi Germany in interwar years .
 When Adolf Hitler took France in 1940, he ordered the master copy of the treaty to be burned . The treaty was signed by France in 1939 .
 After 1945 The Soviet Union defeats Nazi Germany and controls central Europe . After 1945, the Soviet Union becomes the most powerful country in the world .
 Lenin created a single-party state and appointed Joseph Stalin as general secretary . Stalin assumed power in Russia after the October Revolution in 1917 . Stalin was general secretary of the party .
 Stalin then used his position to launch his bid for supreme leadership, becoming dictator in 1929 . Stalin became dictator five years after Lenin’s death . He then used the position to try to become supreme leader .
 He confiscated land belonging to rural farmers to turn it into large farms to be run collectively to make food for the new workforce . The new workforce will need to be able to feed them .
 In 1931-32, he requisitioned grain from the peasants, which led to a severe famine in Ukraine, killing millions . The famine in 1932-32 led to the deaths of millions .
 The People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs was tasked with hunting out Stalin’s political opponents . Stalin's political opponents were hunted down by the People’S Commissary for internal affairs .
 Thousands of Soviet citizens died in the 1930s' ""blood purges," known as the Great Terror . Millions of non-Russians were deported to labor camps . Thousands died in Russia's Great Terror, and millions were deported .
 Stalin portrayed his country as a land of peace and progress, and himself as a man working for the benefit of the people . Stalin portrayed the Soviet Union as a place of peace, progress and progress .
 The dictator looked for chances to expand communism beyond Soviet frontiers . After World War II, it spread to Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and others, becoming known as the Eastern Soviet Bloc .
 Communist parties came to rule in North Korea in 1948, China in 1949, Cuba in 1959, and Vietnam in 1975 . Communist parties have ruled North Korea, China, Cuba, Vietnam and Vietnam since 1949 .
 Soon after his death in 1953, his nation was a superpower to challenge the U.S. Soon after he died, his country was the world's superpower .
 After 1930 Mass unemployment hits the US, Britain, Germany, and other countries . After 1930, mass unemployment hits US, UK, Germany and others .
 The downturn began on October 23rd, when stocks from car manufacturer General Motors were sold at a loss and the market started to collapse . General Motors was the largest car manufacturer in the world .
 On Tuesday October 29, which became known as Black Tuesday, stock prices plunged even lower . On that day, Black Tuesday was known as "Black Tuesday" Stock prices fell even lower.
 In total, $25 billion, approximately $319 billion in today's market, was lost . In today's world, the market has lost approximately $300 billion in value .
 It was the biggest financial catastrophe ever, and plunged the world into the Great Depression . It was also known as the 'biggest financial catastrophe in history'
 The United States had recovered quickly after World War I . factories that had made supplies for the war effort switched to producing consumer goods such as cars and radios .
 The growth of new technologies and mass production saw economic output increase by 50 percent . The age of prosperity and consumerism that resulted became known as the Roaring Twenties . In the 1920s, the growth of mass production and new technologies saw the country's economic output rise by 50
 Newspapers and magazines were filled with stories of people becoming rich overnight by dabbling in the stock market . Thousands of ordinary Americans bought shares, increasing the demand for them and inflating their value .
 Between 1920 and 1929, the number of shareowners rose from 4 million to 20 million . The rise in share ownership was due to increase in 1920 to 1929 .
 Still confident they could make a fortune, some people continued to invest on the stock market . Some people still invested in the market . Still confident, some investors still invested .
 Prosperity in the U.S. leads to overconfidence and reckless investment, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Prosperity leads to reckless investment in the United States, says Sutter.
 Mass unemployment in the U.S. results from overproduction and inadequate demand . Mass unemployment is due to overproduction in the United States . Overproduction is caused by inadequate demand and overproduction .
 Discontent in Europe leads to the fall of governments and the rise of dictatorships . Discontent led to the collapse of governments in Europe and the end of democracy .
 President Roosevelt introduces the New Deal to stimulate the economy . Roosevelt's New Deal was introduced in 1933 . The New Deal is the largest economic stimulus in the United States .
 When stock prices began to drop in October 1929, panic set in . Panic set in when the stock prices started to fall in 1929 .
 The ensuing crash triggered a worldwide recession known as the Great Depression . The ensuing recession triggered the ensuing global recession .
 In the US, factories were closed and workers sacked . The Great Depression in the US was the worst period of the Great Depression .
 Unemployment went from 1 million in 1929 to 12.75 percent of the workforce, by 1933 . Unemployment went up to 24.75% of workforce, a pattern seen around the world .
 Unemployment in Britain rose to 2. million, 25 percent of the workforce, with heavy industry particularly hard hit . Heavy industry, such as shipbuilding, particularly badly hit by the downturn .
 Germany suffered greatly, since its post-war economy was supported by huge American loans which it was unable to pay back . Post-war German economy suffered greatly from the American loans .
 The crash helped bring Democrat Franklin D Roosevelt into the White House in 1932 . FDR was elected to the presidency in 1932 after the crash .
 His policy, the New Deal, introduced a program of social welfare for the poor and government expenditure on huge public projects that created new jobs . The New Deal was introduced by FDR .
 The Great Depression marked the end of the U.S.’s postwar boom . It was the beginning of the Great Depression .
 He achieved this success despite suffering from polio in 1921, which crippled both legs and almost led him to give up on his political career . He achieved his success despite having both legs crippled by polio .
 Pledging a New Deal for the American people, he won a landslide victory . Pledged to a new deal for the U.S. people .
 These immensely popular measures won him a second landslide victory in 1936 . The measures were hugely popular measures that won him second landslide win .
 In 1939, the U.S. was propelled into World War II, and Roosevelt took his place as one of the allied war leaders . Roosevelt was a war hero for the United States .
 He was one of the principal movers in the plans for a United Nations . He died in March 1945, just before the UN’s first meeting was convened in San Francisco .
 After 1935 Mussolini invades Abyssinia as part of his ambitious foreign policy . Mussolini invaded Abyssinia in 1935 .
 European German resentment economies make festers over the terms of the everyday life harder . Slowing European German unemployment rates make festering life harder for the country's citizens .
 The disintegration of formal structures of government clears the way for Adolf Hitler to become dictator . Adolf Hitler became dictator in the early 1930s .
 Fire broke out at the Reichstag, the German parliament building, February 27, 1933 . Chancellor Adolf Hitler claimed it was a communist plot to bring down the government . Hitler's cynical ploy gave Hitler an excuse to decimate his communist rivals .
 Hitler rushed to blame the fire on a lone Dutch communist, which prompted suspicions that the Nazis were behind the arson . The Nazis had so much to gain from discrediting the communists, given that they had .
 Many Germans believed that Hitler’s decisive action had saved the nation . Hitler's response fed on fears of a communist takeover, and many believed it had saved them .
 By April, under pressure from the Nazis, the Enabling Act was passed by the Reichstag . Under pressure from Nazis, it was passed under pressure by the Nazis .
 Hitler was given the right to make his own laws without involving the Reichstag . This was the first time he had been allowed to make laws without the need to involve the Reichsag . Hitler was a fascist dictator with complete control over Germany .
 Fascism emerged across Europe in the 1920s and 30s and 1930s . Dictators seize power in the 1930s and '30s .
 Fascism in Italy and Nazism in Germany were set up as defenders against communism . As governments struggled with post-war economic hardship and the fear of communist revolutions, extreme right-wing movements set up in Italy .
 They used paramilitary groups to intimidate opponents, and spread propaganda to gain popularity . The group also used paramilitary forces to intimidate and gain support .
 In Italy, Benito Mussolini was seen as the only man able to restore order . Mussolini saw as the man who could restore order in the country . In the 1930s, Mussolini ruled Italy's entire society .
 Mussolini gradually assumed dictatorial powers, becoming II Duce, the leader of Italy . Mussolini was appointed prime minister in 1922, and later became the leader .
 In Germany, Hitler worked ceaselessly to transform the Nazis into a major political force . Hitler worked to transform Germany into a powerful political force.
 Relying on a mix of nationalist rhetoric, anticommunism, vicious anti-Semitism, and call to reverse the peace terms made at Versailles in 1919, Hitler rode a wave of popularity .
 In 1933 he became Chancellor, then, shortly after, dictator, calling himself Fiihrer . In 1933, he was Chancellor, and called himself FIIhrer.
 Hitler and Mussolini began to send military support to aid General Franco in the Spanish Civil War . Fascists united in 1936 in order to support General Franco .
 The Reichstag Fire is said to have burned so fiercely that flames could be seen for miles around . Franco’s victory against the left-wing Popular was a victory for Franco .
 Front government emboldened dictators and emphasized the weakness of Western democracies, says Front Front government . Front government has emboldened the dictators and emphasizes the weakness in Western democracies. Front government is emboldened by the strength of the Front government, he says . Front Front Government emboldens the dictators,
 It led to the absolute dictatorship of Adolf Hitler and the growth of fascism, setting Europe on the path to world war . Hitler's dictatorship led to an absolute dictatorship and the rise of fascism .
 fascist parties boasted that they would provide strength where weakness had prevailed . Democracies lost legitimacy with their people, and fascist parties offered a form of extreme right-wing nationalism .
 In the 1930s, no European country, with the exception of the Soviet Union, was without a form of fascist party . The Soviet Union was the only country without a fascist party in Europe . No European country was without an anti-fascist party .
 Ireland had the Blueshirts; France, Le Faisceau; Denmark and Norway had many far-right parties . Ireland had a far-left party; France had a party that was very popular in France .
 Engelbert Dollfuss’s Fatherland Front was installed in Austria in 1934, while Greece was under the rule of General Ioannis Metaxas between 1936 and 1941 .
 Portugal and Bulgaria also came under right-wing dictatorships, as did Romania and Portugal . Portugal, Bulgaria and Romania were dictatorships under dictatorships .
 By the end of the 1930s, authoritarian governments had assumed power in virtually every corner of central and Eastern Europe, and democracy was in decline . Democracy had been in decline in many parts of Europe .
 Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact in August 1939 . They secretly agreed to invade and then divide Poland between them .
 Joseph Stalin decided that in the event of war, Germany offered the best hope of Soviet security . Joseph Stalin had decided to choose Germany as the best country to join the Soviet Union .
 More than a million German troops invaded Poland from the west on September 1, 1939 . One week later, more than 1,000 Germans invaded Poland .
 Russian troops attacked Poland from the east on September 17, 2011 . Soon after, Russian forces attacked Poland .
 The context for this unprovoked assault was the pursuit of Lebensiaum, “living space” deemed necessary for the expansion of the German people . Hitler saw as a superior “Aryan master race,” with the right to displace inferior races .
 Polish air force and army fought valiantly, but lacked modern aircrafts and tanks . Trapped between two huge, well-armed powers, the Polish army and air force struggled to survive . They were forced to rely heavily on Soviet-Russian forces in the Second World War .
 Poland's aviators and soldiers, fighting on two fronts, were overwhelmed . In the end, Poland’s aviator and soldiers were overwhelmed by the loss of life .
 The invasion ended in a resounding victory, adding to Hitler’s increasing belief that he was a military genius . It added to Hitler's increasing belief he was military genius, he said .
 Some areas in western Poland were absorbed into Germany, while territory east of the River Bug was annexed by the Soviet Union . Some areas west of the Bug were absorbed by Germany .
 The Nazis imposed a brutal regime on the German part of Poland . The Nazi regime in Poland was brutal and brutal .
 Hitler was bent on the elimination of anyone who stood in the way of German domination . Hitler was determined to kill anyone who tried to stop the rise of fascism .
 As part of Hitler’s plan for ethnic cleansing, around 5 million Polish Jews were rounded up and herded into ghettos . Around 5 million of the 5million Polish Jews rounded up in Nazi Germany .
 The invasion of Poland gave some forewarning of the violence that would soon be visited upon scores of countries and countless people around the globe .
 The Treaty of Versailles sets tight limits on German armaments and armed forces . Germany’s German forces incapable of starting military and promotes invade Poland .
 Britain and France declare war on Germany, leading to World War II, the most destructive conflict in history . World War I was most destructive war of all time . The war was the deadliest conflict in the history .
 Germany was forced to return Alsace and Lorraine to France, and all of its overseas colonies were annexed by the Allies . All of Germany's overseas colonies, including Alsacke, were annexed .
 Germany’s Weimar Republic began its economic recovery in the 1920s, but it could not survive the U.S. economic crash of 1929 . Germany's economic recovery began in 1920s but could not withstand the blow inflicted by 1929 .
 Hitler had fought in World War I, and the shock of defeat was to influence his life . The experience of trench warfare, the terms of the Versailles Treaty were to influence the rest of his life, he said . Hitler fought in the trenches during World War One .
 He developed extremist views based on far-right nationalism . By the time he became chancellor of Germany's coalition government in 1933, he ruthlessly pursued his policies of nationalism, antiSemitism, and anti-communism .
 Under this creed, Hitler embarked on an ambitious foreign policy . Hitler’s Lebensraum was founded by the Nazis . Hitler was the first German leader to take over the Nazi Party .
 In 1935, openly going against the terms of the Versailles Treaty, he began a massive program of re-armament . In 1935 he openly went against the . terms of . Versaille Treaty . He began to openly go against . the terms .
 In 1936 he occupied the demilitarized Rhineland, but none of the major powers intervened . In 1936, he occupied an area of Germany that was demilitarily neutralized .
 In March 1938, Hitler annexed Austria to Germany, before setting his sights on the German-speaking part of Czechoslovakia, the Sudetenland . Hitler annexed the region in March 1938 before moving on to the rest of the country .
 British and French politicians wanted to avoid a repeat of the horrors of World War I . They felt that the Sudetenland was not worth fighting for .
 In 1938, the Sudetenland was handed to Hitler in exchange for his promise to end his land-grabs . In the Munich Agreement of September 29, 1938, Hitler promised to end the land-grabbing .
 Neville Chamberlain declared that he had secured ""peace for our time,” only for the Nazis to invade the remainder of Czechoslovakia in March 1939 . The Nazis invaded the rest of the Czech Republic in 1939 .
 Adolf Hitler watched a victory parade in Warsaw following the invasion of Poland . Adolf Hitler was in Poland at the start of the Second World War .
 He and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin agreed to the invasion and division of the country . The invasion was part of the plan to divide the Soviet Union . He and Stalin agreed that the invasion would be illegal .
 Fascism in Europe had aspirations for foreign glory . Italy’s Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini also had aspirations to foreign glory. Mussolini was a dictator of Italy .
 In October 1935, he invaded Abyssinia in retaliation for the defeat of the Italians had suffered there in 1896 . The Italian invasion was in response to the defeat in 1896 by the Italians there .
 By May 1936, Mussolini had conquered the country, facing no opposition from the Western powers . Mussolini's Italian government ruled out any opposition to the West .
 Mussolini and Hitler sent ‘volunteers’ to fight in the Spanish Civil War, to aid nationalist General Franco in his campaign against left-wing supporters of the Spanish Republic . Western democracies' weakness in facing up to the Fascist challenge was provided the same year .
 Franco’s victory in 1939 bolstered the Fascist cause . Britain and France took no action, and Franco won the war in 1939 .
 The two nations had guaranteed Poland support in the event of German aggression . Deciding to take a tougher stance against Hitler after his takeover of Czechoslovakia, the two nations took a tougher stand .
 Britain's dominions Australia and New Zealand declared war immediately, the Union of South Africa followed on September 6, and Canada on September 10 . South Africa also declared war, followed by South Africa and Canada .
 Germany quickly overran Poland with its tactic of blitzkrieg . Blitzkrieg utilized tank divisions supported by the Luftwaffe, the German air force .
 Neither Britain nor France attempted an offensive against Germany . The British sent an Expeditionary Force to France, but neither attempted to attack .
 Some politicians still believed that peace terms could be negotiated . They were not ready for a largescale attack, and some were not prepared for a large attack .
 Expecting to be bombed, Britain began to evacuate its children from major cities . Children were evacuated from major British cities .
 The Phoney War ended in April 1940, when Germany attacked Denmark and Norway . Germany attacked and conquered Denmark, Norway .
 France relied on Maginot Line, a chain of fortresses along the frontier with Germany, to halt any attack . France had relied on the Maginots Line, which was used to stop any attack on Germany .
 The fortification did not extend along the Franco-Belgian border, and the Germans bypassed it at the north end . But the fortification was not extended along the French-Belgien border .
 Within the space of six weeks, France had fallen to the German onslaught . The country had been in the grip of the Nazis for six months .
 Only a hesitation by Hitler prevented the destruction of British forces before . Hitler may have wanted to rest his troops and spare them from a possible counterattack . We shall defend our island whatever the cost .
 "We shall fight on beaches, landing grounds, fields, in streets, and on the hills," he said . We shall fight in the streets, fields and hills, he added .
 Thousands of Allied soldiers were transferred across the Channel in all kinds of vessels in Operation Dynamo . Operation Dynamo took place during the Second World War in 1944 and 1945 .
 Winston Churchill told the British parliament, “The Battle of France is over.” Winston Churchill, the First Lord of the Admiralty and later Britain’s wartime prime minister, said the battle was over . Winston Churchill said the Battle of the France was over in 1944 .
 Hitler’s attempts to invade Britain in Operation Sea Lion had to be abandoned after the Luftwaffe failed to win the battle of the skies . However, Hitler's attempts to invasion Britain were eventually abandoned after failing to win .
 With the Luftwaffe triumphant in both Poland and France, the Germans had hoped that Britain could be beaten by air power alone . The Germans hoped that the Germans could defeat Britain by air force alone .
 Radar enabled the Royal Air Force to track incoming planes and take off in time to meet an attack . However, German crews were exhausted and intelligence was poor, and Britain's use of radar enabled the RAF to take off .
 Operation Dynamo, in June 1940, focused on the evacuation of Allied soldiers from the port of Dunkirk, in France, after they had become surrounded by German troops . The Battle of Britain in the summer of 1940 was the first phase of Operation Dynamo . Operation Dynamo saw Allied soldiers evacuated from
 Some nations (such as those asterisked) switched sides late in the conflict . Some of the nations that switched sides later switched sides .
 What started as a European war gradually became a world war . The world at war began with the fall of the Great Depression .
 In June 1940, Italy declared war on Britain and France, fulfilling the terms of the Axis agreement made between Hitler and Mussolini on May 22, 1939 . Italy, emboldened by German successes, declared war in June 1940 . In June 1941, the Italian government declared war against Britain and
 Italy’s failures in Greece and North Africa forced Hitler to send German armies into these areas, as well as Yugoslavia . Hitler also sent troops into Yugoslavia, Greece, North Africa and Yugoslavia in response to Italy's failure .
 The Blitz, as the bombing of the English capital became known, thrust civilians into the war . The Blitz put relentless pressure on industry, ports, and British morale .
 With men joining the army, women were required to work in factories and on farms . Women were forced to work on farms and factories to support the army .
 Food rationing was introduced in Britain in January 1940 . People were urged to grow their own food to cope with the rationing .
 Nazi-occupied Europe also experienced food shortages, which weighed most heavily on the conquered populations . Food shortages were the main factors in the Nazi occupation of Europe .
 In some locations, the Germans worked with existing governments and fully supported puppet administrations, such as the proNazi Vidkun Quisling in Norway and the Vichy regime in southern France . In some cases, the German government supported existing governments such as Norway .
 Vichy was officially neutral, but collaborated closely with Germany, fighting the French resistance, and implementing anti-Semitic legislation . Led by Marshal Philippe Petain, the French government collaborated closely .
 Germany had total control in Poland and eventual control of the Baltic states . Germany had control of Poland and eventually control of Baltic states.
 Monarchs and politicians of more than a dozen occupied countries escaped to Britain . Monarchs, politicians and more than 200 others escaped to the UK .
 Polish ministers set up headquarters in London, and Belgium’s government operations were transferred there . Poland's government operations in Belgium were transferred to London .
 The Dutch royal family, under Queen China Dec., 1941 Australia Sept 3, 1939 Wilhelmina, also sought refuge in London . Wilhelminea, the Dutch queen of the Netherlands, was forced to flee to London .
 Charles de Gaulle opposed the newly installed Vichy government . He became the voice of French opposition to the Nazi occupation of Germany .
 German U-boats were sinking dozens of Allied ships each month . Britain was dependent on its merchant ships to bring in vital supplies but also to export equipment to its fighting forces .
 Merchant ships traveled in convoy to increase the chances of supplies getting through on each journey . But casualties were high, and casualties were very high .
 In June 1941, Britain gained a new ally when Germany invaded the USSR in Operation Barbarossa . The USSR became a major ally of the UK in June 1941 .
 Hitler looked to Soviet Union for new territory for the German people . Hitler had looked to the Soviet Union as a potential new territory in Germany .
 At first it looked as if Germany and its allies would be as successful against the Russians as it had been against the French . At first, it seemed as if the Germans would be able to defeat the Russians .
 By winter, Germany had advanced to within 1 mile of Moscow, and Leningrad, the USSR’s second city, was under siege . By winter 1941, the Soviet Union had advanced 1 mile from Moscow . By summer 1941, it had advanced within 1 miles of Moscow .
 War in the east was based on racist ideology and Hitler’s hatred of Slavs and Jews . War in east was a powerful rationale for war in east based on ideology .
 As German troops swept into Russia, they inflicted a terrible campaign of genocide against communists and Jews . Germans inflicted a brutal campaign of extermination against communists, Jews .
 History knows no greater display of courage than that shown by the people of the Soviet Union . Russian troops endured extreme hardships during the Soviet invasion .
 The harshness of the Russian winter slowed the Germans, and Russian counterattacks drove back their front line by several hundred miles . The harsh winter in Russia forced the Germans to retreat from the Russian border .
 An estimated 650,000 soldiers from the Soviet Army lost their lives in the Battle of Moscow . An estimated 6,000 Soviet soldiers were killed in the battle of Moscow in 1941 .
 In the spring of 1942, the Germans resumed their offensive in the USSR, driving the Red Army back and coming close to taking the Russian oilfields . The Red Army was driven back by the Germans and came close to capturing the oil fields .
 Japan entered the war by attacking the U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor, in the Hawaiian Islands, in December 1941 . It was part of its plan to drive American forces out of the Pacific .
 Germany had a tripartite agreement with Japan and Italy to provide mutual military assistance in the event any one of them was attacked by a nation not already involved in the war . Germany declared war on the U.S. in 1941 .
 Operation Barbarossa launched in June 1941 saw the invasion of the Soviet Union by Germany, in breach of the non-aggression pact the two countries had signed two years earlier . Britain now had two strong allies, the USSR under Joseph Stalin, and the US, led by President Franklin
 American industry gave Americans in combat in Europe and Asia the tools they needed to fight the Axis . American industry became a triumph of wartime production .
 It successfully captured the Philippines, Malaya, Burma, Indonesia, and Singapore . Singapore was Britain’s main naval base in East Asia . It was the first time the British Navy captured Singapore .
 Axis offensive led by General Erwin Rommel brought the German and Italian armies within striking distance of Cairo and the Suez Canal . In North Africa, meanwhile, the Axis forces were able to reach Cairo and Suez .
 In July 1942, Rommel was halted at El Alamein; in October, he was forced into retreat by the British 8th Army, led by Field Marshal Montgomery . In October, the British army forced Rommel into retreat .
 The Soviets encircled the Germans, forcing a surrender in February 1943 . The Soviets forced the Germans to surrender in 1943 .
 General Dwight D Eisenhower led the Allied forces during the Normandy landings of June 1944 . Eisenhower was in command during the invasion of Normandy .
 The invasion was a decisive step toward taking Europe back from the Nazis . The invasion took place in 1945 and was a major step toward defeating the Nazis.
 The Russians drove the Germans back in the east, and the British and Americans advanced slowly through Italy . The Allied invasion force arrived in Normandy in June 1944 .
 Eleven months later, it had reached the river Elbe in northern Germany, while Russian troops were advancing block by block through Berlin .
 Germany was being hit repeatedly by British Lancaster bomber aircraft from Bomber Command and the U.S. Eighth Air Force . Bomber Command was in charge of the aircraft .
 Hitler committed suicide on April 30, and Germany surrendered unconditionally a week later . Staring at defeat, Hitler took his own life .
 The Battle of Iwo Jima saw United States troops fight against Japan's Imperial Army for possession of the tiny island in the Pacific Ocean . 100,000 Japanese casualties resulted in the deaths of more than 1,000 people . The last act of the war came in August 1945, when
 The effects of the bombs were cataclysmic, inflicting unprecedented horror on the two Japanese cities . The bombs were the most powerful bomb attacks on Japan since the Second World War .
 Hitler's invasion of Poland marked the start of World War II, the largest and most destructive war in history . By the end of the war, an estimated 60 million people had been killed . Nations united to defeat the Nazis in Poland .
 The Allies were determined that this should be the last war of its kind . Like their predecessors in 1918, they were determined to end the war of 1914 .
 Representatives of 50 nations met in 1945 to set up the United Nations . Representatives from 50 nations meet in 1945 in New York City .
 There was hope that this would mark the start of a new era of international understanding . But this was not the case, and it has been proved otherwise .
 Japan had cause to reconsider its position when the Soviets entered the war against them by crossing into Manchuria on August 9 .
 Japan was brought to its knees and agreed to the Allies’ terms of surrender . The United States dropped “Fat Man” on Nagasaki, instantly killing 50,000, on the same day . The U.S. dropped ‘Fat Man,’ killing 50
 The unprecedented attacks avoided a bloody ground assault by the Allies on the Japanese mainland . Many thousands lost their lives as a result of the long-term effects of radiation sickness .
 Hitler's takeover of Austria is followed by widespread attacks on Jews . The Nazis look for efficient ways to kill millions after the invasion of Russia . Hitler's takeover of Austria was followed by wide-ranging attacks on the Jews .
 Germany conquers Poland, and Polish Jews are forced to move into overcrowded ghettos . Poland's Jews were forced to leave their homes in overcrowded, overcrowded areas .
 As a result of the new Nuremberg Laws, Jews lose their civil rights . September 1935 . As a consequence of the laws, Jews were not allowed to have civil rights in Germany .
 The German invasion of the Soviet Union is accompanied by the mass killing of Jews . June 1941 is the anniversary of the death of the Jews in Russia .
 The men approved the ‘Final Solution’ and the slaughter of the Jews, the men called for brandy and cigars . After approving the “Final Solution,’s called for the slaughter, they called for cigars and brandy .
 Those prisoners subjected to forced labor were summarily executed when they became too weak to work . Prisoners subjected to such labor were then executed . Those prisoners were then forced to work in order to survive .
 The Wannsee Conference was far from the start of Nazi brutality against Jews . The conference was held in Nazi Germany in the 1930s .
 Adolf Hitler had come to power in 1933, spreading his belief that Germans were the Aryan master race, superior to all others, and that their blood should not be contaminated . Adolf Hitler believed Germans were Aryan masters race .
 German Jews were banned from marrying nonJewish Germans . They were subjected to increasing discrimination and segregation . Jews were not allowed to marry nonJews .
 From the time of the German takeover of Austria in 1938, Nazi brutality against Jews worsened . Austria's Jews were targeted by the Nazis in the early years of the Holocaust .
 Jews wanting to flee German rule found other countries unwilling to accept them . Jews wanted to flee Germany under German rule . Many countries were unwilling to allow them to leave Germany .
 After Germany's invasion of Poland in 1939, the Nazi campaign against the Jews reached a terrifying new level . Jews were targeted by the Nazis for their support in Poland .
 Polish Jews began to die in large numbers of starvation and ill-treatment . Herded into ghettoes, Polish Jews were forced to live in ghettos . Polish Jews died of starvation, ill treatment and starvation .
 When Germany invaded Russia in 1941, paramilitary death squads carried out mass killings of Jews in the conquered areas . The death squads were responsible for the deaths of Jews .
 Victims were shot, up to 30,000 at a time, but the SS then began gassing Jews in the backs of vans . Victims were then gassed in the back of vans by the SS .
 Until 1941, the Nazi leadership had envisaged solving the ‘Jewish problem’ by deporting Jews to a distant location . The Nazi leadership envisaged a solution to the Jewish problem by moving Jews to distant locations .
 By the time of the Wannsee Conference, they were committed to systematically killing Europe's Jewish population . They were committed not to systematically kill Europe's Jews, but to exterminate them .
 Adolf Eichmann of the Nazi paramilitary corps, the SS, arranged the transport of Jews to the camps from right across Europe, including France, Greece, Hungary, and Italy . The SS was responsible for transporting Jews to concentration camps .
 The Jews from the Polish ghettos were also taken there to be exterminated . The Jews were taken to the Auschwitz concentration camp to be killed .
 Prisoners arrived at these huge killing factories by train and were gassed in shower rooms . Their corpses were burned in large crematoria . Prisoners died in the factories, their bodies were burned .
 At the Belzec camp, about half a million Jews were imprisoned . At the Nuremberg Trials, the Allies sought to bring the Nazis to justice . After the end of World War II, the Nazis were hunted down by the Allies .
 An international tribunal was held at Nuremberg, Germany, beginning in 1945 . The tribunal began at the end of 1945 .
 Newsreels captured from the Nazis revealed the gas chambers, the massacre of civilians, and the ill-treatment of prisoners . Newsreel footage shows the horrors of the concentration camp .
 The trials were televised, showing to the world the horrors that had taken place in the concentration camps . Only seven prisoners are known to have survived .
 The death camp at Auschwitz, however, also had a labor camp attached, where those who were not killed on arrival were made to work . Those who did not die on arrival at Auschwitz were forced to work at the camp .
 The Germans needed slave labor to support their war effort, and this offered Jews their best chance of survival . Jews were forced to work as slave labor in order to survive the war .
 Many Jews were sent to concentration camps . Many other prisoners, including socialists, homosexuals, Roma, and prisoners of war, were sent there .
 Their heads were shaved, and they were given a uniform to strip them of their identity . They were also given a head shave and a uniform .
 When the Allies liberated the camps in 1945, they found a vision of hell . The camps were liberated by the Allied forces in 1945 .
 The Wannsee Protocol, the minutes of the conference, represents the unimaginable . State-sanctioned genocide . The Protocol was signed by the UN in 1998 .
 For the first time, a modern state had committed itself to the murder of an entire people . The first time in modern history, the state committed itself . For first time the state would commit itself to killing an entire population .
 As many as 6 million Jews lost their lives, and an estimated 5. million others were also killed . Slavs, homosexuals, communists, communists also killed in the Holocaust .
 Albert Speer, head of war production, was jailed for 20 years, while 12 of the other defendants were sentenced to death . The trials led to the setting up of a permanent international criminal court in The Hague, in the Netherlands, in which the trials took place . The trial led
 U.S. troops fought against the Bolsheviks during the Russian Civil War . Cold War BEFORE 1918-20 focused on the Cold War before 1918-1919 .
 After 1961 The Soviets erect the Berlin Wall between East and West Berlin . After 1961 After 1961 the East Berlin Wall was built .
 On June 24, 1948, the Soviet Union imposed a blockade on West Berlin, cutting off all links by rail, road, and canal . The blockade was to prevent vital supplies from reaching the population .
 2 million people faced a choice between starvation and accepting a communist regime . 2. million people were forced to choose between starvation or accepting the communist regime.
 Dozens of people in West Berlin stand waiting for the much-needed supplies that are about to be dropped from a low-flying U.S. Air Force plane during the 1948 Berlin Airlift .
 A clash between East and West had the potential to lead to another world war . The Western nations devised a plan to use airplanes to drop supplies into Berlin .
 Over the next 14 months, 278,288 relief missions were flown to the city . The relief missions took place over the course of 14 months .
 The era of cooperation between the victors of World War II was shortlived . Western countries clashed with the Soviet Union over the type of governments being set up in Europe .
 The USSR banned non-communist parties in every Eastern European country . It created a block of satellite states subservient to Soviet leadership . The USSR also created an Eastern European block .
 Western powers sought to create democracies that excluded communists from power . The Western powers wanted to create a democracy that excluded the communists . The West sought to exclude the communist party in order to win power .
 Germany remained divided into communist East and democratic West, emblem of polarized Europe . Germany's divided East and West was emblem of divided Europe .
 The Western Allies plan to turn their occupied zones into a separate German state . Western Allies want to turn the occupied areas into a state of Germany .
 The West is determined to have a presence in Berlin but cannot risk another world war . The West wants to remain in Berlin, but can't risk a world war with the West .
 The Berlin Airlift is a peaceful solution. never escalated into direct military conflict. The Airlift was never a direct military solution. Berlin never became involved in any military action .
 The struggle over the future of Berlin became the first major crisis of the Cold War . The struggle for Berlin's future was first major Cold War crisis in history .
 In June 1948, the three Western Allies announced plans to merge their zones and introduce a new currency . A plan to starve Berlin was revealed in June 1948 .
 Western powers did not want to give the Soviets control of the Western sector . The Western powers were determined to stay in the West .
 The Berlin Airlift was a success, and Stalin lifted the blockade in May 1949 . The blockade was lifted by Stalin in 1949 .
 The communist states of Eastern Europe organized a rival alliance in the Warsaw Pact in 1955 . The alliance was formed in the wake of the Cold War .
 After World War II, Korea had also been split into a Soviet-occupied northern zone and an American-occupied southern one .
 The United States provided troops for a United Nations army, which went to the support of the South Koreans . The U.S. provided troops to South Korea .
 The Korean War ended in 1953, but it, the conflict over Berlin, and the Soviet testing of their first atomic bomb in 1949, created a climate of fear in the West over communist expansion . The war, the war over Berlin and the creation of the Soviet Union's first atomic bombs
 His rise to power began in 1903, when he became a friend of Vladimir Lenin, the first leader of Soviet Russia . He became a close friend of Lenin, who was the first Soviet leader .
 He became supreme leader in 1927 and aimed to transform the Soviet Union into a major industrial force . He was supreme leader of Soviet Union in 1927, aiming to become industrialist .
 In 1928, he launched an industrialization program and introduced collective farming . He launched an agricultural program in 1928, introducing collective farming to China .
 Millions died of starvation, in labor camps, or in a wave of purges directed at his supposed opponents . Millions died in the purges or in the deaths of those who opposed him .
 Stalin was condemned by his successors for his campaigns of terror and murder . Following his death, Stalin's successors condemned him for his crimes . Stalin's successor, Vladimir Putin, was elected to the Nobel Peace Prize .
 The Indian National Congress is founded and campaigns for Indian rights . India will wake up to life and freedom in 1885 . Indian independence was achieved in 1883 .
 After 1947 The Commonwealth of Nations was formed—all former British colonies can take part . After 1947, the Commonwealth was formed as a result of the war .
 India had been the crown jewel of the British Empire for more than a century . On August 14, 1947, India became an independent nation .
 In India’s Constituent Assembly, Delhi, a special midnight gathering of parliament was convened .
 Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of India, rose to his feet to declare India's freedom . Nehru declared India's independence in a speech in New Delhi .
 This independence opened a social and geographic wound that has yet to heal . However, this independence also opened an economic and social wound that still hasn't healed .
 Millions of Muslims trekked to West and East Pakistan (the latter now known as Bangladesh) Millions of Hindus and Sikhs headed towards newly independent India .
 Thousands never reached it, and many died from malnutrition and disease . Thousands of people died from starvation, disease and malnutrition .
 Across India there were outbreaks of sectarian violence, with Hindus and Sikhs on one side and Muslims on the other . Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims were pitted against each other in the riots .
 By 1948, as the great migration drew to a close, more than 15 million people had been uprooted . Between 1 million and 2 million were dead, and between 1 million-2 million were killed .
 India was independent and India's Muslims had their own independent state, but freedom came at a great cost . Freedom came at the cost of the Muslim state of India .
 During World War I, expectations for greater self-governance were raised when Britain promised to deliver self-rule in return for India's contribution to the war effort .
 Indian national leader known as Mahatma, meaning “great soul,” Mohandas Gandhi led his country to independence from Great Britain . Britain envisaged gradual progress toward self-government, beginning with the Government of India Act .
 He came from a Hindu family and studied law in England before moving to South Africa . He spent 20 years in South Africa trying to secure rights for Indians living there .
 Gandhi's involvement in Indian politics began in 1919, and he soon became the unquestioned leader of the independence movement . Gandhi was the leader of India's independence movement in the 1920s .
 He preached the doctrine of Satyagraha (soul force, or passive resistance) which he applied against the British with great effect . He applied it to the British .
 He adopted a simple life believing in the virtue of small communities . He campaigned against Indian industrialization .
 Gandhi's life work was crowned in 1947, when India finally won independence . But concessions he had made to the Muslims led to his assassination the following year by a Hindu fanatic .
 This did not satisfy Indian nationalists, and the British responded to their protests with sometimes brutal repression . The British response to the protests was sometimes brutal and sometimes brutal .
 The push for independence from the 1920s to the 1940s was galvanized by the work of Mohandas Karamchandand Gandhi . Gandhi's work galvanized the push for independent India from 1920 to 1940 .
 Gandhi launched the Satyagraha campaign, promoting non-violent protest . Gandhi also became an influential figure for millions of followers .
 By the end of World War II, it was clear that Britain lacked the means to defeat the nationalist campaign . Britain was defeated in the war, but was unable to defeat nationalists .
 Britain's officials in India were utterly exhausted, and Britain itself was almost bankrupt . Britain itself itself was nearly bankrupt .
 While Gandhi and Nehru advocated Indian unity, the Muslim League demanded a completely separate Muslim state . The Muslim League was founded in 1906 to safeguard the rights of Muslims . It was founded to safeguard Muslims' rights .
 Mohammed Ali Jinnah feared Muslims could not protect their minority rights if left under Hindu rule . Jinnah's leader feared Muslims would not be able to protect minority rights under Hindu law .
 Congress rejected the proposal and violence on the streets between Hindus and Muslims began to escalate . Congress rejected it and violence continued to escalate between Muslims and Hindus . Congress also rejected it .
 In 1947, Lord Louis Mountbatten flew into Delhi as Britain’s final Viceroy of India . Pakistan is born in 1947 .
 He persuaded all parties to agree to partitioning the country into Hindu India and Muslim Pakistan . Faced with irreconcilable differences over the demand for a separate state for India's Muslims .
 Jinnah, the first governor general of Pakistan, died the following year . Jinnah was the country's first prime minister .
 In 1948, India and Pakistan fought over Kashmir, the only Muslimmajority area to remain within India . Kashmir is one of India's most populous Muslim areas .
 After World War II, European colonial powers recognized that change was inevitable . Mohandas Gandhi's 99 Colonies gain freedom .
 Some colonies won independence by peaceful means, such as in Burma and Ceylon . European powers tried to hold on to their colonies, but often tried to keep control .
 After the Japanese surrender in 1945, nationalist movements in former Asian colonies campaigned for independence rather than a return to European colonial rule .
 Ahmed Sukarno declared the Independent Republic of Indonesia in 1945 . He was the leader of Indonesia’s nationalist movement . He declared the country independent in 1945.
 An estimated 150,000 Indonesians and 5,000 Dutch soldiers died in two military campaigns in Indonesia . The Dutch sent troops to restore their authority, and in two campaigns, they died .
 International pressure forced the Dutch to concede independence in 1949 . International pressure eventually forced the Netherlands to admit independence .
 India's independence was declared by Jawaharlal Nehru and Lord Louis Mountbatten at Delhi’s Constituent Assembly, just seconds into August 15, 1947 . Nehru declared the country's independence on August 15 .
 In Kenya, the imposition of a state of emergency in 1952, in response to the Mau Mau uprising, led to greater insurgency . The British rounded up tens of thousands of Mau Mau suspects .
 The methods used by the British to regain control brought international condemnation . By 1956 the rebellion had been crushed, but the methods were condemned .
 In Rhodesia, savage conflict erupted between the black majority and the fiercely racist white leadership . Rhodesia had unilaterally declared independence in 1965 after independence from white Rhodesia .
 "We are proud of this struggle, of tears, of fire, and of blood, to the depths of our being," says President Obama .
 The process of decolonization coincided with the new Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States . Patrice Lumumba was the first prime minister of the Congo .
 The U.S. became concerned that as the European powers lost their colonies, Sovietsupported communist parties might achieve power in the new states . The United States became concerned about the possibility of Soviet-backed communist parties gaining power .
 The U.S. used substantial aid packages to encourage newly independent nations to adopt governments that aligned with the West .
 Soviet Union deployed similar tactics in an effort to encourage new nations to join the communist bloc . The Soviet Union used similar tactics to encourage members of the bloc .
 This movement began out of a 1955 meeting in Bandung, Indonesia, involving 29 African and Asian countries . This movement was formed from a meeting in Indonesia in 1955 .
 Member countries decided they would not be involved in alliances or defense pacts with the main world powers . Instead, they would focus on internal development instead of alliances .
 France was determined to maintain its political status in Algeria . The French government was determined not to lose control of the country .
 When independence was not realized after World War II, war broke out between Algerian nationalists and French settlers . Algeria's independence from France was never realized .
 In 1958 the National Liberation Front led several terrorist attacks, first in Algeria, then in Paris . In 1958, the main nationalist group led several attacks in Algeria .
 The crisis led to the return to power of Charles de Gaulle, the wartime leader of the Free French . The crisis was the first to lead to the end of the war .
 In 1960, de Gaulle, to the horror of the French settlers, agreed to emancipate Algeria . De Gaulle agreed to liberate Algeria in 1960, but it was not until 1960 .
 Algeria gained independence from Algeria in 1962 . After a long and bloody conflict in which an estimated 150,000 died, Algeria gained its independence in 1963 .
 Mau Mau suspects captured in Nairobi’s Great Rift Valley, Kenya, in 1952 are led away, with their hands on their heads, to be questioned by police .
 The British Commonwealth was formed in 1931, preserving Britain’s global economic and political influence . It was the successor to the British old empire, preserving its global influence .
 Britain and her dominions shared equal status, and they accepted the British monarch as head of the Commonwealth . The British monarch was the head of Britain's Commonwealth .
 In 1949 the British Commonwealth became a free association of independent states . The end of the empire was drawing near, but the end was nearing .
 Britain fought a war to retain the Falkland Islands in 1982, and Hong Kong continued as a British dependency until 1997 .
 Martin Luther King Jr. and Tibet's Dalai Lama were peaceful resisters during the 1960s . The Dalai Lama's methods were similar to that of the Dalai Lama in Tibet . Other peaceful leaders, including MLK, have followed his example .
 Around the world, the struggle for countries to secede from nations they belong to continues . Scotland, Quebec and Palestine are among the countries fighting to be seen as nations in their own right .
 During the Six Day War, Arabs unite against Israel, but Israel is victorious and captures swathes of Arab territory . After 1967, Israel is forced to withdraw from the Arab world .
 The United Nations grants the land of Israel to the Jewish people . Jews escaping Nazi control flee to Palestine . The name of our state shall be ISRAEL .
 The flag was lowered at Government House, on Jerusalem's Hill of Evil Counsel, on May 14, 1948, ending the 26-year British mandate over Palestine .
 David Ben-Gurion proclaimed the news of the establishment of the Jewish state in Palestine . The news was announced by the longtime leader of the . Jewish settlers, or Zionists, who fled to Palestine from Europe .
 Israel's Muslim neighbors, united as the Arab League, rejected the state's creation and reacted with an attack . Israel's Arab neighbors attacked the state of Israel's creation in the 1970s .
 Theodor Herzl Zionist writer writes that after years of protecting their settlements in Palestine, the Jews thwarted the Arabs . Herzl: 'The Jews thwarted Arabs. They thwarted them' Herzl says .
 Jews had immigrated to Palestine to avoid persecution in Europe since the 1880s . They believed it to be the land promised to them by God . Jews believed it was the promised land by God to them .
 With the Balfour Declaration in 1917, the British government supported a Jewish homeland . The Declaration was the first step in the development of a Jewish nation .
 The majorityArab population objected to the settlers' claim on their country . The majority of the population of Israel objected to their claim .
 Facing increasing attacks, the Jews formed local defense groups under the umbrella term the Haganah . David Ben-Gurion was the prime minister of Israel in the 1950s .
 In 1939, the rise of anti-Semitism in Europe, particularly in Nazi Germany, forced Jews to flee to Jerusalem . The rise in anti-Semitic violence in the 1930s led to the death of many Jews in Jerusalem .
 Facing a much larger influx of settlers than they had anticipated, the British proposed a restriction on the free settlement of Jewish refugees in Palestine .
 After World War II, violence in Palestine escalated, and in 1947, the British government said it would terminate its rule and hand the ""Palestine problem" to the United Nations .
 UN partitioned Palestine into an area for Arabs and the rest for a Jewish state . The Holocaust convinced the UN that the Jewish people needed a homeland, so they resolved to partition Palestine .
 Israel's immediate priority was to build a credible defense force from the Haganah . Israel's first defense force was to be formed from the 'Haganah' force .
 David Ben-Gurion was born in 1886 to Zionist parents in Poland . He was the founder and first prime minister of the state of Israel . After the Six Day War he became Israel's first president .
 In 1906, he immigrated to Palestine, where he became an active supporter of the struggle for an independent Jewish state . In 1906 he became a supporter of Israel's struggle to become an independent state .
 He led the Jewish campaign against the British in Palestine, authorizing acts of sabotage . He led to the deaths of Jews in Palestine during the occupation .
 He established the Israeli Defense Force and guided the modern development of Israel . When he became the nation's leader, he established Israel's first defense force .
 The flag of Israel was adopted in 1948, a few months after the birth of the state . Israel's flag was adopted by Israel in 1948 .
 Israel controlled the Sinai, Gaza, the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and Jerusalem . It was originally designed in 1891 for use by the Zionist movement and has the Star of David at its center .
 It faced many attacks from Arab neighbors, Arab neighbors and threats from the paramilitary Palestine Liberation Army . It was formed in 1964 .
 Arab Palestinians repeatedly called for an independent state in the West Bank and Gaza . Arab Palestinians have called for a Palestinian state in both the West and Gaza. Arab Palestinians also called for independent state .
 In the occupied zones, they suffered from poor living conditions, military raids, and restricted movement .
 In his later years in power he initiated secret talks with Arab leaders in an attempt to gain peace for the Middle East . He briefly retired in 1953, and in later years he attempted to gain Arab peace .
 In 1970, Ben-Gurion retired fully from the Knesset (Israeli parliament) and devoted himself to writing his memoirs in SdeBoqer, a kibbutz (communal settlement) in the Negev Desert in southern Israel .
 After 1958 Mao Zedong introduces the Great Leap Forward, a five-year economic plan . China's economic plan was the first of its first five years in existence .
 China is ruled by regional warlords, and there is no central government . The country has been ruled by warlords and regional governments . It is ruled out of control by a regional government .
 The exertion and triumph of the Long March cements Mao’s leadership and becomes mythic . The exertions and triumph become mythic in China . Mao's leadership is cemented by the march's success .
 Nationalists had taken control of the country and launched a major attack against their base in Jiangxi, a southeastern province . Nationalists launched major attack on Jiangxi in a bid to regain control of China .
 In October 1934, the Communists were forced to abandon their Communist and Nationalist parties unite against the warlords . The Communists and Nationalists united against warlords in October 1934 .
 The Communists regroup and survive to fight until the People’s Republic of China is born . Incompatible ideologies mean these two groups mostly fight each other .
 They traveled mostly at night, splitting into different columns to make them harder to spot . The unit split into different groups to make it harder to see .
 In 1895, China had suffered a heavy military defeat against Japan . Unifying the nation was the first step taken by China to unite the nation .
 Anti-Japanese feeling swelled following Japan’s aggression against China during World War I . Huge protests erupted after the 1919 Treaty of Versailles handed former German colonies in China to Japan .
 His role in the march ultimately saw him rise to leader of the nation . 1921 the CCP was founded. 1921 the party was founded . He was one of the founders of the CCP .
 The Kuomintang, a Nationalist party, also grew and by the mid-1920s had begun unifying the country . By the 1920s, it had unified the country, unifying it .
 Nationalists joined forces with Communists in 1926 under Chiang Kai-shek in the Northern Expedition to regain territories controlled by regional warlords . Nationalists and Communists fought to regain control of regions controlled by warlords in 1926 .
 The foremost non-communist Chinese leader of the 20th century, Chiang Kai-shek (18871975) was a soldier who, in 1925, became leader of Kuomintang . During the expedition, as the CCP increased in strength, a bitter rivalry led to
 During his various stints as China’s premier, he ruled over a troubled country . He ruled over China's troubled economy during his time as premier .
 He attempted modest reforms but was beset by intractable domestic strife, as well as by armed conflict with Japanese invaders . He was plagued by domestic strife and the threat of Japanese invasion .
 Despite making attempts to crush his chief rivals, the Chinese Communists, when China was Nationalists against the CCP in Shanghai, in 1927, in April 1927 . Despite attempts to . crush his main rivals, he was not killed by the Communists .
 Massacre triggered years of anti-Communist violence in Jiangxi province . Communists retreated to the Jiangxi countryside . Massacre triggered anti-communist violence .
 After the Long March, the CCP regrouped in the north . The struggle for survival has been described as a struggle to survive in North Korea .
 Nationalists and Communists were forced into an uneasy alliance in 1937, when Japan invaded China . China's Nationalist and Communist Party were forced to work together in China .
 After Japan's defeat in World War II, tension between Nationalists and Communists flared up again, leading to civil war in 1946 . Civil war ended in Japan's first civil war between the Communists and Nationalists .
 Communists won after massive battles with more than half a million troops on either side . More than half-million troops were involved in the battle .
 To the survivors, it provided a deep sense of mission and contributed to the perception of Mao as a leader of destiny and revolutionary struggle . Mao's followers forced him to make an alliance with the Communists against the invading Japanese forces .
 The alliance did not survive the end of the World War II, and in 1949 Chiang and his party were driven from the mainland to the island of Formosa, which by that time had become known as Taiwan .
 Chiang set up a government in exile, which he controlled until his death in 1975 . While he was there, Chiang's government was based in exile . Chiang died in 1975 at age 81 .
 His government was recognized by many states as China’s legitimate government . His government is recognized as China's legitimate government by many countries .
 African experiences in World War II spur demands for racial equality . I Nkrumah wins independence for Ghana . I am a proud member of the Ghanaian family .
 The formation of the international Pan-African Federation promotes African independence . Postcolonial Africa BEFORE 1946 . Post-colonial Africa before 1946 .
 Most African nations achieve independence from French, British, Portuguese, and Belgian rule . After 1957-75 most African nations achieved independence from British and Portuguese rule .
 The strikes and protests they encouraged remained peaceful but paralyzed the country . Britain agreed to elections in early 1951, but the country was paralyzed .
 The CPP won 35 out of 38 seats, and the Gold Coast moved rapidly toward independence . Nkrumah became prime minister of the nation of Ghana in March 1957 .
 The European powers that ruled Africa had been impoverished by World War II . But attitudes to colonialism were changing, and attitudes were changing in Africa .
 Nations that fought against fascism found it hard to justify imperialism . Nations that had fought against Fascism found it difficult to justify imperialistism .
 Events in Ghana had a significant impact on West Africa . A domino effect has been seen in West Africa since Ghana began .
 Nigeria celebrated independence from Britain on October 1, 1960 . Determined not to be left behind, Nigeria became independent from Britain in 1960 .
 By 1964, independence had also been granted to Kenya, Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland and Uganda . By 1964 independence was granted to all of the world's nations .
 Kwame Nkrumah, Kojo Botsio, Krobo Edusei, and other Ghanaian politicians celebrate the independence of their country . The independence was achieved peacefully and democratically .
 The French fought an eight-year war to hold on to Algeria, finally conceding independence in 1962 . The French finally conceded independence in 1963 after eight years of war .
 Portuguese fought a long war to hold on to their colonies of Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea from 1961 to 1974 . The Portuguese were the first European colonial power in Africa .
 The collapse of Belgian authority in the Congo in 1960 led to a wave of violence across the nation . The assassination of the first prime minister, Patrick Lumumba, in 1961 led to the collapse of Belgium's authority .
 Civil wars were also numerous, such as ethnic civil wars in Rwanda and Zaire, as well as the clashes between warlords over food supplies in Somalia . Civil wars also occurred in Rwanda, Zaire and Somalia .
 African nationalist leaders sought to consolidate power by banning political rivals . Dictatorial rulers once achieved independence sought to ban political rivals from politics .
 Coups and military governments predominated—such as that of Idi Amin in Uganda . The Ugandan government was overthrown by a military government .
 By the early 1970s, only Zimbabwe and South Africa were still ruled by the white political elite .
 Nkrumah wanted Ghana to be a beacon of success, but his Pan-Africanism failed . Ghana’s fortunes began to slide as he became increasingly dictatorial . He became a dictatorial dictator .
 He went to college in the U.S. and later traveled to England, where he became involved in the West African Students' Union .
 In 1957, he became prime minister of the newly independent Ghana . While in prison, he won the general election, and five years later he became PM .
 Nkrumah faced a coup in 1966 and went into exile in Guinea . After two assassination attempts and increasing human-rights abuses, he faced an assassination attempt in 1966 . He was forced to go into exile after the coup and was forced into exile .
 After 1963, the USA and Russia agree to a nuclear test-ban treaty, and tensions lessen . After 1963 the U.S. and Russia agreed to an agreement on nuclear tests .
 The USSR and U.S. begin stockpiling nuclear weapons . The USSR begins stockpiling nukes . The United States and the United States end up stockpiling weapons . And the USSR and United States start stockpiling their nuclear weapons.
 A struggle develops for the control of satellite states, including Cuba . Cuba is one of the most important satellite states in the world .
 F or 13 days, from October 15 to October 28, 1962, the world teetered on the edge of nuclear destruction . The world was on the brink of nuclear war for 13 days . The U.S. and the world were at risk of nuclear weapons .
 Nikita Khrushchev deployed nuclear weapons in Cuba, and U.S. president John F Kennedy demanded he remove them from Cuba . U.K. President Kennedy demanded that he removed them .
 Strategists articulated the mutually assured destruction doctrine, which held that if Russia attacked the West, the West would make sure that they retaliate . Strategists said the West made sure that Russia would retaliate if it attacked them .
 Fidel Castro overthrew the government of President General Fulgencio Batista on January 1, 1959 . The United States and Cuba had a history of mutual cooperation, but this changed with the Cuban Revolution .
 The United States accepted Castro as ruler of Cuba, despite his communist leanings . The U.S. had a large economic presence in Cuba . Trade embargo was imposed on Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro began to break the American hold on the economy, nationalizing all industry without compensation . However, Castro began breaking the U.S. hold on economy .
 Castro turned to the Soviet Union for support after the U.S. imposed a sweeping trade embargo on Cuba . Castro's government turned to Russia in response to the embargo .
 Fearing communist expansion, the U.S. tried to topple Cuba's government with the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961 . The failed invasion involved CIA-backed Cuban exiles . The United States was trying to topple the Cuban government in 1961 .
 In 1961, the U.S. deployed 15 nuclear-tipped Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The missiles were in readiness to strike against the USSR if the need arose .
 Turkey shared a border with the Soviet Union, so this was viewed as a direct threat to Soviet territory . This was seen as a clear threat to the Soviet territory of Turkey .
 Khrushchev came under pressure from Soviet hard-liners to take a tough stance . Khrushchchev was under pressure to take tough stance on the issue .
 President Eisenhower installed missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads in Cuba . This, and the desire to defend his Cuban ally from American aggression, led him to install missiles in Cuba that could carry nuclear warheads .
 Cuban president Fidel Castro and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev joined hands in a show of unity in 1962 . Castro made an official state visit to Moscow in May 1963 . The two leaders joined hands on October 14, 1962 .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was the first Roman Catholic president of the US . At 43, he was the youngest man ever to be elected to that office . He was also the youngest Roman Catholic ever elected president .
 This included a challenge to venture into outer space and eliminate poverty . This included venture into space and the elimination of poverty .
 Kennedy's years in power were marked in foreign affairs by Cold War tension . Kennedy's foreign policy was marked in the wake of the Cold War .
 Kennedy favored a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent the installation of more missiles . Kennedy’s military advisers sought an immediate attack on the missile sites, but Kennedy favored the naval blockade .
 He issued an ultimatum to Khrushchev to withdraw and informed the world that nuclear war was an imminent possibility . He issued the world's first warning of nuclear war in 1962 .
 Khrushchev ordered the captains of Soviet ships to hold their course for Cuban ports . The incident occurred during the Second World War .
 Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from Turkey in secret if Khrushchev dismantled all nuclear weapons in Cuba . Kennedy agreed in secret to remove the missiles in exchange for removing all nukes in Cuba from Turkey .
 The Soviet leader agreed, only if America would also abort its plan to invade Cuba . The U.S. agreed to pull out of Cuba only if it would also abandon its plans to invade .
 On October 28, Khrushchev ordered his ships to turn around— a defining moment of the Cold War . The decision was made by the Soviet Union in the wake of the Second World War .
 His firm stance against Russia brought him even greater popularity . The threat of nuclear war began to diminish . The superpowers became more cautious .
 His ambitious domestic reforms, however, were increasingly blocked by Congress . Reforms on issues such as welfare and civil rights were also blocked by the Congress .
 JFK was assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . While he was campaigning for the next presidential election, he was assassinated .
 Kennedy's death was a shock and a tragedy for Americans, at a time when tensions were just starting to ease between the U.S. and Russia . Kennedy died at the age of 50 .
 After 1961 Alan Shepard commands Freedom 7 on the first Mercury mission, he became the first American in space . Shepard was first American to be in space in 1961 . Shepard commanded Freedom 7 during the first mission .
 Neil Armstrong becomes the first man to set foot on the moon on July 20, 1969 . Neil Armstrong is the first American to walk on the lunar surface .
 October 4,1957, the USSR launched the world’s first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1.1 . The USSR launched a satellite in the Soviet Union in 1957 .
 The satellite remained in orbit until January 4, 1958, when it re-entered and burned up in Earth's atmosphere . Carrying a simple radio transmitter to relay information about conditions in space, the satellite was launched in 1958 .
 It was a sensational coup for the Soviets during the Cold War with the West . It was the first time they had been allowed to take part in a secret operation .
 No shots fired, but the military and political ramifications were immense . No shots were fired, and the political and military ramifications were enormous .
 The USSR was now a Superpower, stunning the United States and initiating the ""space race" The space race was a frantic competition between nations for technological superiority .
 Sputnik was a mass-media event that ushered in the ‘Space Age,’ capturing the world’s collective imagination . The United States catches up with the event .
 There was a boom in science-fiction books, films, and TV dramas set in space . There is now a new wave of space-themed books and films .
 The U.S. had created NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, but they could only watch in envy as the Soviets sent Yuri Gagarin into orbit in 1961 . Neil Armstrong was the first human to go to outer space .
 The United States caught up by sending John Glenn into orbit in 1962 . By 1967, the U.S. had built a rocket that was powerful enough to reach the moon .
 In 1969, 12 years after the launch of Sputnik 1, Neil Armstrong left Apollo 11 and became the first man to walk on the moon . Armstrong was the first American astronaut to leave Apollo 11 .
 Malcolm X, founder of the Organization of AfroAmerican Unity, was shot dead in 1965 . Malcolm X was assassinated in 1965 in Atlanta, Georgia .
 The March on Washington on August 28, 1963 brought roughly 250,000 people to the nation's capital . The march on Washington was mostly African-Americans .
 They were calling for equality, an end to racial segregation, and for all Americans to have access to a good education, decent housing, and jobs that paid a living wage . They were also calling for an end of racial segregation .
 Martin Luther King was arrested that April during anti-segregation protests in Alabama . King had been arrested that year for anti-Segregation protests . MLK was arrested for his role in the civil rights movement .
 The abolishment of slavery after the American Civil War of 1861-65 led to emancipated slaves seeking American citizenship . The abolition of slavery led to the emancipation of American slaves seeking citizenship .
 While they were no longer slaves, they were not equal with whites . They endured discrimination, segregation, and violent racist attacks .
 In the 1950s, a number of African-American groups fought back against discrimination with a policy of non-violence . The 1950s was a time when African-Americans fought back from discrimination with non-violent protests .
 There are those who say to you, we are rushing this issue of civil rights. In the 1960s, ** There were those who said to you . We are not rushing civil rights, ** The civil rights movement is still alive today .
 99 civil rights marches in Birmingham, Alabama, led by King were central to the campaign . Hubert Humphrey was mayor of Minneapolis .
 Some extremists, especially in the South, reacted with gruesome acts of violence . Some extremists react with gruesome violence .
 After the March on Washington, Congress passed the Civil Rights Acts of 1964, outlawing discrimination, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . After the march on Washington in 1964, U.S. Congress passed a series of laws banning discrimination and voting discrimination .
 More than half a century later, many of the goals set on that day are still out of reach to black Americans . More than 50 years after that day, black Americans still struggle to reach their goals .
 The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, ASEAN, was established in 1967 to promote stability in the region . After 1967, the group was established to promote the stability of the region.
 Covert American activity culminates in a United States warship being attacked in the Gulf of Tonkin . U.S. warship was attacked by a U.N. Navy ship in the same area .
 Johnson uses the incident to justify military intervention in Vietnam . The incident widened the frontiers of the Cold War . Johnson used it to justify the U.S. intervention .
 The states of Southeast Asia struggled to create stable political systems after World War II . The region became embroiled in the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 After French colonial rule came to an end in 1954, Vietnam was divided at the Geneva Conference into North Vietnam, with a communist government under Vietnamese revolutionary leader Ho Chi Minh, and South Vietnam .
 Russia and China set up the National Liberation Front in South Vietnam, and started a guerrilla war to unite the country under communist rule . This incident was the spark that led to the Vietnam War .
 Maddox was operating off the coast of North Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin in August of that year . The U.S. Navy was monitoring radar and radio from northern coastal installations, to support attacks by the South Vietnamese navy .
 North Vietnam believed Maddox was linked to raids on its coastal targets . North Vietnam launched a torpedo attack on the Maddox . The Maddox is believed to have been launched by North Vietnam .
 During the Vietnam War, North Vietnam used Cambodia to channel soldiers and supplies to the South along the Ho Chi Minh Trail . This second attack has since been disputed, but U.S. president Lyndon B Johnson, recognizing that South Vietnam could not prevail on its own .
 In 1970, a joint US and South Vietnamese force invaded Cambodia to flush out the Viet Cong . The U.S. and South Vietnam invaded Cambodia in a joint invasion of Cambodia .
 This allowed him to take any measures necessary to deal with threats to U.S. forces in Southeast Asia . This allows him to act against any threats to United States forces .
 The United States feared that if Vietnam became a communist regime, other countries in the region would soon follow . The U.S. feared that other nations in the Middle East would follow suit .
 Using the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Johnson poured troops into the South and bombed North Vietnam by air . The Gulf War was the first Gulf War of the Vietnam War .
 Huge numbers of Pol Pot's brutal regime intended to style the country into a classless agrarian society inspired by Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution in China . Pol Pot wanted the country to be classless, aglarian society .
 The entire population was marched to the countryside and forced to work as rice farmers . The population of the country was marched into the countryside .
 Over the next 44 months, around 2 million people—a quarter of Cambodia's population—died, either killed or starved . Over the same period, around a quarter of the population was killed and starved . Cambodia is now the world's most impoverished country .
 After three years of terror, Pol Pot was driven from power by a Vietnamese invasion . Despite technological superiority, the Americans failed to crush the Viet Cong guerrillas .
 American troops suffered high casualties and gradually became demoralized . American troops died in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 Vietnam War was the first televised war in U.S. history . The Vietnam War is the first TV war in the United States history .
 As the public watched horrific events unfolding, an increasing number of people opposed the conflict . The public opposed the war in Syria .
 Around the world, peace movements organized large anti-war demonstrations . Peace movements organized around the world to protest the war .
 In March 1973, the last American troops withdrew from Vietnam, and in April 1975 South Vietnam fell to the North . The last American troop withdrawal was in March 1973 .
 U.S. policy-makers consistently misinterpreted Asian nationalist movements for Soviet-inspired communism . Policy-makers often misjudged Asian nationalists as Soviet-style communism .
 The U.S. feared what the United States feared never came to pass . With the exception of Laos and Cambodia, the region remained out of communist control . Ultimately, however, the U.N. had no impact .
 Salvador Allende, president of Chile, dies during a coup led by army chief Augusto Pinochet . Allende was overthrown by Pinochet's army in 1973 .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion is a disaster, and Castro emerges triumphant . A revolution is not recognized as a revolution in the United States .
 The U.S. steps up its support of anti-communist regimes in Latin America . The USSR backs pro-communists . The United States steps up support of Latin American regimes .
 A force of Cuban exiles began an invasion of Cuba to try to topple Fidel Castro's left-wing regime . The Cold War continues to dominate global geopolitics n April 15, 1961 .
 Eight American B-26 bombers flew from Nicaragua to destroy Castro's air force on the ground . Eight American bombers flew out of Nicaragua from the ground to destroy the air force .
 The air raid seemed successful, but at least six of Castro's fighter planes survived . The raid was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 Castro’s air force sank two ships loaded with vital supplies . The next day, Castro's air force sunk two ships . Castro's Air Force sank the next day .
 Around 1,400 Cuban exiles, codenamed Brigade 2506, launched an amphibious assault on the coast of southern Cuba, the Bay of Pigs . In the early hours of April 17, a group of around 1,000 exiles took part in the assault .
 The U.S. supported rightwing dictators with anti-reformist regimes in countries such as Cuba, Honduras, and Guatemala . The United States was determined to eradicate communism and supported right wing dictators .
 During the 1950s, corruption and brutality within the Cuban Batista government forced the U.S. to withdraw support from Cuba .
 When Castro defeated Batista in 1959, the U.S. government had misgivings over Castro’s communist leanings . The United States government was wary of Castro's communist tendencies . The U.N. government was skeptical of the Castro regime .
 By 1960, Castro had nationalized all U.S. interests in Cuba without compensation . Castro had broken diplomatic ties with the United States . Castro nationalized Cuba's interests in 1960s .
 U.S. policy-makers decided that Castro must go . To protect their economic assets and defeat communism, they decided to kill Castro .
 Several counterrevolutionary groups were formed by Cuban exiles in Miami . Within a year of Castro taking power, several groups formed .
 The American Central Intelligence Agency took an interest in these groups, providing them with training and equipment to topple the Cuban government .
 The failure at the Bay of Pigs was largely down to poor planning and poor planning . President Kennedy's reluctance to become too involved in the failed operation was behind it .
 Castro forged a closer alliance with the Soviet Union, its ally against American aggression . Castro was able to export his ideals across Latin America .
 The invasion incited pro-Cuba anti-US demonstrations from Chile to Mexico . The invasion of Cuba in Cuba incited anti-U.S. demonstrations .
 Castro actively supported guerrilla warfare, and thousands of Latin American guerrillas went to Cuba for training . Thousands of Latin Americans went for training in Cuba .
 The revolution in Cuba inspired similar uprisings through the 1960s and 70s in Nicaragua, Brazil, Uruguay, and Venezuela, where there was disaffection with illiteracy, inequality, and poverty .
 The United States intervened several times in an effort to contain communism . The U.S. intervened in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 They supported military coups in Chile in 1973 and Argentina in 1976 . They also funded the El Salvadoran military in the late 1970s to prop up their regime .
 To detractors, he was a dictator whose close ties with the Soviet Union brought the world close to nuclear war . To his detractors, the dictator's close ties to the USSR brought the country close to a nuclear war.
 Castro was jailed as a student in 1953 for his revolutionary activities . He was released two years later and went into exile in the United States and Mexico . Castro was released from prison two years after he was released .
 He returned to Cuba in 1956 with a small guerrilla band, among them the Argentine Marxist revolutionary Ernesto “Che" Guevara . He set to work undermining the regime of the dictator Batista .
 Castro was determined to improve literacy, offered free healthcare, and instituted land reforms . Castro was also determined to offer free healthcare and offer free land reform .
 Castro saw himself as a leader of the world's oppressed people . Castro helped train anti-Apartheid forces in South Africa . Castro was one of the leaders of the Cuban revolution .
 In the 1970s, he sent troops to support communist forces in Angola, Ethiopia, and Yemen . He sent troops in support of communist forces during those years .
 In 2008, Raul Castro stood down as president of Cuba, leaving power in the hands of his brother Raul . Castro was wracked by ill health, leaving him unable to hold the presidency .
 Richard Nixon’s trip to China paves the way for diplomatic relations between the two countries . Nixon's visit to China in 1972 paves way for the opening of diplomatic relations .
 Mao Zedong fixes on ambitious plans to industrialize China . The Communist Party of China was founded in the 1920s . The party was founded by the Communist Party Party of the Republic of China .
 In the Great Leap Forward, all Chinese society is directed to this cause. In China, all . society was directed towards this cause . In the 1950s and '60s, the Chinese were encouraged to take part in the revolution .
 Mao’s death marks a key turning point in China's post-war history . Tens of millions die in the fall of Mao's reign .
 Deng Xiaoping's adoption of capitalist ideas allows China to move toward superpower status . Cultural Revolution was one of the darkest periods in Chinese history . Deng Xiaop's adopted capitalist ideas allowed China to become superpower .
 Mao decided to purge any opposition and transform capitalists and intellectuals into ordinary workers . Mao wanted to bolster his primacy and ignite revolutionary fervor .
 Some 36 million people were persecuted, and up to a million died in the turmoil . The turmoil lasted until 1976, and some 36 million were persecuted . Up to one million died during the period .
 Mao launched reforms to transform China's semifeudal, mostly agricultural society into an industrialized socialist state . Mao launched the Great Leap Forward in 1949 to transform the country into a socialist society .
 Mao ordered the Great Leap Forward in the late 1950s in a bid to achieve rapid economic growth . Mao's government ordered the 'Great Leap Forward' in order to boost the economy .
 Industrial output climbed with steel and coal production, rail network doubled . More than half of all Chinese land was irrigated by 1961 .
 Mao transformed rural China into a series of farming communes in which villagers pooled land, animals, tools, and crops . Mao's communes were set up in rural China in order to help farmers pool their resources .
 The authorities took vast amounts of grain from the communes to feed city workers . This led to famine and starvation in the 1970s and 1980s .
 After the Cultural Revolution, Mao needed American expertise to restore China, the U.S. wanted an ally against the Soviet Union . The United States wanted to be a strong ally against Russia .
 In 1972, United States President Richard Nixon traveled to Peking to meet with Mao . President Nixon met with Mao in Peking .
 By the time Mao died in 1976, China had become a major oil producer with nuclear capabilities . China had oil and nuclear capabilities by the time he died, Mao's regime was in control .
 Deng Xiaoping, who led China from 1978 to 1997, was willing to use capitalist ideas to focus on economic growth . Deng was able to use capitalism as a way to get ahead of economic growth in China .
 He initiated new and far-reaching measures, such as inviting foreign firms to invest in Chinese industry . But he also resisted pressure to make democratic reforms, he said .
 By the beginning of the new millennium, China's economic growth was spectacular . China's economy has been a major source of growth .
 In 2001, the country was admitted to the World Trade Organization . In 2008 it played host to the Olympic Games in Beijing, China .
 Some economists predict that by 2026 China will boast a gross domestic product greater than Japan and Western Europe . China's economic growth is expected to be greater than the likes of Japan and Europe .
 Mao's ideals, focused on the people and self-sufficiency, grew among farmers and members of the urban working class . However, as the country experienced a period of unparalleled economic growth, nostalgia for Mao’s ideals grew .
 Mao’s legacy continues to cast a long shadow over a modernizing China . Mao was Mao's first president of the Communist Party of China in 1949 .
 Mao declared the Chinese Soviet Republic in 1931 . Mao was forced to retreat to the countryside after leading an unsuccessful rebellion against Chiang Kai-shek . Six years later he was forced into the countryside .
 Mao became disenchanted with the Soviet policy of ‘peaceful coexistence” toward the West . He developed Maoism, a stronger form of communism . A devoted Leninist, Mao became a committed Leninist .
 His radical ideas and experiments with collectivization led to the death and suffering of millions of people . However, his radical ideas led to millions of deaths and millions of suffering .
 One of his last acts, in 1972, was to hold a meeting with Richard Nixon, the first American president ever to visit China .
 After 1964 The Palestine Liberation Organization calls for an end to the Jewish state . After 1964 Israel was declared a state of Israel .
 Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser declared the nationalization of the Suez Canal in 1956 . The canal was the waterway through which most oil bound for Western Europe had to pass .
 For Egyptians, the nationalization symbolized the liberation of their country from the British imperialist dominance it had been under since the 1880s . The nationalization of the Egyptian government symbolized their liberation from British imperialism .
 Britain, France, and Israel hatched a secret plan in response to Nasser’s bold move . In response to the move, the three countries hatched a plan .
 France was eager for Nasser's downfall because of his support for Algerian insurgents against French colonial rule in Algeria . Nasser supported the Algerian insurgency against colonial French rule in the country .
 The three conspired that Israel would attack Egypt, and Britain and France would intervene posing as peacemakers, taking control of the canal . France and Britain would intervene a few days later posing as peacekeepers, taking over Egypt .
 British and French troops invaded on October 31, but faced diplomatic pressure to call a ceasefire . British forces faced immediate diplomatic pressure from French and British forces to call ceasefire .
 The United States was trying to cultivate good relations with Arab states . The U.S. was appalled by the Anglo-French invasion, believing it threatened stability .
 President Eisenhower forced through a U.N. resolution imposing a ceasefire . British and French troops had to conduct a humiliating withdrawal from the conflict .
 The strong anti-Western sentiment in the Middle East dates back hundreds of years . It was fueled by the West's increased involvement in the region . Anti-West sentiment has been fueled by increased involvement of the West .
 Colonialism in the 1800s and the division of the Ottoman Empire after World War I were bitter humiliations for peoples who felt their religion, Islam, was the highest form of divine revelation .
 In 1948, the partition of Palestine to form Israel spilt the land into two states, one Arab and one Jewish, and was rejected vehemently by Israeli Arabs and enraged the other Arab nations . The partition of the land in 1948 was rejected by the Arab nations and enraged by the Israeli Arabs
 Arab states attacked Israel in the first Arab-Israeli War in May and June 1948 . Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, Transjordan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and Egypt fought in the war .
 Egypt continued its stance of belligerence toward Israel by closing the Suez Canal to Israeli shipping . Egypt continued to close the canal off Israeli shipping routes .
 When Nasser ousted the regime of King Farouk in 1954 and sent him into exile, he imported arms from the Soviet Union . Nasser imported arms to build his arsenal for future confrontations with Israel .
 Nasser relied on funds from Britain and the United States to fund ambitious plans to develop Egypt . Britain had agreed to withdraw its troops from the Suez area by June 1856 .
 Nasser angered when Britain and the U.S. withdrew its offer of loans to help him pay for the dam . Nasser was angered by the withdrawal of the loans and was angered .
 The United States and Britain backed out of Israel . There is a rise in in Palestine . Israel is founded .
 The Suez Crisis deals a blow to British and French imperialism and stirs anti-Western sentiments in the Muslim world . The crisis was a major blow to the West, stirring anti-Islam sentiments in Muslim countries .
 The Israeli-Arab dispute widens to become an Israeli and Arab conflict . The United States becomes the main backer of Israel . There is an increase in Palestinian liberation movements in the region .
 The canal was a source of Arab pride in Egypt . The move was popular in Egypt, as the canal was an Arab pride .
 Nasser was a secular modernizer who advocated the separation of religion from political life . Nasser believed it was the hallmark of Arab modernity, but not universally welcomed .
 The Muslim Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in 1928, argued for Islam to have a central role in government . The Brotherhood was founded in 1928 .
 The organization was finally banned in 1954 . After repeated calls for the application of Sharia law, the organization was banned . Nasser's assassination attempt against Nasser was an assassination attempt .
 In 1967, Arab countries suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of Israel in the Six Day War . Israel took the Sinai from Egypt, the Golan Heights from Syria, and the West Bank and East Jerusalem from Jordan . Israel was now an occupier .
 President Jimmy Carter signed a peace treaty with Menachem Begin, Israel’s premier, at the White House in 1979 . President Anwar Sadat of Egypt shook hands with Egypt's prime minister at the signing of the treaty .
 Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982 destabilized of the fragile peace . PLO and other Palestinian groups attacking Israel destabilized the peace continuously .
 Modern Iraq was carved out of the ruins of the Ottoman Empire in the aftermath of World War I . Iraq was a land divided along ethnic lines between Arabs and Kurds, as well as sectarian lines between Sunni and Shia Muslims .
 Saddam Hussein, a Sunni, became leader in 1979, and suppressed ethnic Kurds and Shias alike using immense brutality . He became leader of the Iraqi government in 1979 .
 He espoused Arab nationalism and ruled Iraq as a secular state . Like Nasser in Egypt, he espoused nationalistic nationalism and secularism .
 The secular, Western way of life was swept away in the Islamic revolution in which the US-backed Shah was ousted . The secular and Western way was swept up in the revolution .
 The new regime, under Ayatollah Khomeini, based its laws and ideology on the strict teachings of the Koran . It was based on the Koran, and the Koran was the basis of its ideology .
 Saddam felt threatened by the Islamic revolution and a possible Shia uprising in his own country, so he invaded Iran on September 22, 1980 under the pretext of a territorial dispute over the Shatt al-Arab .
 The invasion triggered a bruising eight-year war that devastated both countries and increased tensions in the Middle East . It was the first invasion of Iraq and Afghanistan in the early 1980s .
 Iran's principal ally was Syria, but Libya, China, and North Korea all also sent it weapons . North Korea also sent weapons to Iran in the past .
 Saddam Hussein's desire to control Kuwaiti oilfields had initially led to Iraq invading Kuwait in 1990 . Iraq provided billions of dollars in loans to help fund the invasion .
 Iraq, now awash with armaments supplied by several Western nations, invaded Kuwait in 1990 . Ultimately, Iran was defeated; and Iraq was awash in arms supplied by Western nations .
 The UN demanded their withdrawal, but Saddam announced that Kuwait had been annexed by Iraq . Saddam Hussein announced that the UN had withdrawn from Kuwait . The UN had demanded the withdrawal of the Kuwaitis .
 The United States, with support from coalition forces, sent in troops during the First Gulf War and toppled Saddam from power .
 The continued U.S. support of Israel led to profound grievances among Islamists among Islamists . The 9/11 attacks led to the deaths of Osama bin Laden and others in 2001 .
 To them, the capitalist, secular US, with its greed for oil, symbolized all that was wrong with the West, and terrorist strikes on U.S. targets grew . Terrorists attacked the capitalist and secular US in the 1980s .
 After September 11, President Bush declared a “War on Terror"" and, with help from the British government, attacked Iraq on the premise of destroying “weapons of mass destruction” deemed a threat to national security . Iraq was attacked in 2002 .
 Western intervention in the Muslim world heightened the belief among Islamists that the West was the enemy of Islam . The West has been accused of being Islamophobic in recent years .
 The 9/11 attacks were inspired by a radical ideology and belief that the problems plaguing Arab and Muslim people could be resolved by attacking foreign powers that were seen to oppress Islam . The Arab Spring was inspired by the belief that foreign powers should be seen as oppressors of Islam .
 In 2011, young Arabs were at the heart of uprisings across the Arab world . Young Arabs were looking inward to promote change and blaming their own leaders for decades of decline .
 At its core, what became known as the Arab Spring was a new generation's attempt to change the state order . At the core of the Arab spring was the new generation of young people trying to change state orders .
 Arab Spring caused huge upheavals in the Middle East and North Africa . Arab Spring was a series of pro-democracy uprisings in the region . The Arab Spring is the name of the Arab Spring .
 A street vendor set himself on fire in Tunisia in December 2010 in protest against police brutality . It started in Tunisia on December 17, 2010 when a street vendor was set on fire .
 Tunisian President Zine el Abidine fled the country on 14 January . Demonstrators demanded democracy, and President Abidine was forced to flee the country .
 Disorder spread from Tunisia to Algeria, where there was unrest over lack of jobs . Disorder spread to Tunisia, where it has been hit by unrest over the lack of a job .
 President Hosni Mubarak resigned after 18 days of protests in Egypt . Thousands of protestors took to the streets in Egypt on January 25, 2011 .
 By mid-February, civil unrest had swept through Bahrain, where it was brutally suppressed, and into Libya . Libya's civil unrest has also swept through the Middle East, including Bahrain .
 An international coalition led by NATO launched a campaign of air strikes targeting Gaddafi's forces in October 2011 . Gaddafi was killed by an international coalition of airstrikes .
 Further uprisings occurred in Jordan, Yemen, and Saudi Arabia, but the worst violence was seen in Syria . President Bashar Assad promised reforms but used force to crush dissent .
 In July 2011, hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets, and the country descended into civil war . Hundreds of thousands were in the streets during the country's civil war in 2011 .
 By August 2015, more than 210,000 people had been killed in the conflict . The United Nations reported that more than 200,000 had died in Syria .
 Islamic State (also referred to as IS, ISIS, or ISIL) took control of huge swathes of territory across northern and eastern Syria, as well as neighboring Iraq . The extremist Muslim group that replaced al-Qaeda, replaced al Qaeda, took control in Syria and Iraq .
 Suez Crisis was the end of one era in the politics of the Middle East and the start of another . The Suez crisis was the beginning of another era in Middle East politics .
 Arab nationalism stimulated Arab nationalism and opened an era of Arab-Israeli wars and Palestinian terrorism . It stimulated Arab nationalistism and opened a era of Israeli wars and terrorism .
 Wars are being fought over religion, ethnicity, territory, politics, and commerce . These conflicts have led the worst refugee crisis since World War II . Millions fleeing anarchy and fanaticism .
 Arab leaders formed the Palestine Liberation Organization in 1964, declaring Israel's establishment illegal . In 1964, Arab leaders declared Israel’s establishment illegal, declaring it illegal .
 The PLO used terrorism to attack Israel and Western targets for their support of Israel . Israel was attacked by the PLO for its support of the country .
 In 1970, Palestinian militants blew up three hijacked planes in the Jordanian desert . In 1972 a group linked to the PLO hit the Israeli Olympic team during the games in Munich, Germany .
 Both Jews and Muslims have employed terrorism to derail attempts at peace in the region . Both Muslims and Jews have employed terror to derail the many attempts to achieve peace .
 Two million people form a human chain across Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia in protest at Soviet rule . August 23, 1989, was a protest against Soviet rule in Estonia and Lithuania .
 Hungary opens its border with Austria to allow the departure of East German refugees . September 11, 1989 Hungary opened the border to allow refugees to leave the country . Hungary was the last country to open its borders to allow East Germans to leave .
 After December 3, 1989 The United States and USSR declare that the Cold War has ended . The U.S. and USSR jointly declare the end of their Cold War .
 This process of democratization reduces Cold War tensions . He introduces 1. He introduces one of his ideas to the West .
 Gorbachev has no intention of using military force to prop up satellite communist regimes . The former Soviet leader says he has no plans to use military force in the future .
 Uprisings take place across Eastern Europe, and communist regimes are ousted . The events take place in Eastern Europe in the early 1950s .
 The Berlin Wall is dismantled, followed soon after by the collapse of the Soviet Union . The collapse of Soviet Union was followed by the fall of the Berlin Wall .
 Berlin Wall stood as a reminder of the Cold War, a bitter division between Soviet communism and Western capitalism . The Berlin Wall divided East and West Berlin between the two sides .
 On November 9, 1989, the East German government lifted travel restrictions . Thousands converged at the wall to celebrate the fall of the wall .
 On November 10, soldiers from both sides helped Berliners break through the wall . Soldiers from Berliners helped break through Berlin Wall .
 Hungary rose against its communist government in the fall of 1956, only to be crushed by Soviet tanks . In 1968, the USSR invaded Czechoslovakia to remove a government it found too liberal . In Hungary, the government was overthrown in 1968 .
 In the 1960s, Germany was still divided between East and West, and its former capital Berlin split into the Allied-operated West and the Soviet-controlled East . Berlin was divided between West and East, and Berlin split between the two .
 Thousands of East Germans escaped to the West, and the country hemorrhaged its skilled workers . Thousands of people are now living in the United States .
 On August 13, 1961, the government sealed off East from West Berlin with a fence . Over time, the fence became a heavily fortified barrier dividing the city, the nation, and family .
 President Obama lifted the ban on Eastern Bloc countries reforming their political systems . Critically, he lifted a ban on the idea of reforming the political system in the Eastern bloc .
 Eastern Bloc countries protested to end communist rule . With threat of Soviet military intervention removed, citizens protested . The collapse of communism led to the end of communist rule in Eastern Blooms .
 The fall of the Berlin Wall meant liberation for many people . In June 1989, Poland’s Solidarity, originally a Polish democracy, was founded by the Polish Communist Party .
 German reunification, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the end of communism in Eastern Europe followed soon after. banned trade union, was elected to lead a coalition government . banned trade unions were elected to form a government .
 The East German government declared that its citizens would be able to visit West Berlin through any border crossing, including the Berlin Wall . As the push for reform gathered pace, East German citizens would visit any border crossings, including any .
 It marked an era that saw the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union . It marked a period that saw an era of peace and prosperity .
 It allowed millions to travel more freely, and previously stifled economies across Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union opened up to the world .
 Many former communist countries were welcomed into NATO and joined the European Union . Former communist countries have joined NATO and the EU in recent years .
 Communism was dead in the East, and a reunified Germany was about to take its place at the heart of Europe . The West was beginning to look to the future of the country .
 In July 1989 he announced that countries within the Warsaw Pact could hold openly contested elections . He laid out radical reforms —glasnost and perestroika —and in July 1989 .
 Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, and others opted for democratic governments, destabilizing the Soviet Union itself . The Soviet Union was overthrown by the West in the 1980s .
 In July 1991, the anticommunist Boris Yeltsin was elected president of Russia . In 1991, he became the first Russian president of the Soviet Union . He was elected in July 1991 .
 A month later, with Gorbachev weakened by an attempted coup by hardline communists, Yeltsin took advantage . A month after the attempted coup, the Russian president took advantage of Gorbavachev's weakened by the coup .
 On Christmas Day 1991, Gorbachev resigned, leaving Yeltsin as president of the new Russian state . Yeltsins was the first Russian president since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The former empire split into 15 new independent states, and the USSR was no more . The former Soviet Union was no longer the Soviet Union .
 After 1969 The Days of Rage demonstrations in Chicago use violence to protest against the Vietnam War and U.S. racism . The radical group Japanese Red Army protests the presence of United States military bases in Japan . After 1969 the days of rage demonstrations began in Chicago .
 In March, riot police were called to deal with the unrest, and hundreds of students descended on Nanterre . Riot police have been called out in the wake of the unrest in March .
 By May, the uprising had moved to the center of Paris, and the number of protestors swelled to thousands . Thousands of people were demonstrating in the streets of Paris .
 Demonstrators call for revolutionary social change and the collapse of the government . Tension erupted on the streets, as demonstrators called for revolutionary change .
 8 million workers went on a wildcat strike that brought France to a standstill . Within a few days, 8 million people went on strike . The strike was the first of its kind in France .
 France’s journey to near revolution is the defining event of 1968, a year of global protest . 1968 was a momentous year for France and the world .
 Much was against the Vietnam War, but many people also marched against oppressive regimes . Much was also against anti-Vietnam War and anti-war regimes .
 The French protests lost steam as elections showed overwhelming support for the government . The French government has been heavily criticized for its handling of the protests .
 The revolutionary movements of 1968 ultimately failed, but they inspired a generation to question authority . The revolutionary movement of 1968 failed but ultimately changed the course of history .
 In their wake came a rise in left-wing terrorist groups that used bombing and kidnapping while purporting to fight for social justice . In the wake of their rise, there has been a rise of left wing terrorist groups using bombing, kidnapping .
 Mandela received a life prison sentence in 1964 for his role in anti-apartheid protests held in Sharpeville, South Africa . Mandela was sentenced to life in prison in 1964 .
 Mandela was a militant member of the African National Congress . The ANC was set up to campaign against apartheid, a system of racial segregation enforced by the white government .
 Mandela had become a symbol of the struggle for racial equality in South Africa . Mandela had been imprisoned in the 1970s and 1980s . Mandela was a symbol for the struggle to achieve racial equality .
 I greet you all in the name of peace, democracy, and freedom for all . Friends, comrades, and fellow South Africans, greet you .
 Many in the anti-apartheid movement advocated non-violent protest, which helped rally white South Africans to their cause . Non-violent protests helped rally the white South African population to support the movement .
 Apartheid was globally condemned, and tough international sanctions were imposed . The South African government was accused of apartheid in South Africa .
 He had been in secret negotiations for two years to end the apartheid system . Seeing the need for fundamental change, he had seen the need to fundamental change .
 Mandela won by a huge margin in 1994 elections . Multiracial elections were held in 1994 . Mandela was elected to power in South Africa .
 It transformed the country into a multiracial democracy without a bloody civil war that so many had feared . The country was transformed into a multi-racial democracy without war .
 After 1998-99 war breaks out in Kosovo between ethnic Albanians and ethnic Serbs . War breaks out between Serbs and Albanians in Kosovo . Kosovo was declared a state of war in 1999 .
 During the 44-month siege, the city’s food and electricity supplies were cut off, and the civilian population was bombarded by nationalist Bosnian Serbs .
 Croatia, Montenegro, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegina, Macedonia, and Serbia, each with its own prime minister and constitution . Croatia and Montenegro are each with their own prime ministers and constitutions . Slovenia, Croatia, Slovenia and Slovenia are the only two countries without their own
 Overall power in Yugoslavia was held by a president, notably communist leader Josip Broz Tito from 1953 to 1980 . Tito was the only president to hold power in the country .
 After the 1991 break-up of the Soviet Union, a nationalist revival swept Eastern Europe . After the 1990s, the nationalist revival of Eastern Europe swept across the continent .
 Croatia and Slovenia's call for independence was opposed by Serbia . Vukovar, in eastern Croatia, was destroyed by the Yugoslav army under Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic .
 When Bosnia also declared independence in 1992, the violence intensified . The violence intensified when Bosnia declared independence from Bosnia in 1992 .
 Bosnian Serbs aimed to create a separate ethnically pure Serbian state . Republika Srpska was carved out of the new Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina . The new republic was formed from the Republic of Bosnian-Herrges .
 Nationalist Bosnian Serbs, supported by neighboring Serbia, launched a campaign to expel non-Serbs . During the Siege of Sarajevo, they targeted the majority Bosnian Muslim population . Nationalist Serbs supported by Serbia, supported the campaign .
 The Bosnian War ended in 1995, but fighting continued in Kosovo, where ethnic Albanians began a separatist movement against the Serbs . The war ended in Bosnia and Kosovo, but the conflict continued until 1995 .
 Ethnically based nationalism also led to bloody anti-Armenian pogroms in the Nagorno-Karabakh region and in Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan .
 In Georgia, violence erupted between the Georgian and Abkhazian population . Violence erupted between Abkhazi and the Georgian population .
 The wars in Yugoslavia forced the issue of the global community's responsibility to resolve disputes that threaten wider instability or cause unacceptable human suffering or rights violations . The conflicts in Yugoslavia were the focus of the world's responsibility .
 After 2004 Al-Qaeda urges Sunni Muslims to rise up against U.S. forces in Iraq . After 2004 U.N. forces were attacked by Sunni Muslims in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Terrorist group ISIS aims to create an Islamic caliphate that covers Iraq and Syria and spreads its influence worldwide . Terror group wants to create Islamic caliphate . Terrorists want to spread its influence around the world . ISIS has been fighting in Syria and Iraq since September .
 September 11 was not the first terror attack on U.S. soil by Islamic extremists . September 11 wasn't the first terrorist attack on American soil . The seeds of extremism can be traced back to September 11 .
 On February 26, 1993, a bomb was detonated at the World Trade Center by men thought to have links to al-Qaeda . The bombing occurred in the United States and Canada .
 Muslims had adopted international terrorism during the struggles over Israel . Some Muslims had been radicalized and adopted international terror during the struggle .
 In 1979, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan led to the worldwide mobilization of Muslim militants to fight the invaders . The Soviet invasion led to a worldwide mobilization of Muslims against the Soviets .
 Intelligence reports suggest he was the mastermind behind September 11 . Intelligence reports suggested that he was behind 9/11 .
 The civil war in Syria since 2011 has led to the emergence of ISIS, the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and Syria . ISIS has taken control of several towns in the region, including towns in Syria .
 The events of September 11 mark the largest terrorist attack ever on U.S. soil . September 11 is the largest attack on American soil ever on United States soil .
 London, Madrid, and Paris attacks have added a chilling dimension to the threat of Islamic terrorism . Subsequent attacks in London and Madrid carried out by a diffuse network of regional terrorist groups .
 The boom in wireless communication connects nearly all of humankind . After 2000s, wireless communication has taken over the world .
 The Internet radically changes how the world shares information and conducts business . YOU AFFECT the world by what YOU BROWSE THE LAUNCH of the first WEBSITE THE ARPANET .
 Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist at the European Organization for Nuclear Research in Geneva, Switzerland, built the device . It was built by Tim Berner Lee, a computer scientist in Geneva .
 Berners-Lee was interested in facilitating the exchange of ideas between scientists in universities and research institutes . He first proposed his idea for a worldwide network of computers sharing information in 1989 .
 Berners-Lee persuaded CERN that the World Wide Web should be given to the world as a free resource . CERN agreed to give the world the Web to be given as free .
 The Soviet Union's launch of the Sputnik 1 satellite in 1957 spurred the U.S. Defense Department to consider means of communication after a nuclear attack . The Internet is now the world's largest way of communication .
 This led to the formation of the ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network) in 1969 . The network was initially of four computers, initially four computers . It was the first network of its own computers .
 In the mid-1980s, this growing network of interconnected computers became known as the Internet . The Internet is now a worldwide network of networks of computers and computers .
 Both the Internet and the World Wide Web were limited to academic and research organizations . The Internet was used by academics and research groups .
 It wasn’t until the 1993 launch of a user-friendly Web browser called Mosaic that the Web took off for more general use . Mosaic launched the Web in the early 1990s, but the Web has since taken off .
 Mosaic could show pictures as well as text, and users could follow Web links simply by clicking on them with a mouse . Mosaic will be available in the U.S. next month .
 The Web became synonymous with the Internet, but they are distinct from one another . The Web and the Internet are not synonymous with each other, and they are separate .
 The World Wide Web facilitated navigation of the Internet and helped make the Internet such an effective mode of communication . The Web was created by the Internet in 1995 .
 IBM's 5150 personal computer introduced in 1981 drove a revolution in home and office computing . The introduction in 1981 led to the introduction of IBM's personal computer 5150 .
 Smaller and cheaper than the large office computers, it and its successors had access to the Internet and email . Smaller than the larger office computers in the 1960s, it was cheaper and smaller than the big computers .
 The first search engines began to appear in the early 1990s; Google arrived a little later in 1997 . Google, which is now almost synonymous with Web searches, arrived in 1997.
 The launch of online marketplace Amazon in 1994 revolutionized the way people shopped, allowing the purchase of everything from books and CDs to hotel rooms and airline tickets from the comfort of home . Amazon launched the online marketplace in 1994 .
 The Internet brought about significant changes to the way businesses operated . globalization escalated and the world seemed to become a much smaller place . Communication improved by the speed and efficiency of the Internet .
 Jobs were outsourced, and companies effectively became ""nationless," since it was easier to operate from anywhere in the world . The world has become more and more of a global economy .
 The introduction of microchip technology had more impact than the introduction of the Apple iPhone in 2007 . Microchip technology has had a huge impact on the iPhone and iPad .
 So-called smartphones have made the Internet a mobile resource . Wireless connectivity offers on-the-go access to news and satellite navigation, for example .
 Information and ideas can be shared from anywhere at the touch of a button via social-networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter . Information can also be shared via social networks such as Twitter and Facebook .
 Smartphones have also changed the political landscape through use by protestors organizing rallies via social media to undermine regimes . Smartphones also have also had an impact on education, healthcare, and culture, and have changed the world .
 Uprisings such as the Arab Spring, which began in 2010, were partly powered by activists who communicated across the Internet . The Arab Spring was partly powered partly by activists using the Internet, which is now powered by smartphones .
 Internet activism, or ""clicktivism," has become a powerful way to share ideas, raise awareness, or support a cause . Clicktivism has since become a way of sharing ideas, raising awareness and supporting a cause.
 The World Wide Web has transformed every aspect of modern daily life . With more than 3 billion users, the World Wide Internet has transformed everyday life .
 T he turn of the 21st century brought troubling signs of a worldwide recession . Tensions rise in the global economy .
 Low interest rates and unregulated credit had induced more and more people to get into unsustainable debts, experts say . The debt crisis was caused by low interest rates, unregulated credit and unsustainable debt, they say .
 Bankers offered mortgages to customers with a poor credit history . Bankers, particularly in the US, offered mortgage mortgages to those with a bad credit history.
 It was hoped that if people could not keep up with their mortgage payments, their houses could be repossessed and sold at a profit . But this depended on house prices rising, and this depends on rising house prices .
 The interlinking of financial markets leads to a global crisis . houses were repossessed at a great loss, with bankers fearing they would not get their money back . Banks feared they would never be able to repossess their properties .
 In August 2007, French bank Paribas revealed that it was at risk from the subprime mortgage market . The crisis spreads to Europe, with the crisis spreading to Europe .
 Bankers gamble with trillions of dollars of investment on risky mortgages that might now be worthless . Bankers gambled with trillions on risky mortgage investments that might be worthless. Bankers had gambled .
 British bank Northern Rock faced a shortage of readily available cash . Northern Rock was forced to ask the British government for an emergency loan . Bank Northern Rock is one of the UK's biggest banks .
 The United States government considered Lehman Brothers too insolvent and did not bail it out . The U.S. government decided not to bail out the company . Lehman's collapse was the result of a government bailout .
 The turmoil in financial markets led to a severe economic downturn in most Western economies . The turmoil led to the collapse of financial markets in 2008 .
 Share prices plummeted, and world trade decreased because governments spent less . World trade decreased due to less government spending . Share prices dropped, and the world trade increased .
 Ireland became the first European country to fall into recession, a period of economic decline . Ireland is now the first country in Europe to have fallen into recession .
 Iceland's government resigned in October 2008 after the country became almost bankrupt . Iceland was almost bankrupt in 2008 after becoming almost insolvent .
 Others, especially in Europe, opted for austerity, freezing public spending, and increasing taxes . Others opted to freeze public spending and increase taxes .
 Protests and strikes swept through Europe in response to these measures . Protests against these measures have swept across Europe in recent weeks .
 Portugal, Spain, and Greece came under pressure from the European Union to lower their debts . Portugal and Spain are among the three countries under pressure to lower debts . Greece, Portugal and Greece are the only three countries in the world to fall into recession .
 The EU spent billions propping up weak economies in an attempt to keep the Eurozone, and the euro, viable . The EU has spent billions of euros propping-up weak economies .
 The effect of the economic crisis was devastating, and many people lost their homes and jobs . But the effect was not as devastating as the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 After World War II, most of Europe, Japan, China, and the Soviet Union, all devastated by war, needed time to recover . Post-war economy needed more than a decade to recover after the war .
 The US had experienced a huge rise in manufacturing for the war effort and was spared destruction . The US continued manufacturing at higher levels than ever before and dominated the world economy .
 Post-war planners sought a new economic order based on industrial strength and a stable dollar . The post-war economic planners sought to create a new world of strength and stability in the dollar .
 In 1944, the International Monetary Fund was formed to foster the revival of global trade . The IMF was formed in 1944 to encourage global trade to flourish .
 The Marshall Plan of 1947 invigorated world trade through encouraging capitalism and the free exchange of goods between nations . The US's strong postwar economy and the Marshall Plan helped invigorate world trade .
 Signed in 1947, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade dictated that tariffs be removed to open up markets around the world . The agreement was meant to open the world's markets to the world and open up trade .
 The Japanese government implemented reforms based on efficiency and restricted foreign imports . The reforms were followed by the introduction of reforms to the economy .
 Japan invested in its coal and steel industries, as well as shipbuilding and car manufacturing . Japan invested heavily in the coal, steel and shipbuilding industries in the 1990s .
 In the 1960s, Japan specialized in high-tech products such as cameras and computer chips . In the 1970s, the country specialized in cameras, chips and cameras .
 Countries such as South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Singapore and Malaysia experienced similar growth with an emphasis on electronics and technology .
 The oil crisis that struck Western countries in 1973-74 was the result of the Yom Kippur War . Western countries were hit by the crisis in the wake of the war .
 Fuel rationing in the U.S. led to scenes such as this, with motorists getting stranded . Motorists were stranded after fuel shortages in the United States .
 World divided between rich industrial countries and poor developing nations in 1970s . Oil had become increasingly important for rich industrial nations and developing nations .
 In 1960, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries was founded . Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Iraq, Iran, and Iran were the first Arab nations to join the group .
 As oil reserves in other countries dwindled, the states around the Persian Gulf, where this resource had remained plentiful, became dominant . The Gulf states are now dominant in the region .
 OAPEC embargoed oil to any country helping Israel during the Yom Kippur War, and prices tripled . In October 1973, when Egypt and Syria invaded Israel, the embargo was lifted and prices doubled .
 The United States introduced strict fuel rationing, which ended in March 1974, when the oil embargo was lifted . The U.S. introduced rationing in 1973 .
 The oil crisis in the mid-1970s led to a deep global recession, soaring inflation, and high unemployment . Oil crisis in mid-70s was a major global recession . The crisis led to high unemployment and deep recession .
 A new “neo-liberal” economic policy was adopted, transferring control of economic factors from the public to the private sector . In response, a new ‘neo’liberal’ economic policy has been adopted .
 Welfare programs are perceived to be one cause of economic failures, and there were drastic cutbacks . Welfare programs were perceived as one of the economic failures in the country .
 Deregulation became the driving force behind world economics, sweeping away many governmental controls and freeing up organizations to trade across a wider range of territories . The world economy has become the most powerful economic force in the world .
 Some of the rigid laws and regulations that had been put in place to protect consumers were now considered to be interfering with free enterprise . Some of these rigid laws were now seen as interfering with the free enterprise of consumers .
 The global push for deregulation resulted in the adoption of new markets, greater competition, and openness, especially as the world adapted to the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The example set in east Asia influenced policy makers in other Asian countries, such as India and China . Policy makers set the example for east Asia .
 Mexico and Brazil lowered their barriers to trade and embarked on economic reform . Economic reform has led to a dramatic improvement in living standards in both countries .
 As East and West Germany reunited in 1989, after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the European Union emerged as a major force in the world economy . The EU is an economic union of 28 European countries .
 Also in the 1980s, China opened up to foreign trade, and huge sums of foreign investment poured in, leading to extraordinary growth . China's economy has grown dramatically since 1980s .
 Internet use allows people to order goods in one part of the world and have them delivered within a matter of days . Internet use means people can order goods from one country to another within hours .
 World trade is made up of global partnerships, with multinational companies that boast huge turnovers . World trade consists of partnerships between companies that have huge turnover .
 Across the globe, people tend to migrate to cities to find work, resulting in an increase in urbanization . People tend to move to cities in search of work, leading to urbanization of cities .
 One complaint that often aimed at globalization is that some companies exploit cheap labor and behave unethically in their bid for profit . One complaint: Some companies exploit the cheap labor in bid to profit from their bid to make money .
 Globalization has contributed to the extraordinary accumulation of wealth by a few individuals, says David Frum . Another is that globalization contributes to increased inequality .
 Sub-Saharan Africa has fared badly and been left behind, in debt to wealthier nations . Some countries have also remained extremely poor—areas of sub-Saharan .
 The financial crisis of 2008-11 was the worst since the Great Depression of 1929 . Economic recessions have occurred throughout history, but the financial crisis was perhaps the worst ever .
 Many felt it was an avoidable disaster caused by widespread failures in government regulation and heedless risk-taking by investment bankers .
 Household and business debts remained high, and there was widespread fury directed at bankers . Many felt that they had survived relatively unscathed . Households and business debt remained high .
 The impact on the lives of ordinary people had profound, lasting consequences . While financiers argued over the causes of the Global Recession, the impact on ordinary people was profound . The Global Recession was the result of a global recession .
 The global economic crisis that began in 2008 generated much anger at institutional symbols of power and greed, and there was an upsurge of popular protest . An era of protest has been defined by the 2008 financial crisis .
 Demonstrators united those venting at bankers and capitalists, anti-globalization protestors, and environmentalists . Demonstrations united those angry at bankers, capitalists, and eco-activists .
 There is growing anger at the level of inequality, corporate greed, and the lack of jobs . There was growing anger in the country at the levels of inequality .
 The G20 is an international forum for finance ministers to meet in the heart of London . Thousands of angry protestors met in the financial heart of the city in 2009 .
 Social media is critical in the organization of large gatherings and the occupation of physical spaces . Social media has become critical in organizing large gatherings, the author says .
 Global population is set to hit 9. billion, a slowdown in growth, with fewer babies born per household . After 2050 Global population will hit 9 billion, the world's population will reach 9 billion .
 During the 20th century, life expectancy rose dramatically . Life expectancy in the United States increased dramatically .
 In 2013, the average life expectancy worldwide, from birth, was 71. years . The average life in the world was 71 . years .
 Health education focused on diet and basic hygiene led to a reduction in infant mortality . Better sanitation and clean drinking water have reduced the risks of spreading infectious diseases .
 A baby girl born in Manila, the capital of the Philippines, was chosen by the United Nations to symbolically represent the 7 billionth person on earth . One of the biggest contributory factors to longer life expectancy has been the rise in life expectancy .
 October 31st was named Seven Billion Day to mark the global-population milestone . October 31 was the day when a billion people were reported to be going hungry . Debate rekindled about whether the Earth could support so many people .
 Before the 17th century, the world’s population increased very slowly, but it began to expand rapidly after 1850 . The population of the world grew rapidly after the birth of the first World War II .
 Death rates fell overall, too, as new farming technology expanded the food supply and lowered the risk of famine . This was in part due to a reduction in the number of children dying in infancy .
 The marked increase of industrialization and advances in medicine improved public health and living standards . Industrialization and medical advances led to better living standards in many countries .
 In the early 20th century, population growth was highest in the rich industrialized West, but this pattern began to change . Population growth in the industrialized West has slowed since the 1950s . The world's population growth rate is now the highest in industrialized West .
 The antibiotic drug penicillin, which helps fight bacterial infection, became widely used to treat diseases such as tuberculosis and syphilis . Penicillin was widely used in the 1930s and '90s to treat tuberculosis and other diseases .
 Mass vaccination programs helped eradicate smallpox and work toward the elimination of polio . Later, mass vaccination programs by governments and the U.N. World Health Organization .
 Some scientists predict that by 2050, the average life expectancy will be 100 . Population growth increased sharply in areas of Asia, Africa, and South America due to a much higher birth rate .
 In 1987, the 5 billionth person was born; by 1999, the 6 billionth was born . By 1999, there had been 6 billion people born .
 During the early 20th century, many countries imported large quantities of food that they were unable to grow themselves, to enable them to meet the demands of a growing population . The Green Revolution is the name of the country's Green Revolution . It is the first time a country has imported large
 In the early 1940s, Mexico imported half of its wheat, and its population was rapidly expanding . The country's population was growing rapidly .
 The country requested technical expertise from the United States on ways to increase wheat production . The U.S. requested technical assistance from the U.K. to help boost wheat production.
 By 1944, with the financial support of the American Rockefeller Foundation, a group of U.S. scientists, including American biochemist Norman Borlaug, had begun Dr. Dr. Norman's work . Dr. Borrlaug's work was funded by the Rockefeller Foundation .
 Norman Borlaug shows off his wheat, which he bred specifically for its hardiness against disease and ability to produce high yields . The wheat is hardy and hardy enough to withstand disease and can produce a high yield of wheat .
 This success launched what became known as the Green Revolution . New modern agricultural technologies in the 1960s and 70s dramatically increased food production around the world .
 The Green Revolution benefited countries that included the Philippines, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, China, Indonesia, Kenya, Iran, Thailand, and Turkey . It also benefited countries including the Philippines and Bangladesh .
 Indian scientists had followed the work of Borlaug and his colleagues . Indian scientists in particular had followed work of his colleagues in India .
 In the mid1960s, India had been struck by two back-to-back droughts, which led to the need for large food imports from the U.S. In the 1960s, the need to rely on the United States for food imports .
 IR-8 was developed at the International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines in 1960 . The new so-called miracle rice is now known as IR-9 .
 With its much reduced growing cycle, this new product brought about a dramatic transformation in farmers' lives . The new product has reduced the growing cycle of food production to a much reduced amount .
 In countries such as Vietnam, two complete crops of the new rice could now be produced each year . The traditional rice it replaced would only produce one crop each year, instead of two .
 Concern about how to feed the growing population kick-starts the Green Revolution . The global population continues to increase, particularly in developing countries .
 Agricultural science allowed chronically poor countries to feed themselves and meet the demands of their growing populations . Increasing strains on the environment such as food shortages, water scarcity, and climate change threaten millions of lives .
 The Green Revolution did not come without controversy, not least because it involved a move toward chemical pesticides . It involved the move toward pesticides, which led to the use of pesticides .
 During the 1940s, the insecticide DDT was introduced as a way of controlling a variety of diseases, including mosquito-borne malaria, with a single treatment . The insecticide was introduced to control malaria, including malaria, in the 1950s .
 In 1962, American biologist Rachel Carson highlighted the dangers of DDT in her groundbreaking book Silent Spring . Rachel Carson claimed that DDT may cause cancer and also be bad for the environment .
 Silent Spring led to a nationwide ban on DDT in the United States . Silent Spring raised enough concern to trigger the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency . The agency was established in 1973 .
 The Green Revolution also faced huge challenges in many countries in Africa, where there was a lack of irrigation facilities, unreliable rainfall, high fertilizer prices, and no credit to buy new seed varieties .
 GM crops are foods produced from organisms that have had changes added into their DNA via genetic engineering . GM crops include foods that have been added to their DNA by genetic engineering. GM crops can be grown in a variety of plants that are genetically modified .
 Flavr Savr tomatoes were introduced in America in 1994 when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved them for sale . They were introduced to the United States in 1994 by the FDA .
 The delayed-ripening tomato had a longer shelf-life than conventional tomatoes . But trials using potatoes suggested that GM produce was toxic to rats .
 Most European Union governments banned the use of GM crops . Supporters of GM say that without genetic intervention, the world was destined to starve .
 Advocates of GM say it has the potential to combat disease and hunger . Advocates say it could combat hunger and disease . The US, Brazil, Canada, Argentina, Australia, and Australia are among countries where GM is being developed .
 The feeling in Europe, Africa, and Asia is more cautious, with concern about pesticides and possible harm to health . The feeling is also more cautious in Europe and Africa .
 670,000 children die from lack of vitamin A each year, a deficiency that causes diseases such as malaria and measles and leads to blindness . It is thought to be the largest vitamin deficiency in the world .
 Advances in tackling deficiencies include the creation of 'golden rice' in which vitamin A is added to ordinary rice .
 Cities have swallowed up large tracts of farmland and rural areas . More and stronger crops are needed to feed an ever growing global population .
 At the beginning of the 21st century, China experienced an onslaught of urban development that meant the loss of a large number of the country's tiny farms . Stephen Emmott is a computer scientist and author of the book, "China's Little Farm"
 People have historically been drawn to cities for employment and social opportunities . People are drawn to the cities for social and economic opportunities, says CNN.com .
 In 1800, one in four British people lived in cities, but by 1900 this had grown to three in four . Three in four people in Britain now live in cities .
 Many moved from rural areas to the city, but people also moved from one country to another seeking refuge and a better life . People also moved to one country, seeking refuge, and to the other seeking refuge .
 The urban population in 2014 accounted for 54 percent of the total global population, up from 34 percent in 1960 . Urban population is now 54 percent, the highest level in the world, according to the UN .
 In 2014, the UN predicted that two-thirds of the world will live in cities by 2050 . The UN said that two thirds of the population will live within cities . The world's population is expected to grow to two thirds by 2050, according to UN .
 Poor health and violent crime is an issue in the world's major cities, as is the huge disparity between rich and poor . Poor health, violent crime and poor health are a major issues in major cities .
 Urbanization and development have placed increasing stresses on the environment . Urbanization has led to increased pressure on environment . Climate change has been blamed on the effects of climate change .
 2011-15 is the warmest five-year period on record, according to the World Meteorological Institute . Global temperatures have risen since the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century .
 The rise of environmentalism in the 1970s raised public doubts about the benefits to the planet of human activity . Some of the reasons behind climate change are due to natural occurrences, but in the early 1970s it was due to environmentalism .
 Developing nations are urged to reduce carbon emissions, which are thought to effect climate change . Developing countries are being urged to cut carbon emissions to reduce their emissions .
 In 2015, India was opening a mine a month to lift its 1.1 billion citizens out of poverty rapidly . In 2016, India opened mines a month in order to lift 1.2 billion citizens from poverty rapidly.
 Developed countries caused a new tension by suggesting that developing nations should cease exploiting their own natural resources to improve the economic well-being of their people . Developed nations had themselves contributed to climate change .
 Scientists warned that humans would pass the threshold beyond which climate change becomes catastrophic and irreversible if greenhouse-gas emissions kept increasing . Barack Obama on fossil fuels: "It's time for us to stop using fossil fuels"
 Sea levels are eroding coastal areas and obliterating small islands in the South Pacific . Sea levels have also erode coastal areas in the region .
 Rainfall patterns are changing, leading to severe drought in Africa, and many species of animals are in danger of extinction . Many species of African animals are threatened with extinction .
 The threat of climate change is now considered so serious that leaders from around the world met in 2015 in Paris, France, at a conference to reduce the build-up of greenhouse gases .
 Developed countries have demanded that wealthier nations help pay for them to adapt to the effects of climate change, such as increased floods and droughts . In fraught negotiations, developing countries demanded wealthier countries help pay to adapt .
 In the 1970s, ecology movements predicted that hundreds of millions would die from mass starvation by the mid-1980s . In the 1980s, millions of millions were predicted to die from starvation by mid-80s .
 With 7 billion humans on the planet, there is an inevitable drain on natural resources . This dire prediction did not come to pass, but with an astonishing 7 billion people on the world's planet, it will drain resources .
 Overfishing, particularly in Indonesia and China, has led to fish stocks around the world falling rapidly . The demand for water could soon outstrip supply .
 In 2015, the UN predicted that 1. billion people will be living in countries or regions with absolute water scarcity by 2025 . The UN predicts that 1 billion people in the world will need to rely on water resources .
 Coal, which drives industry and production, is in increasing demand but will eventually run out . Coal will eventually be used to power the world's largest-ever nuclear power plants .
 The UN estimates that by 2050 the global population will be at 9. billion . By 2100, 11. billion people will inhabit the Earth, the UN estimates .
 Population dynamics are changing from high mortality and high fertility to low mortality and low fertility, with an increasingly elderly population worldwide, which will be difficult to support . The elderly population will be hard to support, according to experts .
 Climate change, migration and refugee crises, food and water insecurity, poverty, debt, and disease are greatly exacerbated by rapid population growth . Challenges such as climate change and migration crises are great exacerbated by population growth, experts say .
 Stabilizing the growth of the world's population may be the key to global survival . World's population will need to be stable enough to survive, experts say .
 The republicans set up their own parliament and declared Ireland independent . Britain sent troops to quell the rebellion in Ireland .
 By 1922, most of Ireland should become independent as the Irish Free State . The six northeastern counties, which had a Protestant majority, should remain part of the United Kingdom . Most of Ireland's northeastern counties were Protestant counties .
 In 1930-31, republicans overthrew Spain's military dictatorship and forced King Alfonso XIII into exile . Spain's monarchy was overthrown by the Spanish republicans in 1931-31 .
 The republican government introduced socialist reforms and reduced the power of the church and the military . It was the first government to introduce socialist reforms in the country .
 However, a revolt by disgruntled army officers and members of the Fascist Falange party led to civil war in 1936 . Civil war in Austria followed by a revolt in 1936 by disgruntled soldiers and Fascist members .
 The conflict escalated into an international ideological clash . Fascist Italy and Germany supported the right-wing Nationalists, while socialists from all over Europe volunteered to join their Republican comrades in Spain .
 Nationalist leader General Francisco Franco led his side to victory and ruled as dictator of Spain until 1975 . General Franco ruled Spain until the end of the war .
 In December 1941, the Japanese bombed the U.S. fleet in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, and launched a campaign of invasion in Thailand, Malaysia, Burma, the Philippines, and other targets . World War II began in December 1941 .
 The United Nations was conceived during World War II as a way to bring the countries of the world together in order to prevent further devastating conflicts . The U.N. was founded in 1945 by the United States .
 Its aims were outlined at a 1944 conference at Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, DC . It was formally established in 1945 .
 Although the UN did not prevent subsequent wars, it has worked worldwide to promote peace . UN has worked to champion education, health, human rights, and independence for colonized peoples .
 In 1958, France faced a crisis over the future of its colony Algeria . Members of the French army opposed that country's independence and were in open revolt .
 General Charles de Gaulle proposed a new government system with a strong executive president . The Republic collapsed after the collapse of the French Republic in 1961 .
 This proposal won approval in a referendum, and de Gaulle himself was elected president . This proposal was approved by the French parliament in 1945 .
 There was an attempted coup against Indonesia’s President Sukarno in 1965, but troops under MajorGeneral Suharto defeated the rebels . In 1965 there was an attempt to overthrow Sukarnaro, who had led Indonesia to independence in 1940 .
 Suharto, having seized power from Sukarno, had some 500,000 alleged communists killed . Communists were blamed for the coup, and some 50,000 were also killed .
 As Indonesia's second president, Suharto ruled until 1998, he led the country into a period of economic development . He led Indonesia to better health and living conditions for many, with better living conditions .
 His invasion of East Timor resulted in a massive death toll . However, his government was corrupt and he embezzled millions of dollars .
 The coup was carried out by part of the army with United States backing . It ushered in a military government whose policies were in line with U.S. views . The coup ushered in the military government .
 Half of the country’s largest companies passed into foreign ownership in Brazil . There was a huge increase in foreign economic involvement in Brazil, according to the report .
 Brazil enjoyed high economic growth under the dictatorship, but at the expense of freedom, as opponents of the regime were treated harshly . The country's economic growth was seen as the result of the dictatorship .
 In 1968, many western countries saw anti-capitalist and anti-imperialist demonstrations, strikes, and riots . The Red Army was involved in the first wave of anti-capitalism demonstrations in 1968 .
 In the aftermath, a number of groups evolved to pursue an armed anticapitalist struggle . These failed to produce any change, however, and in the aftermath they evolved into armed groups .
 The Germany Red Army Faction was founded in 1970 and also known as the Baader-Meinhof group . The group was founded by Andreas Baader and Ulrike Meinhof, after two of its founders .
 The group carried out a series of terrorist attacks (including kidnappings, bombings, robberies, and murders) mostly in the 1970s but also in later decades . The group was known for its kidnappings and bombings .
 Their activities and those of similar groups such as the Revolutionary Cells (also operating in Germany in the same period) alienated most people . Their activities were similar to those of other groups .
 General Augusto Pinochet deposed Chile’s elected socialist leader Salvador Allende . Pinochet led Pinochet to power at the head of a military junta at the end of the Chilean Revolution .
 Pinochet, who was notorious for imprisoning, killing, and torturing his opponents, ruled until 1990 . Pinochet continued to receive American backing and ruled until he died in 1990 .
 In the late 1970s, Afghanistan’s left-wing government (a close ally of the Soviet Union) was threatened by US-backed Muslim fighters . The mujahideen objected to the regime's modernizing policies such as women's education .
 In 1979, the USSR invaded Afghanistan, beginning a 10-year war in which an estimated 1. million Afghans were killed . An estimated 1 million Afghans died and many others left the country after the Soviet invasion .
 Groups of mujahideen guerrillas fought the invaders, who withdrew in 1989 . The invaders withdrew from the country in 1989 after a decade of fighting .
 The war left the USSR militarily and politically weakened, contributing to its collapse . The war also left the Soviet Union politically and economically weakened .
 A civil war broke out between the mujahideen and the Afghan army, and power eventually passed to the hardline Islamic Taliban . The Taliban took over the Afghan government in 2001 .
 Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, headed a secular regime that westernized the country . The Shah's rule brought prosperity for some, but also prosperity for others .
 In 1979, the Shah was forced to leave the country, and Ayatollah Khomeini installed a new government . The new government was focused on very strict Muslim values .
 The revolution had a huge impact, particularly in highlighting the increasing prominence of Islam on the world stage and in relations between the countries of the west and the Middle East .
 The 2003 invasion of Iraq started a war that saw forces depose the Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein . The U.S. and its allies said Hussein had weapons of mass destruction . Saddam Hussein was deposed in 2003 .
 Saddam Hussein's removal from Iraq was welcomed by many Iraqis . The removal of Saddam Hussein was nonetheless welcomed by the Iraqi people .
 War gave extremist opponents of U.S. and allies a pretext for launching terrorist attacks against them . However, the lack of a post-war strategy brought further instability and violence to Iraq .
 Autocracy is a community or state in which unlimited authority is exercised by a single individual . Autocratic is a state or community in which the individual has unlimited authority . Autocrisy is a form of authoritarianism .
 Barbarian In ancient times, a group of people, land, or culture not belonging to one of the great civilizations (Greek or Roman) considered less socially advanced and uncivilized . Barbarian in ancient times was a group that was not part of the Greek or Roman civilization . Barbarian was a
 Middle class is perceived to have materialistic values or conventional attitudes . Bourgeoisie is a middle class with materialistic views .
 A government characterized by specialization of functions, adherence to fixed rules, and a hierarchy of authority . Bureaucracy is characterized as a government characterized as specialization of function .
 The rule or rank of a caliph is an Islamic spiritual and political leader regarded as the direct successor of Muhammad . Caliph is considered the successor of the Islamic spiritual leader Muhammad Muhammad .
 Capitalism is an economic system in which the means of production are privately owned . Firms compete to sell goods for profit, and workers exchange their labor for a wage . Capitalism is capitalism .
 Class A status hierarchy within the social system reflects power, wealth, education, and prestige . The social hierarchy reflects power and prestige within the system .
 Colony is the area occupied by a body of settlers living in a new territory, often already occupied by an indigenous people . The area is subject to control by the settlers’ parent state .
 Communism is an ideology that advocates the elimination of private property in favor of communal ownership . It is based on the political manifesto of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels . Communism is a form of communism .
 Constitution is a written collection of the fundamental principles and laws of a nation . Constitution is written in accordance with the American Constitution . Constitution was written in 1903 .
 The state of an advanced capitalist society in which the buying and selling of various goods and services define the era . Consumerism is a form of capitalism that defines the era.
 The term refers to a perception that individuals desire goods to construct self-identity . The term also refers to people wanting to construct themselves .
 Coup d'etat is a sudden, illegal, and violent act of overthrowing a government or leader . Coup d’etat was a sudden act of overthrow of a government .
 It is often committed by members of the current political establishment . It is also committed by current political leaders such as Barack Obama .
 European Christians launched expeditions in the 11th, 12th, and 13th centuries to reclaim the Holy Land from Muslims . Often used to refer to the expeditions launched by European Christians to reclaim Holy Land .
 Democracy is a form of government in which supreme power is vested in the people and exercised by their elected representatives . Democracy is the most democratic form of democracy .
 An absolute ruler assumes complete control without the free consent of the people . Dictator is an absolute ruler, especially a ruler with complete control of the governed .
 Government by the people in fact, rather than merely in principle—citizens vote on every issue affecting them—as practiced in ancient Athens . Citizens vote on all issues affecting them, as did the ancient Athens government .
 A doctrine that holds that a monarch derives legitimacy from God, and is not subject to any earthly authority . The Divine right of kings is a doctrine that includes the monarch's right to power .
 Dynasty is a line of rulers from the same family or group, or a period in time when a country is ruled by them . Dynasty is the name of a country ruled by a dynasty or a dynasty .
 Egalitarianism is a philosophy that advocates social, political, and economic equality . It advocates equality for all .
 Emancipation is the act of being freed from legal, social, or political restrictions . It is also known as freedom of speech, freedom of conscience and freedom of expression .
 Embargo A government order to cease trade or other commercial activity with a particular country . Embargo is often used as a diplomatic measure .
 Emigration is the act of leaving one's own country and moving permanently to another . The act of emigrating is considered a form of emigration .
 Empire is an extensive group of countries or people under the rule of a single leader, oligarchy, or sovereign state . Empire is a group of nations or people ruled by one leader or oligarchy . Empire was first Empire in the 19th century .
 Enlightenment was a period of intellectual advances in the 18th century that involved a questioning of religious understandings of the world and the application of reason . Enlightenment was also known as the Age of Reason .
 The belief that the human population can be improved upon by controlling breeding . Eugenics is the study of the belief that controlling breeding can improve the population . The study of breeding is a form of form of control .
 Fascism is an ideology typified by strong leadership, stress on a collective identity, and the use of violence or warfare to further the interests of the state . Fascism typified as strong leadership and stress on collective identity .
 The term derives from the Italian fascio —a tied bundle of sticks — referring to collective identity . The term was first applied to Mussolini’s regime .
 Feudalism was a medieval political system that consisted of small geographical units, such as principalities or dukedoms . The peasant population lived in a state of bondage to their ruler .
 Genocide is the deliberate killing of a large group of people, especially a whole religious group, race, or nation . Genocide is a deliberate killing .
 A member of an unofficial, often politically-motivated, military group that uses surprise attacks and sabotage against larger regular forces, such as the official army or police . Guerrilla is a member of a political or unofficial military group .
 Hegemony is the winning and holding of power and the formation of social groups during that process . Hegemony means winning power and holding power .
 Ideology provides a framework of ideas that provide a viewpoint or set of beliefs for a social group . Ideology is a framework that provides a view of ideas for a group of people .
 Immigration is the act of entering a foreign country to live there permanently . Immigration is a form of living in a country where you are not allowed to leave .
 Imperialism is the policy of extending the dominion of a nation through direct intervention in the affairs of other countries, and seizure of territory and subjugation of peoples in building an empire .
 Industrial Revolution originated in the UK in the 18th century . During that period, economies were transformed by new forms of mechanization . A mainly agricultural economy was transformed to an urban, industrialized one .
 Insurgency A condition of revolt against a government that is less than an organized revolution and is not recognized as warfare . Insurgent is revolt against an organized government less than a revolution and not recognized by warfare .
 Jihad In Islam, a religious duty to struggle against evil in the name of God, whether spiritually or physically . Jihad in Islam is a fight against evil against the will of God .
 Just war theory is a doctrine of military ethics comprising Jus ad bellum and Jus in bello . It is the need for a moral and legal basis for war, and the moral conduct of warfare .
 It is characterized by an interventionist approach to social welfare and an internationalist worldview . The U.S. government has been in touch with the U.N. since 2001 .
 The concept originated in 18th-century France, when nobility sought to improve peasants' conditions sat to the left of the king . The nobility who wanted to improve the peasants' conditions sat to a left of king .
 Liberalism is a philosophy that advocates the rights of the individual over those of the state or Church . Opposes absolutism and the divine right of kings . Liberalism was a philosophy originating in the 18th century .
 Martial law is temporarily imposed by the military when civil law is suspended in a country or state . The law is temporary law temporarily imposed . Martial law was imposed in 2007 by the U.S. military .
 Marxism is the philosophy underpinning the writings of Karl Marx . The economic order of society determines the political and social relationships within it . Karl Marx proposed that the economic order in society determines its political relationships .
 The belief that rulers should be selected on the basis of ability, rather than wealth or birth . Meritocracy is the belief that a ruler should be chosen for ability, not wealth, birth .
 Militia is a body of citizens who may have some level of military training . Militia is called on to supplement a country’s professional army in times of emergency . Militia may be called on by citizens who have no military training to supplement the army .
 Nation-state is a sovereign state inhabited by a largely homogenous group of people . Nation-states share common features such as language, descent, and traditions . State is a nation-state inhabited by people who share a common language and descent .
 Loyalty and devotion to the home nation should be the primary goal of a political policy . Nationalism is the belief that its interests should be pursued as the primary policy .
 Nomadic is a group of people who move from place to place, often in relation to the seasons, and within a specific territory . Nomadic refers to, or characteristic of, nomads .
 A form of government in which power is held by a small group and exercised in their own interest, usually to the detriment of the general population . Oligarchy is considered an oligarchy by the majority of the population .
 Paramilitary is a group of civilians that have military training and are organized according to military structure . Paramilitary often acts as support for a country’s official military force . Paramilitaries often act in support for the official military .
 Pilgrimage is a journey to a shrine or sacred site as an act of religious devotion . Pilgrimages are a journey of pilgrimage to a sacred site or religious shrine .
 Prehistory The period of human past before written records began, and so largely understood through archaeological history . Prehistory is largely known through archaeology .
 Propaganda is the organized spread of information, ideas, and opinion, often via the media, to either promote or damage a government, movement, institution etc. Propaganda means the spread of ideas, ideas and opinions .
 A country that is nominally independent relies on an external foreign power . A puppet state often controls the state using military force . The puppet state is a country that relies on the power of an external power .
 Racism is the belief that all members of a certain race share similar characteristics and attributes, and that this means that certain races are inherently superior or inferior . Racism occurs when people believe they are superior to each other .
 The belief that reason, not emotion or intuition, should govern the actions that people take . Rationalism is the belief that rationalism should govern people's actions .
 A 16th-century European political and religious movement that sought reform from the Roman Catholic Church and papal authority . The Reformation was the first Protestant church to establish the Protestant Churches .
 Renaissance period in Europe from the 14th-17th century marked by great achievements in arts, literature, and learning . Renaissance is often regarded as the transition from the medieval to the modern world .
 Reparations Compensation is paid by a defeated nation to make up for damage, injuries, and economic losses suffered by another country as a result of war . Reparations compensation is usually money, material, or labor .
 Republic A state with no monarch, in which power resides with the people and exercised by their elected representatives . Republic is a state without a monarch; power is exercised by the people .
 Revolution is overthrow of the current political regime or social order, sometimes using violent measures, by the governed people . Revolution is overthrown by the people, sometimes with violent measures .
 The ideology of the political “right’s’� loosely defined as favoring conservative, pro-market attitudes . A preference for individual rights over interventionist government, a strict approach to law and order .
 The concept originated in 18th-century France, when those who were broadly in support of the monarchy sat to the right of the king . Those who supported the monarchy would sit to the left of the monarch .
 Separatists are a group of people who advocate separation from an organization or group . Separatist is a group that advocates separation from a group or organization .
 In medieval Europe, a lower class person bound to undertake agricultural work on his lord’s land . A Serf was a lower-class man bound to do agricultural work .
 A serf could be transferred with the land should it be sold to a new landowner . The land will be transferred to the new owner if it is sold .
 Socialism is an ideology and method of government that advocates state ownership and regulation of industry . It advocates central control over the allocation of resources, as opposed to allowing these to be determined by market forces .
 Supreme power as exercised by an autonomous state or ruler, free from any external influence or control . Supreme power is exercised by a ruler or autonomous state .
 Usually used to refer to a nation's right to self-determination in internal affairs and international relations with other countries . Usually used in referring to a country's right of selfdetermination .
 Space Age is a period in the 20th century characterized by space exploration . Space Age was a period of space exploration during the space age .
 It is considered to have started in October 1957 when the Soviet Union first launched the satellite Sputnik I into orbit .
 State is an organized authority that has legitimate control over a territory, and a monopoly of the use of force within its territory . State is a state that has control of a territory and monopoly of force . An organized authority is a legitimate authority that controls its territory and uses force .
 Universal suffrage refers to the right to vote of citizens regardless of their gender, race, social status, or wealth . Universal suffragism is a form of universal suffrage in the United States .
 A sovereign nation with great political and military power, capable of influencing international politics, is a superpower . Superpower is a sovereign nation that can influence international politics .
 A regime subordinates the rights of the individual in favor of the interests of the state . Totalitarianism is a regime that subordinates the individual to the state's interests . It controls political and economic affairs and prescription of the attitudes, values, and beliefs of the population .
 Treaty is a formal contract that sets out agreements between two or more states . Treaty A formal contract . Treaty is set out agreements such as alliance, end of hostilities, or trade agreement .
 A man granted the use of land by a king, lord, or other superior landowner, in return for homage and allegiance . Vassal In a feudal system, a man is granted the right to use his land in exchange for homage or allegiance .
 Viceroy is a ruler who controls a colony on behalf of his or her sovereign . A ruler controls a country on behalf his or his sovereign .
 Zionism is a worldwide political movement that proclaims that the Jewish people constitute a nation, and are entitled to a homeland . Zionism is the belief that Israel is a nation .
 Israel was originally focused on creating a country for Jewish people . It now looks to develop and protect the modern state of Israel . Israel was founded in 1948 .