 The exhibition, coming on the 50th anniversary of that historic time, opens October 12, 2012, in the Lawrence F O'Brien Gallery of the National Archives Building .
 It then travels to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston . It opens April 12 and runs through November 11, 2013 .
 It is made possible in part by the Foundation for the National Archives, the John F Kennedy Library Foundation and the generous support of Lead Sponsor AT&T .
 This video is in the public domain and not subject to any copyright restrictions . The video was shot in New York City, New York, at the center of a traffic jam .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of a nuclear strike force in Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States . The missiles could reach most major U.S. cities in less than five minutes .
 President Kennedy emphatically stated that the missiles would not be tolerated, and insisted on their removal . Kennedy insisted on removing them from the U.S. arsenal .
 The exhibit shows Kennedy and his advisers in the throes of deliberation during 13 agonizing days in October 1962 . The U.S. and the then-Soviet Union stood on the brink of nuclear war . The exhibit also shows Kennedy's advisers deliberating on the issue .
 The peaceful resolution of the crisis with the Soviets is considered to be one of Kennedy’s greatest achievements . Kennedy's peace deal with the Soviet Union is considered one of his greatest achievements.
 Original documents, artifacts, and photographs from the National Archives and its Kennedy Library complement the tapes in a dramatic presentation that engages the visitor into this milestone 20th-century event . Original documents and artifacts, . and photographs, . complement the . presentation .
 With the President guiding the discussions, they argued heatedly—and passionately—over the best course of action . The President guided the discussions .
 Kennedy recorded White House meetings . Unbeknownst to almost all the participants, Kennedy had recorded those meetings .
 The tapes comprise a valuable historical resource and a real-time glimpse back into the highest level of deliberations . The tapes will be available at the request of President Obama .
 They capture the tension, anxiety, drama, and, at times, fatigue, that permeated the talks . They are the raw stuff of history and capture not only the options under consideration, but also the tension and anxiety .
 Watch clips from Kennedy’s October 22, 1962, address to the nation, informing the U.S. of the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba . Watch clips of the speech from Kennedy's 1962 speech .
 Kennedy had a habit of jotting down words, notes, and doodles during meetings . Kennedy had to jotter down notes, notes and notes in meetings .
 These papers are now official records and are preserved as part of the President’s papers .
 Hear Kennedy and his advisers discuss and debate the crisis in “real time” as they view evidence of Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba and deliberate on how best to respond to the crisis . Hear Kennedy discuss the crisis with advisers in "real time" as they look at evidence of
 Examine satellite photographs of missile sites under construction, images that were shown to Kennedy on October 16, 1962 . Look at satellite photos of missile site under construction .
 Review CIA-prepared Personality Studies of Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro . Review of CIA's personality studies of the two men .
 See the map of Cuba used and annotated by the President when he was first briefed by the CIA on the missiles .
 The President’s annotations mark the locations where the Soviets were believed to have placed nuclear weapons . The President's annotations mark .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev met at the United States Embassy in Vienna, Austria, in 1961 . The two leaders were photographed seated on the chairs at the U.S. Embassy .
 All Archives Shop proceeds support National Archives Experience and educational programming at the National Archives . The National Archives Shop is on sale at National Archives in New York .