 Kennedy’s Catholicism became an issue until he told a group of Protestant ministers that he accepted separation of church and state . Catholic leaders would not unduly influence him, Kennedy said .
 First time debates shown on national television; determined fate of election . Those listening on the radio gave the edge to Nixon . i. ii. Debates were the most important debates in history .
 Only Catholic president in U.S. history; youngest to be elected at age 43 . Youngest president to have been elected president of the United States .
 Congress blocked income tax cut, federal aid to education, urban renewal, medical care the aged, and creation of Dept. of Urban Affairs 2 .
 Kennedy promoted $24 billion project to land an American on the moon . -In early 1960s, United States was behind the USSR in space technology 2.2.5 billion dollars . - In early 60s, U.S. was behind Soviet Union in space tech .
 RFK’s attempts at enfranchisement in the South was largely unsuccessful . Only small percentage of blacks able to register due to literacy tests, poll taxes, white primaries, and grandfather clauses . White primaries, grandfather clauses, literacy tests and poll taxes were among reasons for
 White segregationists wreaked terror on Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee . Church bombings, church bombings and assaults on blacks 4.4.5 .
 Freedom Riders rode interstate buses to verify segregation wasn’t happening . May 1961, Freedom Riders organized by CORE Rode interstate buses . Freedom Riders were first Freedom Riders in the U.S.
 In Alabama, Freedom Riders were arrested by police, state troopers, and National Guard . Some were severely beaten . Some of the activists were arrested .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. chose Birmingham because it was the toughest challenge and a victory would break segregation throughout the South . King chose Birmingham as a challenge to break segregation in the South, and chose Birmingham for a victory .
 MLK and supporters were arrested on Good Friday for marching without a permit and spent 2 weeks in jail . MLK was arrested in 1968 and spent two weeks in prison for his arrest .
 Police commissioner Eugene ""Bull"" Connor used cattle prods and ordered police dogs on demonstrators and used fire hoses on children as world watched in horror . Police commissioner used cattle prods on demonstrators and ordered police police dogs on demonstrators . Children were hit with fire h
 King called off the demonstrations . Local business leaders agreed to desegregate the big department stores . King agreed to the desegregation .
 March on Washington, August 28, 1963, Largest protest in nation's history thus far; 200,000 -Organized in part by A Philip Randolph (who had started March on D.C. Movement during WWII) i.i. i. March on W. D
 Protesters demanded support for Kennedy’s civil rights bill and for better and more jobs . i.ii. i.iii. Protesters wanted support for the bill and support for better jobs and better education . v.ii: Protesters demanded that Kennedy support for a civil rights act . v
 Kennedy developed conventional military strategies to deal with difficult challenges around the world . Kennedy's strategy was developed in response to the challenges posed by the U.S.
 JFK criticized Eisenhower for allowing a ""missile gap"" that favored the Soviets . When JFK became president, he learned that the gap was actually in favor of the US . Yet he continued the largest peace-time military buildup in history .
 Built up nuclear arsenal for 2nd strike capability . Set up Green Berets . Built up . Up to 30,000 troops in the United States .
 Early 1860, Eisenhower authorized CIA to organize, train, and arm in Central America a brigade of 1,400 Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba to overthrow Fidel Castro . Early 1860s, CIA planned to arm a brigade to overthrow Castro .
 Invaders would presumably trigger a popular uprising in Cuba . JFK continued the plan 2.2.3 years later .
 Kennedy publicly took full responsibility on national TV for the ill-conceived mission . -Privately Kennedy blamed the CIA for faulty information . 4.5% of Americans voted for the mission to carry out the mission . 5% voted for President Kennedy to be assassinated .
 Established in 1961, sent young volunteers to third world countries for local sponsored projects to improve economic stagnation, poor health and education .
 Khrushchev delivered new ultimatum on Berlin; saw U.S. weakness in Bay of Pigs . USSR would give Berlin to East Germany, stripping western access to Berlin . East Germany would strip western access .
 USSR announced increase in defense; Kennedy asked for a $3.3 billion increase . USSR asked for $3 billion in defense, Kennedy said it would be $1.2 billion . USSR announced increased in defense .
 East Germans built wall separating West Berlin from the rest of Berlin and East Germany almost overnight . -Purpose: Stem the flow of 100,000 people leaving East Berlin 5.5 years ago . - Purpose: To stem flow of people leaving West Berlin .
 Khrushchev began placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, just 90+ miles off Florida coast, in October 1962 . The Cuban nation was just 90- miles off the Florida coast .
 Soviets intended to use weapons to force U.S. into backing down on Berlin, Cuba, and other troubled areas . Soviets wanted to force United States to back down in Berlin, Havana, Cuba . Soviets planned to attack Berlin, Berlin and Cuba, but failed to do so .
 U.S. aerial photographs revealed Russians were secretly and speedily installing nuclear missiles . Oct. Oct. 2013: United States aerial photos revealed Russia was secretly installing nukes .
 Warning of missile attack would shrink from 30 to 2 minutes . U.S. unaware that tactical nuclear missiles were also in Cuba . Warning of attack on Cuba would have been 30-2 minutes .
 Soviets also had nuclear cruise missiles to destroy U.S. Navy 3.3.5.4.5 . Soviet Union also had cruise missiles . U.N. Navy also had missile missiles .
 Kennedy also stated any attack by Cuba on United States or any other Latin American country would result in a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union . -Organization of American States gave Kennedy full support .
 Kennedy rejected ""surgical"" bombing strikes against missile sites since no guarantee that all missiles would be hit . Kennedy rejected 'surgical' strikes since there was no guarantee of all missiles being hit .
 Unbeknownst to Kennedy, Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba could have destroyed invading American army . i. ii. Also rejected a United States invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy announcement on national TV; Americans shocked by Kennedy announcement . All United States forces put on full alert. All U.S. forces put in full alert .
 World watched as Soviet ship carrying missiles steamed toward Cuba . For a week, world watched as the Soviet ship carried missiles . World watched for a week .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles if U.S. removed its missiles from Turkey and vowed not to attack Cuba . October 26, 1962, agreement was reached in exchange for removal of missiles . Khrushchev agreed to pull missiles out of Turkey and remove them from Cuba .
 JFK assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963, while on a southern tour to drum up support for his policies . Vice President Lyndon Johnson became president . Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin arrested shortly thereafter, was killed a few days later by Jack Ruby, a Mafia member .
 Conspiracy theorists questioned the magic bullet, Oswald’s alleged connections with Moscow . D A congressional investigation in the 1970s opened the door to the possibility of a second gunman in the Kennedy assassination .