 Blogger Template Style Name: Rounders 3 Date: 27 Feb 2004 Updated by: Blogger Team . Rounders are rounded corners .
 Wednesday, October 31, 2012 Midnight and the Great Pumpkin Midnight will be celebrating his second Halloween with us this year . The Great Pumpkin will be celebrated with us on October 31 .
 He is eagerly awaiting the arrival of the neighborhood children, dressed as ghosts and goblins . He is eager to see the children dressed up in costumes .
 He's not really sure what it’s all about; and I think all the commotion kind of scares him a bit . But he does take an active interest in the proceedings .
 He will be found; I’m sure; waiting in the bushes, alternately leaping out to frighten someone, or just to check them out . He will find him; I'm sure; .
 When all the tricksters have retreated from the street, you will find him patiently awaiting the arrival of the Great Pumpkin . He will undoubtedly treat him to a can of salmon as a reward for being so brave .
 All Souls Day is celebrated on October 1 . Charlie Brown's Charlie Brown is the subject of the popular TV show .
 By May of 1944 the war in the Pacific had gone from the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor; in December of 1941; to a chain of island invasions, which forced the Japanese to adopt a defensive posture .
 The explosion of several fully laden LST’s in the West Loch of Pearl Harbor, would be hushed up for 16 years . But, between that time, and our later victory, 2 events would occur; one, involving African-American sailors would be held up as
 On May 21st, 1944 an explosion occurred aboard LST-353, igniting all of its cargo of ammunition, bombs and fuel . The explosion ignited all of the ammunition and fuel aboard the ship .
 Burning shrapnel landed on other fully loaded LSTs causing them to explode as well . The burning shrapnel lands on other LST’s as well as the other ones .
 Hundreds of lives were lost, along with thousands of tons of supplies bound for Saipan . Hundreds of people were killed and hundreds of tons were lost .
 The continued spread of the disaster actually caused our Navy to sink some of the other vessels before those, too, caught fire . The Navy was able to sink the other ships before those too caught fire, too .
 The battle for Saipan, which would occur on July 18th, was the last major stepping stone in our conquest of the Pacific . It would be the first major step stone in the Pacific invasion of the United States .
 Tojo and his entire cabinet resigned the following day . The battle was so decisive a victory for the United States that Tojo resigned .
 Author James Campbell juxtaposed the disaster which occurred at Port Chicago, located just 25 miles from San Francisco, as an example of how we were fighting not only Germany and Japan in this war, but also ourselves .
 On the same day as the Marines were taking Saipan; was the direct result of an Armed Forces which was still racially segregated even as we fought for freedom abroad . That disaster was the result of a racially segregated Armed Forces .
 The crews loading ammunition ships were all African-American . Someone was going to pay for the accident, even as the events in Hawaii just 8 weeks earlier were being hushed up .
 The Port Chicago disaster was the largest mutiny trial in the history of the Armed Forces . African-American sailors refused; rightfully so; to resume their work . The result of the Port Chicago . disaster .
 As would be shown at their trial, these men had been working without any of the specified safety measures outlined in the manuals concerning the loading of explosives . The trial was shown at the trial of the men .
 Inert explosives are dangerous enough to handle; as are fuses; which are never to be stored in the same space as the explosives . Fuses should be never stored in same room as explosives .
 Port Chicago is where the rules simply didn't apply . That is, unless you were working at Port Chicago, where you're not allowed to work .
 The author follows the lives of several of the men charged with Mutiny from the days prior to their enlistments, and on through the events at Port Chicago . Mutiny is a crime punishable by death .
 His coverage of the Court Martial; at which future Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall would act as their Chief Counsel, has been supplied by the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund .
 50 men, along with their Defense Team, were charged with mutiny and facing the Death Penalty . President Truman finally desegregated the military in 1947 . Their victory would ultimately be a part of a greater one, when President Truman desegregation .
 The Court of Inquiry should have exonerated the men altogether . The story of the case is equally as fascinating, as its conclusions should've exonerated .
 All of this is played out against the Battle of Saipan, being fought by primarily white troops, who were winning the war by using the very supplies shipped to them via the men loading them at Port Chicago .
 The vast difference in their experiences, while ostensibly fighting for the same cause, makes for a remarkable contrast . The vast differences in their lives makes for an incredible contrast .
 It will stand as a true and accurate account of not only the Port Chicago Incident, but also as a reminder of a time when fighting for freedom didn’t always guarantee freedom here at home .
 This book may also stand as a warning about repeating some of the mistakes of our past . And, if the only thing new is the history you don’t know, it may also be a warning .
 Through the magic of you tube I am able to go back and walk the streets, getting a bit of a feel for what is going on there . I was able to get a feel of what is happening in London .
 I'm pulling especially hard for zip code 11229 where this video was shot . I'm hoping power stays on for everyone, but pull especially hard .
 Located less than 1 mile from Sheepshead Bay and Brighton Beach, the area was on the lip of the mandatory evacuation zones . The area was less than one mile from the beach . The evacuation zone was closed .
 The interaction between the musical artists and the producers/engineers can sometimes be fraught with peril . The interaction is often fraught with difficulty .
 Phil Spector’s famous shooting of a pistol while working; for the last time; with John Lennon, over some difference of opinion in the studio . Spector shot the pistol in the face of John Lennon in the heart of a disagreement .
 Janis Joplin recorded “Summertime” for their upcoming album “Cheap Thrills” in 1968 . Big Brother and the Holding Company recorded the song for the album .
 The video was too large for the video player here, according to blogspot . The video runs a little over 10 minutes .
 In the video, Janis Janis is clearly in control, while at the same time displaying a unique quality to compromise with both the band and the engineer/producer John Simon .
 Manager Albert Grossman was in agreement with Mr Simon, and pressured the band to change some of their arrangements on several songs .
 Their reaction to this is evident in the video, as they attempt to talk music with a technician and businessman . Their reaction is evident as they try to talk about music .
 As the video begins, the band is rehearsing, sounding like the best garage band on earth, as Janis enters the studio dancing . The video begins with the band playing in the studio .
 This would be the band's first album for Columbia, and the band is clearly excited .
 The album would not be released until late that summer/ early fall, and so the band worked on the record on their off days . The album was released in late fall .
 The "Lenny" who Janis refers to in her story about the “bust” in Vancouver is Henry McCullough, who would later play with “Wings” and Paul McCartney . The “Lenny” who she refers to is McCullough
 Janis is clearly pissed about the way in which “Lenny” was being used by his record company, as well as his band mates and manager . Janis says he's not happy with the use of "Lenny" by the label .
 The band is summoned into the control room to listen to the playback, and a very technical discussion begins . Mr Simon is clearly not in touch with the vision the group has for the song .
 The band shifts seamlessly between the music and gossip about a party the night before . This is one of the most interesting parts of the video, as the band shifts .
 James Gurley, the group’s guitarist, had put on quite a load the night before . His band mates just can’t resist ribbing him about it .
 The cover for the album was supposed to be a black and white photo of Janis, alone . The album was meant for Janis to sing and perform alone .
 "His working motto was always to conquer and divide the artists with whom he worked," he said . His working motto is to conquer, divide and conquer and conquer .
 Janis Janis chose the brilliant cover art of cartoonist Robert Crumb . Crumb was a staple of the psychedelic scene in San Francisco, where the band was based . Janis would have none of the cover art, opting instead for the brilliant cartoonist .
 He had already done several posters advertising gigs for most of the bands in San Francisco at the time . Big Brother’s shows at the Avalon Ballroom .
 James Gurley overdubbed a new intro for the album . The new version of the album was released in October .
 Originally named “Sex, Dope and Cheap Thrills” Columbia nixed the title, allowing the band to retain only the “Cheap Thrill” portion . Originally called “sex, dope and cheap drugs”
 The biggest hit on the album was “Piece of My Heart” which went on to become a classic of the era . The album was released in 1991 .
 By October 15th the album had already surpassed $1 million dollars dollars in sales .
 The cover is in excellent condition, and I have been thinking of framing it as a way to capture a bit of the past . The cover has been in good condition and I'm hoping to use it to frame it in a new way .
 Earlier shows contain all that you need to know about living in harmony with your fellow man . The earlier shows, from the first 3 seasons, contain all of the first three seasons .
 These shows espousing a hard work ethic along with self-reliance and responsibility . Although not overtly religious, these shows are like sermons . They espouse hard work and responsibility, espousing hard work .
 Andy Taylor, the Sheriff of Mayberry, does all he can to instill these values into his son, Opie, who grew up to be the great film director Ron Howard . Opie is the son of Andy Taylor and Opie .
 "Sometimes even Andy speaks out of turn, and without thinking, winds up with his foot in the mouth, just like a politician," he says .
 Opie is having a problem with his new teacher, Ms. Ms. Kelly, in this episode from the 3rd season . Opie has a big problem with her new teacher .
 When Sheriff Taylor agrees with him that history is unimportant, he unknowingly sets off a rebellion in Ms. Taylor's novel .
 Crump confronts Sheriff Taylor, he is once speechless, and slightly smitten with her . Crump: "I'm not sure what I really want to do, but I'm glad to see her smile back"
 Now, all he has to do is undo the damage he has done, while still saving face with his son and the other boys . He has to undo it, but still save face with the boys .
 Opie's teacher, Ms. Opie’s teacher, needs to repair her reputation with Opie, the author .
 "Blow me Down" with Popeye the Sailor was released 79 years ago today .
 It is one of the earlier Popeye cartoons, in black and white, with the animation done by Max and Dave Fleischer associates Willard Bowsky and William Sturm . The animation was done by Willard Bowky and Willard .
 Popeye arrives at a town on the coast of Mexico he wants nothing more than to see his beloved Olive Oyl . Olive is working at a bar when Popeye finds her in the town .
 Popeye is drawn into a game of one-upmanship with local bandit Bluto . When Popeye arrives, with a flower for Olive, he is quickly drawn into an affair .
 Bluto calls in all of the towns’ thieves and roughnecks to finish Popeye off while he goes upstairs to “visit” with Olive . Things escalate to the point where Bluto is forced to call in the town’s thieves and toughnecks
 Popeye, after finishing off a can of spinach and soundly trouncing his foes, is quick to come to her rescue . Just as he would continue to do for so many years after .
 Apparently there is a book about ‘Bummy’ Davis; who happens to be related to Mr Slater; titled “Bummy Davis vs. Mr Slater’s”
 Born Al Davis, in Brownsville in 1920, “Bummy” was raised by his mother and father, who owned a candy store in the neighborhood . The real story is always what intrigues me the most, I decided to go to Wikipedia to learn about him .
 According Wikipedia he was employed by his father as a lookout, hiding the fact that his father sold bootleg whiskey during the days of prohibition . Wikipedia says he worked for his father to hide the fact he was selling bootleg alcohol .
 This was ‘Bummy’s’ introduction to the world which lay beyond his own doorstep, and ultimately into contact with the life which would ultimately claim his own at the age of 25 .
 Brownsville was known as the home turf of Murder, Inc., and Al’s two older brothers worked as collectors for them . The two brothers were collectors for Murder Inc. and later worked together as collectors .
 Al, himself, was not part of the lifestyle, and is credited with having once stood up to Abe Reles, the man who would become famous for either falling; or being thrown from; the window of the Half Moon Hotel .
 It is widely believed that he was thrown from the hotel’s 4th floor by the police assigned to protect him . It is believed that police were responsible for throwing him out of hotel .
 He was raised in a typical Jewish home of the time, with his mother referring to him as ""Vroomeleh,"" which is a play on his middle name; Avrum; or Abraham . He was also known as Avrum, or Abraham, by his mother .
 The nickname ‘Bummy’ was suggested by his manager when he was a teenager . Al says he has been nicknamed 'Bummy' by his former manager . The nickname was suggested when Al was a teen by his boss .
 Young Al was not altogether happy with his new moniker, but for the sake of drawing larger crowds to his fights, he accepted it . For obvious reasons, young Al wasn't happy with it, but it was necessary to draw larger crowds .
 By the close of 1939 he would go on to defeat Tippy Larkin, dispatching him with a mighty left hook in the fifth round . By the end of 1939, he had defeated Larkin with a left hook .
 Former world No. 1 boxer had 66 wins and 47 knockouts, with only 10 losses and 4 draws . That left hook was his trademark, and enabled him to amass the impressive record of 66 wins .
 He is still considered one of the greatest punchers of all time for his weight and class . He is now considered to be a world class puncher for his class and weight .
 His penchant for anger caused him to lose a bout with Lightweight Champion Lou Ambers in 1940 . He lost his fight to Lightweight World Champion Lou Ambers in 1941 .
 Also that year, he fought Fritzie Zivic, who knocked ‘Bummy’ down in the first round, and continued to harass him in the 2nd round, gouging his eye with a thumb . Also in the same year, Zivic knocked “Bummy
 By July of 1941, “Bummy’s” had been re-instated by the Boxing Commission and fought a rematch with Zivic, who scored a TKO against him in the 10th round .
 “Bummy’s last major victory was in 1944 when he defeated Hall of Famer Bob Montgomery in the 1st round . For the next 4 years he continued to fight in the ring, with his last victory being won in February of 1944 .
 After that it was kind of downhill for him, he lost to former Champ Beau Jack in March, and went on to be defeated by another former title holder, Henry Armstrong, in June of that same year .
 His short, but storied, career seemed to be coming to a close when he lost to future Champ Rocky Graziano in May 1945 . Grazian scored a TKO in the 4th round of his fight against the future champ .
 In November of that same year, ""Bummy"" was enjoying an evening in Dudy's, a local bar which he had bought a few years earlier and just sold . The bar he had just sold had been a popular local bar .
 While bleeding from his wounds he chased the other 3 men, who shot him a fourth, and fatal, time . He chased the men and chased them after they shot him four times .
 The date was November 22nd, 1945, and ""Bummy"" Davis was only 25 years old .
 Murder Inc., Foot in the Bucket, Glen Slater, Jewish Boxers, Mafia, Organized Crime and Sports, Ron Ross . "Land of Islam"" Morris J Kandel .
 "I can sit here and visit places I have never seen, or re-visit the places I've visited," says the author . "I have never been to these places, but I can visit them again and again," he says .
 As an added bonus attraction, I can go back in time to places; both seen and unseen; which, for various reasons, intrigue me . And; as a bonus attraction; I can . go back to places, both seen or unseen, that intrigue me. And as an added
 The film captures the flavor of the film "Casablanca," one of my all-time favorite . It reminds me of my own visit there in the 1970’s, as well as capturing the flavors of the movie .
 As the announcer takes us on a tour of the city, it is interesting to note the many similarities still in evidence in the 21st century world in which we live today .
 Everywhere on the planet, people still struggle to eat, or seek medical care and a place to live . Everywhere in the world, people are still struggling to find a way to eat and live .
 In many parts of the world, little has changed since this film was made almost 70 years ago . The film is still being shown in cinemas around the world .
 These videos are valuable tools in helping to understand the world around us . These videos help us understand our surroundings and help others understand our world .
 Looking at them we can see the similarities of the things we share; as well as the differences which divide us . Looking at the similarities, we can also see the differences that divide us.
 When you break it down, there are more basic similarities than there are superficial differences . Surprisingly, when you break down, the similarities are more common than superficial differences.
 Apparently there are quite a number of these films available on You Tube . Apparently there is quite a lot of these videos available on YouTube .
 There are brief descriptions of the films at the bottom of all the postings . How to get in touch with the owners for licensing of the film for commercial use .
 "The Fish That Ate the Whale" by Rich Cohen . "I had never heard of Samuel Zemurray until I picked up this book"
 As usual, I chose the book by its cover; which is something I was told never to do, and have done since . I chose to do it as usual, and I've never been told not to do so .
 From his first encounter with the fruit sometime around 1893 in Selma, Alabama, to his first taste of the fruit . From the first encounter to the first taste, the fruit was found in the hands of a black man .
 Samuel, like most immigrants from Eastern Europe at the time, looked at everything in a different light than others . Samuel was born in 1961 in New York City, New York .
 Sam Zemurray is the man who popularized the banana, taking it from the small marketplaces of the southern ports of America to every grocery store in the nation . The banana was popularized in the 1950s and '60s .
 By the time Mr Zemurray was through, bananas were celebrated in song . The bananas had become a staple of American cuisine .
 Author Rich Cohen has given us both an education in the history of the banana in America and a chronicle of the United Fruit Company .
 This is a story of American capitalism; in a business started by an immigrant . This is the effects his success had on those less fortunate than he in the countries from which he derived his that good fortune .
 Mr Zemurray started as a fruit peddler with one cart of bananas . He rose from humble beginnings to become a tycoon . He is now a successful businessman .
 His empire proved capable of starting wars and influencing politics . Along the way he wrestled with Unions, politicians, foreign governments, and even the CIA, as he built an empire .
 Zemurray was fascinated with this healthy and exotic fruit . Just as his great grandfather Max Henkin, who hailed from Russia; and is shown here next to a palm tree .
 "In his own turn, the author does everything within his power to convey this fascination to the reader," he writes .
 Also of interest is the bit of education about the industry which the author manages to squeeze into the narrative . He also manages to let us understand how he stayed top of his industry for 40 years .
 A “stem’s” holds one hundred “bunches” of 9 “hands”, which in turn comprise 15 “fingers” or bananas each . A ‘stem” is a stem, which holds nine “
 Stevedores in tropical ports unload bananas by hand; shouldering several hundred pounds at a time . The danger of scorpions and spiders lurking within each bunch unloaded . This called forth the image of stevedores unloading the bananas .
 This book covers everything from bananas to foreign coups in “banana republics, as well as corporate and labor disputes . This book includes everything from banana republics to foreign . coups .
 Rich Cohen’s entertaining; and educational; biography of a highly unusual individual . This is a real life tale worthy of a good screenplay; and your time will not be misspent in reading Rich Cohen's .
 No-one can compel you to tell them for whom you have cast your vote . Simply put, that means that no-one . cannot compel you . to . tell them who you have voted for .
 It prevents “gridlock” amongst the populace, and thus prevents ‘we the people’ from coming to loggerheads with one another, thereby giving all power to the elected officials who will only represent about half of the nation’s views, and needs .
 Each election cycle reveals a further split; right down the middle; of our national spirit . The split between the two sides of the political divide is revealed in the polls .
 The repercussions of this are that there is a lack of civil discourse in the land. The repercussions were that there are no civil discourse, the government says . The repercussions are that this is not a solution to the problems of the country's problems.
 There is a proliferation of propaganda from both sides, in a further effort to divide us; to conquer us . To keep us powerless to effect any change, there is a stagnation of solutions to the many problems which we all face .
 The White House seems to be doing a damn good job with the 24/7 news cycle and the blogosphere .
 Let’s all take a step back and breathe a bit before pulling the lever, punching the card, or marking your ballot . Let's take a bit of a breather before pulling that lever and punching your card .
 Let this election be a lesson to us in what not to expect of our elected officials. But, most importantly, let it be a warning to us . Let's hope this election is a lesson for us to not expect of elected officials' actions .
 We do not expect to spend the majority of the next 4 years with a partisan, obstructionist Congress, or Senate, says President Obama .
 As usual, I urge you all to wait until after the election to phone, e-mail, or fax your concerns for America to your Congressional Representative, as well as your Senators .
 Let them know that you hold them responsible for both the successes; and failures; of the 4 years . Let them be responsible for the successes and failures of the past 4 years. Let them hold them accountable .
 When you pull that lever on Election Day, you are hiring; or retaining; an employee . Remember, when you pull the lever on election day, you're hiring, or retaining, a job .
 The average American employee has benefits which the average American only dreams of these days . That employee has a job with the government, the government says, but it's not all about .
 Health Care, paid for by you, and a very generous Retirement system . All at a time when you yourself may be struggling to find employment, or keep your home . The tax loopholes are necessary to wash clean the honorariums .
 Let’s be quiet for the next 2 weeks and ponder one of the most important decisions which we, the people, will probably ever be called upon to make in our lifetimes . So, instead of screaming at one another, let's be quiet .
 Regardless of who wins the election; we, the people are all we really have to count upon . And when all is said to be said, done; regardless of who won the election, we are still counting upon .
 The President addresses the main point of our Quarantine of Cuba until the Soviets agreed to the removal of those missles . Over the years the speech has been whittled down to about 3 minutes in which the President addresses .
 I have decided to post both the complete video of the speech; which runs a bit over 18 minutes; and the text . I have also posted the text of both the speech and the video .
 At the end of that I have also posted the actual text of the Proclamation which authorized the blockade under the tenet of the Monroe Doctrine . The text is below .
 This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba, Cuba .
 Any vessel or craft which fails or refuses to respond to or comply with directions shall be subjected to being taken into custody .
 Any vessel or craft believed to be en route to Cuba and may be carrying prohibited material may be directed to proceed to another destination of its own choice . Vessels may be taken into custody if it fails to obey such directions .
 In carrying out this order, force shall not be used except in case of failure or refusal to comply with directions, or with regulations or directives of the Secretary of Defense issued hereunder . Force shall be used only to the extent necessary .
 His stellar performance in ‘The Grapes of Wrath’; in which he plays a migrant worker; is indicative of the many roles he would play in the future . His performance in the film is a great example of his versatility .
 In “The Wrong Man” he plays an ordinary working stiff who is falsely accused of a crime he did not commit . In the film, he plays a man falsely accused in a case of murder . The film is set in New York and London .
 Even in the midst of the McCarthy Era witch hunts he defied the system, making “12 Angry Men” at a time when questioning anything was suspect . Even in McCarthy era, he defied system .
 William Wellman’s screen adaptation of ‘The Ox Bow Incident’ was released just after the Second World War . Japanese-Americans were being interred in detention camps, even as their sons were fighting in the war for freedom .
 Gil Carter, played by Henry Fonda, rides into a town plagued by cattle rustling . Gil Carter and Art Croft become caught up in a lynching of 3 rustlers suspected of murder the town’s most popular resident .
 The Sheriff is out of town and the Judge is too timid to control the mob . The Judge is afraid of the mob and the Sheriff is afraid to control it . The mob erupts in the town .
 Only Gil and Art, along with the son of the local Militia’s Major, and an old Negro man, are willing to question the execution without trial . Only Gil, Art, and Art are willing .
 The evidence is circumstantial at best at best, but the dead man must be avenged at all costs . The dead man was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 The Sheriff arrives at the scene, informing them that he has captured the real killer . As the men proudly head back to town the Sheriff arrives to inform them of his capture .
 When he hears what the men have done in his absence he heads back to town . Vowing to prosecute each and every man involved in the unlawful mob action will be prosecuted .
 The men head back to town and contemplate what they have done while awaiting their own trials for murder . The men are in the midst of their own trial for murder.
 Gil and Art ride out of town, left wondering about the human condition, and what drives men to do what they do . Gil is left wondering what drives him to do this .
 This was only one of many daring scripts which Mr Fonda was willing to tackle during trying times . Fonda starred in a number of films during the 1960s .
 It is what sets him apart from so many other actors in his ability to truly portray the common man, and all of the problems encountered when you stand up for what you believe to be right .
 Popeye the Sailor tries his hand at drawing a cartoon for his nephews . Henry Fonda was in Japanese Interment Camps during the McCarthy era .
 One of his better ideas ‘censored’ by a human hand . Quickly looking about him he comes up with a few of his ideas, only to have one of them "censored"
 This cartoon was made during the war . There are a few references in it that may puzzle the viewer who is not acquainted with the history of World War Two on the home front .
 All in all, we had it pretty good; at least that’s what I have been told, says the author . "All in all of the things I've been told are pretty good," he says .
 Popeye draws himself, and the other cast members of his cartoon, as stick figures . Another unusual approach to this cartoon; which was not produced or directed by Max or Dave Fleischer .
 Popeye acts as a one man band, playing everything imaginable, creating a soundtrack as wild as the cartoon he has drawn . While showing the cartoon to his nephews, Popeye plays everything imaginable .
 In it, he plays himself, working for Newt’s Zoot Suits, carrying a sandwich board style sign .
 Olive is being accosted by the evil landlord, complete with mustache, who wants the rent, or Olive . Meantime, back at home, Olive is back in the house with Olive .
 The only difference is that this time it’s just a cartoon inside a cartoon; so you don’t have to worry about how it all works out . This time, it's not a cartoon, but it's a cartoon in a cartoon with a cartoon .
 This may be one of the most unusual Popeye cartoons ever . Directed by Seymour Kneitel, and animated by Orestes Calpini and Otto Feuer .
 Unlike Vietnam; where we won just about every battle, but lost the war; the American Revolution was the complete opposite . Unlike Vietnam, the American revolution was the opposite .
 "We managed to lose almost every battle, and still win the War for Independence," says President Obama . "We still have a long way to go," says Obama .
 When people fight; on their own soil; for their own freedom, it is virtually impossible to beat them . When people are fighting for their freedom, they can't beat them, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 John Trumbull’s painting ‘Surrender at Yorktown’ epitomizes the strength inherent in a just cause . Trumumull's painting “Surrender” epitomized the strength of the troops in the war .
 Had the Americans lost the war, England would have faced a hostile colony for centuries . Indo-China was a “thorn in the side” to the Koreans, French and eventually the Americans who tried to rule it .
 The surrender of the British at Yorktown in 1781 is the subject of this post . The British surrender was surrendered by the British in 1783 .
 George Washington was able to lead the Continental Army to a decisive victory over the British forces for the simple reason that they were fighting on ‘home turf’, for their families as well .
 In September, Lord Cornwallis had reinforced with about 7,000 new troops in a last ditch effort to stamp out the revolutionaries . In September the British government had reinforced the army with 7,500 troops .
 He took troops to Yorktown, where he established a fort, hoping for relief from the British Navy . The British Navy never arrived .
 Cornwallis found himself caught between the land forces of the Continental Army, and the French Navy . Washington deployed more troops and artillery, with the help of the French fleet, under the command of Admiral Compte de Grasse .
 Those vessels repelled the British fleet, keeping them from rescuing Lord Cornwallis and his men . The British fleet was unable to rescue the British men .
 The British, and the Germans fighting with them, were eventually forced from their fort under threat of further bombardment . The British were instructed to bring their colors with them .
 The British military band played ""The World Turned Upside Down"; a popular song of the era; as a way of displaying their disbelief in their loss to the colonies . The band played the song as a sign of their disbelief .
 Cornwallis elected to remain indoors, rather than face his adversary in defeat . Cornwallis chose to stay indoors, instead of face his opponent in defeat. Cornwallis was killed in the battle .
 General O’Hara tried to surrender to the French rather than to the Americans, but he was rebuffed in this effort, leaving him no choice but to surrender . Even his second in command, General O'Hara, tried to turn his back on the French, but
 General O’Hara surrendered his sword to General Lincoln instead of himself . This was the reason which compelled General Washington in his decision to have General O'Hara surrender his sword . General Washington decided to give General Lincoln his sword instead of General Lincoln .
 The painting of the surrender is not exactly what many Americans think of it as being . So, it's not exactly the painting of a surrender . The surrender is a surrender surrender .
 That is not General Washington mounted on his horse accepting the sword of surrender . That's not the General Washington, it's the General George W. Washington .
 It is, rather, General Benjamin Lincoln who is extending his right hand toward that sword, which is not carried by Lord Cornwallis, but is borne by General O’Hara instead . General O'Hara was not carrying the sword, but was carrying it instead .
 Trumball’s painting shows British troops in a line which extends into the background . Depicted in the painting, the British troops are in the background of the painting .
 The troops on the left are the French officers, mustered under the banner of the Bourbon family . The troops are on the right side of the French, mustering under the banners of the family .
 To the right are the American officers with the flag of their new republic . To the left are the soldiers who fought for the U.S.
 The Marquis de Lafayette and Colonel Jonathan Trumbull were captured by the artist who captured it all on canvas .
 General Washington is in the background, astride a brown horse, keeping an ever watchful eye on the events . General Washington guided the colonies to victory over the course of the war .
 The British and Americans signed the Treaty of Paris in 1783 . The war did not come to a formal end until sometime later, when the treaty of Paris signed .
 The painting hangs in the Rotunda of the capitol in Washington, D.C. today . The painting itself was not completed until 1820 and hangs there today .
 "Catch .44" is a multi-layered thriller by writer/director Aaron Harvey . The result is a wild, enjoyable adventure .
 Bruce Willis plays “Mel” who is a crime boss . Forest Whitaker plays a hit man in his employ, who is masquerading as a police officer named Ronny . The film is set to be released in cinemas on Friday .
 The 3 women; Tes, played by Malin Akerman, and her two cohorts Kara played by Nikki Reed, and Dawn played by Deborah Ann Woll, are also involved with Mel . Just as Forest Whitaker is .
 Mel has the women go on an “assignment” 40 miles out of New Orleans to intercept a drug shipment and the money . Something is clearly not adding up .
 The film is dealt out in sequences, which all return to the fateful moment at the beginning of the film, keeping you guessing at what the real story is .
 Violence and adult language are dealt out appropriately; though gratuitously; in this film . Violence and “adult’s” language are . dealt out . appropriately .
 This movie does not come near the level of violence of Quentin Tarentino’s ‘Kill Bill’ series, which were way beyond belief to me . This movie doesn’t come near as much violence as the series, but it doesn't come near that level
 A fantastic musical score rounds out this colorful and exciting send up of today’s action films a la “Pulp Fiction” while doing nothing to detract from that movie . The film is a great send-up of today's action films .
 Soviet ships had been photographed with missile parts, headed for Cuba, as early as September 25th of that same year . While this is true of the time of actual confrontation, Soviet ships were photographed with missiles .
 "I was just 8 years old, but the events of that period will live with me forever," says the author . "It was just eight years old. But the events that happened to me will live in the memory of that time."
 The Soviet point of view was that if we had our Monroe Doctrine as authority to invade; or even blockade; Cuba, then they had the same authority to act in their own self-interest in their hemisphere . Cuba .
 The Soviets already had tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Soviets didn't know then, but has been divulged since . What they didn’t know then was that the Soviets .
 The weapons, which were portable, would have enabled the Cubans to wipe out any full scale invasion by the U.S. at the time of the invasion .
 It was only the resolve of President Kennedy which kept us from providing the air cover that had been promised by his predecessor, and of which new President had not been informed .
 Had he given the go-ahead on the Bay of Pigs, the Soviets would have used that as a pretext to invade West Berlin, he would have given it a pretext .
 They either did not understand, or seemingly care about, the results which would have been precipitated by such action . They either didn't understand or care about what would have happened .
 From the 15th of October until the 28th, the world seemingly stood still, as we all awaited the outcome of the unfolding events . The world seemed to stand still as we waited for the events to unfold .
 There was no “hot line” or “red phone’s” between Moscow and Washington yet yet . There is no "hot line" or "red phone" between Russia and the U.S.
 That would only come about after the crisis was over, in an attempt to keep this type of thing from ever going so far again . That's not possible, but it would be necessary to make sure it never happened again .
 President Kennedy, along with his brother Robert, took a full week to assess the situation as if it were a chess game . President Kennedy and brother Robert Kennedy took a week to discuss the situation in Washington .
 They analyzed each move possible, along with the outcomes these moves would provoke . The team analyzed each of the moves possible, and the outcomes would provoke them .
 In the end they settled on the Quarantine, announcing it on the evening of October 22nd .
 The photo above is of one of our Neptune aircraft buzzing a Soviet cargo ship en route to Cuba during the Missile Crisis . The photo was taken during the Cuban missile crisis .
 In school we had daily “fallout’s drills, sitting in the hallways, covering our heads with books, covering us with books . In school, "fallout" drills, sat in hallways covered with books. We had daily 'fallout' drills,
 The deal was so lop-sided that the full details of the deal were withheld from the American people for some time . It is true that those missiles were being replaced with longer range ones based in Europe .
 A new phone line is being installed between Moscow and Washington which would allow the leaders of the two countries to have quicker, and more direct, contact with one another .
 I was going to use a portion of President Kennedy’s speech here today, but I have decided instead to post the entire 18 minute speech on the anniversary of the date on which the President delivered it .
 "It is one of the most vivid memories of my childhood, which is saying a lot, considering that my childhood encompassed several assassinations; including that of President Kennedy himself; and massive civil disobedience over both the War in Vietnam, as well as Civil Rights .
 Christie actually did disappear for a period of 11 days; and her whereabouts never explained . Christie disappeared for 11 days, but her whereabouts were never revealed .
 She was married at the time to a Colonel Christie, who was having an affair with his secretary, one Ms. Christie was having .
 Two years after the fictitious events in this film, the two divorced, and he married Ms. Jennifer Lopez . Two years later, he and Ms. Lopez were married .
 Kathleen Tynan penned this story almost 50 years later, creating a real life Agatha Christie mystery in the process . Based solely upon that bit of gossip from the 1920’s, Kathleen .
 The film is tightly woven . Assisted in the screenplay by Arthur Hopcraft, the film is a tightly woven affair .
 Dustin Hoffman as the sleuthing journalist who uncovers the truth behind her disappearance . The affection between Hoffman and Christie is almost palpable in the affection between the two .
 The most important thing to remember when watching this film is that it is fiction, based, though it is, upon a true event . The film is based on a true story and is fiction .
 Christie has never fully been resolved, and the story presented here could actually have been the truth . Christie's story has never been fully resolved .
 Director Michael Apted does a great job in keeping this film on track, as well as capturing the mixture of fear; and affection; between the main characters .
 The most fascinating thing about this book is the mystery of why the Confederacy did not immediately take possession of Washington, D.C., which would have ended the war . The Siege of Washington by John and Charles Lockwood .
 They marched off to war, thinking that they would return within months, rather than years . They thought they would be returning within months or years, but years later .
 Book explores Lincoln's 12 days between April 15th and April 25th, 1861 . Historians explore the relationship between Lincoln and 2 key aides .
 John Nicolay; aged 29, from Springfield, where he had worked as Lincoln’s assistant; and John Hays, aged 22, who was hired as Nicolay's assistant in Washington; were instrumental throughout Lincoln's Presidency . Hays was hired by Nicolay and Nicolay
 Plans were immediately put into effect to secure the roads and railways entering the city . But they were never more effective than they were in the crucial first days of the War Between the States .
 Washington was; at that time, and on into my own youth; a decidedly ‘southern” town . Washington was . at that . time, . on into . his own youth, he said . Washington . was . a decidedly "southern" town .
 Segregation existed there openly up until the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act . Segregation was openly open before the Civil War Act . It was the first time segregation was allowed to be allowed in the United States .
 The threat of hostilities breaking out within the city itself was a real and constant danger that had to be dealt with . The threat was a constant danger, says the author of the book .
 The President called upon 75,000 Union volunteers, each of whom would serve for 3 months . Each of the volunteers would serve 3 months each .
 Just as the South expected to crush the North in a short while, the North fully expected the same of themselves . The North expected the South to crush them, but the South did not expect the same .
 California talked openly of leaving the Union, and form a Republic of her own with Oregon and the Pacific Northwest territory which would later become the state of Washington .
 Added to that was the threat of the ‘free negro’; 4 million to be exact; who would eventually move to the Northern cities, competing with white immigrant workers for the same jobs . The threat of a free negro was added to that .
 Also threatening Washington was the City of Baltimore, with its own peculiar mixture of feelings concerning slavery .
 The city was also home to the Union Trust Bank, which held considerable reserves for the North .
 After the events of April 18th, mobs in the city attacked the Union soldiers as they marched along Pratt Street, the city was under occupation for the remainder of the war . This made it imperative to hold onto Maryland, and after the events, it was imperative .
 The troops had been marching from the old train station; which stood on President Street, at the Eastern end of today’s Harborplace; to the Camden Street Station, the site of today's Camden Yards, home to the Baltimore Orioles baseball team .
 At the intersection of Charles and Pratt Streets the mob had grown to over 2,000 strong . Armed with clubs and paving stones, the mob attacked the troops . The mob was armed with paving stones and clubs .
 The author gives new thought to the importance of these 12 most perilous days of the war . In this wide ranging account, the author gives . new thought .
 Lincoln's most engaging story of Lincoln’s assumption of the Presidency has always been the attempted assassination which occurred before he even took office . Until now, the story has been told of the attempt to assassinate Lincoln .
 Author has successfully re-created the excitement; and fear; of a time when our nation was at war, and the seat of government surrounded by her enemies . The author has successfully . re-creates the excitement and fear of the time .
 Mavis Staples, Nick Lowe and Wilco perform at the White House in Washington DC . Music is magical .
 This video from You Tube was filmed last December in Chicago prior to the Nick Lowe concert with Wilco and Mavis Staples . The Band sang this iconic song with The Band in the film “The Last Waltz” over 35 years ago .
 Silly Symphonies did some very memorable work during the 1930’s . Mavis Staples, Nick Lowe, The Staple Singers, The Weight, Wilco .
 Some of the things they did consisted of taking the best loved classics and turning them into cartoons . The best known classics were turned into cartoons, such as The Wizard of Oz .
 This is the first time the audience has been given a platform to impart some values to the audience . It also provided a platform for the audience to learn some values from the audience.
 I have always enjoyed these sort of cartoons; in much the same way as I preferred “Illustrated Classics” to the super-hero comic books of my youth . Today this would be considered to be somehow offensive, but I've always enjoyed the cartoons .
 Silly Symphonies takes on the old Aesop Fable of the “Grasshopper and the Ant” in a new cartoon . The cartoon was created by the team at Silly Symphony Orchestra .
 The Grasshopper learns a very valuable lesson about compassion, while picking up a work ethic in the process . There is room for everyone in this cartoon .
 Aesop's Fables, Aliyah, Jlia, Molly, Saturday Morning Toons, Silly Symphonies, The Grasshopper and the Ant, Trinity Friday, October 12, 2012 .
 When I was younger it seemed so much easier to become exposed to newer and different music than it is today. When I'm younger I was exposed to new music than I was today. I'm glad to have been exposed to music like this, but it's not so easy now.
 With the advent of satellite radio, and other technologies, it has become easier to not hear a new sound which you might otherwise enjoy for a few years .
 Although the name was lingering on the edge of my consciousness, I had never really taken the time to seek out her music . The name of the late singer has never been forgotten by the world .
 If this were 1967 I would have already heard her music in the eclectic mix which was the signature of AM radio . Her music is now the signature mix of radio's eclectic mix .
 Bob Greene says his neighbor, Linda, invited him to see a new artist . He says the artist was a neighbor of his own . Greene says he's been in the art business for years .
 She had commented that the weather didn’t look too good for an outdoor concert she was set to see that night . She had said she was worried about the weather .
 When I asked who it was see was going to see, she replied Grace Potter . When asked if she wanted to see her, she said yes .
 This was the third video I watched, and immediately grabbed my guitar to try and figure it all out . This is the first time I've seen this video, and I'm trying to figure out how to do it .
 Halfway through the video, the scene shifts to the live concert seamlessly . The video was shot in New York, New Jersey .
 The real difference in the two films is not so much the location of the story; a mountain pass in South America versus an island in the Caribbean; but the actors themselves . The two films are both shot in the same locations .
 Cary Grant plays cynical Geoff Carter, the leader of a group of cargo planes located in the jungles of South America . The planes fly mail, as well as any cargo, anywhere, at any time .
 Brooklyn born Bonnie Lee, played by Jean Arthur, puts in by boat to a small airstrip somewhere in South America . Bonnie Lee played Bonnie Lee in the series .
 To fly out, pilots must risk great danger as they go through the mountain passage, which is always clouded by fog, and even snow .
 Bonnie falls for Geoff, who is distant and cold towards her . It is in this environment that Bonnie meets, and falls for him .
 He has seen too much of life to get attached to anyone, or anything . Yet there is something between the two that threatens to grow into more .
 When another pilot, Bat Mac Pherson, shows up with his wife Judy, played by sultry Rita Hayworth, gets complicated . Bat Mac is played by Richard Barthelmess and played by his wife, Judy . The film is set in New York City, New York
 It seems that Bat bailed out of a plane ahead of his crew, which included the brother of Geoff’s right hand man, Kid Dabb, played by Thomas Mitchell, causing his death .
 Written by Paul Donahue, directed by Howard Hawks, this film sizzles as events unfold and lives are altered . Howard Hawks directed by the incomparable .
 Sig Ruman plays the Dutchman, which is to say that he basically plays himself . The film is set in New York City, New York, and opens in the U.S.
 Noah Beery Jr. plays pilot Joe Souther in the new comedy series . Noah's co-starring in the film is a collaboration between Beery and The Walking Dead .
 Though the story takes place in the fictional port of Barranca, I can tell you from experience, that as late as the 1980’s, ports like these still existed .
 "The Old Magic" In Concert . Cary Grant and Jean Arthur .
 We saw Nick Lowe at the McGlothon Theater, which is located in Spirit Square in “uptown” Charlotte, Charlotte .
 Nick Lowe is one of the key people who kept rock and roll alive and kicking during the 1970’s disco craze . Lowe was a key figure in the 1970s disco scene .
 Nick Lowe, along with Dave Edmunds, formed ‘Rockpile’, once again keeping the genre viable and raucous . And when the end of that decade rolled around; with Punk Rock all the rage; Nick Lowe .
 Mr Lowe re-invented his approach to some of his older tunes, and at the same time developed a new way to express his more current thoughts .
 For a while I had heard that Mr Lowe was alive and well, living in Amsterdam for obvious reasons . Mr Lowe is now living in the Dutch capital, Amsterdam .
 With a mixture of old songs, along with the new, he beguiled the audience for several hours . He performed old favorites solo, and told stories between numbers .
 His performance of some of the new material; including “Sensitive Man’s and “Somebody Cares for Me” was absolutely wonderful, and would have been enough to satisfy me .
 I was thrilled to see him play solo, using only 1 guitar throughout his extraordinary performance, and no capo to boot . He used to play solo .
 His voice is as strong and expressive as ever, and his easy attitude with the audience was a delight to all . His easy attitude to the audience at the end of the show was a pleasure .
 Wilco is the band which consists of Patrick Sansone, Mikael Jorgensen, Jeff Tweedy, Nels Cline, Glenn Kotche, John Stirratt . The band is also known as the band that formed in 2009 .
 There is nothing better than seeing your favorite artist striped down to the bare minimum . This video highlights just what you love about their work .
 Seeing Mr Lowe perform last night reinforced my suspicion that the ‘old magic’ is not only back; but for some of us, it never left in the first place .
 What a great way to celebrate our birthdays together? Listening to music which we both love. What a good way for us to celebrate . We both love music .
 Video from McGlothon concert on October 9th in Charlotte posted on Facebook .