 Cuba Almost Almost Became a Nuclear Power in 1962 . The scariest moment in history was even scarier than we thought .
 Sergo Mikoyan Collection, National Security Archive, is a collection of images from Russia's most recent U.S. history . Sergo Mikhoyan was a member of the National Security Council .
 Fidel Castro's excruciating meeting with Soviet deputy prime minister Anastas Mikoyan, on November 22, 1962 . Cuba would have become the first nuclear power in Latin America .
 The final straw apparently came on November 20, when Castro sent instructions to Cuba’s representative at the United Nations, Carlos Lechuga, to mention “we have tactical nuclear weapons, which we should keep” — partly as leverage .
 Even with the pullout of the strategic missiles, the tacticals would stay, and Soviet documentation reveals the intention of training the Cubans to use them . Fidel Castro was livid .
 Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Cuba on November 2, 1962, and began to appreciate the danger tactical nuclear weapons posed if they were left on the island .
 On one day, Castro would refuse to see Mikoyan; on another, Fidel would order his anti-aircraft crews to shoot at the American surveillance planes . The final straw apparently came on November 20, when Castro sent instructions to Cuba's representative at the United Nations, Carlos Le
 This four-hour conversation provided the final blow to the Cuban revolutionaries, now that the Soviet Union was removing all the weapons for which Cuba had to suffer so much . Mikoyan had to break this unpleasant news to his hosts, and he had to do it in such a way that
 He said the Cubans accepted the weapons as part of their duty to the socialist camp . He went back to the initial offer of missiles and stated that the Cuban government did not want the missiles .
 Castro almost begged Mikoyan to leave the tactical warheads in Cuba, especially because the Americans were not aware of them and they were not part of the agreement between Kennedy and Khrushchev . "We tried to help the Soviet Union to get out of a difficult situation. We tried to
 This ended Cuba's hope to become a Latin American nuclear power . If the Cubans were more pliant, and a little less independent, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island .