 Lang: "We want people to have a sense of this moment when the world nearly blew up" Lang said. "We're trying to make people understand this moment," Lang said .
 With filmmaker Koji Masutani, they have created ""The Armageddon Letters,"" a transmedia project with graphic novels, blog posts, podcasts and short films . They say the lessons of the Cuban missile crisis are especially relevant today, when nuclear-armed North Korea is threatened .
 Their research includes extensive documentary studies as well as oral histories taken from Americans, Russians and Cubans who experienced the crisis . They include documentary studies and oral histories .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro and former U.S. defense secretary Robert McNamara were involved in a standoff between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Some of the most revealing moments were exchanges between the two men .
 Khrushchev had moved missiles and nuclear warheads to Cuba in response to U.S. missiles based in Turkey and aimed at the Soviet Union .
 The standoff meant the island was likely to be destroyed . But to the Cubans, the standoff meant that the island had likely been destroyed . The island is now in ruins .
 Castro was sure the Americans would attack Cuba to derail the revolution . Since the failed, U.S.-backed Bay of Pigs invasion 18 months earlier, he was sure they would do so . Castro was certain the Americans were going to attack Cuba .
 Blight and Lang learned the Soviets had installed medium-range missiles that could reach the U.S. He expected and hoped the Soviets would respond with nuclear weapons . The Soviets had short-range tactical nuclear weapons that could be used against a United States attack .
 The latter were controlled by Soviet forces based in Cuba who identified with the Cubans . They were equally determined to resist an invasion of Cuba .
 Both the Americans and the Soviets failed to understand how history gave Cubans a sense of pride and dignity, the authors said .
 Like Texans at the Alamo and Jewish rebels at Masada, they were ready to die while inflicting damage on their enemies . The same sense of being under siege can be seen in many countries that possess or are seeking nuclear weapons today .