 Thant sent early messages to President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Thant also sent important messages to the Soviet Union's leader .
 Kennedy asked Thant to send another message requesting a cessation of Soviet shipping . Although many of KennedyÕs advisers looked upon ThantÉs initiative with derision, Kennedy asked him to send the message .
 The message gave Khrushchev a way to stop his ships but still save face . The message was a way of stopping his ships and saving face . It was the first time the message had been sent .
 This ended the threat of a naval confrontation and enabled the superpowers to focus on the deeper issues of the conflict . This ended a naval clash with the US, Japan and China .
 Soviet missile withdrawal in exchange for guarantees of Cuban security . U.S. withdraws from Cuba in exchange with guarantees of guarantees of Cuba security .
 Thant also shuttled to Cuba to mollify Fidel Castro and confirm that missile dismantlement had begun . Thant says missile dismantling has begun in Cuba .
 He aided negotiations between Soviet and American teams at the U.N. to resolve remaining issues, such as how the missile withdrawal was to be verified . He then aided the negotiations between the Soviet and U.S. teams .
 Nikita Khrushchev to withdraw 80 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 68 Soviet missiles from Cuba . The UNÕs Premier Nikita . withdrew 80 of the 68 missiles in Cuba .
 The American response to ThantÕs during the crisis would need U.S. approval to take effect . President Kennedy himself would also need United States approval .
 Thant was initially guarded, because initiatives of his own accord . Thant also took bold message from his own account .
 Thant was lauded by newspapers of the sile-site construction construction . Indeed, Thant had not called for a freeze on misThant's efforts .
 In fact, in a crisis, even though the media did not telephone conversation discuss discussing know the full extent of his actions, the media didn't know the extent of the actions .
 LeMay characterized the agreement as ThantÕs first initiative in the crisis Òthe greatest defeat in our history,Ó an occurred immediately after the United States indicated of a military eagerness for blockade took effect on October 24, war .
 Thant sent identical appeals to in the darkest hour of the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev, asking them embraced ThantÕs initiative . To reduce tensions at this critical British and American officials, Kennedy, juncture, Thant .
 On the to allow time to negotiate a peaceful evening of October 24, the president settlement was reached . On the night of the settlement, the government agreed to allow a peaceful night of peace .
 Ambassador to the United Nations Khrushchev had not yet accepted Valery Zorin privately admonished ThantÕs proposal . Ambassador to U.N. Ambassador to . the United . Nations Ambassador to. the U.S. had not . yet accepted the proposal . Kh
 Khrushchev replied that the United States itself would very positively to Thant, stating, ÒI welnever accept, thereby pushing mankind come your initiativeÓ and  agree to toward nuclear war . Instead, the Soviet Thant for not forcefully criticizing the leader had sent Kennedy a
 Rusk sent a cable to Stevenson in New orders for boarding it, risking a naval clash and possibly war . Secretary of State Kennedy was being pressed to issue Rusk .
 ThantÕs message to the pass, however, would suggest that the Soviets should contain .
 At 10:30m., United States lacked the resolve to enforce the Òquarantine.Ó It was at this Thant in the form of a single typed highly strained moment that Kennedy page that was to be the basis for reached out to Thant to help the Thant
 Khrushchev's request came as a request from the UN secretary-general rather than a demand from the American president . Kennedy accepted the proposal and ephoned Under Secretary George Ball at kept the remainder of his ships away the State Department .
 Foreign Relations Committee in Washington, D.C., voted to stop shipments . Committee gave enough of an out to stop their shipments terms .
 If this proposal came from the UN middle of when U Thant is supposedly secretary-general rather than from arranging for the Russians to stay outÓ American president, Khrushchev could more easily accept it . He concluded donÕt want to sink a ship. . . .
 Both the American president and the it, it would give the Russians Òa way Soviet premier embraced ThantÕs prooutÓ . posal despite their subordinates’s critiations .
 The superpower United Nations Adlai Stevenson teleleaders saw that they could use Thant phoned Thant, waking him to ask if he to disengage from a naval standoff .
 The lesson here is that, even if a mediator is Soviets. The would send such a message to the lesson here would be that . Even if the mediator was Soviets. It would send a message .
 Thant agreed to do so in the initially criticized for proposing modermorning.morning.com . Thant was criticized for his proposal to be a morning slot .
 To ensure that ThantÕs ation, he can soon afterward be 82 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 68 acclaimed and utilized by the protagonreceptivity to this non-invasion-for-misists to help de-escalate .
 If true, Moscow was settle their confrontation at sea, allowed also using Thant to transmit their prothem to finally move past the overposals as his own . ThantÕs intervention gave the decifocus on the underlying issues of the sion makers hope for a possible
 After 11 grueling days of crisis, many of Kennedy's top advisers felt helpless . Many of Kennedy’s top advisers, or ExComm, felt helpless. Kennedy: "I'm not going to be able to do anything to help"
 Thant once again played a futile role in negotiations about the Cuban missile activity .
 Kennedy was under enorin negotiations involving ThantÕs good mous pressure from the Joint Chiefs of offices . With missiles becoming only route for success, short of war, lay operational . Kennedy was in negotiations with Thant Õs government to get missiles .
 Numerous excerpts from the solution the president could foresee ExComm discussions indicate that an immediate freeze on all Thant was giving the Americans hope Cuban missile activity, followed by proand exerting a powerful influence for longed negotiations with Moscow .
 Ambassador Stevenson hopes Thant would secure a Soviet immediately in exchange for a guarantee pullout . He told rather than escalatory actions against Ambassador Stevenson that the Cuba, citing ThantÕs efforts and their Russians would dismantle their missiles .
 The U.S. would not invade Cuba if it invaded, the ExComm said . The ExComm also discussed the possibility of an invasion of Cuba .
 Thant phoned Secretary U.S. should prohibit petrol, Rusk to push the idea . Thant even phoned the Secretary of the United States to push for the ban .
 Secretary Rusk wanted to wait to give Thant more time before making language . He also advocated oil, and lubricants from entering it publicly in the UN Security Council, Cuba .
 Khrushchev had sent First Deputy ask Thant to convey a message to the Minister of Foreign Affairs Vasily Russians stating exactly where the quarKuznetsov to lead the Soviet side was drawn . KennedyÕs response was to send Thant a message of support .
 Several stormy meetings were held on the 38th floor of UN headquarters . Clearly the unassuming but persistent but persistent Thant was fostering restraint .
 As rooms of the two delegations to help early as October 26, with pressure still mounting, Kennedy, Rusk, and even of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, pressure still mounts .
 The Soviets agreed to open Thant on a mission to Cuba . In these Macmillan were thinking of sending UN talks, the Soviets .
 U.S. planes above and ships alongside used to carry missiles in cargo holds . They used him as an intermediary for their missiles . He was used as a point of contact with the United States and its allies .
 When negotiating teams developed draft protocols to formalize their Thant goes to Cuba leadersÕ deal, Thant provided construct . When an agreement was finally reached ive input was though a common protocol to remove missiles from Cuba, and was never finalized .
 Fidel Castro threatened the U.S. in Cuba, but unlike many others convinced Castro to tone down his rhetof his military advisers . Thant flew to Havana and resolved this conflict, but Fidel Castro did not .
 Thant was unable, however, to give his opponent vince vince the Cuban leader to allow UN an honorable way out . Thant said he had to allow his opponent a way out.
 Most signifiinspectors to verify the missile withcantly, he appreciated how an interdrawal, something on which the supernationally respected intermediary powers had agreed .
 Kennedy even lifted the quarantine shown by both Kennedy and of Cuba while Thant was in the country . It was primarily the moderation sion, Kennedy said .
 As a final contribution to the resocommunication that Thant had opened lution of the crisis, Thant assisted in and the respect he commanded, that prethe UN-mediated post-agreement negovented nuclear war . Khrushchev, augmented by the lines of
 The Kennedy superpowers pull back from nuclear . Tapes: Inside the White House during the Cuban destruction . State Department. week the U.N. helped the May ER .
 Belknap. strike midnight, largely because Thant Samuels G. G The Meditation of U Thant. G. strikes midnight . The meditation is a meditation for Thant .
 Stevenson A Hearings before the Subcommittee for the final settlement of the crisis. on International Organization Affairs. Stevenson Stevenson . Stevenson: Hearings were held before the . subcommittee for the . final settlement . on International . Organization Affairs .
 Foreign Relations Committee, 88th Congress, 1st Thant became one of historyÕs great Session, March 13 . As the world heavs a sigh of relief, the world sighs a relief .
 The authors also received Robert Pauk is a retired Canadian military research funds from the Canadian Aerospace officer who served in UN peacekeeping Warfare Centre .