 He was a long-time reporter for The Washington Post . He covered the collapse of communism as a foreign correspondent .
 He is currently on the staff of the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum . He is a Holocaust Museum curator .
 His previous books include the bestselling One Minute to Midnight on the Cuban missile crisis .
 The Central Intelligence Agency’s chief photo interpreter hovered over the president's shoulder . The president's photo interpreter was also in attendance .
 On superficial inspection, the grainy images of fields, forests, and winding country roads seemed innocuous, almost bucolicic . The images were taken in a series of grainy photographs .
 One of the fields contained tubelike objects, others oval-shaped white dots neatly lined up next to one another . The fields were filled with white dots and tubelikes .
 He was about to display the briefing boards when there was a commotion outside the door . The commotion was outside of the door when the commotion occurred .
 A four-year-old girl burst into one of the most heavily guarded rooms in the White House . The incident happened in a heavily guarded room in the presidential residence .
 The president got up from his leather-upholstered seat and led his daughter back toward the door of the Cabinet Room . Their frowns dissolved into smiles as the president sat down with his daughter .
 Father and daughter disappeared for a few seconds, his arm draped around her shoulders . He draped his arm over her shoulders as they left the scene .
 He took his place at the center of the long table beneath the presidential seal, his back to the Rose Garden . He sat in front of the president's desk beneath the White House seal .
 He was flanked on either side by his secretary of state and secretary of defense . The president was flanked by his Cabinet members .
 His brother, his vice president, and his national security adviser were also in the room . President Obama sat in the middle of the table with his brother, vice president and national security advisor .
 Behind them stood a small bronze bust of Abraham Lincoln, flanked by some model sailing ships . Behind them was a small bust of Lincoln flanked by models of sailing ships and a model model .
 Above the fireplace to the right was the celebrated Gilbert Stuart portrait of George Washington . The portrait was of a powdered and bewigged Washington .
 The thirty-fifth president of the United States called the meeting to order . The 30-fifth U.S. president was called to order the meeting .
 Kennedy seemed preternaturally calm to the other men in the room as he listened to the evidence of Kremlin duplicity . Kennedy seemed to be calm in the face of the evidence .
 Soviet leaders installed surface-to-surface nuclear missiles on Cuba, less than a hundred miles from American shores . In secrecy, while insisting they would never contemplate such a thing, the Soviet leaders had installed them .
 The missiles had a range of 1,174 miles and were capable of hitting much of the eastern seaboard . According to the CIA, the missiles were able to hit much of America . The missiles were launched by the U.S. in 1994 .
 Once armed and ready to fire, they could explode over Washington in thirteen minutes, turning the capital into a scorched wasteland . The U.S. capital could be turned into a charred wasteland .
 Lundahl took the briefing boards out of his bag and laid them on the table . Lundahl: "I don't know what I'm going to do" Lundahl says he's not sure if he'll be able to get the job .
 CIA experts pored over thousands of reconnaissance photographs of the hills and valleys of western Cuba . CIA experts spent the last thirty-six hours poring over photos of the area .
 Missiles of identical length had been photographed at military parades in Red Square in Moscow . Missiles were photographed at . parades .
 That would depend on how soon the missiles could be mated with their nuclear warheads . That would be possible depending on the timing of the missiles and their warheads .
 So far, there is no evidence that the Soviets had moved the warheads to the missile sites . No evidence to suggest that the warheads had been moved .
 There is some reason to believe the warheads aren’t present and hence they are not ready to fire,” said Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara .
 Former head of Ford Motor Company calculating the chances of a surprise attack . The computerlike brain of the former head of the Ford Motor Co. clicked away furiously .
 Maxwell Taylor parachuted into Normandy during World War II . General Maxwell Taylor had commanded Allied forces in Berlin and Korea . Taylor had parachuted in Normandy during WWII .
 Kennedy had received an initial intelligence briefing earlier that morning . Kennedy had been briefed on the intelligence surrounding the assassination .
 National security adviser McGeorge Bundy knocked on the door of his bedroom, on the second floor of the White House, shortly after 8:00m. His national security adviser had knocked on his bedroom door in the early hours .
 The president was propped up in bed, in pajamas and dressing gown, reading the morning newspapers .
 Dwight D Eisenhower broke an unwritten convention of former presidents refraining from publicly criticizing the current occupant of the Oval Office . On this particular morning, his exasperation was directed at his predecessor, Eisenhower, who had broken the unwritten .
 Over the past two years, he and Nikita Khrushchev had been engaged in a very public game of nuclear oneupmanship . The two nations were engaged in nuclear one-upmanship in the 1960s .
 Kennedy thought he had an understanding with the mercurial Soviet premier . But Kennedy thought that he had a deal with the Soviets .
 Khrushchev had sent word through intermediaries that he would do nothing to embarrass the U.S. president politically before the midterm congressional elections, which were exactly three weeks away . The midterms were three weeks before the midterms .
 News that the Soviets were constructing missile bases on Cuba could hardly have come at a worse time . News of the bases came at the same time as the discovery of Soviet missile bases .
 Now that the Democrats are in power, the political roles are reversed . The political roles were reversed when Democrats took control of the White House in 2008 .
 Republican politicians seized on reports of Soviet military buildup on Cuba to denounce Kennedy for weakness and fecklessness . Republican politicians were seizing on the reports of a Soviet buildup to Cuba .
 Determined to keep the information secret as long as possible, Kennedy decided to stick to his regular schedule, acting as if nothing was amiss .
 He showed off Caroline’s pony Macaroni to the family of a returning astronaut, chatted amiably for half an hour with a Democratic congressman, and presided over a conference on mental retardation .
 It was not until nearly noon that he managed to break away from his ceremonial duties and meet with his top foreign policy advisers .
 The metalworker turned superpower leader was unlike any other politician he had ever encountered . Alternately ingratiating and boorish, friendly and intimidating, he said .
 Their single summit meeting was in Vienna, Vienna, in June 1961, had been a brutal experience for Kennedy . Kennedy and Obama met in Vienna for the first time .
 Khrushchev had treated him like a little boy, lecturing him on American misdeeds, threatening to take over West Berlin, and boasting about the inevitable triumph of communism . He was treated like a child, lectured him on U.S. misdeed, threatened to
 Khrushchev did not seem to share his alarm about the risks of nuclear war, and how it could be triggered by miscalculations on either side . Most shocking of all, he did not share his concerns with the dangers of war .
 President Obama spoke about nuclear weapons in a casual, offhand kind of way, as simply one more element in the superpower competition . He spoke about the nuclear weapons as one of the world's most powerful superpowers .
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson was contemptuous of his boss’s performance . Vice President Johnson was not impressed with his performance .
 British prime minister Harold Macmillan met with Kennedy shortly after he left Vienna . Harold MacMillan was only slightly more sympathetic .
 For the first time in his life Kennedy had met a man “who was impervious to his charm,” Macmillan noted later . MacMillan noted that Kennedy was “impossible” to charm .
 In April 1961, four months after taking office, he had authorized an invasion of Cuba by fifteen hundred CIA-trained Cuban exiles . In March 1961, he authorized the invasion by 15 hundred exiles. In April 1962, he approved an invasion by ex-Cubans .
 Castro mounted a vigorous counterattack, trapping the exiles in an isolated beachhead . Castro's counterattack has trapped the exile in a beachhead, trapping them in a trap-trap .
 Kennedy refused to order U.S. ships and planes stationed just offshore to come to the rescue of the outnumbered invaders . Most of the invaders ended up in Castro’s jails .
 As Kennedy later confessed to Reston, Reston had no doubt concluded that “I’m inexperienced.” Reston .
 The perception of an inexperienced leader with no guts was one that he had struggled to reverse ever since . The perception was one of his struggles to reverse since .
 Military options ranged from an air strike targeted on the missile sites alone to an all-out invasion . Military options range from a strike on missile sites to an attack on the entire country .
 General Taylor warned that it would probably be impossible to destroy all the missiles in a single strike . General Taylor said it would be impossible for the missiles to be destroyed .
 The invasion plan called for as many as a hundred and fifty thousand men to land in Cuba a week after the initial air strikes . As many as 100,000 men were expected to land a week later in Cuba .
 In the meantime, the Soviets might be able to launch one or two nuclear missiles against the U.S. The United States may have to wait to see if it can launch a nuclear missile .
 Robert Kennedy still had an angry glint in his eye when he met the men in charge of America’s secret war against Fidel Castro in his cavernous Justice Department office .
 Operation Mongoose had been under way for a year, achieving virtually nothing . He was determined to make clear the president’s ‘dissatisfaction’ with the operation, he said . He said the president was ‘disappointed’ by the operation .
 Countless acts of sabotage had been planned, but none had been carried out successfully . Countless plans had been made but none were successfully carried out .
 Fidel and his bearded revolutionaries were still in power, inflicting daily humiliations on the U.S. The United States continues to be humiliated by the Cuban regime .
 Officials from the CIA, the Pentagon, and State Department were arrayed in a semicircle in front of the attorney general .
 A fresh assortment of his children’s watercolors decorated the walls, along with standard-issue government art .
 One of the documents on the untidy, paper-littered desk was a two-page memorandum captioned “secret mongoose” with the latest ideas for fomenting an insurrection inside Cuba .
 The attorney general title masked Bobby’s true role in government, which was closer to that of deputy president . Bobby's true role was to be deputy president, not attorney general .
 His extracurricular responsibilities included heading a secret committee known as the Special Group . His goal was to “get rid of” Castro and “liberate” Cuba from Communist domination .
 The addition of the president’s brother to the group was a way of emphasizing its importance to the rest of the bureaucracy . The president's brother is a member of the White House staff .
 Bobby had decreed that “the Cuban problem carries top priority in the U.S. government.” Bobby declared that the Cuban problem was “top priority”
 Soviet missiles were discovered on Cuba the day Soviet missiles discovered . By coincidence, he had arranged a long-scheduled review of covert action plans against Cuba .
 Half the officials in the room were unaware of the latest developments, and the president had stressed the need for total secrecy .
 Frustrated by the lack of “push” in getting on with acts of sabotage, he announced that he planned to devote “more personal attention” to Mongoose .
 To accomplish this, he would meet with the Mongoose operational team every morning at 0930 every morning until further notice .
 For Bobby, the appearance of Soviet missiles in the western hemisphere was not simply a political affront; it was a personal affront . Bobby's father died in the war of the Cold War in 1968, but his son survived his father's death .
 He was the emotional member of the family, as rough and intense as his brother was smooth and calm . He was a rough, intense and calm member of family, his brother says .
 JFK had been humiliated once again by Castro and Khrushchev, and RFK was determined to redress the insult . JFK had already been humiliated by the Soviet-Cuban regime .
 Kennedy was extraordinarily competitive, even by the intensely competitive standards of the Kennedy clan . He was the longest to nurse a grudge, and it took him to do so for the longest time .
 Michael Dobbs combines the skills of an experienced investigative journalist, a talented writer and an intelligent historical analyst . Dobbs is the author of the book, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post .
 Martin Sherwin: "No other history of the Cuban missile crisis matches this achievement."
 This book gives a day by day perspective on how two world leaders, John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, showed their ability to manage a crisis . John Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 This book puts forward the first reports I've seen of Soviet-Cuban plans to wipe out the Guantanamo Naval Base . The book is published by Pulitzer Prize-winning author David Gergen .
 Dobbs gives the first full account of what happened to an American U-2 over the Soviet Union . Dobbs: The U2 strayed over Soviet Union during the crisis has been known .
 Anyone reading One Minute to Midnight will quickly realize that we did need another—and that this is it . This is it. Anyone reading this book will realize it will be the first time we've seen a book like this .
 This is unquestionably the most complete and accurate account of the crisis that we have, and will no doubt long remain so. It will no longer remain so, says the author of the book .
 Michael Dobbs has managed to combine the careful and thorough research of a scholar into the ability of an able journalist to bring his findings to life . The story illuminates the historical events it examines with lively characterization of the people who made up the cast of the drama .
 Norman Mailer fused fact and fiction to create indelible portraits of such figures as Marilyn Monroe, Gary Gilmore, and Lee Harvey Oswald . The Gospel According to the Son was named one of the best books of the year by The Globe and Mail .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning and unforgettable classic about convicted killer Gary Gilmore now in a brand-new edition . Norman Mailer reports on the presidential conventions of 1968, the turbulent year from which today&rsquo;s bitterly divided country arose .
 Norman Mailer fashions an unprecedented portrait of one of the great enigmas in U.S. history . An American Mystery is perhaps his most important literary feat .