 The resulting showdown brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . The Russians call it the ""Caribbean Crisis"" and the Cubans call the ""October Crisis"
 From its inception, the Soviet missile operation entailed elaborate denial and deception efforts . The Soviet missile program was designed to cover up the Soviet launch of the Soviet Union's missile program .
 The craft of denying the United States information on the deployment of the missiles was the foundation of Khrushchev's audacious Cuban venture . The craft was the creation of the craft of the Soviet Union and deceiving U.S. policymakers .
 U.S., Russian, Cuban accounts revealed in declassiﬁed US, Russian, and Cuban accounts . D&D efforts can help us anticipate and overcome the efforts of a growing number of foreign adversaries today .
 Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles and SS-5 intermediate-range missiles, if launched from Cuba, would launch from Cuba . Range of Soviet missiles could range from 1 to 5,000 miles .
 Moscow has always had a ﬂair for D&D, known in Russian as maskirovka . The city is known for its reputation for its role in the World War II .
 Russia says it wants to prevent an adversary from discovering its intentions by deceiving him about the nature, scope, and timing of an operation . Its central tenet is to prevent from discovering Russian intentions, the Kremlin says .
 Maskirovka covers a broad range of concepts, from deception at the strategic planning level to camouﬂage at the troop level . The concept of deception is covered in a range of different levels .
 Russian military texts indicate that maskirovka is treated as an operational art to be polished by professors of military science and ofﬁcers who specialize in this area .
 Moscow also trained foreign forces to apply deception, including North Vietnamese units before the Tet offensive in 1968 and Egyptian forces before crossing the Suez Canal in 1973 .
 Anatoli Gribkov, then a senior member of the Soviet General Staff, provides revealing insights into the early planning of the operation .
 After Khrushchev decided to emplace the missiles in Cuba in the spring of 1962, the General Staff detailed only four generals and a colonel . He says that after the missiles were placed in Cuba, only four of the four generals were detailed .
 Semyon Ivanov, chief of the General Staff's Chief Operations Directorate, was in overall charge . Ivanov was in charge of the Russian military in Ukraine .
 During that summer, the circle of collaborators and contacts expanded to include members of each of the relevant service branches, but secrecy and need-to-know prevailed .
 Cuba was involved in the operation, but only a few were informed of the exact nature of the mission . The most senior ofﬁcers brought into the plan were at least told of Cuba's involvement .
 The top civilian and military ofﬁcials conceptualizing the operation did not see eye-to-eye about the likelihood of pulling off a successful deception . The top military and civilian officials were not optimistic about the success of the operation .
 First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan, Presidium member Frol Kozlov, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky, and Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces .
 Alternate Presidium member Sharaf Rashidov was brought in as well, possibly for the cover that he later provided for traveling delegations . The cover may have been provided by Sharaf, who later provided the cover to travel delegations.
 Biryuzov and his experts believed that the deployment could be made expeditiously and secretly, without the US discovering the missiles . The deployment of the missiles was possible, experts said .
 Mikoyan was surprised at this judgment and believed the marshal to be a fool . Mikoyans was surprised by this judgment . He said he believed the Marshal was a fool.
 Rashidov claimed that the missiles could be placed so as to blend in with the palm trees . The missiles would be hidden in the trees, he said . The Russian president said they could be hidden from the trees .
 Gribkov held that only somebody inexperienced in military matters could reach such a conclusion, given the extensive preparations needed for each missile site . He said only someone inexperienced could reach that conclusion given the preparations needed .
 Throughout the early planning stage, no secretaries were used to prepare ﬁnal typed texts . No secretaries used during the planning stages of the project .
 A colonel with good penmanship wrote the proposal that the Defense Council adopted . The proposal was written by a colonel who wrote it in a letter to the council .
 Malinovsky and Khrushchev approved full-ﬂedged plan on 4 July and 7 July . It grew into a full-fledged plan, still handwritten, which was approved by Malinovsky and Khrrushchev .
 From May through October, for reasons of security, no communications about the proposed, planned, and actual Soviet deployments in Cuba were sent . Even coded messages were sent, even by coded messages . For reasons, the Soviet Union did not communicate about the deployment in Cuba .
 Everything was hand-carried by members of the small coterie of senior ofﬁcials who were directly involved .
 The General Staff's code name for the operation was ANADYR . The code name was designed to mislead Soviets as well as foreigners about the destination of the equipment .
 Anadyr is the name of a river ﬂowing into the Bering Sea, the capital of the Chukotsky Autonomous District, and a bomber base in that desolate region . The name of the river is also known as a Russian bomber base .
 Troops called up for the Cuban expedition were told only that they were going to a cold region . Promoting the illusion, the troops that were called up were told that they would be in cold weather .
 ICBMs will be sent to a site on Novaya Zemlya, a large island in the Arctic where nuclear weapons had long been tested .
 Many units were outﬁtted with skis, felt boots and felt boots, and other winter equipment .
 Moscow taps four ground forces regiments from the Leningrad Military District in the north for dispatch to Cuba . Moscow tapped four regiments in the region for dispatch .
 The deception was so thorough that it fooled even senior Soviet ofﬁcers sent to Cuba . It fooled senior Soviet officials sent to the island nation .
 One general asked Gribkov why winter equipment and clothing had been provided . One general also asked why winter gear and clothing was provided .
 The general admonished him to ""think like an adult,"" and explained, ""It's called ANADYR for a reason" The general also explained, "Anadyr is a name for an animal"
 The ofﬁcials arrived in Havana with little fanfare on 29 May, amidst a delegation of agricultural experts headed by Rashidov . The delegation arrived in Cuba amidst a visit to Havana by the Russian president .
 Ivanov and several missile construction specialists and other military experts, whose job it was to determine whether the missiles could be deployed in secrecy, were tasked with deciding whether to deploy them in secrecy . Ivanov: "Ivanov's job is to determine if the missiles can be used in
 Ambassador Aleksandr Alekseev took Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro aside to explain that ""Engineer Petrov"" in the group actually was Marshal Biryuzov . The ambassador then explained that he needed to meet with el lider .
 ""Engineer Petrov"" was shown into Fidel Castro's ofﬁce. Only three hours later he was shown back into the Castro family .
 The Cuban leadership unanimously and enthusiastically gave its approval of the proposal . The Cuban leader gave his approval in principle . The proposal is expected to be approved by the Cuban leadership .
 Soviet maritime policy began to shift in accordance with these ﬁrst trips . Soviet maritime policies began to change after these trips .
 In June and July, the USSR began charter Western ships to carry general cargo from the Soviet Union to Cuba . The USSR reserved its own freighters for carrying military cargo, reserving its own .
 Cuban delegation led by Raul Castro traveled to Moscow to discuss Soviet military shipments, including nuclear missiles . During 2-17 July, a Cuban delegation met with Soviet officials in Moscow .
 The Russians began to dispatch ofﬁcers and specialists covertly to Cuba by air by air . The Russians were dispatched covertly by air to the island nation .
 Issa Pliyev, traveling under the name ""Pavlov,"" arrived in Cuba to command the Soviet contingent in Cuba . The Soviet contingent was the first to arrive in Cuba in the Soviet Union .
 Their covers, however, could not have withstood probing . They had been assigned to occupations about which they knew nothing . Their covers were not withstanding probing, but they had to be covered .
 They were urged to consult the few genuine specialists traveling with them to gain some rudimentary knowledge of their ostensible jobs .
 U.S. intelligence analysis at the time speculated that the new Tu-114 was bringing Soviet military ofﬁcers and sensitive electronic and signal-monitoring equipment to Cuba .
 Then-Minister for Industry Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara and the head of the Cuban militia led another delegation to Moscow during 27 August-2 September .
 In the Soviet Union, the men and equipment destined for Cuba were assembled, loaded, and moved by rail at night under reinforced guard .
 To mask the immensity of the overall effort, shipments to Cuba left from eight ports . Western access to these ports was closed off .
 It was normal for the Soviets to close ports when munitions were being loaded, but this time the surface-to-surface missiles were being put on ships under tight security and cover of darkness .
 The troops were housed at nearby military facilities during the two or three days required to load a ship . The troops would be housed at local military facilities .
 No letters, telegrams, or telephone calls were permitted . The rule also applied to the ofﬁcers, who also had to be informed .
 The ships' crew members, some of whom made more than one run to Cuba, were forbidden shore leave and correspondence . Crew members were forbidden to write or write to Cuba .
 Secrecy was so strict that couriers carried all messages between ports and the Defense Ministry in Moscow . Criers carried messages from ports to Defense Ministry .
 On board, the Soviets applied the same maskirovka measures that they had adopted when they began to send weapons to Cuba .
 Packing crates or special shipping containers concealed and protected weapons carried as deck cargo . Special shipping containers are used to conceal weapons .
 Certain telltale military equipment was boarded up with planks to make it look like the ship's superstructure . Planks were made of planks and planks made to look like a superstructure of the ship .
 The Soviets shielded crated military hardware with metal sheets to defeat infrared photography . The metal sheets were used to shield missiles and launchers from infrared photographs .
 They stored other combat and specialized equipment below, out of sight . They stored them in the basement .
 Ordinary automobiles, trucks, tractors, and harvesters were placed on the top deck to convey the impression that only civilian and agricultural gear was being transported .
 The freighter Poltava, which sailed to Cuba in September, was a good example of the ship .
 On deck were cargo trucks, none of which were associated with the missiles . None of the missiles were equipped with missiles .
 Some U.S. experts speculated that the ship might be carrying ballistic missiles deep in its hold, because the Soviets tended to use largehatch ships of the Poltava and Omsk classes to deliver such missiles .
 The ship captains were not told where their cargoes were to be delivered . Ship captains had to be informed of the location of their cargo .
 Before casting off, the captain and the troop commander jointly received a large sealed envelope . Captain and troop commander were given a sealed envelope before casting off .
 Unfastening it, they found a smaller envelope to be opened only at a certain set of geographic coordinates in the Atlantic Ocean . Unfastened it, the envelope was found to be found in a different place in the ocean .
 When they reached the designated point, an ofﬁcer from the KGB's Special Department joined them for the opening of the envelope . The envelope was opened at a designated point in Moscow .
 The instructions told them to proceed to a Cuban port and authorized them to inform the ship's company of the destination . The instructions said they should proceed to the port .
 The study materials on Cuba were buried in these packets, so that not even the compilers would know the real focus of the operation . The material was buried in the packets to hide the study materials from the public .
 Soviet ships made false declarations when they exited the Black Sea and the Bosporus . The Soviet ships were made to make false declarations . They made false statements when they left the Black sea .
 Cargo records were altered and tonnage declared was well below what was being carried . The tonnages declared were well below the amount being carried by the ship .
 The ships would declare from Odessa, Ukraine, although they had loaded at other ports . The ships had loaded from other ports including Odessa .
 Often ships going to Cuba listed Conakry, Guinea, as their destination . Often ships bound for Cuba listed the destination as destination .
 Captains were under orders to prevent any foreigners from boarding, even the Turkish pilots who usually guided civilian ships through those tricky waters . Not only were the soldiers kept below decks, but the captains were also under orders .
 Whenever the pilots approached the Soviet ships, the Soviet crews would lower bulging parcels of vodka, brandy, caviar, sausages, and other delicacies .
 Should evasive action fail, they were to destroy all documents with state and military secrets . They were to take measures to protect personnel, and sink the ships .
 Should their vessels experience mechanical failure en route, the captains were to explain to ships offering assistance that they were exporting automobiles .
 The USSR had few cars of any kind and was not recognized as an automobile exporter . Had this occurred, it might have provided clues to the discovery of Soviet cars .
 Moscow also resorted to diplomatic means to reduce U.S. reconnaissance of the ships en route . The Russian-led Baltic Sea fleet was en route to Russia .
 In July 1962, the Soviets described US reconnaissance missions in international waters as ""harassment,"" and requested through their GRU ofﬁcer in Washington, Col. Col. John Sutter . The Soviets described the missions as 'harassment'
 Georgi Bolshakov, that these ﬂights be stopped for the sake of better bilateral relations, writes . Bolshkov: "These ﬁights should be stopped"
 Bolshakov met with Attorney General Robert Kennedy more than a dozen times . Bolshkov met with attorney general Robert Kennedy several times before Kennedy's death .
 The troops were kept below decks except for a few minutes at night when small groups were allowed to exercise and get some fresh air .
 During the tropical days, heavy tarpaulins covered the hatches to the lower decks where the troops were berthed . During the stormy period, heavy equipment was used to protect troops .
 Many of the troops on board swore that they would never again set foot on a ship . Many of them swore they would not set foot in the ocean .
 Although the restrictions made conditions on board board nightmarish, the deceptions worked . The deceptions proved to be the key to the success .
 In early fall, they began to exert control over the movements of all foreigners on the island . The islanders began exerting control over their movements in early fall .
 News reporters and foreign embassy personnel were forbidden to travel outside Havana . News reporters were also forbidden from traveling outside Havana.
 Cuban agents surveilled and harassed foreigners, especially British embassy ofﬁcials . In the city, Cuban agents often harassed foreigners .
 Havana, Mariel, Cabanas, Bahia Honda, Matanzas, La Isabella, Nuevitas, Nicaro, Casilda, Cienfuegos and Santiago de Cuba .
 They earmarked three of the islands to receive surface-to-surface missiles and nuclear warheads . The islands are located on the northwest coast and the south coast .
 Even before the Soviet ships approached Cuban ports, a number of maskirovka precautions had been implemented . The Soviet ships were not allowed to enter Cuba .
 At Mariel, the Soviets built a large cinder-block wall around the unloading area so that none of the port activity could be observed by land-based agents . The Soviets built the wall around Mariel so that no land based agents could watch .
 Local inhabitants within a mile of the waterfront in Mariel had to evacuate their homes . Local inhabitants in the area evacuated their homes after the storm .
 The SS-4 missiles arrived in Mariel on board the Omsk on 8 September . The missiles are the first to be sent to Mariel aboard the ship .
 According to one source, this ship carried 99 nuclear charges . Over 20 times the explosive power dropped by all Allied bombers on Germany throughout World War II . Most of the military technicians also came ashore at Mariel .
 Deception activities throughout the transit stage and the strict security measures at Mariel hindered the ability of U.S. intelligence agencies to estimate the number of Soviet troops . Deception and security measures hindered the intelligence agencies .
 The plan for ANADYR that was approved in early July had called for moving 50,874 men . The plan was approved by the government in July and called for 50,000 men to move .
 The total included personnel for hospitals, bakeries, mechanical workshops, and other support units . All with a three-month supply of food and fuel . That total included people for hospitals and bakeries .
 The plan was revised to eliminate submarine and surface ship squadrons due to potential resupply problems . Concerns that their presence might sound an alarm bell in Washington .
 By late October, the size of the contingent in Cuba had reached about 41,900 personnel . The U.S. contingent was quadruple the size that intelligence agencies had said it was .
 Cuba's secrecy created more than a few glitches in the hectic initial days in Cuba . Nonetheless, in the early days, secrecy created some glitches .
 General Staff had neglected to provide passwords to facilitate communication between the arriving transport ships and the Cuban greeting parties . The General Staff did not provide passwords for the arriving ships and greeting parties to communicate .
 Some ship captains and on-board troop commanders had difﬁculty accepting orders to reroute their ships from their originally assigned ports . Some ships were rerouted from their original assigned ports to other ports .
 The captain of one ship even turned back out to sea rather than allow a Cuban patrol boat crew to come aboard to guide him to his anchorage .
 Usually two or three days were required to unload a ship with military cargo, and maskirovka requirements always complicated the work .
 Equipment that had at least a superﬁcial resemblance to agricultural machinery was unloaded in broad daylight . Weapons and other military equipment could be unloaded only at night . Equipment that looked like agricultural machinery could not be unloaded in daylight .
 From the docks, specialized equipment was stored in sheds or moved directly to designated bases along back roads at night .
 Hundreds of Russian troops in fatigues seen in Havana and in seemingly endless convoys along Cuba's main highways . U.S. received reports from friendly nations, newspaper correspondents, and other sources .
 Many young Russian men also had been observed sightseeing in the Cuban capital in checked, cotton shirts and cheap trousers .
 Cubans gave a steady stream of clues to U.S. SIGINT collectors . The Soviets and Cubans took extra precautions to keep gawkers away from the wharves and moved the nuclear cargoes away under black canvas .
 The Soviets and Cubans mounted a major campaign using HUMINT channels to bolster the overall deception effort . At the same time, the Soviets and Cuban leaders mounted a massive campaign to bolster their efforts .
 The planners leaked accurate information about the deployment so as to mask it, planners leaked it, it was revealed . Planers leaked the information to mask the deployment of troops .
 The CIA discounted the information, because it did not consider the groups and people peddling it to be credible . The CIA did not believe the information was credible, the CIA said .
 This strategy was highly effective, according to a former Cuban intelligence ofﬁcer . This strategy, he says, was 'highly effective'
 The deception campaign exploited the émigrés' lack of credibility was unwittingly backstopped by correspondence between Cubans and their friends and relatives in the U.S. It was unwittingly backed up by correspondence from Cubans in the United States .
 From June to September, Cuban intelligence intercepted some 17,000 letters that had something to say about the deployment of Soviet troops and missiles in Cuba . The letters were intercepted between June and September .
 In late September, Cuban authorities permitted those letters to arrive in Miami as part of the deception campaign . The letters were allowed to arrive by Cuban authorities in Miami .
 For U.S. intelligence analysts, the amount of ""noise"" from Cuba grew deafening . The amount of "noise" from Cuba became deafening for U.N. analysts .
 Cubans, tourists, foreign diplomats in Cuba are reporting in a private capacity . Cubans and tourists are reporting from Cuba in Cuba .
 At the CIA focal point at Opa-Locka, Florida, intelligence ofﬁcers screened countless reports and debriefed Cubans who had been on the island . Intelligence of-the-counterterrorism team debriefs Cubans .
 Most of the reports from Cuba were exagerated or imaginary—some were so outrageous that they were laughable and made all the others suspect . Most of these reports were so absurd that they made all of the other suspects suspect .
 There were far-fetched tales of African troops with rings in their noses, lurking Mongolians, and even Chinese troops .
 Earlier erroneous reports of Soviet military equipment secreted away in caves, underground hangers, and concrete domes . These accounts followed earlier reports of secret military equipment .
 The previous reports had cast doubt on the reliability of sources . U.S. analysts found it easy to dismiss the stream of reports of Soviet missiles . The United States had been skeptical of previous reports .
 The canvas-covered SS-4 missiles were moved in night convoys, under tight security, to sites in the interior of the island . From the port areas, the missiles were . moved in convoys under tight . security .
 Security was tightened so that troops disembarked dressed as civilians . Escorts were required to wear Cuban military uniforms and issue commands along the convoy routes only in Spanish .
 On the march or bivouacked, Soviet military men remained dressed in civilian clothing and were forbidden to mention their military designations or the ranks of their commanders .
 All communications between the Soviet military headquarters in Havana and units in the ﬁeld had to be made in person, not written or sent by radio . The Soviet military had to make all communications in Cuba in person .
 Soviet troops maintained total radio silence in order to mask their identity, location, and troop strength from U.S. intelligence .
 Soviet and Cuban ofﬁcials found it remarkable that the operation remained secret for a full month after the missiles arrived in Cuba .
 The missile carriers were too big to go unnoticed on the back roads of the island for long . The missiles carriers are too big for the islanders to ignore .
 As they rumbled through the little Cuban towns, they left a trail of downed telephone poles and mailboxes . As they left them, the Cuban towns were also left with downed phone poles .
 When a peasant's shack had to be moved or knocked down to allow a missile carrier to turn a tight corner, those who witnessed the event were bound to talk .
 Soviet and Cuban efforts to discredit such anecdotal accounts paid off . The Soviet Union and Cuban government tried to discredit the anecdotal accounts .
 Soviet spokesmen kept up a steady stream of denials and disinformation in September . Disingenuous Diplomacy .
 Dobrynin also assured his brother that the Soviet military buildup was not of any signiﬁcance . The Attorney General also said that the military buildup in the Soviet Union was not a sign of any form of instability .
 Dobrynin assured U.S. Ambassador to U.N. Adlai Stevenson that the USSR was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba . The following day, Dobrynins assured the United States Ambassador to the United Nations that the Soviet Union had only provided defensive weapons .
 In late September, Khrushchev embarked on a barnstorming tour in the Turkmen and Uzbek republics . Khrushchev visited Turkmen, Uzbek Republics .
 This high-proﬁle trip, which extended into the ﬁrst week of October, emphasized agricultural themes . The trip was part of a series of high-profile events .
 In none of Khrushchev's many speeches during his travels was there any reference sugesting agression or threats to the U.S. In . none of his many speeches in the 1950s and '60s was there no reference suging . agression, threats or threats
 State Department ofﬁcial, Chester Bowles, questioned Dobrynin on whether Moscow intended to put offensive weapons in Cuba . Ambassador denied any such intention . State Department official: "Russia's intention was not to put weapons into Cuba"
 They were constructed in areas expropriated from Cuban landowners, had no fences or walls, and were exposed to aerial observation . They were built in areas of Cuba expropriation .
 Cuba's forests were generally sparse, consisting of a few clusters of palm trees or a thick undergrowth of bushes . Standard maskirovka doctrine gave preference to deployment in wooded areas, yet Cuba's forest was sparse .
 SS-4 launchers are anchored to large concrete slabs and surrounded by multiple buildings, fuel trucks and tanks . The missiles are surrounded by hundreds of meters of thick cable . The launchers can be anchored to buildings, tanks, tanks and buildings .
 Soviet commanders forbade their troops from taking any leave from deployment sites . They also ruled out using Cuban labor .
 Soviet commanders and planners knew that although the tractor-trailers and associated large objects could be covered by canvas, their masses could not be shrunk .
 Heavy equipment might obscure part of the missile site signature from ground-level, but from above it stuck out markedly . From above it sticks out markedly from the site .
 On 14 October, a U-2 aircraft photographed the area of San Cristobal, where the ﬁrst missile unit was being deployed . The U.S. missile unit is being deployed in the region .
 Washington stepped up intelligence collection, readied massive air attack and invasion plans . The U.S. also engaged in extensive policy deliberations in the Executive Committee .
 The Russians informed Raul Castro that more attention would have to be paid to concealing the site work and camouﬂaging the missiles and other heavy equipment .
 The Soviet units stretched tarpaulins and nets over the missiles, and daubed paint or mud across the canvases . The Soviets covered the missiles with nets, and painted them with mud or paint .
 This marked the ﬁrst time that they tried to conceal their missiles from the air, probably hoping to mask the total number of missiles and protect against sabotage . This is the first time that the U.S. has attempted to conceal missiles .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed on a formula to end the crisis in Cuba . Kennedy imposed a naval and air quarantine on the shipment of offensive military equipment to Cuba .
 Many of the slips occurred not in the USSR but in Cuba, when Soviet units had to unload their weapons, transport them to the ﬁeld, and set them up .
 In the 1980s, a special maskirovka directorate was created within the General Staff . In the 1990s, it was created by the Soviet Union .
 President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board issued a major postmortem report over the signature of its chairman, James R Killian, Jr. Such an organization would have played a vital role had it existed in 1962 .
 The 10-page Killian Report took the Community to task for inadequate early warning of hostile intentions and capabilities . Failure to provide senior policymakers with meaningful, cumulative assessments of the available intelligence indicators, the report said .
 The awareness and systematic study of foreign D&D had not been developed, and would not emerge until some 20 years later . Within U.S. intelligence organizations, the awareness and . systematic study had not yet been developed .
 The U.S. could have uncovered Khrushchev's great gamble long before Maj. Maj. Gen. Vladimir Kagan: "It's likely that with a trained, wellstaffed, and deception-aware analytic corps"
 Only now, four decades later, can we uncover the extent of the use of deception in the events leading to the Cuban missile crisis . Only now can we find out the extent the extent .
 The Soviet effort to cloak the truth of its strategic missile deployment within a body-guard of lies, most U.S. planners could not comprehend . To paraphrase Sir Winston Churchill, perhaps the least-explored aspect of the crisis was the Soviet effort .
 The SS-4 mediumrange ballistic missiles had a range of up to 2,500 kilometers . The missiles were deployed to Cuba . They were deployed in Cuba .
 The SS-5 intermediate-range ballistic missiles had a range of up to 5,000 kilometers . The missiles were launched by the South Korean state of Korea in 2007 .
 Defense Intelligence Agency , Soviet/Warsaw Pact Ground Forces Camouﬂage and Concealment Techniques, DDI-1100-161-78, January 1979, vii.78, . January 1979 . Defense intelligence Agency .
 The author was a key ﬁgure at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in 1962 .
 This source draws extensively on input from key Soviet/Russian and American ofﬁcials who had a hand in the crisis . This source includes input from the Soviets, Russians and Americans involved in the conflict .
 United States SIGINT revealed that Soviet vessels were making false port declarations and listing less than their known cargo-carrying capacity . U.S. SIGINT: Soviet vessels made false port declaration and listed less than capacity .
 57 voyages to Cuba had taken place in a little over a month, the National Security Agency says . Some ships were on their second voyage in that time .
 The Cubans probably knew that the British were helping the United States, which did not have formal representation in Havana . The U.S. had no formal representative in Cuba .
 Gribkov's map puts Nicaro in the wrong location, apparently confusing it with Niquero on the Southeast coast . Nicaro is located in Nicaro on the South American coast .
 There is conﬂicting source information on the number of warheads speciﬁcally for the SS-4 missiles . There is no information on how many warheads will be used .
 This issue cannot be resolved based on current evidence, but 36 appears to be a likely ﬁgure as that tracks with Soviet doctrinal requirements for reﬁre missiles .
 The United States SIGINT ship Oxford was hugging the Cuban coastline at that time . The ship was hugging the Cuban coast .
 Domingo Amuchastegui, ""Cuban Intelligence and the October Crisis,"" Intelligence and National Security, Volume 13, Number 3, Autumn 1998, 101 .
 This is a special issue on intelligence and the missile crisis, edited by James G Blight and David A Welch .
 It is a unique collection of articles on the roles played by different intelligence services . It is the first of a series of articles by the British Intelligence Services .
 The maskirovka requirement is similar to that used during the Korean conﬂict, when Soviet pilots were instructed to speak in Chinese while ﬂying missions to try to fool United States SIGINT units .
 A cautionary note here is that this article is the only published account by a former Cuban intelligence ofﬁcer thus far .
 Only some of the nuclear-capable delivery systems were ready for action in late October . The discovery of the weapons in Cuba was unknown at the time .
 Of the 36 SS-4s deployed, only about half were ready to be fueled, an 18-hour process . Not one had been programmed for ﬂight .
 This revelation comes from a former GRU ofﬁcer who wrote under the pen name of ""Viktor Suvorov"" and produced books and articles on the Soviet military and intelligence forces in the 1980s .