 Answer all the questions on one option only . Answer booklet in order to avoid further questions .
 Follow the instructions on the front cover of the answer booklet . Option B: Twentieth century topic . Option A: Nineteenth century topic. Nineteenth-century topic .
 If you need additional answer paper, ask the invigilator for a continuation booklet . If you want more information, check out a continuation book .
 The Indian Mutiny of 1857–58 was the result of resentment that had been building during British rule . British rule was the source of resentment against British rule in India .
 It started with a mutiny of sepoys in Meerut, but soon turned into a much wider rising against British rule . Cities such as Delhi, Cawnpore and Lucknow either fell to the rebels or were put under heavy siege .
 In some places, such as Cawnpore, British women and children were killed . In some cases, such a British woman and child was killed .
 Accounts published in Britain showed the British East India Company doing this with great heroism . The army of the company had to deal with the troubles in India .
 After the rising was put down there were demands from Britain that the rebels be dealt with severely . After the rebels were put down, Britain demanded that they be dealt severely .
 The Qaisar Bagh Palace had fallen on 14 March and within half an hour, discipline was at an end, and the officers had lost all command over their men . The officers lost control of their men after the fall .
 On 17 March General Campbell was obliged to establish patrols to prevent plunder .
 In the city, while the vanguard were fighting against the natives’ fire from the houses, the rearguard plundered and destroyed to their hearts’ content . In the . city, the . vanguard was fighting against . the natives' fire from . the
 Matters were still so bad that the most strict orders were issued for the suppression of plunder and outrage . Matters were so bad they issued strict orders to suppress plunder .
 This is indeed a dreadful state of things in a civilised army in the nineteenth century, says the historian . The army is now in a state of war with the British Army, says historian .
 We are told that such things are the normal consequences of war . But these are the deeds of the British army, and therefore we are told . We are not allowed to discuss the situation in the UK .
 It was later republished in ‘Heroes of Britain in Peace and War’, 1880 . It was then republished .
 The Victoria Cross is the highest British award for bravery for members of the armed forces . It is awarded for bravery in bravery by the highest honour in the country's armed forces.
 The most hostile of our foreign critics are in awe of our administration of India, says President Obama . India's foreign critics have been "in awe" of the Obama administration .
 The last of these heroes are among us still, white-haired and too often infirm, but the very men who saved India from itself in 1857 when the tide of rebellion threatened to wipe away our rule .
 From a book entitled ‘In Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Indian Mutiny’, published in Britain in 1907 in 1907 .
 A very large proportion of the English community has a violent hatred of every Indian of every class . SOURCE F. F. S. F .
 There is a cruelty, even from those who ought to set a better example, which is impossible to see without feeling shame for one’s fellow countrymen . The cruelty is even from people who should be setting a good example .
 We reject the desire to impose Christianity on any of our subjects . We strictly charge all those in authority under us that they abstain from all interference with the religious belief of any of us .
 We deeply regret the misery which has been brought upon India by the acts of ambitious men, who have deceived their countrymen and led them into open rebellion . We regret the 'misery' which has brought on India .
 We desire to show our mercy by pardoning the offences of those who have been misled, but who desire to return to the path of duty . We want to show mercy .
 Our mercy will be extended to all offenders, except those who have been convicted of having taken part in the murder of British subjects . Those convicted of taking part in murder will not be allowed to be tried again in prison .
 From Queen Victoria’s Proclamation to the Princes and People of India, November 1858 . Queen Victoria's Proclamation . From 1858, Queen Victoria was Queen of India and Queen of England .
 They argue that the broader context of the Cold War and the national interests of the USA and the USSR were crucial factors in the decision . They say that the wider context was crucial factors .
 Kennedy spoke to an American reporter in 1961 shortly after his disastrous Vienna Summit meeting with Khrushchev . Kennedy was speaking to a reporter shortly after the disastrous meeting .
 President Kennedy issued an ultimatum, demanding that we remove our missiles and bombers from Cuba . President Kennedy also ordered that the U.S. remove its missiles, bombers and missiles from Cuba.
 I remember the exchange with the President especially well because I started it and was at the centre of the action at our end of the correspondence . I remember it as I started the exchange because I was at centre of it .
 "I take complete responsibility for the fact that the President and I entered into direct contact at the most crucial and dangerous stage of the crisis," he said .
 Dobrynin’s report of a meeting with Robert Kennedy went something like this, ‘The President is appealing directly to Chairman Khrushchev.’ The President is appealed directly to chairman of the Council of Soviet Union, according to the report .
 For some time I had felt there was a danger that he would lose control of his military, and now he was admitting this to us himself . For some . time I felt there were . a . danger that the . danger of losing control of the . military, he said .
 We sent a note saying we agreed to remove the missiles on condition the President gave us his assurance that Cuba would not be invaded . We sent it to Cuba on condition that the President would not invade Cuba, he said .
 Evidence has established that a series of offensive missile sites are now in preparation on Cuba . The Cuban government is preparing to launch a missile attack on the island .
 Their purpose is to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere . Their purpose can be none other than to provide the nuclear strike capabilities .
 The characteristics of these new missile sites indicate two types of installations, says CNN.com.com .
 Several of the missiles are capable of striking Washington DC, Mexico City or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United States . Several of them include medium range ballistic missiles capable of hitting Washington DC or Mexico City .
 Additional sites appear to be designed for intermediate range ballistic missiles – capable of travelling twice as far . Additional sites also appear to have been designed for intercontinental ballistic missiles . The sites are believed to be located in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 This transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base is an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas . This is a serious threat to peace, security of the Americas, says Julian Zelizer .
 President Kennedy spoke to the American people on 22 October 1962 . President Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 The United States, it is worth repeating, could have erased every important Soviet military installations and population centres in two or three hours, while the strike capability of the USSR was negligible . The U.S. could have wiped out every important military installation and population centre in just a few hours
 Although Kennedy held the trump cards, he granted the Communist empire a privileged sanctuary in the Caribbean by means of the ‘no invasion’ pledge .
 This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download from www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination .
 Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group . The assessment group is based in Cambridge, England, and is based on Cambridge Assessment .