 American reconnaissance aircraft discovered the missiles in October . The missiles were discovered before they could become operational .
 President Kennedy demanded their removal and instituted a blockade of Cuba, while calling up reserve forces . President Kennedy ordered a blockade, and the blockade was imposed .
 The world stood on the brink of a nuclear holocaust, but the Soviets, under Premier Khrushchev, blinked and agreed to remove their missiles . n the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs crisis, the U.S. continued to make plans for the ouster of Fidel Castro .
 In August 1962, reports reached Washington of a significant increase in Soviet aid . The Soviet Union increased its aid to the United States .
 Reports stated that over the previous month, 20 Soviet ships had arrived in Cuba with military supplies . Reports said over the past month, over the last month, the Soviet ships were reported to have arrived with supplies .
 Reconnaissance photos soon made it apparent that the Soviets were installing Sam 2 anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviets in 1961 .
 The Sam 2 was good only against very high flying aircraft such as the U-2 . It was designed to be able to intercept very high-flying aircraft such a U.2 .
 The reason for the missile buildup became the subject of much speculation . It is not known why the missile program is being implemented .
 If the missiles were not there to protect against an invasion, they were obviously there to . protect something else else .
 Many theories abounded throughout September and early October, but there was no hard evidence . No hard evidence was found to support the theories .
 On October 14th, the sky over Cuba was clear, and a U-2 flight took place . The sky was clear over Cuba, and the plane was flying over Cuba .
 Photo experts concluded that the Soviets were building medium-range missile sites in Cuba . By the following night, photo experts had concluded that they were building sites in the country .
 At 8:45 AM on Tuesday, national security advisor McGeorge Bundy knocked on the president's door and broke the news to him . The president is expected to make a speech at the White House on Tuesday .
 Director John McCone; Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon; United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson; U.N. Ambassador Adm. Stevenson; Undersecretary of State for economic affairs George Ball .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Wall Street banker Robert Lovett attended the meetings .
 For almost a week, the president and his advisor tried to decide on a course of action . The president and adviser were unable to come up with an immediate solution .
 In the midst of the meetings, on Thursday, Soviet foreign minister Gromyko had a meeting with Kennedy . Kennedy was visiting the Soviet Union in Moscow, Russia, in 1968 .
 At the meeting, he gave assurance that the Soviets would never place any offensive weapons in Cuba . At the time, he said that he gave assurances that he would not place offensive weapons .
 The initial response, among most of the participants, was that the missiles had to be bombed . "The initial response was that [the missiles had] been bombed," he says . "Most of the people in the U.S. were surprised by the response, he adds .
 First, a surprise attack on the missiles reminded many of Pearl Harbor in reverse in reverse . First, the surprise attack was a surprise strike on missiles . Second, the attack on missiles was a direct strike on the U.S.
 Kennedy and his advisors felt that foreign governments would not understand the need for such drastic actions . Finally, Kennedy felt foreign governments wouldn't understand the drastic action . Kennedy and advisors believed foreign governments didn't understand need for drastic measures .
 Congressional leaders were brought to the White House and informed of the crisis . On Monday, October 22, Congressional leaders met with White House officials to discuss crisis .
 That evening at 8:00 PM, the president addressed the country about the crisis . President Obama addressed the nation that evening .
 As he spoke, 22 U.S. airforce planes turned toward Cuba, in case the country responded to the speech with an attack .
 In his speech, he announced the quarantine, demanded that the missiles be removed, and stated that further actions would be taken if they remained in place .
 56 American warships steamed to their positions to enforce the blockade . The blockade began immediately .
 All military leaves were canceled, and United States forces were placed on a DEFCON-3 alert . The U.S. military was placed on the alert, with all military leaves canceled .
 Organization of American States met and voted unanimously to condemn the Soviet actions, and demand the removal of Soviet missiles . Organisation of American states met and met to condemn Soviet actions .
 On Wednesday, as the blockade went into effect, a number of Russian ships stopped in mid-sea . The White House received word that the blockade had begun . The blockade began Wednesday .