 Major Richard S Heyser’s U-2 mission over San Cristobal Cuba . Not twenty fours hours before, McGeorge Bundy received the results of the mission . The mission was carried out by a U.S. Navy U.2 aircraft .
 The president’s administration had given the order to conduct reconnaissance missions over the island of Cuba . In light of recent mysterious Soviet and Cuban activities developing in the Caribbean Sea and Atlantic Ocean .
 In particular a fifty-mile trapezoidal swath of territory in western Cuba was to be looked upon under intense scrutiny . The Cuban government was to look at a 50-mile wide swath of land .
 CIA agent reported in the second week of September that this stretch of land was being guarded closely by Peruvian, Colombian, and actual Soviet soldiers . A CIA agent said in September that the area was guarded closely .
 There was a real reason to be suspicious of the activity in western Cuba, says CNN iReporter .
 The first of this U-2 reconnaissance mission would reveal a shocking discovery . The mission would be the first of a U.2 mission to find the U.S.
 U-2 reconnaissance reports that Bundy received in full detail two 70-foot-long MRBMs at San Cristobal . Bundy received the reports in detail . The U.2 reconnaissance mission was part of a U.S. mission to carry out an attack on the Philippines .
 Bundy would eventually have to expose to President Kennedy would sound alarms not just in his administration or in the United States of America, but throughout the entire world . Bundy would have to reveal his story to the president . Bundy's story would have shocked the world, including the world .
 He opted to allow him a good night’s rest, the last he would have for some time, as it turned out .
 Bundy felt there was nothing the president could do about the missiles that night anyway, and he would need to be sharp the next morning . Bundy: "There was nothing to be done with the missiles" Bundy said he would be sharp and ready for the next day .
 The U.S. intelligence community received word of the discovery of the U-2 before going to bed on October 15 . Bundy and the leadership of the United States intelligence community, Dean Rusk and his team at State, as well as McNamara and the deputy secretary of defense,
 U-2 mission that flew over Cuba had spotted two nuclear missiles and six missile transports southwest of Havana . Bundy informed Kennedy that the U.2 mission had spotted the missiles .
 Khrushchev had made the twin promise that “nothing will be undertaken before the American Congressional elections that could complicate the international situation or aggravate the tension in the relations between our two countries” and ensured the president through his own brother Robert F Kennedy .
 No weapons capable of hitting any target in the continental United States were being placed in Cuba at this time . This last and final statement left the entire administration to believe that no offensive nuclear missiles were being put in Cuba .
 The news brought to the Kennedy administration in the form of the U-2's telltale photographs made nonsense of both of Khrushchev’s pledges . The news was brought to Kennedy administration by the U.2's photographs .
 The Soviet Union had equipped Cuba with an arsenal of Soviet nuclear missiles despite a U.S. statement only a month early that the United States would not tolerate such a situation in the Western Hemisphere . But most importantly the Soviet Union also had a nuclear missile arsenal .
 He thought that he had done everything possible to defuse and smooth over tense relations with the Soviet Union even before he took office in 1960 .
 This devastating news from Cuba would result in the tense period in Cold War history to date and perhaps its tensest period in the entire history of the war . The news would lead to a tense period of the entire Cold War .
 Kennedy decided to limit the information regarding the devastating news from Cuba to as small a group as possible . Kennedy said he wanted to keep the news private to a small group of friends .
 This group would come to be known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . It would later be known and shortened to simply Ex Comm. Ex Comm .
 This would be the group of Washington’s sharpest and most influential minds that would more or less decide the fate of the nation and the world . The group would be Washington's sharpest minds, the group would decide fate of nation and world .
 The group would come to include Charles Bohlen, the old Kremlin hand who was recently named U.S. ambassador to France . Bohlen was recently appointed United States ambassador to French .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Undersecretary of State George Ball and Undersecretaries for Latin America George Ball would also be in attendance . Ambassador at Large Llewellyn Thompson would also attend .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and his deputies Roswell Gilpatric and Paul Nitze represented the Defense Department . Defense Secretary McNamara attended the ceremony .
 John McCone, head of the CIA, was away on an urgent family matter, replaced by his deputy Marshall “Pat” Carter . The NPIC head of Arthur Lundahl, whose analysts had found the missile sites on the U-2 photographs, was also represented by the
 Rounding out the group were McGeorge Bundy and the Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorensen, as well as Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon . The group also included the Kennedy administration's Treasury Secretary .
 Robert F Kennedy was joined by the President’s brother and closest advisor, the Attorney General of the United States, Robert F. Kennedy . The group of Washington's sharpest minds was joined and highly influenced by President Kennedy's brother .
 Robert F Kennedy would prove to be one of the most important person responsible in deciding the fate of the two world superpowers and essentially the entire world . Nikita S Khrushchev, the Premier of the Soviet Union, and his own brother, John F Kennedy, the President of the
 Bobby Kennedy played a key role in trying to guarantee America’s worst nightmare would never come to being . Even before the crisis reached a head when the American government finally discovered the nuclear missiles in western Cuba .
 Kennedy attempted to shape and relay messages and negotiations between the two superpowers in question . Through his own personal back channel to the Kremlin, a Soviet intelligence officer and member of the KGB, Georgi Bolshakov, was a KGB officer . Kennedy was in the process of trying to shape
 Robert F Kennedy felt a degree of personal insult and damage to his own pride . When Kennedy was deceived through these private and often personal channels, there was no question that . Kennedy was .
 Kennedy would play a key role throughout all of the Ex Comm meetings . While his brother was away, there was no question that he was in charge of these meetings .
 Throughout these meetings, Bobby’s own views on how to deal with this dramatic situation evolved from a rather hawkish and indignant position; a wish to get even, to a much more moderate and sensible, even dovish position .
 Kennedy would play an important role in shaping the final course of action in handling the drama at hand . Kennedy is expected to play a key role in helping shape the outcome of the situation .
 Kennedy would play the role of messenger and negotiator with the Soviet ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, in negotiating the final deal and trade off to defuse the conflict and end it once and for all . Kennedy would also play role of negotiator with Dobrynlin in negotiating final
 Less than ten men in both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were involved in the secret negotiations . The knowledge of the secret negotiating, the knowledge of which was possessed by less then ten men at this time, is also laden with controversy .
 Without his presence it would have been unknown which direction this war would have taken . Without him presence it is unknown which way this conflict would have gone .
 It would be Robert F Kennedy whom the president would rely on and trust the most in this situation . The president would be relying heavily on Kennedy, the president says .
 He was one of the most vocal in dealing with the conflict and certainly the most rational . He was a rational and vocal leader in the world of politics, he says .
 He helped keep control of the situation and staved off the continued assaults of the war hawks in congress who truly looked to attain the upper hand in the method of dealing with this conflict .
 His great and important role in this conflict will be discussed, from his secret back channels to the Kremlin in the months before the crisis, to the deals he would eventually present and make to the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin .
 The GRU began his grueling training process in 1943, while the war with Hitler was still very much in full swing . The training process began in 1943 .
 Bolshakov trained in a vigorous apprenticeship for seven years to become a Soviet intelligence officer . He then attended a three-year course at the High Intelligence School of the General Staff . Despite the war going on around him, he was trained to be a Soviet spy .
 In all his training lasted until 1950 during which time he acquired some impressive English language skills . In all, he trained until 1950 .
 Bolshakov was assigned to the TASS Soviet news agency in Washington where he would be an editor whose main role in the office would be to cultivate sources . As a result of his impressive English skills he was assigned as an editor at the agency .
 Bolshakov was recalled back to Moscow where he was to work under Soviet Defense Minister Marshal Georgi Zhukov . After dedicating four years to this assignment aboard in Washington he was recalled to Moscow .
 When Zhukov was dismissed in 1957, Bolshakov’s career was brought to a temporary halt . Bolshakakov was dismissed from the Russian football team in 1957 .
 Adzhubei was the husband of Soviet Premier Khrushchev . He would see a rival by the end of the 1950’s .
 Frank Holeman had first met Bolshakov in 1951 at a Soviet held lunch-in in Holeman’s honor . The two men first met at a lunch in the Soviet Union in 1951 .
 The two hit it off rather well and met infrequently and exchanged information . The two were able to get along well .
 Soviets soon began to value Holeman as a useful informant and encouraged this budding relationship . Bolshakov was transferred back to Moscow in 1955 after Holeman was transferred to Moscow .
 Bolshakov’s return to Washington in 1960, Holeman was quick to reestablish ties with his former acquaintance .
 Holeman dropped the prospect to Bolshakov of possible meeting in person to discuss national interests with the attorney general of the United States . Robert F. Kennedy is the brother of the President himself .
 Bolshakov was taken off guard by the suggestion, but was quite tempted and excited about possible taking face to face with someone in such a position of U.S. power as Kennedy . Bolshakakov was excited about meeting Kennedy .
 Bolshakov replied to the journalist that he needed approval from his “embassy before such a meeting could be proposed” Despite his hidden enthusiasm, Bolshakakov replied that he would need approval from the ‘embassy’
 Bolshakov really needed permission for his boss in the GRU, whose identity is still unknown, to carry out the mission . The GRU's boss initially upon hearing the proposal was rather surprised that one of his assistance would of interest to the Attorney General of the United States and rejected
 Bolshakov decided to risk it anyway and meet up with Holeman just ten days after Holeman made his initial proposal . Despite the rejection by his superior and despite relaying the message back to Holeman that he would be unable to meet with the attorney general, Bolshkov decided
 Bolshakov chose the date of May 9th for the meeting with Bobby Kennedy because it was a Soviet holiday in celebration of the defeat of fascism in 1945 . His office with the GRU would be understaffed as most of his colleagues would be home enjoying the holiday .
 Holeman met Bolshakov at roughly 4:30 a.m. at a nearby restaurant in Georgetown . Holeman: "I don't think it's a good day for me, but it's not a bad day for him"
 Bolshakov had barely sat down to eat when Holeman asked him if he would be ready to meet Kennedy at 8:30 in front of the Justice Department office in D.C. The meeting was scheduled for the day before Kennedy's arrival .
 Bolshakov was once again caught off guard by the abruptness of the scheduling of the meeting, but agreed non-the-the less to meet with Kennedy at this time . The meeting was the first time Kennedy has met with Bolshakakov in Russia .
 At 8:30 sharp Kennedy was waiting with one of his aides on the steps of the Justice Department building . Kennedy is waiting for the president to arrive at the Justice Dept. building in Washington .
 Holeman introduced the Soviet intelligence officer to the Attorney General of the United States . Holeman's role in the case led to the death of an American intelligence officer in the 1950s .
 Both Holeman and the Kennedy aide left the two gentlemen to themselves to talk . With that both men to themselves, the aide said goodbye to Kennedy .
 From then on Robert F Kennedy had his own personal connection to the Kremlin, via a Soviet intelligence officer . Robert F. Kennedy had a personal connection with the Kremlin via a KGB officer .
 Khrushchev did not entirely condone Georgi Bolshakov’s meetings with Bobby Kennedy . The meeting took place in Moscow in 1960s .
 Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin wrote to President Kennedy himself that his ambassador in Washington enjoyed his “complete trust,” to encourage the use of regular diplomatic communications . President Kennedy wrote to Dobrynins to encourage regular communications .
 The personal rapport between the president’s brother and the Soviet military intelligence officer was too great for the Kremlin or the White House to wish to close down the back-channel .
 Khruschev also had no problem using this back channel as the means for an initiative . Khruschevsvsky also used it as a back-channel to get information from the Kremlin .
 The channel had already been used in negotiations involving a nuclear test ban treaty and the continuing stalemate in Berlin .
 Khruschev also saw a way in which he could take advantage of the channel in an attempt to keep the Cuban Missile operation, codenamed Anadyr, a covert operation, a secret operation .
 Khrushchev new he couldn’t possible prevent American U-2 pilots from flying over the island of Cuba, but perhaps he could prevent them flying over Soviet ships delivering missiles and supplies necessary to make missile sites operational .
 Khrushchev instructions for Bolshakov were to convey to Bobby Kennedy that the Soviets felt that reconnaissance missions via U-2 spy planes over the open ocean were acts of harassment on the part of the United States . The ceasing of these activities might lead to more friendly US-Soviet
 Bolshakov relayed his instructions and the Kennedy’s agreed only under the condition that the Berlin issue be iced . The Kennedy's agreed only to ice the issue, but the issue was iced, and the deal was never discussed .
 Khrushchev was reluctant to agree on such a volatile issue as Berlin . He did promise not to do anything until after the American elections in November . Americans did cease to send spy planes over the Atlantic .
 Bolshakov was left in the dark about the entire missile situation . The Russian president was left out of the details about the missile crisis .
 Kennedy questioned Bolshakov on weapons and materials being sent to Cuba by the Soviet Union . RFK repeatedly assured RFK that these weapons were purely of a defensive nature . Kennedy: "On repeated occasions Kennedy . Asked questions on weapons being sent by Soviet Union to Cuba, Bolshkov
 The weapons were merely a means for Cuba to defend itself against any possible aggregations, the Cuban president says . Cuba's weapons were only a means of defending itself, he says . The weapons will be used to defend Cuba from any possible aggregation of enemies, he adds .
 As recently as two weeks before the Kennedy administration became aware of the actual missile situation in Cuba, Bolshakov came to Bobby with an important message . The Kennedy administration didn't know about the Cuban missile threat until two weeks later .
 Kennedy’s at this point knew that the Cubans had already received state of the art SA-2 missiles from the Soviets, which were designed as high-tech antiaircraft defensive missiles . The Cuban government knew the Soviets had already sent the missiles to the country .
 Robert Kennedy made time to see Bolshakov on October 5 because he said he had received an important message from Khrushchev . Robert Kennedy visited Bolshakakov because he was impressed by Khrushchchev's message .
 Kennedy usually affected a casual, unbuttoned look with his Russian friend . Bolshakov noticed that this day the attorney general’s shirt was meticulously buttoned . Kennedy usually affects a casual look .
 There was no small talk about Bolshakov’s vacation, which months before the men had considered taking together . Bolshkov: “There were no small talks about the vacation, and months before, the men were considering it together .
 Kennedy listened and took notes as Bolshakov conveyed a pledge from Khrushchev that the Soviet Union was sending only defensive weapons to Cuba . Kennedy listened to Bolshakakov's pledge that the Soviets would only send defensive weapons . Kennedy took notes of Bolshakhakov's promise to
 Kennedy asked Kennedy to repeat the key phrase in the message . Kennedy asked him to be sure he had not missed any nuance, Kennedy said .
 Bolshakov really believed that the Soviets had know intention of placing offensive nuclear missiles capable of targeting any region in the continental United States, at least without first informing the United States and the Kennedy administration . The Soviet Union did not tell the U.S. and Kennedy administration, Bolsh
 Bolshakov lived to see the end of the Cold War; but he never got over his bitterness towards the Soviet Premier at having been used to deceive the Kennedy’s .
 The deception that the Soviets employed through Bolshakov insulted the pride of both Kennedy’s but in particular that of Bobby, who was a friend . The deception insulted both Kennedy's and Bobby's pride, especially that of his friend, Bobby .
 Bolshakov was dumbfounded when it was brought to the attention that the U.S. government was well aware of the Soviet missiles in Cuban territory . Bolshakakov was shocked to learn that the American government was aware of Soviet missiles .
 Bolshakov was not aware of the missiles in Cuba until John F Kennedy’s administration itself had informed him that the missiles were there and even showed him photographs of them in Cuba .