 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was the leader of Cuba from 1959 to 2008 . He was the prime minister of Cuba between 1959 and 1976 . He also served as president from 1976 to 2008 and was the president from 2008 .
 Under his administration, Cuba became a one-party communist state . Industry and business were nationalized, and state socialist reforms were implemented .
 Castro traveled to Mexico where he formed a revolutionary group, the 26th of July Movement, with his brother Raúl Castro and Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara . After a year's imprisonment, Castro returned to Mexico and formed a group .
 The United States came to oppose Castro's government and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination, economic embargo, and counter-revolution . The U.S. tried to remove Castro's regime by assassination and economic embargo .
 Castro supported anti-imperialist revolutionary groups in Chile, Nicaragua, and Grenada . He also sent troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur, Ogaden, and Angolan Civil War .
 Castro forged alliances in the Latin American ""pink tide"" – namely with Hugo Chávez's Venezuela – in the 2000s . He formed the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas with Venezuela and formed the Venezuelan alliance .
 In 2006, Castro transferred his responsibilities to Vice President Raúl Castro, who was elected to the presidency by the National Assembly in 2008 . Castro transferred the responsibilities of the vice president to vice president in 2006 .
 Castro was the longest-serving non-royal head of state in the 20th and 21st centuries . Castro polarized opinion throughout the world during his reign .
 His supporters view him as a champion of socialism and anti-imperialism . His revolutionary government advanced economic and social justice while securing Cuba's independence from the United States .
 Critics call him a dictator whose administration oversaw human rights abuses, the exodus of many Cubans, and the impoverishment of the country's economy .
 Fidel Castro was born out of wedlock at his father's farm on 13 August 1926 . Castro was the son of Fidel Castro and Fidel Castro, who was born in Cuba in 1926 .
 His father, Ángel Castro y Argiz, was a veteran of the Spanish–American War . His father was a migrant to Cuba from Galicia, in the northwest of Spain . Castro's father is a war veteran .
 He had become financially successful by growing sugar cane at Las Manacas farm in Birán, Oriente Province .
 After the collapse of his first marriage, he took his household servant, Lina Ruz González, as his mistress and later second wife . Together they had seven children, among them Fidel, Fidel .
 At age six, Castro was sent to live with his teacher in Santiago de Cuba, before being baptized into the Roman Catholic Church at the age of eight . Castro was baptized at age eight and was sent home at age six .
 Being baptized enabled Castro to attend the La Salle boarding school in Santiago, where he regularly misbehaved . He was next sent to the privately funded, Jesuit-run Dolores School in Santiago .
 In 1945, Castro transferred to the Jesuit-run El Colegio de Belén in Havana . Castro was a member of the Communist Party in Cuba . Castro's first school was in Havana, Cuba .
 Castro took an interest in history, geography, and debate at Belén . He did not excel academically, instead devoting much of his time to playing sports .
 Castro became embroiled in student activism and the violent gangsterismo culture within the university . Admitting he was ""politically illiterate" and admitted he was politically illinois inexclusive .
 A charismatic figure, Chibás advocated social justice, honest government, and political freedom . His party exposed corruption and demanded reform, while he exposed corruption .
 Chibás came third in the 1948 general election, but Castro remained committed to working on his behalf . Castro was committed to campaigning for his son .
 Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers . Castro soon received a death threat urging him to leave the university .
 In later years, anti-Castro dissidents accused him of committing gang-related assassinations at the time, but these accusations remain unproven .
 The only ideas that appear to have driven him were a lust for power, a willingness to use violent means to get it, and an unwillingness to share it once he had it .
 I witnessed the spectacle of a totally spontaneous revolution ... hat experience led me to identify myself even more with the cause of the people. I witnessed ... the revolution," he said. "Hat experience led him to identify himself even more"
 Fidel Castro on Bogotazo: "My still incipient Marxist ideas had nothing to do with our conduct" Castro learned of a planned expedition to overthrow the right-wing government of Rafael Trujillo, a United States ally, in the Dominican Republic .
 The protests, accompanied by a crackdown on those considered communists, led to violent clashes between activists and police in February 1948 . Castro was badly beaten in the clashes, which left him badly beaten .
 In April 1948, Castro traveled to Bogotá, Colombia, leading a Cuban student group sponsored by President Juan Perón's Argentine government . In contrast, his former public criticisms had centered on condemning corruption and U.S. imperialism .
 The assassination of popular leftist leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán Ayala led to widespread rioting and clashes between the governing Conservatives – backed by the army – and leftist Liberals .
 Castro joined the Liberal cause by stealing guns from a police station . Police investigations concluded that he had not been involved in any killings . Castro was found not guilty of any killings, according to police investigations .
 In April 1948, the Organization of American States was founded at a summit in Bogotá, leading to protests, which Castro joined . Returned to Cuba, Castro became a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares .
 He married Mirta Díaz Balart, a student from a wealthy family, through whom he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite . That year, he married .
 Prío faced widespread protests when members of the MSR, now allied to the police force, assassinated Justo Fuentes, a socialist friend of Castro's .
 In response, Prío agreed to quell the gangs, but found them too powerful to control . In response to that, he agreed to control them, but said they were still too powerful .
 Castro had moved further to the left, influenced by the Marxist writings of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Vladimir Lenin . Castro had also been influenced by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels .
 In 1949, Mirta gave birth to a son, Fidelito, so the couple moved to a larger Havana flat . Visiting Havana's poorest neighborhoods, he became active in the student anti-racist campaign .
 The group's purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university . Despite his promises, Prío had failed to control the situation, instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries .
 Castro fled into hiding, first in the countryside and then in the United States . Returned to Havana several weeks later, laid low and focused on university studies . Graduated as a Doctor of Law in September 1950 .
 Castro co-founded a legal partnership that primarily catered to poor Cubans . The partnership proved a financial failure, but it proved to be a success .
 He took part in a high school protest in November 1950, fighting with police to protest the ban on student associations . He was arrested and charged for violent conduct, but the magistrate dismissed the charges .
 Seeing himself as Chibás' heir, Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections . Senior Ortodoxo members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him .
 He was instead nominated as a candidate for the House of Representatives by party members in Havana's poorest districts . Party members nominated him for a seat in the U.S. House, which is Cuba's second chamber .
 Batista offered him a place in his administration if he was successful . Although both opposed Prío's administration, their meeting never got beyond polite generalities .
 On 10 March 1952, Batista seized power in a military coup, with Prío fleeing to Mexico . Batista took control of the country in 1952, with the coup taking place in 1952 .
 Batista cancelled the planned presidential elections, describing his new system as ""disciplined democracy" Castro was deprived of being elected in his run for office .
 "If you win tomorrow, the aspirations of Martí will be fulfilled sooner," says Víííríímírá .
 Fidel Castro formed a group called ""The Movement" which operated along a clandestine cell system, publishing underground newspaper El Acusador . Fidel Castro's speech to the Movement just before the Moncada Attack, 1953 .
 From July 1952 they went on a recruitment drive, gaining around 1,200 members in a year . The majority of Havana's poorer districts were from poorer districts .
 Castro stockpiled weapons for a planned attack on the Moncada Barracks, a military garrison outside Santiago de Cuba, Oriente . Castro stockpile weapons for the planned attack, including weapons to defend the base .
 Castro's militants intended to dress in army uniforms and arrive at the base on 25 July . They planned to seize control and raid the armory before reinforcements arrived . Castro's militant group intended to wear army uniforms .
 Castro intended to spark a revolution among Oriente's impoverished cane cutters and promote further uprisings . Supplied with new weaponry, Castro wanted to spark an uprising among the impoverished .
 The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties, whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded . The army suffered a total of 19 dead, 27 wounded and 6 other casualties .
 Some rebels took over a civilian hospital; subsequently stormed by government soldiers . Government soldiers rounded up, tortured and 22 were executed without trial . Meanwhile, some rebels took control of a hospital .
 Castro set out for Gran Piedra in the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains several kilometres to the north, where they could establish a guerrilla base . Castro was accompanied by 19 comrades, with 19 comrades .
 Some rebels were rounded up; some were executed and others – including Castro – were transported to a prison north of Santiago . The government broadcast misinformation about the event, claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients .
 Castro was sentenced on 16 October, during which he delivered a speech that would be printed under the title of History Will Absolve Me . Castro delivered the speech during his sentencing .
 Castro was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in the hospital wing of the Model Prison . The Model Prison is a relatively comfortable and modern institution on the Isla de Pinos . Castro was jailed for 15 years in prison .
 Castro renamed his group the ""26th of July Movement" in memory of the Moncada attack's date . Imprisoned with 25 comrades, Castro formed a school for prisoners and formed a prison school .
 He read widely, enjoying the works of Marx, Lenin, Martí and Martí . He also read books by Freud, Kant, Shakespeare, Munthe, Maugham, and Dostoyevsky .
 He was locked up in solitary confinement after inmates sang anti-Batista songs on a visit by the president in February 1954 . Initially permitted a relative amount of freedom within the prison, he was later locked up .
 Castro's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior, something he discovered through a radio announcement . Castro discovered his wife had a job at the Interior Ministry .
 Both Fidel and Mirta Castro initiated divorce proceedings with their son Fidelito . This angered Castro, who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment . Fidelito was the son of Fidel Castro .
 Batista's government held presidential elections in 1954, but no politician stood against him . The election was widely considered fraudulent . Fidel Castro and his men in the Sierra Maestra, 2 December 1956 .
 In 1955, bombings and violent demonstrations led to a crackdown on dissent, with Castro and Raúl fleeing the country to evade arrest . He argued that a successful revolution could not be run by committee and required a strong leader .
 Castro also associated with the Spaniard Alberto Bayo, who agreed to teach Castro's rebels the necessary skills in guerrilla warfare . Bayo was also a key figure in the Cuban revolution .
 Castro toured the United States in search of wealthy sympathizers, there being monitored by Batista's agents . Batista agents allegedly orchestrated a failed assassination attempt .
 Castro kept in contact with the MR-26-7 in Cuba, where they had gained a large support base in Oriente . Castro kept contact with them in Cuba and kept in touch with them .
 Other militant anti-Batista groups had sprung up, primarily from the student movement . The Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil was founded by José Antonio Echeverría .
 Antonio Antonio met with Castro in Mexico City, but Castro opposed the student's support for indiscriminate assassination . Castro set sail from Tuxpan, Veracruz, with 81 armed revolutionaries on 25 November 1956 .
 The 1,900-kilometre crossing to Cuba was harsh, with food running low and many suffering seasickness . Food ran low and people suffered seasickiness, with many suffering from seas sickness .
 MR-26-7 members under Frank País led an armed uprising in Santiago and Manzanillo . The plan had been for the crossing to take five days, and on the scheduled day of arrival, 30 November .
 País and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks . Castro and his men unable to provide reinforcements, País dispersed .
 Castro biographer Robert E Quirk noted that there was ""no better place to hide"" in all the island . Castro biographers noted that the island was a better place for Castro to hide .
 Granma ran aground in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las Coloradas, close to Los Cayuelos, on 2 December 1956 . The Granma was the first ship to run aground .
 Only 19 rebels made it to their destination, the rest having been killed or captured . Castro discovered that only 19 rebels had made it . The rest of the rebels died or were captured .
 The survivors included the Castros, Che Guevara, and Camilo Cienfuegos . The survivors set up an encampment in the desert .
 They began launching raids on small army posts to obtain weaponry . In January 1957 they overran an outpost at La Plata, treating any soldiers wounded but executing Chicho Osorio, the local mayoral . Osorio was despised by the local peasants .
 In July 1957, Castro divided his army into three columns, commanded by himself, his brother, and Guevara . With volunteers boosting the rebel forces to over 200, in July 1957 Castro divided the army into two columns . Castro's brother and brother were among the three columns commanded
 The MR-26-7 members operating in urban areas continued agitation, sending supplies to Castro, and on 16 February 1957, he met with other senior members to discuss tactics .
 Anti-Batista groups carried out bombings and sabotage during the 1958 stage of the Cuban Revolution . Police responded with mass arrests, torture and extrajudicial executions .
 In March 1957, the DRE launched a failed attack on the presidential palace, during which Antonio was shot dead . Antonio was killed in March 1957 during the attack .
 Batista's government often resorted to brutal methods to keep Cuba's cities under control . Batista used brutal tactics to keep the country under control during his rule .
 Castro was joined by Frank Sturgis who offered to train Castro's troops in guerrilla warfare . Castro was in the Sierra Maestra mountains when he was in contact with the guerrilla guerrilla leader .
 Sturgis purchased boatloads of weapons and ammunition from Central Intelligence Agency weapons expert Samuel Cummings' International Armament Corporation .
 Sturgis opened a training camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains, where he taught Che Guevara and other 26 July Movement rebel soldiers guerrilla warfare . Frank País was also killed, leaving Castro the MR-26-7's unchallenged leader .
 Castro hid his Marxist–Leninist views, hoping to gain the support of less radical revolutionaries . Guevara and Raúl were well known for their Marxist views . Castro was known for his Marxist views, but hid his .
 Castro's guerrillas increased their attacks on military outposts, forcing the government to withdraw from the Sierra Maestra region . By spring 1958, the rebels controlled a hospital, schools, a printing press, slaughterhouse, land-mine factory and a cigar-making factory .
 By 1958, Batista was under increasing pressure as a result of his military failures coupled with increasing domestic and foreign criticism . Batista's administration's press censorship, torture, and extrajudicial executions led to increased criticism .
 U.S. stopped supplying Cuba's Batista with weapons after anti-Batista sentiment in Cuba . The United States stopped supplying him with weapons in Cuba in 1959 .
 Opposition calls for a general strike, accompanied by armed attacks from the MR-26-7 . The opposition calls for armed attacks on the government .
 Batista responded with an all-out-attack, Operation Verano, in which the army aerially bombarded forested areas and villages suspected of aiding the militants . 10,000 soldiers commanded by General Eulogio Cantillo surrounded the Sierra Maestra .
 Castro halted their offensive using land mines and ambushes . Despite their numerical and technological superiority, the army had no experience with guerrilla warfare .
 Batista's soldiers defected to Castro's rebels, who also benefited from local popular support . Many of the Batista army defections were made by Castro's forces . Castro's government was overthrown by Batista in 1959 .
 In the summer, the MR-26-7 went on the offensive, pushing the army out of the mountains . Castro used his columns in a pincer movement to surround the main army concentration in Santiago .
 By November, Castro's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas, and divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines, severely disadvantaging Batista . The United States instructed Cantillo to oust Batista, fearing Castro was socialist .
 By this time the great majority of Cuban people had turned against the Batista regime . By the time of the revolution, the majority of Cuba had already turned against Batista .
 The CIA mission had become too close to the MR-26-7 movement, says Smith . Smith personally went to Batista and informed him that the U.S. would no longer support him .
 General Cantillo secretly agreed to a ceasefire with Castro, promising that Batista would be tried as a war criminal . However, Batista was warned, and fled into exile with over US$300,000,000 on 31 December 1958 .
 Cantillo proclaimed the Supreme Court judge Carlos Piedra to be president, and began appointing the new government . Cantillo entered Havana's Presidential Palace .
 Castro ordered Cantillo's arrest by sympathetic figures in the army . Furious, Castro ended the ceasefire, and ordered the arrest of Cantillo .
 Castro ordered the MR-26-7 to prevent widespread looting and vandalism . The anti-vandalism device was ordered by Castro in 1959 .
 Castro entered Santiago and gave a speech invoking the wars of independence . Cienfuegos and Guevara led their columns into Havana on 2 January, while Castro gave an address .
 Heading toward Havana, he greeted cheering crowds at every town, giving press conferences and interviews . Heading to Havana, crowds greeted him with cheering crowds .
 Castro proclaimed himself Representative of the Rebel Armed Forces of the Presidency . He set up home and office in the penthouse of the Havana Hilton Hotel . Castro was Cuban President of Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro exercised a great deal of influence over Urrutia's regime, which was now ruling by decree . Castro exercised great influence over the regime, now ruling with decree .
 He then pushed Urrutia to issue a temporary ban on political parties . He repeatedly said that they would eventually hold multiparty elections .
 He began clandestinely meeting members of the PSP to discuss the creation of a socialist state . Although repeatedly denying that he was a communist to the press, he began clandestine meetings with PSP members to discuss creating a state .
 Castro helped set up many trials, resulting in hundreds of executions . In response to popular uproar, Castro helped to set up hundreds of trials . Hundreds of executions were carried out .
 Critics argued that many of the trials were not fair trials . The trials were popular domestically, but critics argued that they were not free trials .
 President-elect Rómulo Betancourt unsuccessfully requested a loan and a new deal for Venezuelan oil . The Venezuelan President-Elect failed to agree to a new loan and oil deal .
 An argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out . Castro was returning home from a visit to Cuba .
 Prime Minister José Miró Cardona resigned, going into exile in the U.S. and joining the anti-Castro movement . As a result, he resigned and went into exile . He was the prime minister of the Cuban government .
 On 16 February 1959, Fidel Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba . Fidel Castro became Fidel Castro's first Prime Minister in 1959 .
 In April, he visited the United States on a charm offensive where President Dwight D Eisenhower would not meet with him, but instead sent Vice President Richard Nixon, whom Castro instantly disliked . Castro also visited the U.S. in April .
 His ideas as to how to run a government or an economy are less developed than those of almost any world figure I have met in fifty countries, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'His ideas as well as that of almost all world figures, are not developed'
 René Lévesque, the future Premier of Quebec, interviews Castro during his trip to Montreal in late April 1959 . Castro's visit to Montreal was the first time he had been to Montreal .
 Castro unsuccessfully proposed a $30 billion U.S.-funded ""Marshall Plan"" for Latin America . Castro attended an economic conference in Buenos Aires, Argentina, Canada, Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina .
 Around 200,000 peasants received title deeds as large land holdings were broken up . Popular among the working class, it alienated richer landowners, including Castro's own mother, whose farmlands were taken .
 Castro undertook many foreign visits during his initial years in power . Castro visited the U.S. during his first years of power . He visited the United States, Cuba and Mexico .
 Castro appointed himself president of the National Tourist Industry . He introduced unsuccessful measures to encourage African-American tourists to visit Cuba . Cuba is now a tropical paradise free of racial discrimination .
 In March 1959, Castro declared rents for those who paid less than $100 a month halved . Judges and politicians had their pay reduced while low-level civil servants saw theirs raised .
 The Cuban government expropriated casinos and properties from mafia leaders and took millions in cash . The government also began to expropriate the casinos and . properties from Mafia leaders .
 In the summer of 1959, Fidel began nationalizing plantation lands owned by American investors . Before he died Meyer Lansky said Cuba ""ruined"" him .
 He also seized property previously held by wealthy Cubans who had fled . Cubans had fled the country .
 Castro appointed Marxists to senior government and military positions . He nationalized sugar production and oil refinement over the objection of foreign investors . Castro refused to categorize his regime as socialist .
 Che Guevara became Governor of the Central Bank and then Minister of Industries . Che was the leader of the Communist Party in Argentina .
 President Urrutia increasingly expressed concern with the rising influence of Marxism . President Urrtia increasingly expresses concern with rising influence in Marxism .
 Castro's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba's standard of living, often to the detriment of economic development . Castro resumed his premiership and appointed Marxist Osvaldo Dorticós as president .
 Major emphasis was placed on education, and during the first 30 months of Castro's government, more classrooms were opened than in the previous 30 years . More classrooms opened during Castro's administration than in 30 years prior .
 Health care was nationalized and expanded, with rural health centers and urban polyclinics opening up across the island to offer free medical aid . Rural health centers were opened up across island to provide free medical help .
 A third part of this social program was the improvement of infrastructure . The country's infrastructure was also improved by the government .
 1,000 km of roads were built across the island in the first six months of Castro's government . $300 million was spent on water and sanitation projects in the same period .
 Castro used radio and television to develop a ""dialogue with the people" He posed questions and made provocative statements . Castro was a leader of the Cuban Revolution in 1960 .
 His regime remained popular with workers, peasants, and students, while opposition came primarily from the middle class . Thousands of doctors, engineers and other professionals emigrated to Florida in the U.S. causing an economic brain drain .
 Productivity decreased and the country's financial reserves were drained within two years . Productivity increased and financial reserves drained in two years, the government said .
 After conservative press expressed hostility towards the government, the pro-Castro printers' trade union disrupted editorial staff . In January 1960 the government ordered them to publish a ""clarification"" written by the printers' union at the end of articles critical of the government .
 Castro's government arrested hundreds of counter-revolutionaries, many of whom were subjected to solitary confinement, rough treatment, and threatening behavior . Many of the counter-insurgentaries were subject to harsh treatment .
 Cuba's refineries – then controlled by the U.S. corporations Shell and Esso – refused to process Soviet oil . Under United States pressure they refused . Cuba's government ordered the refineries to process the country's oil .
 La Coubre explosion was the explosion of a French vessel in Havana harbor in March 1960 . Relations between Cuba and the U.S. were further strained following the explosion .
 Castro insinuated that the United States government was guilty of sabotage . The ship carried weapons purchased from Belgium . The cause of the explosion was never determined, and the cause was never found .
 President Eisenhower authorized the CIA to overthrow Castro's government in 1960 . Inspired by their earlier success with the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, in March 1960, the CIA overthrew the Castro government .
 The Mafia were aggrieved that Castro's government closed down their brothel and casino businesses in Cuba . He provided them with a budget of $13 million and permitted them to ally with the Mafia .
 Castro decided to stay in Harlem as a way of expressing solidarity with the poor African-American population living there . World leaders such as Nasser of Egypt and Nehru of India had to drive out to Harlem to see him .
 The opening session of the United Nations General Assembly in September 1960 was a highly rancorous one . Khrushchev famously interrupted a speech by Filipino delegate Lorenzo Sumulong, which set the general tone for the debates and speeches .
 Castro delivered the longest speech ever held before the U.N. General Assembly . He spoke for four and a half hours in a speech mostly given over to denouncing American policies towards Latin America . Castro's speech was the longest ever held by a member of Congress .
 In 1959 Castro feared a U.S.-backed coup; in 1959 his regime spent $120 million on Soviet, French, and Belgian weaponry . By early 1960, the Cuban regime had doubled the size of Cuba's armed forces .
 Fearing counter-revolutionary elements in the army, the government created a People's Militia to arm citizens favorable to the revolution . At least 50,000 civilians in combat techniques were trained by the militia .
 In September 1960, they created the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution . They implemented neighborhood spying to detect counter-revolutionary activities . They also organized health and education campaigns .
 Some Americans disagreed with President Kennedy's decision to ban trade with Cuba . Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy, in which Cubans could assemble at demonstrations .
 U.S. Secretary of State Christian Herter announced that Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of rule, with a one-party state, government control of trade unions, suppression of civil liberties, and the absence of freedom of speech and press .
 President Eisenhower and his successor President Kennedy supported a CIA plan to aid a dissident militia, the Democratic Revolutionary Front, to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro . The plan resulted in the Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 .
 Fearing invasion, he ordered the arrest of between 20,000 and 100,000 suspected counter-revolutionaries . He publicly proclaimed, ""What the imperialists cannot forgive us, is that we have made a Socialist revolution under their noses"
 The CIA and the Democratic Revolutionary Front had based a 1,400-strong army, Brigade 2506, in Nicaragua . Che Guevara and Castro were photographed by Alberto Korda .
 Brigade 2506 landed along Cuba's Bay of Pigs and engaged in a firefight with a local revolutionary militia . The firefight took place on the night of 16 to 17 April . The Cuban revolutionary militia was involved in the fight .
 Castro ordered Captain José Ramón Fernández to launch the counter-offensive, before taking personal control of it . Castro ordered Jos. Ramón Fernandez to launch counteroffensive, then took personal control .
 Castro forced the Brigade to surrender on 20 April . After bombing the invaders' ships and bringing in reinforcements, Castro forced them to surrender . Castro bombed their ships and brought in reinforcements .
 He ordered the 1189 captured rebels to be interrogated by a panel of journalists on live television, personally taking over the questioning on 25 April .
 Fourteen were put on trial for crimes allegedly committed before the revolution, while the others were returned to the United States in exchange for medicine and food valued at United States $25 million .
 Castro's victory reverberated around the world, especially in Latin America, but it also increased internal opposition . Middle-class Cubans who had been detained in the run-up to the invasion were also opposed .
 Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling, Soviet technicians arrived on the island, and Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize . Fidelito was awarded a Soviet Peace Prize and Fidelito received a Moscow education .
 In December 1961, Castro admitted that he had been a Marxist–Leninist for years . In his Second Declaration of Havana, he called on Latin America to rise up in revolution .
 The ORI began shaping Cuba using the Soviet model, persecuting political opponents and perceived social deviants such as prostitutes and homosexuals . Castro considered same-sex sexual activity a bourgeois trait .
 Gay men were forced into the Military Units to Aid Production camps . After many revolutionary intellectuals decried this move, the UMAP camps were closed in 1967 .
 On a personal level, Castro was increasingly lonely . Relations with Guevara became strained as the latter became anti-Soviet and pro-Chinese . Castro was lonely .
 The United States saw the missiles as offensive; Castro insisted they were for defense only . Castro insisted that the missiles were only for defense purposes .
 Castro urged Khrushchev to launch a nuclear strike on the U.S. if Cuba were invaded . Castro was desperate to avoid nuclear war, but Khruschev was desperate not to do so .
 Castro demands U.S. end its embargo, withdraw from Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, cease supporting dissidents, and stop violating Cuban air space and territorial waters . Proposing a five-point plan, Castro demanded that the United States end the embargo and stop supporting dissidents .
 He presented these demands to U Thant, visiting Secretary-General of the United Nations, but the United States ignored them . The U.S. ignored them.
 In 1963 the government cracked down on Protestant sects in Cuba, with Castro labeling them counter-revolutionary ""instruments of imperialism" Many preachers were found guilty of illegal U.S.-links and imprisoned .
 Measures were implemented to force perceived idle and delinquent youths to work, primarily through the introduction of mandatory military service . The measures were implemented in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In September, the government temporarily permitted emigration for anyone other than males aged between 15 and 26, thereby ridding the government of thousands of critics . Most of those critics were from upper and middle-class backgrounds .
 Castro returned to Moscow in 1964 to sign a five-year sugar trade agreement with Moscow . Castro was there to discuss the ramifications of the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 Castro was deeply concerned by the assassination, believing that a far-right conspiracy was behind it but that the Cubans would be blamed for it . Castro believed that the Cuban government would blame the far right for the assassination .
 The greatest threat presented by Castro's Cuba is as an example to other Latin American states which are beset by poverty, corruption, feudalism and plutocratic exploitation . Despite Soviet misgivings, Castro continued to call for global revolution, funding militant leftists .
 Cuba's foreign policy was strongly anti-imperialist, believing that every nation should control its own natural resources . Cuba believed that all nations should control their own resources .
 He supported Che Guevara's unsuccessful plan to set up a guerrilla movement in the highlands of Bolivia, Peru and Argentina .
 He allowed revolutionary groups from around the world, from the Viet Cong to the Black Panthers, to train in Cuba . Cuba was home to a number of revolutionary groups, including the Black Panther Party .
 He considered Western-dominated Africa to be ripe for revolution, and sent troops and medics to aid Ahmed Ben Bella's socialist regime in Algeria during the Sand War .
 He was allied with Alphonse Massamba-Débat's socialist government in Congo-Brazzaville . He allied with the government of the Republic of Congo in the 1930s .
 In 1965, Castro authorized Che Guevara to travel to Congo-Kinshasa to train revolutionaries against the Western-backed government . In 1965 the Castro authorized the visit to Africa to train rebels .
 Castro was personally devastated when Guevara was killed by CIA-backed troops in Bolivia in October 1967 . Castro staged a Tri-Continental Conference of Africa, Asia and Latin America in Havana in 1966 .
 From this conference, Castro created the Latin American Solidarity Organization . The slogan of ""The duty of a revolution is to make revolution" is signifying Havana's leadership .
 Castro's increasing role on the world stage strained his relationship with the USSR, now under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev . Castro and Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space .
 He suggested that Cuban society could evolve straight to pure communism rather than gradually progress through stages of socialism . Diverting from Soviet Marxist doctrine, he suggested that Cuba should not progress through various stages of communism .
 Aníbal Escalante began organizing a government network of opposition to Castro . In January 1968, he and his supporters were arrested for allegedly passing state secrets to Moscow . In turn, he was arrested in January 1968 .
 In August 1968 he denounced the leaders of the Prague Spring and praised the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia . In 1968 he proclaimed a Great Revolutionary Offensive, closing all remaining privately owned shops and businesses .
 The 1969 crop was heavily damaged by a hurricane, and to meet its export quota, the government drafted in the army . The government implemented a seven-day working week and postponed public holidays .
 Castro offered to resign during a public speech, but assembled crowds insisted he remain . Castro's production quota was not met, and he was forced to resign . Castro was a member of the Castro family .
 Despite the economic issues, many of Castro's social reforms were popular, with the population largely supportive of the ""Achievements of the Revolution"" in education, medical care, housing, and road construction . The policies of ""direct democratic"" public consultation and public consultation were popular .
 Cuban-Soviet Commission of Economic, Scientific and Technical Collaboration . Soviet economists re-organized Cuba's economy . Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin visited Cuba in October 1971 .
 In July 1972, Cuba joined the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance . This limited Cuba's economy to agricultural production . Cuba joined an organization of socialist states .
 In May 1970, the crews of two Cuban fishing boats were kidnapped by Florida-based dissident group Alpha 66 . The group demanded that Cuba release imprisoned militants .
 In April 1971, Castro was condemned for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Heberto Padilla . Padilla was freed, but the government established the National Cultural Council to ensure that intellectuals and artists supported the administration .
 In 1973, the military led a coup d'état and established a military junta led by Augusto Pinochet led by Pinochet . The military was overthrown in 1973, and Pinochet's junta ruled the country until 1998 .
 Castro praises Guinea's President Sékou Touré as Africa's greatest leader . Castro also received the Order of Fidelity to the People .
 At the conference he publicly broke off relations with Israel, citing its government's close relationship with the United States and its treatment of Palestinians during the Israel–Palestine conflict .
 Castro earned respect throughout the Arab world, especially from the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . This earned Castro respect from Gaddafi, who became a friend and ally .
 As the Yom Kippur War broke out in October 1973, Cuba sent 4,000 troops to aid Syria . Cuba sent troops to help Syria in 1973 .
 Cuba's economy grew in 1974 as a result of high international sugar prices and new credits with Argentina, Canada, and parts of Western Europe . Leaving Algiers, Castro visited Iraq and North Vietnam .
 A number of Latin American states called for Cuba's re-admittance into the Organization of American States . The U.S. finally conceded in 1975 on Henry Kissinger's advice .
 Cuba's government underwent a restructuring along Soviet lines, claiming that this would further democratization and decentralize power away from Castro . The restructuring was meant to further democratize the Cuban government .
 The decision to intervene in Angola has been a controversial one, all the more so as Castro's critics have charged that it was not his decision . Critics have said that the Soviets ordered him to do so .
 Castro always maintained that he took the decision to launch Operation Carlota himself in response to an appeal from Neto . The Soviets were in fact opposed to Cuban intervention in Angola, which took place over their opposition .
 Castro visited Algeria and then Libya in February, where he oversaw the establishment of the Jamahariya system of governance . In February, he spent ten days with Gaddafi, before attending talks with South Yemen government .
 Throughout much of Africa he was hailed as a friend to national liberation from foreign dominance . He was a friend of national liberation during his time in Africa .
 There is often talk of human rights, but it is also necessary to talk of the rights of humanity, says David Cameron . There is also a need for human rights in the world, he says .
 Castro had a summit with Barre where he proposed a federation of Ethiopia, Somalia, and South Yemen as an alternative to war . In an attempt to stop the war, Castro proposed an Ethiopian-Somalis federation of three .
 Barre saw seizing the Ogaden as the first step towards creating a greater Somalia that would unite all of the Somalis into one state . Barre rejected the federation offer and decided upon war .
 Castro sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the Ethiopian army . Castro was in control of the Ethiopian government . The Castro government sent troops to help Ethiopian troops .
 Mengistu's regime was barely hanging on by 1977, having lost one-third of its army in Eritrea at the time of the invasion .
 Castro's critics accused the government of wasting Cuban lives in these military endeavors . Anti-Castro Center for a Free Cuba has claimed that an estimated 14,000 Cubans died in foreign military actions .
 Castro pointed out the U.S. involvement in various foreign nations, pointing out that Cuba had been invited into them . The Cuban leader also pointed out that he had no right to interfere in these nations .
 The Cuban intervention in Angola was envisioned as a short-term commitment, but the Angolan government used the profits from the oil industry to subsidize Cuba's economy . Cuba's relations with North American states improved during the period with Mexican President Luis Echeverría, Canadian Prime Minister
 He accused Deng Xiaoping's Chinese government of betraying revolutionary principles by initiating trade links with the U.S. and attacking Vietnam .
 In 1979, the Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement was held in Havana, Cuba . Castro was selected as NAM president, a position he held until 1982 . Castro held that position until 1982, when he was president .
 His speech was greeted with much applause from other world leaders, though his standing in NAM was damaged by Cuba's refusal to condemn the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan .
 Unemployment became a serious problem in Castro's Cuba, with the government sending unemployed youth to other countries, primarily East Germany, to work there . For the first time, unemployment became a major problem in Cuba . The government sent unemployed youths to East Germany to work in East Germany .
 In what was known as the Mariel boatlift, hundreds of boats arrived from the U.S., leading to a mass exodus of 120,000 . Castro's government took advantage of the situation by loading criminals, the mentally ill, and homosexuals onto the boats destined for Florida .
 The event destabilized Carter's administration, and later, Ronald Reagan was elected U.S. president . Carter's presidency was overthrown in 1980 .
 Reagan's administration adopted a hard-line approach against Castro, making its desire to overthrow his regime clear . Castro's regime was overthrown by the U.S. in 1953 .
 Soviet subsidies averaged $4–5 billion a year by the late 1980s . Cuba's economy became even more dependent on Soviet aid, with Soviet subsidies averaging $4-5 billion .
 Soviet economic assistance had not helped Cuba's long-term growth prospects by promoting diversification or sustainability, the Cuban president said . The country's economy has been hit hard by the Soviet Union's economic assistance, he said .
 Cuba's basic economic structure changed very little between 1959 and the early 1960s . Cuba was described as a ""relatively highly developed Latin American export economy"" in 1959 . Cuba's economic structure remained unchanged between then and the 1980s .
 Tobacco products such as cigars and cigarettes were the only manufactured products among Cuba's leading exports . Even even these are produced by a pre-industrial process .
 The Cuban economy remained inefficient and over-specialized in a few highly subsidized commodities provided by the Soviet bloc countries . Castro supported Argentina's right-wing military junta in the 1982 Falklands War against Britain and offered military aid .
 Castro supported the New Jewel Movement that seized power in Grenada in 1979 . Castro also sent doctors, teachers, and technicians to aid the country's development . Castro has been in Grenadine since 1979 .
 Castro denounced the invasion and compared the United States to Nazi Germany . Cuban soldiers died in the conflict, with Castro denouncing the invasion .
 By November 1987, Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War, in which the MPLA government had fallen into retreat . Castro's image was painted onto a now-destroyed lighthouse in Lobito, Angola, 1995 .
 In response to the siege of Cuito Cuanavale in 1987–1988 by South African-UNITA forces, Castro sent an additional 12,000 Cuban Army troops to Angola in late 1987 . Castro sent 12,500 Cuban troops to the country's capital in response to
 From afar in Havana, Castro was closely involved in the decision-making about the defense of Cuito Cuanavle . He criticized Ochoa for almost losing the city to a South African-UNITA assault on 13 January 1988 .
 On 30 January 1988, Ochoa was summoned to a meeting with Castro in Havana where he was told that Cuito Cuanavale must not fall and to execute Castro's plans for a pull-back to more defensible positions over the objections of the Angolan .
 Cuban troops played a decisive role in the relief of Cuito Cuanavale, breaking the siege in March 1988 . The siege led to the withdrawal of most of the South African troops from Angola .
 Cuban propaganda turned the siege of Cuito Cuanavle into a decisive victory that changed the course of African history . Castro awarded 82 soldiers medals of the newly created Medal of Merit for the Defense .
 Tensions increased with Cubans advancing close to the border of Namibia . South African government considered this an extremely unfriendly act . South Africa mobilized and called up its reserves .
 In the spring of 1988, the intensity of South African-Cuban fighting drastically increased with both sides taking heavy losses . The prospect of an all-out Cuban-South African war served to concentrate minds in Moscow and Washington .
 The cost of Cuba's wars in Africa were paid for with Soviet subsidies at a time when the Soviet economy was badly hurt by low oil prices . South Africa had by the 1980s become an awkward American ally as much of the American population, especially black Americans, objected to apartheid .
 Russia and South Africa disengage in Angola was the best possible outcome . Russia and the U.S. are pleased with the outcome of the situation in Angola, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The low oil prices of the 1980s had also changed the Angolan attitude about subsidizing the Cuban economy as dos Santos found the promises made in the 1970s when oil prices were high to be a serious drain upon Angola's economy .
 South African whites were vastly outnumbered by South African blacks . The South African Army could not take heavy losses with its white troops . That would fatally weaken the ability of the South African state to uphold apartheid .
 The Cubans had also taken heavy losses while the increasing difficult relations with dos Santos who become less generous in subsidizing the Cuban economy suggested that such losses were not worth the cost . The Cuban economy has also taken a heavy loss .
 Gorbachev called for a negotiated end to the conflict and in 1988 organized a quadripartite talks between the USSR, U.S., Cuba and South Africa . They agreed that all foreign troops would pull out of Angola while South Africa agreed to grant independence to Namibia .
 Castro was angered by Gorbachev's approach, believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world's poor in favor of détente . Castro believed that perestroika meant an end to subsidies for Cuba .
 Castro continued to clamp down on internal dissidents and kept tabs on the military, the primary threat to the government . Ignoring calls for liberalization in accordance with the Soviet example .
 With the collapse of the Soviet bloc, the United States secured a majority vote for a resolution condemning Cuba's human rights violations at the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva, Switzerland .
 By 1992, Cuba's economy had declined by over 40% in under two years, with major food shortages, widespread malnutrition and a lack of basic goods . Cuba was hit by food shortages and malnutrition, and the economy was down by 40% .
 He ceased support for foreign militants in 1994 . Refrained from praising FARC on 1994 visit to Colombia . Called for a negotiated settlement between Zapatistas and Mexican government in 1995 .
 Cuba hosted the 1991 Pan American Games, which involved construction of a stadium and accommodation for athletes . Castro admitted that it was an expensive error, but it was a success for Cuba's government . He presented himself as a moderate on the world stage .
 Castro's government diversified its economy into biotechnology and tourism . The latter outstripped Cuba's sugar industry as its primary source of revenue in 1995 . Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the economics reforms .
 Economic hardship led many Cubans toward religion, both in the form of Roman Catholicism and Santería . Economic hardship forced Cubans to turn to religion .
 Castro viewed the Roman Catholic Church as a reactionary, pro-capitalist institution . Castro organized a visit to Cuba by Pope John Paul II for January 1998; it strengthened the position of both the Cuban Church and Castro's government .
 In 1994 a ministry dedicated to the environment was established, and new laws established in 1997 that promoted awareness of environmental issues throughout Cuba . Cuba's new laws were set up in 1997 .
 Castro also became a proponent of the anti-globalization movement . Castro criticized the U.S. global hegemony and the control exerted by multinationals . Castro also criticized the United States global hegemony .
 Castro maintained his strong stance against apartheid, and at the 26 July celebrations in 1991, he was joined onstage by Nelson Mandela .
 Mandela praised Cuba's involvement in battling South Africa during the Angolan Civil War . Mandela also thanked Castro personally for his role in fighting South Africa .
 Castro later attended Mandela's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994 . Castro was in South Africa when Mandela was elected president .
 Castro attended the Conference Against Racism in South Africa in 2001 . He lectured on the global spread of racial stereotypes through U.S. film . In 2001, Castro attended South Africa's Conference against Racism .
 Castro and Chávez developed a close friendship, with the former acting as a mentor and father-figure to the latter . Together, they built an alliance that had repercussions throughout Latin America .
 In 2000, Cuba would send 20,000 medics to Venezuela, in return receiving 53,000 barrels of oil per day . In 2004, this trade was stepped up, with Cuba sending 40,000 doctors and Venezuela providing 90,000 barrel a day .
 That same year, Castro initiated Misión Milagro, a joint medical project which aimed to provide free eye operations on 300,000 individuals from each nation . The project was aimed at providing free eye surgery to 300,500 individuals .
 In September 2005, Castro established a group of medical professionals known as the Henry Reeve Brigade . The mission of international medical solidarity is to help people in need of medical assistance .
 ALBA sought to redistribute wealth evenly throughout member countries, to protect the region's agriculture, and to oppose economic liberalization and privatization . ALBA was founded in 1961 .
 ALBA's origins lay in a December 2004 agreement signed between the two countries . It was formalized through a People's Trade Agreement also signed by Evo Morales' Bolivia in April 2006 . ALBA was formed in December 2004 .
 Castro had also been calling for greater Caribbean integration since the late 1990s . He said strengthened cooperation between Caribbean countries would prevent their domination by rich nations in global economy .
 Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martín Torrijos .
 Castro proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States after Hurricane Michelle in 2001 . Castro's improving relations across Latin America were accompanied by continuing animosity towards the U.S.
 Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba in 1998 to meet Castro . Meanwhile, in 1998, Canadian PM met Castro to highlight their close ties with Cuba .
 He was the first Canadian government leader to visit the island since Pierre Trudeau was in Havana in 1976 .
 In February 2007, Raúl announced that Fidel's health was improving and that he was taking part in important issues of government . Fidel was reported to be in good health in February 2007 .
 Later that month, Fidel called into Hugo Chávez's radio show Aló Presidente . Fidel called the show to talk about his life in Venezuela .
 Castro asked Cubans not to worry about his lack of recent news columns and failing health, and not to be disturbed by his future death . In January 2009 Castro asked Cuban citizens not to worried about his recent lack of news columns or failing health .
 Castro continued meeting foreign leaders and dignitaries . He continued to meet with Argentine President Cristina Fernández . Photos were released of Castro's meeting with Argentine president .
 Even in retirement, Castro continued his involvement with politics and international affairs . Castro continued to be involved in Mexico's foreign policy .
 On 7 August 2010, Castro gave his first speech to the National Assembly in four years, urging the U.S. not to take military action against those nations . He also warned of a nuclear holocaust .
 Without official role in the country's government, he took on the role of an elder statesman . Now without any official role, he has taken on a role of elder statesmanship .
 Castro condemned NATO-led military intervention in Libya in March 2011 . In March 2011, Castro condemned the NATO-backed military intervention there .
 In March 2012, Pope Benedict XVI visited Cuba for three days, during which time he briefly met with Castro . The Pope's vocal opposition to Cuba's government has been vocal since .
 Later that year it was revealed that along with Hugo Chávez, Castro had played a significant behind-the-scenes role in orchestrating peace talks between the Colombian government and the far left FARC guerrilla movement to end the conflict .
 During the North Korea crisis of 2013, he urged both the North Korean and U.S. governments to show restraint . He urged both North Korea and the United States to act restraint .
 In December 2014, Castro was awarded the Chinese Confucius Peace Prize for seeking peaceful solutions to his nation's conflict with the U.S. He maintained that war would not benefit either side, and that it represented ""one of the gravest risks of nuclear war" since the Cuban
 In January 2015, he publicly commented on the ""Cuban Thaw"", an increased normalization between Cuba and the United States . He said that while it was a positive move for establishing peace in the region, he mistrusted the U.S. government . The United States
 In September 2016, Castro was visited at his Havana home by the Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, and later that month was visited by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzō Abe .
 In late October 2016, Castro met with the Portuguese president Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, who became one of the last foreign leaders to meet him . Castro's last foreign leader meeting was in October 2016 .
 Fidel Castro Castro died on the night of 25 November 2016 . Castro's funeral procession passed through Sancti Spíritus Province, Cuba . Castro died in a state funeral in Sancti, Cuba, on November 25, 2016 .
 His death came 9 months after his brother Ramón died at the age of 91 in February . His older brother Ramon also died in February at 91 .
 Castro sought to transform Cuba from a capitalist state which was dominated by foreign imperialism to a socialist society . Castro was a Marxist who sought to end capitalism and become a communist society .
 Most of the forces involved in Batista's overthrow were led by members of the Cuban middle-class . The Cuban Revolution nevertheless did not meet Marxist assumption that socialism would be achieved through proletariat revolution .
 Castro described Karl Marx and Cuban nationalist José Martí as his main political influences . Gott believed that Martí ultimately remained more important than Marx in Castro's politics . Gott said Martí was important more than Marx .
 Castro described Martí's political ideas as ""a philosophy of independence and an exceptional humanistic philosophy" Biographer Volka Skierka described Castro's government as a ""highly individual, socialist-nationalist 'fidelista' system"
 Political scientist Paul C Sondrol has described Castro's approach to politics as ""totalitarian utopianism" with a style of leadership that drew upon the wider Latin American phenomenon of the caudillo . Castro's style was described as 'totalitarian utopia'
 He drew inspiration from the wider Latin American anti-imperialist movements of the 1930s and 1940s . Argentina's Perón and Guatemala's Jacobo Árbenz were among those inspired .
 Castro took a relatively socially conservative stance on many issues . He opposed drug use, gambling, and prostitution, which he viewed as moral evils . Castro opposed gambling, gambling and prostitution .
 Later in his life he took responsibility for this persecution, regretting it as a ""great injustice" as he himself put it . Although his government repressed homosexual activity for decades, he later said he regretted it .
 Fidel Castro Castro first and foremost is and always has been a committed egalitarian, says Castro . Castro's views of religious views of Castro Castro are that of an egalitarian, he says . Castro has always been committed egalitarian .
 In 2007 Juan Reynaldo Sánchez, Castro's former bodyguard, detailed much of his personal and private life in his book The Double Life of Fidel Castro . There are political prisoners – those who have expressed positions against the revolution – though today only some 300, down markedly from
 He profiled him as an egocentric who loved being the center of attention, and with his almost electric charisma, grabbing the attention of the people around him . He was interviewed by CNN's John Sutter .
 He was also extremely manipulative; with his formidable intelligence, he was capable of manipulating a person or a group of people without much difficulty . He was able to manipulate people or groups without little difficulty .
 In discussions with colleagues or foreigners, he would repeat the same things over again on a continuous loop until they were convinced he was right . He would repeat things over and over again to convince them he was correct .
 "It was absolutely impossible to contradict him on any subject whatsoever," he said . "It is absolutely impossible for him to contradict any of his views," he added .
 Fidel would then make a mental mark of the individual as an 'idiot' and would wait for the right time to retaliate against them . Fidel would make the mark of a person as an "idiot" and would then retaliate .
 Nobody, not even Raúl, was exempt from this; despite being the minister of the armed forces, he would bring seemingly minor military decisions to Castro for his final approval .
 Publicly he was known for throwing tantrums, and could make ""snap judgements"" which he refused to back down from . Publicly known for being known for making snap judgements .
 Castro was skilled at keeping his anger in check and not allowing it to affect his judgement . Sánchez stated that in 17 years he had only seen Castro explode in anger twice, one upon being informed of his daughter Alina's defection in 1993 .
 Castro was known for working long hours, starting his working day around noon . He would often go to bed at 3 or 4 am, often only going to bed before 3 am . Castro would often wake up late – rarely before 10 or 11 am .
 He preferred to meet foreign diplomats in these early hours, believing that they would be tired and he could gain the upper hand in negotiations . He said he hoped to use the early hours of the morning meeting to gain upper hand .
 Balfour described Castro as having a ""voracity for knowledge"" and an ""elephantine memory"" that allowed him to speak for hours on a variety of different subjects . Castro was described as having an "elephantastic memory"
 His hero was Alexander the Great, whose Spanish equivalent Alejandro he adopted as his nom de guerre . His Spanish equivalent was Alejandro, the Spanish equivalent of Alexander the great .
 Castro named For Whom the Bell Tolls as his favorite book, committing several portions of the novel to memory and even utilizing some of its lessons as a guerilla fighter . Castro was a voracious reader .
 He enjoyed art and photography and was known as a patron of both within Cuba . He was uninterested in music and disliked dancing but disliked dancing .
 His favorite film was the five hour long 1967 adaption of Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace . He said his favorite film of the day was the adaptation of the novel .
 Castro had a lifelong passion, almost obsession, with cows and, starting in 1966, with bovine genetics and breeding . Castro had been fascinated with cows since his childhood . Castro was a lifelong obsession with cows .
 State media frequently published details of his attempts to breed cows with increased milk yields . State media often published details about his efforts to increase milk yields in China .
 When the cow died in 1985, Granma published an official obituary for her on the front page of Granma . The postal service issued stamps in her honor as well as a national celebrity .
 He promoted the idea that Jesus Christ was a communist, citing the feeding of the 5,000 and the story of Jesus and the rich young man as evidence .
 Castro was nicknamed 'El Caballo' by Benny Moré for his philandering during the 1950s and early 1960s . Castro was extremely skilled at the art of manipulation and deception . He easily whipped up his audience and even segments of the population into support .
 Castro's fiery speeches typically lasted for hours and without the use of written notes . Large throngs of supporters gathered to cheer at Castro's speeches, which typically lasted hours .
 Officially, the Cuban government did maintain a cult of personality, but unlike other Soviet-era leaders and his allies, it was less widespread and took on a more subtle form .
 There were no statues or large portraits of him but rather signs with ""thoughts"" of the Comandante . There were also signs with "thoughts" of him .
 By 2006 Castro's image could frequently be found in Cuban stores, classrooms, taxicabs, and on national television . By 2006, the image of Castro was frequently seen in Cuba's stores and classrooms .
 In private, Castro hated such idolization campaigns and believed that he had intellectual ascendancy over leaders such as Kim Il-sung of North Korea . Castro considered such behavior excessive, outlandish, and unreasonable .
 Castro gave no importance to his appearance or clothing . For 37 years, he wore only his trademark olive-green military fatigues or the standard MINFAR dress uniform for formal events and special occasions . In the mid-1990s began wearing dark civilian suits and guayabera in
 Until his uprising against Batista, Castro typically kept a pencil-thin moustache along with combed back hair . He grew out both during his years as a guerilla fighter and retaining them afterwards .
 Castro disliked worrying about his appearance and hated shaving, making the beard and uniform all the more convenient for him . Castro also disliked shaving and hated worrying about shaving .
 His uniform was also kept simple, he never wore any medals or decorations . His only marker of rank was the Comandante El Jefe insignia stitched on the shoulder straps .
 Until the 1990s, he wore combat boots, but due to orthopedic issues, abandoned them for sneakers and tennis shoes instead .
 Around his waist, he often carried a 9mm Browning pistol in a brown leather holster with an additional three clips . He often carried an additional nine clips around his waist .
 His personal weapon of choice was a 7.62 Kalashnikov AKM which Castro occasionally carried with him during the 1960s . Castro frequently used it during shooting exercises and practice . Castro kept stored in a suitcase with five cartridges .
 Castro had a lifelong love of guns and was considered an expert sharpshooter . Castro's most iconic public feature eventually became the Cuban cigar that he smoked daily .
 Castro was introduced to tobacco smoking by his father at the age of 15 . He continued the habit for almost 44 years with the exception of a brief period during the 1950s while a guerilla fighter and boycotting against Batista linked tobacco firms .
 Sánchez disputes this, saying that his doctor had Castro reduce his cigar usage starting in 1980 and quit entirely in 1983 after a cancerous ulcer was found in his intestine . Castro's doctor had him reduce cigar usage in 1980 to 1983 .
 Castro saw one of his bodyguards smoking a noticeably aromatic but unbranded cigar . Castro saw the incident in the early 1960s . Castro was a member of the Castro family .
 Castro and the bodyguard located the cigar maker, Eduardo Ribera, who agreed to establish the El Laguito Factory and branded the cigars as Cohiba . The cigars became Castro's signature brand and elevating its profile .
 Che Guevara, Josip Broz Tito, Houari Boumédiène, Sukarno, and Saddam Hussein were seen smoked by Che Guesara . The drug was later presented as diplomatic gifts for allied countries .
 Castro's primary residence was at Punto Cero, a large and vegetative estate 6 km from the Palacio de la Revolution in Siboney neighborhood .
 Close by is a second two-story building used to house the bodyguards and the domestic staff . Close to the palace is a two-storey building used for bodyguards .
 The house itself was decorated in a classical Caribbean style, with local wicker and wood furniture, porcelain plates, watercolor paintings, and art books .
 Sánchez described the estate as naturally beautiful and tastefully decorated, and while considered luxurious for the average Cuban, it was not lavish or over-the-top compared to the residences of the Somoza clan or the Kim dynasty of North Korea .
 Raúl and Vilma's house La Rinconada is located close by on 222nd street . Raúúl's house is located near to where Vilma and Raúel lived .
 Raúl usually hosted large family barbecues on Sundays where Fidel would sometimes come, giving his extended family, sisters, and his elder brother Ramón a rare opportunity to see him . Fidel would often come to see his family, including his older brother and sister .
 The base was over five acres large and surrounded by high walls, essentially a ""city within a city"" consisting of support personnel for transportation, communications, electronics, food, and an extensive armory of Kalashnikovs and Makarovs .
 Casa Cojimar, his initial home after 1959 but disused by the 1970s . Casa Carbonell, maintained by Cuban Intelligence for covert meetings with foreign groups or intelligence assets . Two houses retrofitted with air-raid shelters and connected to command bunkers .
 Casa Americana and Rancho la Tranquilidad are located in the locality of Mil Cumbres . La Deseada is a hunting lodge utilized in the winter for duck hunting and fishing trips .
 Castro's main vacation destination was Cayo de Piedra, a small key island formerly the site of a lighthouse . The island was divided into two by a cyclone in the 1960s .
 He came upon the island by accident while reviewing the region in the aftermath of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Osmany Cienfuegos designed the a private bungalow, guesthouse, bridge, marina, and a building for the use of the bodyguards and support staff .
 He arrived here from his inaccessible private marina located near the Bay of Pigs, La Caleta del Rosario, which also housed a guesthouse .
 His diet was quintessentially Cuban, based on traditional pescatarian cuisine but also the additional influence from his native Galicia .
 All of his food was sourced from Punto Cero or fished from his private island of Cayo Piedra . Algerian Red Wine and Iraqi figs and fruit jams from Saddam Hussein were given by Algerian governments .
 Castro had tea or fish bouillon for breakfast with milk provided from one of the cows that grazed on Punto Cero .
 His lunches were also frugal and consisted of fish or seafood soup with fresh produce . He also had a healthy diet of vegetables and fish .
 Castro's primary vehicle was a black ZiL limousine . Dinner was his primary meal, consisting of grilled fish, chicken, mutton, or even pata negra ham .
 Fidel ordered two mechanics from his bodyguard unit to West Germany to purchase several second-hand Mercedes-Benz 500's to replace the obsolete Alfa Romeos . Subsequently, Fidel ordered the replacement of the obsolete cars .
 A fifth Mercedes would join the procession carrying his doctor, nurse, and photographer . Whenever he would leave Havana, a fifth Mercedes joined the procession .
 In his personal life, Castro was known for being distant, withdrawn, and confided in very few people . Castro and Camilo Cienfuegos before playing a baseball game .
 His closest and most trusted friend was Raúl Castro, his younger brother by five years and longtime armed forces minister . Castro's closest friend was his brother, Raúel Castro, a longtime military minister .
 Sánchez describes Raúl as complementing Castro's personality in all the ways that he is not . Raúal has a vastly contrasting, almost polar opposite personality to Castro .
 Castro spoke nearly every day with Raúl, met several times a week . Vilma was also considered close to Castro and often appeared in public with him at national events .
 Besides Raúl, Castro was not close to any of his other siblings, although he did have friendly relations with his elder brother Ramón and sister Angelita .
 His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the U.S. since the early 1960s . His closest friend was fellow revolutionary Celia Sánchez, who accompanied him almost everywhere .
 Fidel Castro provided a large apartment for Celia on 11th Street near Vedado, El Once . Fidel visited every day before returning home .
 Castro added an elevator, fitness room, and bowling alley for personal use . Over the years, Castro added a bowling alley, elevator and fitness room .
 Department 1 was for Fidel's security, Department 2 was Raúl and Vilma's, and Department 3 was for the members of the Politburo and so on . Department 1 is for Fidel, Raúal and Vilman's, according to Fidel's daughter . Department 2
 Unlike the other MININT Departments, both his and Raúl's units bypassed the normal chain of command and reported to them directly . Unlike the others, both MININT teams bypassed normal chain-command .
 Third ring consisted of thousands of soldiers both in MININT and MINFAR who provided support for Logistics, Air-Defense, Intelligence, etc. The third ring was the third ring .
 He spent most of his time under their protection and were usually his companions in his personal interests . He was often surrounded by them to protect his interests .
 A sports fan, he also spent much of his time trying to keep fit, undertaking regular exercise such as hunting, fly fishing, underwater fishing, scuba diving and playing basketball .
 They were also his companions on special events, such as his birthday or during national holidays . They would regularly exchange gifts and engage in one-sided discussions with Castro .
 The members of the Escort Castro was closest to was former Mayor of Havana Jose ""Pepín"" Naranjo who became his official aide until his death in 1995 and his own personal physician Eugenio Selman .
 Castro was also close to Manuel ""Barbarroja"" Pineiro, the head of the American Department of the DGI, Antonio Núñez Jiménez, and the Colombian novelist Gabriel García Márquez .
 Cuban government has never published official marital history of Castro . Most information from defectors and scarce details published in state media and pieced together over the years .
 In his earlier years in power, he showcased some of his family life, in order to portray himself as a normal ""family man"" to the apprehensive American audience . Eventually abandoned that as he became more concerned about his personal safety .
 Sánchez described Castro as a compulsive lover or ""womanizer" He has been officially married twice but has carried on numerous affairs, including one-night stands .
 Sánchez denies that Castro ever engaged in any unusual or un-consensual behavior . Popular with women and often recognized as a sex symbol in Cuba, Castro never had difficulty in finding love and seduction .
 Castro was also described as a poor father; often absent from their lives . He had little interest in the activities of his children and was more interested in his work . Castro was described as an alcoholic and alcoholic .
 Raúl Castro was often the one who played the role of surrogate father to Fidelito and Alina Castro . Raúúl had much more stronger paternal feelings towards his family .
 Castro's first wife was Mirta Díaz-Balart, whom he married in October 1948 . Castro was married to Días Balart in 1948 . He has a daughter and a son .
 She divorced him later in 1955 while he was in prison due to the attacks on the Moncada Barracks . She later divorced him in 1955 .
 Fidelito grew up between Havana and Miami . Fidelito went to the Soviet Union to study nuclear physics . Fidelita was born in Cuba .
 For a time, he ran Cuba's atomic-energy commission . He was removed from the post by his father . He ran the commission before being removed by his own father .
 His son took his own life in February 2018, over a year after his father's death .
 During his first marriage, Castro had a brief encounter with Maria Laborde, an admirer from Camaguey whom very little is known and has long been deceased . Castro had an affair with Laborde during his first wife's marriage .
 Sánchez and another defector uncovered that he was in fact born earlier than Fidelito . It was long believed that his birth was in 1956, but he was actually born in 1956 . Fidelito's birth was believed to have been in 1956.
 While Castro was married to Mirta, he had an affair with Natalia ""Naty"" Revuelta Clews . Clews was Natalia "Naty" Clews.
 Natalia herself was married to Dr. Dr. Josefina Castro . Natalia was known for her beauty in Havana . She was also married to the Cuban president .
 Orlando Fernandez sympathized with the aims of the Revolutionary movement . Orlando Fernandez was a supporter of the Cuban Revolution . He was a member of the revolutionary movement .
 She initially joined the movement as a friend of Castro but later became his mistress . She visited him while he was imprisoned on Isla de Pinos . She was also his mistress and visited him during imprisonment .
 Castro showed little interest in her but sent her to a boarding school in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France . Castro showed no interest in the girl, but instead chose to send her to boarding school .
 Several defectors have described her personality as the most similar to her father . One of the few people willing to stand up to Castro, several defectors say .
 Alina became a public relations director for a State-owned fashion company and a model for Havana Club . Alina is now the daughter of a Russian President Vladimir Putin . She is also a model and public relations manager for the Havana Club.
 Her father inadvertently found out about the latter job while reading Cuba magazine, coming across an advertisement showing Alina posing in a bikini on a boat with two other models . Alina's father nearly exploded with rage when reading the advertisement .
 Alina left Cuba in 1993, disguised as a Spanish tourist, and sought asylum in the U.S. from where she has criticized her father's policies . Alina has criticized the policies of her father .
 Castro's second and longest wife was with Dalia Soto Del Valle, another admirer . She met Castro during a speech in Villa Clara in 1961 .
 She was part of the government's literacy campaign who moved to Havana on Castro's initiative . She later moved in with him at Punto Cero as his permanent family .
 Castro and Dalia Castro had five sons, each of them starting with the letter A and three of them a variation of ""Alexander"" :Alexis Castro Del Valle, born in 1962 . Alexis Castro del Valle is one of five sons .
 Described as a loner with few friends, he eventually got a degree in computer science but has since become a mechanic . Described himself as a 'loner' and a "loner"
 Formerly trained as an engineer as well but instead became a photographer and cameraman for Granma and Cubavisión .
 Fidel Castro was the official photographer of his father . He published several books and hosted the exhibitions Fidel Castro:Photografia Intimidade . Fidel Castro is the son of Fidel Castro, who died in 1961 .
 Considered a ""computer geek" like his brothers, he also studied computer science and engineering . He is passionate about the subject .
 Around 1990, he wrote software that allowed Russian programs to be run on Japanese ones . The product was purchased by NEC of Japan, which raised his national profile in the engineering community of Cuba .
 He is currently the head of the Surgery unit at the Elite Frank Pais Orthopedic Hospital . He is also the President of the Cuban Baseball Federation and Doctor to the National Baseball team .
 Considered spoiled by his parents from a young age, he was long considered the ""trouble child"" of the family . He was considered the "troubled child" of the parents .
 He earned the ire of his father's escort unit for disrupting the work of the mechanics . He was passionate about cars and frequently earned his father the ire .
 Angelito never obtained any higher education, but later became the senior executive of the Mercedes-Benz concession of Cuba . Angelito was born in Cuba .
 After the 1970s, Castro began a long relationship with Juanita Vera, a Colonel in the foreign intelligence service, who joined his escort unit as his English interpreter . Vera was an intelligence officer who joined the escort unit .
 She often appeared in public with Castro, especially in Oliver Stone's Comandante .
 Castro had another daughter, Francisca Pupo, the result of a one-night affair . Castro had a one night affair with one of his children .
 Another son known as Ciro was also born in the early 1960s, the result of a brief fling with Celia .
 Fidel's domination of every aspect of the government and society remains total . Within Cuba, Fidel Castro remains the most powerful figure in the country .
 He wants to increase people's standard of living, the availability of material goods, and to import the latest technology . He wants people to increase their standards of living .
 Cuba's economic realities, despite rapid growth in the gross national product, severely limit what Cuba can buy on the world market . Castro both inspired and dismayed people around the world during his lifetime . But the economic realities of Cuba severely limit the country's economic growth .
 According to political scientists, Castro ruled a single-party authoritarian regime in Cuba . Castro ruled the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 Castro's Cuba gained a large role in world affairs . Censorship of information was extensive, and independent journalism was repressed .
 Castro government relied heavily on its appeals to nationalistic sentiment, including hostility to the U.S. government . Castro government relies heavily on nationalistic sentiments, such as hostility toward the United States government . The Castro government was overthrown in 1953 .
 According to Balfour, Castro's domestic popularity stemmed from the fact that he symbolised ""a long-cherished hope of national liberation and social justice" for much of the population . Castro's popularity was due to his image as a symbol of social justice .
 Castro publicly rejected the ""dictator" label . He said he constitutionally held less power than most heads of state . Castro insisted that his regime allowed for greater democratic involvement in policy making .
 Critics claim that Castro wielded significant unofficial influence aside from his official duties . Nevertheless, critics claim he wielded significant influence aside of his official role . Castro's government was overthrown in 2009 .
 Balfour stated that Castro's ""moral and political hegemony" within Cuba diminished the opportunities for democratic debate and decision making . Balfours said Castro's influence in Cuba diminished opportunities for democracy .
 Castro's leadership style warranted comparisons with totalitarian leaders like Mao Zedong, Hideki Tojo, Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, and Benito Mussolini . Sondrol suggested that in leading ""a political system largely his own creation and bearing his indelible stamp"", Castro's
 Balfour stated that Castro's story had ""few parallels in contemporary history"", for there existed no other ""Third World leader"" in the second half of the twentieth century who held ""such a prominent and restless part on the international stage" or remained head of state for such a
 Bourne described Castro as ""an influential world leader"" who commanded ""great respect"" from individuals of all political ideologies across the developing world . Bourne: Castro was an influential leader who commanded "great respect" from all parties .
 In Cuba Following Castro's death, Cuba's government announced that it would be passing a law prohibiting the naming of "institutions, streets, parks or other public sites, or erecting busts, statues or other forms of tribute" in honor of the late Cuban leader .
 Citing ECLAC, La Economia Cubana, 217; IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics Yearbook, various editions; and EIU, Cuba, Annual Supplement, 1980,22. Citing the IMF, IMF, and E.I. Cuba, Cuba's trade statistics