 This lesson enables students who have been studying the Cold War to perspective of key events of the Cuban missile crisis . It also gives students a clear overview of significant events during the period of the crisis .
 Some students will be able to explain the different ideological motivations that existed during this time, and how they contributed to SUGGESTED TIME the missile crisis . Timeline cards explain the various ideological motivations .
 This is a one hour lesson, but can be differentiated to serve as a starter activity for a subsequent lesson . This is an activity that can be used as a starting activity for subsequent lessons .
 A few students will be able to highlight the relationship of the ROOM LAYOUT missile crisis to events in the Room Laysout missile crisis . For pair/group work, students will need to present a few students .
 The bombing of Hiroshima and Debating Nagasaki will be required . Presentation skills will be assessed by students .
 Discuss with them what they thought the most critical aspects of the run-up to the bombing were . Deliver a brief overview of the bombings and the arguments for/against them . Discuss what they think the most important aspects of them were .
 Students could work in pairs and write up a list of questions to do with the Cuban missile crisis . Explain how this led to the beginning of the Cold War .
 Students to sort through cards and images of key events in the Cuban missile crisis . Students to pick 3 images and 7 written cards out of the 20 possibilities and create a collage timeline .
 Students need to discuss the different cards to consider which ones are more important and why . Students also need to decide which cards are the most important to consider .
 At the end of the timeline, the timeline can be presented to the rest of the class, with particular attention being paid to why certain events were deemed of more significance than others . The timeline can also be shown to the other class to show how important events were .
 Students can take part in external research to learn more about the Cuban missile crisis . Links to use can be found at the back of the resource .
 Use all the caption events and images on the A4 timeline . Students to draw the events and make their own collage instead of using glue .
 Students explain why each event was significant in the Cuban missile crisis . Add Cold War events to the timeline and link this back to the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Students to write the events down and make their own collage instead of using glue .
 Use newspapers and images to make a creative art and design collage . Students can begin a scrapbook or piece of display work that they carry through the scheme of work in this resource . Students could role play each event on the timeline .
 As a result of the Manhattan project, the United States of America become the first country in the world to develop nuclear weapons . The Cold War was the first Cold War of its kind .
 These weapons were used against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima & Nagasaki in August 1945 at the end of World War Two and just prior to the Japanese surrender . They were used just before the surrender of the Japanese .
 By August 1949, the Soviet Union had developed and tested their own nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union tested its own nukes in 1949 .
 Despite being allies during the Second World War, the two superpowers began forming alliances with other nations . Despite having differing economic and political ideologies, they formed alliances with others .
 Their aim was to restrict each other's global influence, and champion their own . They aim to limit each other’s global influence .
 By 1986, the Soviet Union had 41,000 nuclear bombs and the USA had 23,000 . By 1986 the Soviet U.S. had just 23,500 nuclear bombs . The U.K. had more nuclear bombs than any other nation .
 The name Cold War was applied to the conflict as there was an absence of direct warfare between the two states . There was no direct warfare in the Cold War as the conflict was not directly fought .
 The conflict was characterised by several aspects; the mass stockpiling of nuclear weapons in an arms race between the Soviet Union and the USA; superpowers backing opposing sides in ‘proxy wars’ across the world; espionage and psychological warfare .
 Both countries sought to build up their supplies of nuclear weapons so as to deter the other from using a nuclear weapon against them through their ability to launch a similar attack in retaliation .
 The logic followed that one country would never attack the other with a nuclear weapon as that would mean they would suffer a similar attack in return, leading to the large scale destruction of both countries . Both countries would never be attacked with nuclear weapons .
 It is said to be illogical for either country to launch a nuclear attack on each other .
 The two countries came incredibly close to nuclear Armageddon . However, this did not stop the two countries from coming incredibly close .
 Cold War ended in 1991, but the consequences shaped world politics, and continue to do so . The Cold War is still shaping world politics and continues to shape world politics .
 Castro government of Cuba nationalised many industries and appropriated the property of many individuals . The Cuban missile crisis took place during the Castro government in Cuba .
 President Eisenhower in 1960 froze Cuban assets in the US, sever diplomatic ties and tighten the embargo on Cuba . This prompted President Eisenhower to freeze Cuban assets and sever diplomatic relations with the US .
 The loss of trade with the United States led the Cuban government to find a new ally in the Soviet Union to export sugar to in exchange for oil . The Soviet Union was the country's first sugar export partner in Cuba .
 President Eisenhower gave $13. million to the CIA with the intention of overthrowing the Castro government . The Cuban government was a mere 90 miles from the U.S. border .
 A CIA sponsored paramilitary group launched an attempted invasion of Cuba, known as the Bay of Pigs invasion . The attempt to invade Cuba was launched in 1961 by the CIA .
 Tensions between the Soviet Union and the U.S. had been rising since the end of the Second World War . Both sides built up their stockpiles of nuclear weapons .
 The United States had positioned nuclear missiles in Turkey, the UK and Italy with the capability of striking the Soviet Union . The U.S. was in a militarily stronger position than the Soviet Russia at that point .
 The Soviets believed that placing missiles on Cuba, capable of striking the U.S. would not only defend their ally Cuba, but also give them leverage to win control over West Berlin from the West, through conceding the removal of the missiles from Cuba in return for West Berlin .
 After the U.S. attempted to overthrow the new Cuban government, the Cubans looked to the Soviet Union for protection . The United States tried to overthrow Cuba's new government . The Soviet Union was a key ally of the Cuban government .
 The installation of Soviet missiles on Cuba had begun by September 1962 . On October the 14th US reconnaissance planes captured footage of the construction of a missile base .
 President Kennedy was left with a number of options, from ignoring the threat and appearing weak in the face of Soviet aggression to launching an invasion of Cuba and risking a nuclear exchange .
 Kennedy worried that this could lead to retaliation from the Soviet Union . Many of his advisors thought that air strikes or an invasion of Cuba were the most appropriate reactions, but Kennedy worried this could result in retaliation .
 Kennedy eventually opted to form a naval blockade of Cuba to stop Soviet missiles reaching the island . The blockade was a naval effort to stop the Soviet missiles from reaching Cuba .
 Soviet commander in Cuba authorised to use tactical nuclear weapons against U.S. forces if they invaded . Any attack on Cuba could have led to the outbreak of nuclear war .
 With the blockade in place there were questions of how the U.S. would enforce the blockade and continue to surveil Soviet missile construction on Cuba, without Soviet retaliation .
 Moscow offered to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the U.S. removed theirs from Turkey as well as promising not to invade Cuba . Kennedy later received another message from Moscow offering to remove the missiles .
 This possible resolution angered many of Kennedy’s advisors as it would make the U.S. seem weak and uninterested in supporting their Turkish allies . Kennedy's advisors say the resolution would make it seem weak to support Turkey .
 Robert Kennedy delivered a message to the Soviet ambassador to pledge not to invade Cuba . The Soviet ambassador agreed to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey once the crisis had passed .
 Had it been rejected, a U.S. invasion of Cuba, followed by a nuclear retaliation from the Soviet Union would have been likely . Had the United States rejected, it would have led to a nuclear strike .
 It is claimed that the Cuban missile crisis was the closest the world came to a nuclear armed World War Three . Governments and people across the world feared a nuclear apocalypse .
 Gromyko meets with policies reverse course – except for President Kennedy and one assures him that Soviet weapons were given to Cuba only for the defence of Cuba . President Kennedy insists that the weapons are only for defence purposes .
 In early June the possibility of dropping the bombs on an unoccupied area as a demonstration of their power is also discussed . The bombs could be dropped on unoccupied areas as a show of power .