 President Kennedy did not want to potentially start a World War III with Cuba and the Soviet Union . President Kennedy wanted to avoid a nuclear war and did not know how missiles the Soviets had on Cuba . He chose to quarantine Cuba disallowing Soviet ships from bringing any more missile parts .
 DEFCON level was raised to level 2, the highest it had ever been in U.S. history . Because the Soviets had come into contact with American forces, the level of the highest level in history .
 President Kennedy was willing to trade and remove missiles in Turkey and Italy only if the Soviets removed the missiles in Cuba . The American public responded by finding it necessary to invade Cuba and retrieve the weapons of mass destruction .
 President Kennedy, EX-COMM, and the JCS learned that an American U-2 plane had been shot down by the Soviets . Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev did not immediately respond to this. -October 27, 1962 .
 October 28, 1962 was the closest day the world was to nuclear war . American and Soviet ballistic missiles were aimed at one another and fully operation . President Kennedy was upset, but instead he contacted Khrushchev and organized an appointment in Washington D.C. the following day .
 President Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed upon peace terms as the missiles in Turkey and Italy were removed, and the warheads in Cuba were also removed . However, the missiles were removed from Turkey, Italy and Cuba .
 Aakre, Nels and Silverman, Leslie. Silverman . Silverman: "I'm a great writer. I'm a good guy. I love you"
 The CIA reported that all of the Cubans ballistic missiles were operational and were in standby waiting for the signal by Khrushchev .
 President Kennedy allowed the Air Force to move into position as several American F-102 fighter planes, armed with nuclear missiles, monitored the skies of the Bering Sea and Cuba . In response to this action, President Kennedy .
 With a push of a button, nuclear warheads could have been launched to the Soviet Union and Cuba, resulting with a nuclear war . The U.S. and Cuba were at risk of nuclear war in the 1980s .
 President Kennedy and Khrushchev met between the hours of six and nine o’clock am, and after their long discussion, war was averted .
 Both President Kennedy and Khrushchev had met each other's demands, and people around the world began to rejoice . Both of them agreed to the terms of a deal .
 The Cold War would still exist between the Americans and Soviets for nearly three more decades until peace was finally achieved in 1989 .
 President Kennedy also informed the press about the talks with the Soviets because he wanted all Americans to be on high alert and to retreat to fallout shelters as soon as possible .
 President Kennedy scheduled an immediate meeting with both the JCS and EX-COMM . Kennedy made it clear that if any other planes were to be shot down, he would unquestionably launch nuclear missiles at the Cubans and the Soviets .
 President Kennedy was willing to trade and take out his missiles in both Turkey and Italy . The Soviets and the Cubans had to remove their missiles from Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The president found most of steps in this option to be favorable towards the United States . He did not rule out the second plan, created by EX-COMM, which was to invade Cuba and forcibly remove the missiles from the country .
 President Kennedy seemed to back away from this option because he did not want to start World War III and because it was reported that approximately 18,500 soldiers were to become casualties during the first ten days of fighting in Cuba .
 President Kennedy wanted to negotiate with the Soviets in order to avoid a nuclear holocaust . His emotions swayed him to consider using an invasion because the Soviets did not want to listen to the pleas .
 Adlai Stevenson questioned Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin on whether nuclear warheads were on the island of Cuba . Stevenson also played a huge role as the American Ambassador to the United Nations .
 Several large photographs, taken by U-2 spy planes, were presented on national television . These high quality pictures depicted the bomb assembly plants scattered throughout Cuba .
 The American public now felt that an invasion was absolutely necessary because of the threat posed by the unstable Cubans and fiery Soviets . Stunning millions of viewers and Ambassador Zorin alike, U.S. public felt that invasion was necessary .
 Famed news icon, Walter Cronkite was superstitious of the blockade of Cuba, and he warned Americans to pack their bags and flee to their nearest fallout shelter . Cronkites was even superstitious about the blockade .
 Only one ship, Bucharest, was allowed through because it was an oil carrier . The quarantine was a huge success for the U.S.
 Nikita Khrushchev was intimidated by the potential effects of barging through the quarantine and lost his first battle with the U.S. The Soviet Union was on the brink of nuclear war and lost its first battle .
 The DEFCON level was the highest it had been in the history of the United States . SAC raised the alertness of the nation by raising the alert level .
 The U.S. was getting much closer to a full-scale nuclear war with the Soviets, and the American public demanded answers to their hundreds of questions .
 Khrushchev even sent a personal letter to President Kennedy reaffirming him that the missiles in Cuba were only for self defense in case of an attack .
 President Kennedy sent more U-2 spy planes to investigate . He met with EX-COMM to discuss the actions that would be taken if a spy plane were to be attacked by Cuban ground forces .
 President Kennedy also formally established the quarantine by signing Proclamation 3504 at seven o’clock pm . The enforcement of the quarantine was moved to ten o'clock am the following morning . The quarantine was later moved to 10 o am the next morning .
 President Kennedy cleared made his point that if the Soviet Union or Cuba were to launch any missiles anywhere, it would be considered an attack against the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response solely against Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy also mentioned that he was raising the Defense Condition of the United States to level 3, or DEFCON 3, meaning that the U.S. was on high alert and rapidly approaching a full-scale war . The Defense Condition is now considered a state of war .
 President Kennedy also declared that the quarantine would be effective immediately on October 23, 1962 at seven o’clock pm . All orders to attack would be given by his signal and no one else .
 President Kennedy hinted at attacking Soviet ships and using a large airstrike on Cuba if the Soviets failed to recognize the proposals made by the U.S. President Kennedy also hinted at a possible attack on Cuba .
 President Kennedy wanted to negotiate with the Soviets and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in order to avoid a large conflict . Kennedy was willing to go to war with the Soviet Union if they wanted to challenge his ideologies .
 President Kennedy then met with the Commander of the Tactical Air Command, TAC, General Walter C Sweeney . They discussed an airstrike attack on Cuba, even though President Kennedy had already decided on the quarantine . General Sweeney was the commander of the TAC .
 President Kennedy still believed that the quarantine was the greatest option . He still told General Sweeney to be on high alert in case the Soviets attacked American warships during the Cuban quarantine .
 President Kennedy told General Sweeney that he would personally call him if he wanted to attack Soviet ships . President Kennedy did not want anyone to tell him otherwise . General Sweeney was the commander in chief .
 It was not known how many destructive missiles the Cuban and Soviets had, and the JCS had no way of taking out all of these missiles through an airstrike . In addition, more photographs were taken by American reconnaissance planes .
 President Kennedy chose the radical option of blockading Cuba, disallowing Soviet ships to bring more missile parts and supplies . President Kennedy, the commander in chief, chose to block the Soviet ships .
 The quarantine was considered an act of war against Cuba and the Soviets . President Kennedy wanted them to see this as an act . If it were to fail, he did not count out raining hell on Cuba with several airstrikes .
 President Kennedy would have allowed the use of nuclear missiles against both Cuba and the Soviet Union . Through this tactic no Soviet ships could reach Cuba, and by attacking American military ships, they would have started the fight . The tactic would have prevented the Soviet ships reaching Cuba .
 EX-COMM and JCS queried with President Kennedy regarding his statements . Four more additional nuclear assembly sites had been found during U-2 flights . The men were shocked to find out that four more additional assembly sites were found during the flights .
 President Kennedy's cabinet members felt even more justified using airstrikes against Castro’s communist forces in Cuba . It appeared as if the nuclear arms race between the communists and Americans was heating up, and President Kennedy felt more justified .
 President Kennedy and EX-COMM met privately with Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko in the Oval Office . President Kennedy did not make his decision on this day .
 Foreign Minister Gromyko soothed fears of the Americans and explained that it was solely for defensive purposes . The Soviet Union placed ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 Several of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, of JCS, thought that it was necessary to verbally negotiate with the Soviets and Cubans first in order to meet their demands .
 By agreeing to comply with the enemy, they believed that they could achieve success in Cuba and bring this ‘crisis’ to a conclusion before it blew out of proportion . The U.S. believed they could then achieve success .
 It is also suspected that several of the group’s members wanted to also invade Cuba and intercept their nuclear missiles, as well as capture Fidel Castro . In addition to complying with the communists, the group's members also wanted to invade Cuba .
 By capturing their ballistic warheads, the Soviets would be severely crippled . This would end their interference in the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. would end its interference in Western Hemisphere.
 If the U.S. negotiated with Cuba and then invaded the country, no other nation on earth would rival the United States . The plans were extremely difficult and not set in stone .
 Many of the other JCS board members fund many faults in this particular plan of action, and there is no clear resolution to the conflict in Cuba . However, many of the members of the board of the JCS say there are many faults .
 The 15 men discussed several options that could be used to engage communist forces in Cuba and in the Soviet Union . During the preliminary session that took place at approximately six thirty pm .
 Some of the consensus ideas included ignoring surreptitious operations in Cuba, negotiating with the communists, or using nuclear warheads against the attackers in the South and against the Soviets .
 They planned on contacting the Cuban and Soviet governments privately . Although several other options were discussed, they did not formulate a specific procedure to use against communists .
 White House officials discovered that Soviets and Cubans were constructing ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba on October 15, 1962 . The missiles were constructed in Cuba .
 This was a huge breakthrough for the group because they now had evidence that the communists were planning a surprise combined effort against the U.S. The group now has evidence that they now have evidence of a planned joint effort .
 They also believed that they could not let this conflict get too far out of hand and must not let these findings get anywhere near the public because they would only cause more suspicion and chaos from the American people .
 It was unknown how long the communists had been creating and constructing these nuclear weapons . The U-2 spy planes were only commissioned to start flying over Cuba on October 14 .
 The posts in this blog are of historical nature about a specific event in United States History . This blog includes historical posts about that event in the United States .
 There has been a genuine effort to properly cite all pictures, quotes, information gathered in this research project .
 Within the ranks of these officials, the information about the issue was extremely confidential . However it frightened these men, and they did not know what was in store for America during this conflict against the communist countries of Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The men were on high alert because it was speculated that the communists were nearing a combined offensive against the United States and that the use of atomic arms would be available to their disposal .
 President Kennedy and his men believed that America should be careful in utilizing this Joint Resolution because they already failed twice in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs and through Operation Mongoose, in early 1961 . The Joint Resolution was passed by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 In addition to Joint Resolution 230, the board agreed that the Soviets had violated the Monroe Doctrine, which stated that Eastern countries could not interact with countries of Latin America .
 It was imperative to these men that they kept a close eye on Cuba through the use of several espionage tactics . The use of espionage tactics was also a key part of their mission .