 He teaches at Tokyo Institute of Technology and is an associate of Asia-Pacific Journal .
 This is a revised version of an article that appeared in The Japan Times on July 8, 2012 . It was published in the Japan Times this week .
 United States Nuclear Missile Pioneers on Okinawa Break Fifty Year Silence on a Hidden Nuclear Crisis of 1962 . In October 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union teetered on the brink of nuclear war .
 For the first time three of the U.S. Air Force's nuclear pioneers have broken the silence about Okinawa’s secret missiles, life within the bunkers . The targeting of unaligned China at a time when China-Soviet polemics were in full public view .
 John Bordne, Larry Havemann and Bill Horn were all born during the early days of World War II . Their motivations in joining the U.S. Air Force were very different .
 Coming from a family steeped in military tradition, Bordne signed up out of a sense of patriotism . Bordne says he is proud of his family's military tradition .
 Havemann saw the air force as a means to secure a stable income for his family . Havemann, a laboratory technician, saw the service as a way to secure his family's stability .
 For Horn, the military offered an escape route from impoverished West Virginia . Horn: "I'm not afraid to go to the military. It's a good thing for me"
 Three men from contrasting backgrounds were assigned to the 498th Tactical Missile Group at Lowry Air Force Base, Colorado . Soon after joining the air force, these three men were assigned .
 The TM-76 Mace is the latest weapon in the U.S. nuclear arsenal . The Mace Mace was the latest in the nation's arsenal .
 Mace missiles weighed 8 tons and cost $500,000 each . The 13-meter-long Mace missiles were a progeny of the V-1 “doodlebug” rockets that the Nazis rained down on Britain .
 Packed into the missile’s guts was a 1.1-megaton nuclear warhead that, at over 75 times the power of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima, could obliterate everything within a 5-km radius, create a crater 20 stories deep .
 Mace dispatched to West Berlin and Republic of Korea in 1959 and Okinawa in 1961 . Mace was dispatched to Japan in 1961 and West Berlin in 1959 . Mace also dispatched to the Philippines in 1961, Korea and Japan in 1960 .
 At Lowry, new recruits were streamed into seven-man crews . They received intensive training in the missiles’ engines, guidance systems and nuclear payload . The new recruits also had to be streamed into the seven man crews .
 Six months later, the newly graduated "missileers" were ready for their combat postings . They assumed their postings would be in Europe, where the East Germans had just started work on the Berlin Wall .
 Island-hopping flight to U.S. military’s keystone of the Pacific — Okinawa .
 The United States military had seized Okinawa in June of 1945 in the bloodiest battle of World War II in the Pacific . From early on it split it off from Japan as a U.S. military colony . Okinawa was seized by the United States in June 1945 .
 With the Chinese Communist victory in 1949 and the Korean War, the island’s strategic importance was increased . The island's strategic importance, and United States fortification, increased in 1950 .
 The 1952 Treaty of San Francisco ended the U.S.-led Allied Occupation of mainland Japan . It assured continued control of Okinawa . Okinawa was the site of Japan's largest island island .
 The island was rapidly transformed into the linchpin of U.S. Cold War plans for Asia .
 In 1954, the United States brought hydrogen-bomb armed F-100 fighter-bombers to Kadena Air Base in Okinawa . The first of thousands of nuclear weapons that the U.S. would station on the island were removed in 1972 .
 When Bordne and Horn arrived in 1961, Okinawa still bore the scars of World War II . Civilian buildings were cobbled together from military scrap timber and the wrecks of United States invasion ships lay rusting off the shores .
 Bolo Point in Yomitan, the first of Okinawa’s nuclear-missile sites, became operational in early 1962 . The first of the Okinawa's nuclear missile sites was operational in the early 1960s .
 Eight Mace missiles were trucked from Kadena Air Base and loaded into launch tubes aimed over the East China Sea . Hidden beneath tarpaulins and under the cover of darkness, the missiles were hidden in the dark .
 The men were trained to “defence the institution of democracy and halt the spread of communism,” Horn says . Horn: “To defend the island, protect the institution ... and halt communism”
 The men’s eight-hour round-the-clock shifts began with a briefing at the missile control center on Kadena Air Base to update them on the day's weather and the current geopolitical climate .
 The crews drove to Bolo Point where, upon arrival, they’d be met by an escort from the previous shift with the latest password . Following this, they would be met with an escorting escort from previous shift .
 Havemann: “That’s when they’d send in the guard dogs to see if there was a problem,” says Havemann . Havemann says guard dogs would be sent in to check out if a problem .
 Once safely past the security check, the missileers climbed into the launch site itself . The launch site is located near the site of the rocket launch .
 Three main areas — a crew ready room, a diesel generator chamber and a launch room replete with a red telephone hotline to Kadena . Consisting of three main areas, the launch room is a crew room, generator chamber, launch room .
 Around 10 meters away sat the eight missiles around which the men's duties revolved . Roughly 10 meters from the ground sat the missiles around the men’s duties .
 They checked the engines and fine-tuned the guidance systems, drilled themselves on safety procedures . They practiced countdowns to ensure the missiles were ready to fire at a moment of notice .
 Life within the missile sites was terrifyingly mundane . However, considering the apocalyptic power at their fingertips, life within the sites was mundane .
 The men studied for correspondence classes, played endless rounds of pinochle and compared notes on the shows they’d seen recently at base nightclubs . To pass the time, the men also studied for . correspondence classes .
 The missileers had also been tasked by American manufacturers to field test a new gadget — microwave ovens . They were also tasked by U.S. manufacturers .
 The missiles themselves created few problems for the men and the gigantic springs beneath the bunkers dampened the effects of earthquakes and typhoons . The springs were designed to protect them from nuclear blasts .
 The events of October 1962 soon dashed any hopes that Okinawa would be a sun-drenched holiday posting . But the events of that month soon dashed those hopes .
 The photos mentioned by Horn were taken on Oct. 1962, by an American spy plane on a surveillance flight over Western Cuba . Horn says the photos were taken by a spy plane in October, 1962 .
 The images revealed that, for the first time in its history, the Soviet Union had stationed nuclear weapons outside its borders . The images were taken in the 1980s and 1990s .
 SS-4 medium range missiles — at 22 meters nose-to-tail and carrying a one megaton warhead — could reach the White House 15 minutes after launch . They are at 22m nose to tail and carry a one-megaton nuclear warhead .
 JFK took the news as a personal affront — branding Khrushchev ‘an immoral gangster’ He immediately demanded that his top brass draw up plans to bomb the Cuban sites . JFK called the news an affront .
 The Pentagon raised the nation’s Defense Condition to level two . Over the next few days, tensions escalated in the Caribbean and tensions escalated .
 Bordne: DEFCON 2 meant we were within 15 minutes of a declaration of nuclear war . Bordne remembers, “Our colonel told us that DEFCon 2 meant . We were within . 15 minutes . of a nuclear war, Bordne says .
 If DEFCON 1 was reached, then we would be within five minutes of launching our missiles. If that were reached, we would have launched our missiles . If that happened, it would be five minutes into five minutes to launch a missile .
 "I thought of my family in America, but I could do nothing to help them. I thought of them in America," she said . She said: "I could not help them."
 I wrote a letter to my mother knowing that if war came it would never get there. I wrote it to her knowing if it was going to happen, it wouldn't get there, she said .
 There was a sense of professional rivalry as the men compared their own Maces with the grainy spy-plane footage of the Soviet missiles . They reassured themselves that the SS-4's appeared technically inferior .
 The players experienced a complex sense of excitement that they might finally be given a chance to put their hard months of training into practice . Furthermore, they experienced a sense of joy that they may finally be able to put some of their hard training into action .
 Bordne: "After we reached DEFCON 2, another mechanic offered me $1,000 to give him my shift" Bordne says he was offered the money to keep his shift .
 "That was a lot of money — a year’s salary — but I flatly turned him down," she says . "I flatly rejected him down. That was a year's salary," she adds .
 For a horrifying few days, it seemed like Bordne would receive his chance as events spiraled out of JFK's and Khrushchev's control . The Cubans shot down a U.S. spy plane and the American Navy dropped explosives on Russian submarines forcing them to surface .
 Okinawa missileers steeled themselves for the announcement of DEFCON 1 . The announcement comes as Japan prepares to launch a missile system .
 Havemann was told that if things became any worse, his crew would have to improvise by loading warheads onto missiles and covering the launch doors with tarpaulins .
 There would have been three separate commands and then we would have launched. There would be three separate command commands, then the launch would have taken place. We would have had to launch three separate launches.
 Kennedy and Khrushchev finally struck a secret deal in Cuba . Soviets promised to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Cuba in return for U.S. promises never to invade the island and assurances it would pull atomic rockets out of NATO-aligned Turkey .
 Horn likened the experience to a near-missed car wreck . Horn: "When word reached Okinawa, it was like a car wreck" Horn: When word reached the island, Horn likened it to a "near miss-miss"
 All three men have willingly answered every question about their time on Okinawa . Until now, all three men were willing to answer questions about their Okinawa experience .
 Khrushchev and Mao had come to blows over Russia’s refusal to help China develop nuclear weapons . The 1959 Sino-Soviet split was a fratricidal ideological debate over the future of communism in China .
 The Pentagon continued to operate on the assumption that the two countries were allies . However at the time, the Pentagon operated under the assumption .
 Mao would have sat out the Soviet-American armageddon sparked by the Cuban Crisis . Given the tensions between China and the Soviet Union, it is highly likely that Mao would sit out .
 The Okinawan Maces annihilated Shanghai and Beijing, killing millions of Chinese . The United States and China would have been at war if the U.S. and China had gone to war .
 The U.S. missiles on Okinawa made the island a potential Soviet target, the three missileers say . They all agree that the United States missiles made Okinawa a potential target for the Soviet Union .
 Havemann raises an even more frightening prospect for the islanders still traumatized by the Battle of Okinawa in which between a quarter and a third of the civilian population died . Havemann says an invasion by Russian or Chinese troops could be even more terrifying .
 Havemann says he was warned that he might need to load warheads into the Onna Maces . Havemann was told to get his equipment, helmets and backpacks ready in case he had to head for the jungles . He was warned to get ready for the jungle .
 It seems clear that not only Cubans but also the 900,000 residents of Okinawa were pawns in a far larger power play . The U.S. nuclear weapons were supposed to protect civilians, but now they have been used as pawns .
 All three American missileers are now retired with time to reflect upon their roles in human history's most dangerous moment .
 The American military machine taught us that it was our right to take anything or go anywhere we wanted. The U.S. military machine told us that . It was . Our right to go anywhere was . The American . military machine . taught us . that it . was . our right
 Bordne is proud that he had been able to perpetuate his family’s long military heritage . Bordne says he is proud to be able to continue his family's long military history .
 President Obama has revealed some unexpected similarities with his erstwhile enemies on Cuba . But the ensuing half century has revealed to him some surprising similarities with the country's enemies .
 Havemann shares Bordne’s sense of responsibility and he is a firm believer in passing on the lessons of 1962 to future generations . Havemann: ‘I am a proud member of the team that won’t forget the lessons learned in 1962 .
 The meetings were attended by John F Kennedy’s secretary of state, Dean Rusk . They offer a disturbing glimpse into Tokyo's attitude toward U.S. atomic weapons just 16 years after the bombings .
 The Japanese foreign minister stressed the importance of preventing word from leaking out about the presence of nuclear missiles on Okinawa . He was unaware that the Americans were just about to put the finishing touches to the first Mace launch site at Bolo Point on the main island .
 Rusk assured Kosaka that he would pass the request to his higher-ups in Washington . Rusk was true to his word. Kosaka's request was passed to Rusk .
 The air force drapes rockets in tarpaulin sheets and transports them only at night . Bill Horn, a crew member with the 498th Tactical Missile Group, recalls the measures adopted by the air force .
 We were to be known only as the ‘TMG,’ and nobody was supposed to know what the letters stood for . Nobody should know what it stood for, but the letters were supposed to stand for .
 The Hakone memoranda and missileers’ accounts hint at the deep tensions within the heart of the Washington-Tokyo alliance . The U.S. and Japan are allies in the region .
 Japan's leaders were either ambivalent about nuclear weapons or, in some cases, incontrovertibly pronuclear . While public opinion was overwhelmingly opposed to nuclear weapons, Japan’s leaders were .
 During the U.S.-led postwar Allied Occupation of Japan, American authorities had rigorously censored all media discussions of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . During the American occupation, all media discussion of the bombings was censored .
 The end of the Occupation, in 1952, was accompanied by a flood of stories about survivors’ ongoing struggles with radiation sickness .
 The 23 crew members of the Lucky Dragon #5 fishing trawler were irradiated mid-Pacific following a U.S. H-bomb test explosion on Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands in 1954 . The public’s anger was reinforced in 1954 when the 23 crew
 30 million Japanese people — more than a third of the population — signed a petition demanding the abolition of nuclear weapons . In August 1955 the World Conference Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs was held in Hiroshima .
 Kosaka's government did not share the electorate’s sentiments on abolition of nuclear weapons . However, successive Japanese governments, including the one in which Kosaka was in charge, did not .
 Japanese leaders never questioned U.S. nuclear weapons and the United States nuclear umbrella . Operation within Cold War consensus that prioritized the need to combat the spread of Asian communism .
 The day before Kosaka met Rusk, Hayato had wondered out loud with the secretary of state whether it might be a good idea for Japan to possess its own nuclear weapons . Hayato was the so-called father of Japan's postwar industrial growth .
 Ikeda seemed to care little that his veiled request for the U.S. to nuclear-equip Japan was in direct defiance of its war-renouncing Constitution . Rusk shimmied around the proposal with an awkward joke before explaining that the United States .
 The U.S. had no qualms about stationing nuclear weapons under its own control on Okinawa . But it was not prepared to contemplate the possibility of Japanese fingers on nuclear triggers .
 Niihara Shoji, the researcher at the forefront of U.S.-Japan nuclear relations, uncovered the Hakone memos at the United States National Archives in Maryland in 2001 .
 Kosaka discussed United States plans to resume atmospheric nuclear tests in the Pacific . Tokyo’s two-faced approach to maintaining an antinuclear stance in public while secretly supporting the Bomb behind closed doors .
 He worried that U.S. atmospheric explosions might slow growing anti-Soviet feelings in his country . Instead, he worried that United States atmospheric blasts might slow anti-Russian feelings in Russia .
 More than any other, it is this phrase that cuts to the core of U.S.-Japan atomic relations . The phrase is this one of the most powerful words used in nuclear diplomacy .
 Rusk's failure to acknowledge that the root of Japan’s nuclear trauma lay in the United States atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and in the Lucky Dragon Incident, is equaled only in the Japanese government's hypocrisy in pretending it knew nothing about United States nuclear weapons in
 One of the Okinawa Mace missiles is now displayed at the National Museum of the USAF in Dayton, Ohio . “The Japanese government didn’t want to confirm officially the presence of United States nuclear weapons on Okinawa because they hoped to avoid any responsibility .
 “This kind of thinking has made a big rift between them and the ordinary, antiwar Japanese public,” says Niihara . “It’s a big problem for the Japanese government,’ she says .
 Throughout the 1960s, neither the government of Japan nor the U.S. admitted that there were nuclear weapons on Okinawa .
 It was only in 1971, when the two countries were negotiating for the return of the island, that the U.S. publicly admitted to their presence . Niihara’s research shows that the United States only admitted to its presence in 1971 .
 Washington wanted Tokyo to cough up tens of millions of dollars for the weapons’ removal – which it eventually did . The weapons were removed from Japan in 2010 . Washington wanted to pay tens of thousands of dollars to remove them .
 For the first time, the U.S. military secretly stations nuclear weapons on Okinawa . The first time the United States military has placed nuclear weapons in Okinawa .
 References include “Bush’s Thousand Days”, The Washington Post, April 24, 2006 . References include the book, "Bush's Thousand Days" and “The Bush Years”
 Interviews with Horn, Bordne and Havemann conducted by telephone and email between April 2011 and June 2012 . Interviews were conducted by phone and email .
 The Nautilus Peace and Security Network invites your responses to this report . The report is published by the Peace and Social Security Network .
 Comments will only be posted if they include the author’s name and affiliation . The comments will be private .