 The section “A Student Guide to Better Writing, Speaking, and Research Skills” begins on page 4 of the book .
 It includes improving your writing skills and preparing a short report, a book review, and a term paper . It includes preparing, rehearsing, and delivering a speech .
 Included are a Glossary of terms and abbreviations encountered in research; a listing of general and specific reference books; and information on two systems for arranging materials .
 Index refers you to the specific volume and page where the information appears . To make it easier for you to find what you seek, the index refers to the pages and volumes where it appears .
 If it sends you to a fairly long article, it tells you which section or sections of that article to look for . If it is a long story, it will also tell you which sections you should look for, such as sections of the article .
 Page numbers in two C volumes are indicated with Cand Ci, and those in the two S volumes indicate with Sand So . Page numbers are indicated by the name of the page numbers in each of the two volumes . The page numbers for each volume have been indicated with the name Cand Ci .
 Page numbers for volumes that contain more than one letter indicate the letter you seek, rather than the first letter of the volume . Page numbers indicate the letters you want to find are those of the volumes .
 Some identifiers are not complete in themselves, but the article titles that follow them complete the identification . Core Core Core is the organization that has been called Core Core .
 Feisal See Faisal in this index includes entries you may want to look up . Feisal see also reference indicates that another heading in the index may be an entry to the index . See also reference is a reference to a number of entries in an index .
 References to illustrations appear along with other references to other references in this index, not separately . Illustrations are included in the index .
 The wording of this article shows whether you will find both pictures and text information on the pages listed . Use this information to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary . At the bottom of the page, please share your feedback about the page you've found .
 If the entry says picture on, diagram on, or map on a given page, it indicates that the illustration listed is related to the subject of the index heading you found, even though no significant text information on that subject appears on the same page .
 This section is designed to help you improve your skills in these important areas of your knowledge . It's also important to learn how to use these skills .
 It also provides how-to-advice on preparing a short report and on writing a book report .
 The section concludes with helpful hints on the effective use of audio-visual aids . The section ends with a helpful hint on how to use audio aids .
 A Guide to Research Skills, part three, helps you get the most of the resources from the library or media center . Part three of our guide to research skills includes reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 It includes detailed information about library catalog systems and reference sources . The catalog system is designed to help people understand catalog systems .
 It tells how to evaluate reference sources and how to prepare source cards and take notes . It also gives instructions on how to use reference cards and notes .
 The — ~. até i Wa FF; section provides guidance for tapping sources of information out of the library, such as conducting an interview or using television or the Internet as a source .
 A Student Guide to Better Writing, Speaking, and Research Skills concludes with a Glossary of terms and abbreviations often encountered in research . The guide also includes a list of general and specific Selected Reference Materials .
 Schoolwork involves a steady stream of writing assignments . Many jobs require the writing of effective letters, memos, and reports .
 Writing also plays a role in your personal life, as you fill out forms or write letters to friends and relatives . Writing is also important to your family and friends .
 Good writing gets its message across so clearly that the reader Knows exactly what the writer meant to say . Good writing is so clear that the writer Knows what he means to say, good writing is a good thing .
 It also holds the reader's attention so completely that the entire message, not just a fragment of it, is received .
 Don't believe anyone who tells WRITING’ SKILLS you that it’s easy to write well. Don't listen to anyone who says it's easy to do well . Don’t believe anyone . tell you that you’re writing well .
 People who have no trouble expressing themselves out loud may freeze when they pick up a pencil . They may freeze in writing when they try to express themselves .
 Like any other skill, writing requires practice, writes requires practice . Like any skill, writers need to practice, writing is a skill .
 If practicing writing sounds like drudgery, you probably haven't thought of all the possibilities . Practice writing isn't just a form of writing, it's a great way to express yourself .
 They also provide specific guidelines for preparing such school assignments as short reports, book reports, and research papers .
 Keep a journal or diary to record your experiences, thoughts, and feelings . Use this journal to keep a journal of your experiences .
 Try writing a fan letter to your favorite author, TV personality, or rock star . Do you know a celebrity? Send it to iReport.com .
 Send for brochures, pamphlets, and free samples that you see advertised in newspapers or magazines . Send for your own brochures and other free samples .
 You might also consider writing your own invitations and greeting cards instead of buying them from commercially produced ones .
 The more you write for fun, the more you'll realize that writing doesn’t have to be a chore . Writing for fun is a great way to keep up your writing .
 Every time you write, you’ll be practicing a skill and getting better at it . You’ve been practicing a new skill every day .
 Some of your school writing assignments, such as themes, essays, and stories, are based on your own opinions, ideas, or imagination . Use these photos to help students understand their writing assignments .
 Other writing assignments, such as book reports and research papers, are based on facts gained from reading and research .
 Be sure you understand the specifics of the assignment, such as its length and whether the topic is your choice or assigned . Be sure that the assignment is your own .
 Plan ahead and organize your time to help assure that you have enough time to do a good job . Organize your time so that you get the best of your job at the earliest possible .
 If you already know something about, select one that interests you, one that you already Know something about . Choose one topic that you're eager to learn more about, or one that's an interest in learning more about .
 Limit your topic so that you can cover it adequately in the assigned length and the available time . Limit your topics in the allotted time and the amount of time you have available .
 Simply talking about your assignment with friends can trigger ideas that you might be able to use in your paper . Talking about your assignments with friends is a good way to get ideas from friends .
 Develop an outline to organize your thoughts and to guide your writing so you won't forget a point you intended to include . Develop your own outline to help you organize your writing .
 A simple list of the main ideas may be adequate for a short assignment . A simple idea is a list of ideas that may be enough to complete an assignment .
 In the introduction, you briefly introduce your topic, giving the reader a preview of what's to come . In this article, we ask you to explain your knowledge of your topic .
 The body of the paper—the longest part by far— provides the facts, examples, and details that support the main idea expressed in the introduction .
 The three parts of your paper should work together to make an effective whole . The three pieces of paper must work together in order to make a successful paper .
 Strive for an attention-getting introduction—one that will attract interest and encourage your reader to read on . Strive to be attention-getting introduction .
 In the body, make sure each point relates to the subject youre discussing . Make sure that all the points in the body relate to the topic you're discussing .
 Don't stray into unrelated material or get caught up in trivial details that don’t support your main idea . Don't get distracted by unrelated material .
 Think of the three parts of your paper in terms of this simple formula . A Guide to Writing Skills 7 is available on Amazon .
 When you write a first draft, don't sit with pencil poised waiting for the perfect sentence to come to mind . Don't sit in a chair waiting to come up with the perfect phrase for the first time, write .
 It’s better to plunge right in, without worrying about making mistakes in grammar, spelling, and punctuation . It's better not to worry about spelling and grammar errors .
 At this stage, you simply need to put down the information and ideas you've gathered . At the bottom of the page, you need to write down your ideas and photos .
 Don't feel you have to begin with the introduction, especially if you're having difficulty with it . And don't feel like it's too late for you to start with it.
 In many cases, you'll think of an effective introduction after you ve written the body of your paper .
 Always write or type your first draft on one side of the paper only, with wide margins . Wide margins should allow plenty of room for revisions .
 If you type, set your computer, word processor, or typewriter for double or triple-spacing . Set your computer or word processor for double, triple or quadruple spacing .
 Thesesenable astronauts down to keep from without b to sleep uxstrapped 14 floatingabout. Themesenable astronauts to sleep down to sleep .
 Eating aboard the space shuttle also requires astronauts to adjust to weightlessness . They "revolved adjusting to the conditions of weightlessness"
 Astronauts eat their meals with their feet strapped down te-keep them from foating-about . Their feet are strapped down to prevent them from falling out of the sky .
 Foods include frozen or chilled facilities for heating soups, vegetables, and meats . Foods can be heated using chilled facilities .
 The shuttle has aways-to-heat food . The astronauts eat,with dishes and silverware .
 Think of writing as a building process, with words, sentences, and paragraphs as building blocks . Think of the process as a process of building blocks, writes the author .
 Your goal is to choose the best words, to put them together into clear, grammatical sentences . Form the sentences into logical, coherent paragraphs, and to link the paragraphs into a well-organized paper .
 In most cases, writing involves a lot of rewriting—turning out as many drafts as necessary to produce the best results . Re-writing is a way of getting the best result out of writing .
 After you've completed your first draft, the best thing to do is forget about your paper for a while . The best thing is to relax and take a break from writing for a bit .
 You might be SO impressed or satisfied with your first effort that you think it cant be improved. You might think it can't be improved .
 Look for weak spots in content, organization, and writing style as well as errors in grammar, capitalization and punctuation . Use this article to help you understand your writing style and grammar .
 Editing your own work is one of the hardest and most important tasks in turning out a well-written paper . Editing your work is an important part of the job of a writer .
 Look for weak spots in content, organization, and writing style, as well as for errors in grammar, spelling, capitalization, and punctuation .
 Keep a dictionary, thesaurus, and grammar handbook nearby . Use them to help with your vocabulary and grammar .
 If you are working on a word processor, use such built-in aids as the dictionary . Use the dictionary to help you with your writing .
 If you add one or more sentences, write them in the margin and use an arrow to show where the additions should go . Use the arrow to indicate where the addition should go in this article .
 If you want to take out material, don't erase it or black it out completely . Don't erase material or black out completely. Don't delete it or erase it completely .
 Draw a neat line through the material or draw a circle around it . Instead of drawing a line through it, draw a line or circle around the material .
 Use this article to help you with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the photos to help people understand the content of this article . In the comments below, please share your own photos and videos of your own .
 To judge the content of your paper, keep in mind your reader and the purpose of your purpose . To judge your content, keep an eye out for the reader .
 All other sentences in this paragraph should relate to the topic sentence . Use the previous paragraph to help students understand the meaning of each sentence .
 If you have a sentence that doesn't seem to fit in the paragraph, move it to another paragraph or eliminate it . Move it to a new paragraph or move it away from the paragraph to another .
 Make sure your paragraphs flow smoothly from one to the next in logical order . Use this article to help you understand your writing style .
 Style can make a big difference in the effectiveness of your writing . Style is a big part of the way you express yourself in your writing. Style is the key to success in writing .
 A paper that has all the necessary information but is boring to read may leave the reader disappointed and unimpressed . A paper with all the information but not the most boring may be boring to the reader, say experts .
 The Pueblo Indians dug irrigation ditches, wove cloth, and carved dolls, not how they made ditches and cloth . If you're writing a report on the Indians, for example, tell how the Indians dug .
 More people live in India than in all the countries of North and South America combined . India has the largest population in the world, according to the UNICEF study .
 For example, write today or now rather than at the present time and if rather than in the event that. that. happens, write now or now . Write now or later rather than later in the future .
 Don't use words that you yourself don't understand or that are intended merely to impress your reader . Use these words to help people understand and not to impress them .
 For example, write end rather than termination and best rather than optimum . Write end or terminate rather than terminate . Write best rather rather than end .
 Replace overused expressions, called clichés, with fresher expressions . Replace clichés with fresh new expressions .
 " Hungry as a bear, the last straw, and /ast but not least are examples of clichés" are examples from the film series .
 For certain assignments, your writing style may be more formal than your everyday conversation . Your writing style is more formal for certain assignments .
 Mistakes in grammar can confuse the reader and even change the meaning of what you write . Use this article to help readers understand your writing style and vocabulary .
 Here are some of the most common grammatical problems you should look for as you revise your work .
 Run-on sentences consist of two or more independent clauses written together without a proper connection . Run on sentences include run-on clauses with independent clauses without a connection .
 To correct a fragment, you can join it to a sentence or add words to make it a sentence . Use the fragment to correct it and add words .
 Known for their skill as hunters, lions have little trouble finding food . Lion hunters are known for their ability to hunt for food .
 A pronoun must also agree with its antecedent, that is the particular noun to which it refers . A pronoun also must agree with the noun it refers to, and that it agrees with, to agree with .
 When Karen told Ann the story, Ann looked surprised when Karen told her the story . Ann was surprised when she heard Karen's story .
 Dangling modifier is an element in a sentence that seems to modify a word that it does not logically modify . The dangling modifier is a dangling modifier in the English language . Dangling modmoderative is an element that seems to modify a word that does
 Running at record speed, the race was the highlight of the day . The event was the first time running at record speeds .
 Kelly made the race the highlight of the day . Kelly ran at recordbreaking speed, running at record speeds .
 Misplaced modifier is a phrase or clause not close enough to the word it modifies . Misplaced modifier is a phrase that is not close enough to the word the word modifies.
 After you've completed all your revisions, your work should be the best it can be . After all your work is done, you can make it the best you've ever written .
 During a school year, you'll probably be asked to write short reports on various subjects . The next sections provide specific suggestions on how to prepare a Preparing a Short Report .
 This research provides you with “raw material"—the information you need for your report . Use this information to help shape your future independent investigations .
 As a writer, your job is to produce a finished product—a report that presents the research information in your own words in a clear, interesting manner . As a reporter, your report should be produced with a clear message .
 Writing Tips included a list of preliminary steps to follow before short report, book report, and research paper as well as general guidelines for producing the final copy .
 Here are some additional suggestions that apply specifically to short reports . Short reports should be short reports, not short ones .
 It probably won't matter if you're a bit over or under the number of words assigned . Stay close to the target, but stay close to it .
 You need to know if your teacher expects a summary report or a critical report . You also need to be prepared to give a critical or summary report .
 In a summary report, you present the information you've found without expressing any opinions or judgments . In this article, please share your thoughts and opinions in the comments below .
 A paper describing the founding of the United Nations could be presented as a summary report . For example, a paper about the UN founding could have been a summary .
 In a critical report, you're expected to present your own reactions to the information you've found . In the report, on the other hand, you are expected to give your own reaction to the findings .
 You need to evaluate the information, take a stand, and justify your stand with supporting points . You must take the information and take the stand with a supporting point .
 In a critical report on the United Nations, you might take a position for or against continued United States membership in the organization .
 If your teacher lets you choose between a summary report and a critical report, wait and see how you react to the research material before you decide .
 If you find yourself strongly agreeing or disagreeing with what you read, a critical report might be in order . If you disagree with or disagree with, please submit a report to CNN iReport .
 If the information seems straightforward and noncontroversial, a summary report would be appropriate . On the other hand, if the information appears straightforward, it's appropriate to report it .
 If you tried to write a paper on “The Circulatory System,” or “Life in Colonial America” you'd find yourself swamped with information . For example, if you wrote a paper, you'd be inundated with information.
 One way to get ideas on how to limit your topic is to check an encyclopedia . Check an encyclopedia for more information about topics in the encyclopedia .
 Using the index or search feature, look for the general subject heading you're interested in, such as Circulatory System. Use the search feature to find out what you're looking at .
 The article titles listed under the heading will provide you with a starting point for narrowing your topic . The articles listed are listed in the article titles .
 Check out the individual articles to see what they cover and how they are organized . Then check out each article in which you can read more .
 A subheading in one of the articles might give you just the idea you need for a suitable topic . Subheadings can be used to suggest a new topic for a new article .
 Other sources of ideas include the table of contents of a book covering your topic or the articles listed under your topic in a periodical index .
 Encyclopedia articles on your topic are good sources for background reading . Encyclopedia articles are good source of background reading. Encyclopedia articles can also be used to help with research .
 You can decide what kinds of information you'd like to include in your report . As you read, you can decide whether to include what can be left out or what can't .
 It’s a good idea to jot down a list of points to serve as a sort of preliminary outline and a guide to your research .
 Your list might take the form of a series of questions you hope to answer in your report . Your list of questions might include what you think you can answer in the report .
 Researching a topic involves finding sources, reading them, and taking notes on what you've read . Researching the topic involves reading sources, taking notes, taking photos and taking photos .
 The encyclopedia articles you used for your background reading may have included adaitional resources . Aditional resources may include lists of books or Web sites that provide additional information about your subject .
 After you've found good source material, you need to read it carefully and take accurate notes . Take accurate notes and take careful notes to make sure you're reading it carefully .
 For a short report that requires only a few sources, you may find it easiest to take notes on lined paper A Guide to Writing Skills 11 or a notepad .
 You can print out the information you need or save it on a disk . If you are using electronic reference materials, you can print and save it .
 See “A Guide to Research Skills” for more complete information on research sources and how to take good notes .
 Preparing an outline is the last step you need to do before writing your report . Preparing your outline is a last step for writing a report .
 It will help you organize your notes and make writing your first draft easier . Use this information to help you write a new book of notes .
 Begin preparing an outline by gathering all your notes and reviewing them . Begin preparing the outline by reviewing them. Begin preparing your own outline .
 The information can be organized into major topics and subtopics . Then decide how to organize the information into a major topic .
 For a short report, your outline can be simple, with only a few main headings and subheadings . For a simple outline, outline should be simple .
 This kind of outline is a topic outline . lt uses words or phrases for headings . Performing scientific experiments is an example example .
 A sentence outline uses complete sentences for head12 A Guide to Writing Skills ings. Head12 is a guide to writing skills .
 After you've completed your outline, stop and think about the information you've gathered . Stop and think for a bit of time about your outline .
 It should tell the reader what your paper is about and should guide you as you write . The paper should tell you what it's about and guide you to write .
 Al] the points you make in your report should relate in some way to the thesis sentence, Al says . Al says the points should relate to a thesis sentence . Al: The thesis sentence should be related to some of your points in the report's thesis .
 A look inside a space shuttle shows how people can adapt to living under unusual circumstances . The space shuttle is the first of its kind in the United States .
 When you're ready to write your first draft, keep your notes and outline nearby . Keep an outline and notes ready for the first draft .
 Your notes should provide you with the specific details and examples you'll need to support your thesis statement . Use these notes to help students understand their thesis .
 Follow the suggestions given in the section “Writing Tips” that begins on page 6 as you write and revise .
 “Begin preparing the outline by gathering all your notes and reviewing them. Shs apes apes BS Ie ae 2385 .
 After you've made your last revision, you're ready to prepare a clean, fresh copy of your report . Clean, fresh copies are necessary for a fresh report .
 If your teacher has given you instructions on how to submit the report, follow them exactly . Follow them exactly. If you have been given instructions by your teacher, please follow them .
 If you can, type your report on a computer, a word processor, or a typewriter . Use the word processor or typewriter to report your findings .
 A written report about a book may be only a brief summary, or it may be a lengthy analysis . The author of this article has published more than 1,000 copies of this week's book .
 If you cannot type, write your report on white, lined paper using one side only . Write your report in ink on a white lined paper only .
 Check for last-minute mistakes in spelling or punctuation and for typing errors . Check, too, for spelling errors .
 It’s important that you understand exactly what you are expected to cover in a book report . It's important to be sure that you are prepared for the book report.
 You'll know what factors to pay particular attention to as you read the book . That way, you'll Know what factors you need to pay special attention to .
 If you are allowed to choose a book for your report, you obviously should pick one that you think you'll enjoy reading . Whether it's fiction or nonfiction, you should pick a book that you will enjoy reading, whether it's nonfiction or fiction .
 If a book report is due in three weeks, don't assume you'll have three weeks to read a book . Don't assume that you'll be able to read your book report in less than three weeks .
 Don't pick a '* A Guide to Writing Skills 13 book that’s too easy to read just So you can finish it quickly . Don't choose a ' * A Guide To Writing Skills' book that's too easy .
 Don't choose a book in which the content, vocabulary, or writing style is too difficult . On the other hand, don't choose the content or style of a book that's too difficult to read .
 Select a book that seems to be at or slightly above your reading level . Select the book that you seem to be reading with a reading level at the highest level .
 Literature for children also rates books according to various reading levels . The bibliography in this article includes the bibliographies of children's books .
 If you have trouble selecting an appropriate book, ask your teacher or librarian for suggestions . Ask your librarian or teacher for suggestions for a book .
 If the teacher has specified a topic you are to report on, pay particular attention to the parts of the book that pertain to that topic .
 Take notes as you go along, and record page numbers of pasSages you want to remember . Take notes and take photos of the things you know about .
 If the book is your own copy, you may underline or otherwise highlight important parts and make notes in the margins . Use the margins to help with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 Take time after you've finished the book to think about what you've read . If the topic of your book report is your choice, take time to reflect on your experience .
 You may decide there were more things you didn't like about the book than you liked . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 It's best to select one or two aspects of the book as the topic of your book report . Whatever your overall impression was, it’s best to focus on one of the aspects of your report .
 After you've decided what your topic will be, it’s helpful to make an outline to guide your writing . The outline is a guide to how to write an article .
 Follow the suggestions in the section “Writing Tips” on pages 6-10 as you write the first draft and revisions .
 Remember the need for a strong introduction, a supportive body, and an effective conclusion . Remember the importance of a good introduction and a good conclusion .
 In the body of your book report, back up your thesis sentence with direct references to the book . Back up your report with references to your thesis .
 Interweave your personal comments with summaries of specific parts of the book or direct quotations from the book . Use this article to help students understand today's featured guest interviews .
 If you quote directly, be sure to copy accurately, use quotation marks, and include the page number in parentheses after the quotation . Use quotation marks to help with reading comprehension .
 If you quote from a source other than the book you're reporting on, you'll need to use a footnote . Use a footnote to indicate that the author of the book is quoting from another source .
 When you're ready to prepare your final copy, follow your teacher's instructions precisely . Follow the instructions precisely when you're preparing for the test .
 Think of your research paper assignment as a chance to learn a lot more about something that interests you . Think of it as a way to learn more about what interests you.
 It’s also an opportunity to develop skills in information gathering, organization, and writing . It's also a chance to learn information gathering and organization .
 These skills will make you better equipped to handle many other school assignments and perhaps job duties later in life . These skills are important for students to be prepared for school assignments .
 Research paper is generally eight or more pages, and requires checking more sources . But a research paper is longer—generally eight pages—and it requires checking out more sources.
 It also has more parts, including a title page, an outline, footnotes, and a list of sources .
 The following sections give specific guidelines you need for preparing a research paper . Use these guidelines to help students understand how to prepare their research papers .
 You may be surprised to learn that writing your research paper is one of the last steps you'll do after receiving an assignment . Write your research papers as soon as you receive an assignment as part of the assignment .
 There are many tasks that need to be completed before you can begin writing . There are also many tasks you must complete before writing .
 You might have several weeks, or even months, to prepare a research paper . You might be able to prepare your research paper for several months .
 Don't be lulled into thinking you can relax until a week or two before the deadline . Whatever you do, don't let your self-image be fooled into thinking it's OK .
 Consider other assignments and commitments you have and plan to spend a certain number of hours a day working on your research paper . Consider other commitments and spending time on your paper .
 Allow about an hour per page to type the final copy, including all text pages, the final outline, and the list of sources . Allow about half an hour to type each page, including text pages .
 That hour or So includes time for proofreading, making corrections, and placing footnotes correctly . It also includes time to make sure footnotes are placed correctly .
 One day to organize your notes and one day to prepare your final outline . Allow one day each to prepare a final outline for the next day .
 A Guide to Writing Skills 15: “Planning ahead is a good idea for any writing assignment. The time left will be used to choose your topic, read, gather and gather .
 "Consider other assignments and commitments you may have...” information, and take notes . Take notes. Consider other assignments . Consider other commitments you might have .
 In most cases, your instructor will allow you to choose the topic for your research paper . The topic of the paper should be chosen by your instructor .
 One way to begin the selection process is to choose a broad topic and then narrow it down . One way is to start the process of choosing a topic is to begin with a broad subject, then a narrow topic .
 Remember that you'll be spending much time on your research paper, so be sure you choose a topic you're really interested in . Choose a topic that you're interested in, so don't just pick one of the topics .
 You can probably find a specific topic within the subject area that appeals to you . Even if you don't like the subject, you can find a topic within that area .
 For example, perhaps you don't care much about United States history, but you love music . For example: Perhaps you don’t care much for United States music, but love music. For example,. Perhaps you like music and history.
 A U.S. history research paper on songs of the Civil War could be more fun to prepare than you thought possible .
 Don't be fooled into thinking that you'll have plenty of time and space to cover a broad topic . Don't expect to be given a lot of time to cover broad topics, say experts .
 It’s far better to cover a narrow topic in depth than to skim over a broad topic . It's better to focus on a narrow subject than to cover broad topics in depth .
 See the section “Preparing a Short Report” for how to narrow your topic . Use this article to help students understand today's featured topics .
 An important point to consider in selecting a research paper topic is the availability of research materials . Another important point is to consider is the location of the research materials for the paper .
 Go to the library or media center and check the library catalog and The Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature to be sure enough books or articles have been written .
 If no such books or articles are available, your topic may be too recent or too specialized . If you have questions to answer, please contact us at CNN.com/Heroes .
 After you've chosen your research paper topic, do some background reading . After choosing your research topic, choose a background reading to help you understand it .
 An encyclopedia won't give you all the information you need, but it will provide an overview of the topic . An encyclopedia will give you a basic overview of what you need to know about an encyclopedia .
 Check the index and read the various articles that deal with your topic . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw in the news .
 Background reading will turn up aspects of your topic you hadn't thought of . Most likely, your background reading turns up aspects you didn't know about .
 You may find yourself reshaping your topic according to what strikes your interest . Use this article to help you understand today's featured topics .
 As you read, jot down ideas that occur to you about what you'd like to cover in your paper . Jotting ideas for what you want to write next week's paper .
 Note charts, tables, photographs, maps, and bibliographies that could be helpful . Use these charts to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 With background reading behind you, you're ready to prepare a preliminary outline for your research paper . With your background reading, you'll be able to prepare an outline .
 The outline will help you organize your thoughts and guide your research . The outline is intended to help guide you to the next step in your research.
 Begin your preliminary outline by figuring out what the main idea, or purpose, of your research paper is . Start with a preliminary outline .
 As you're figuring out your thesis, also decide what kind of approach your paper will take . As you figure out your paper, decide what sort of approach you want to take .
 If your subject inspires strong opinions, you may want to take a pro or con approach . Take a stand for or against a certain proposition, in which you take a stance .
 You may choose to compare or contrast two or more things or show the cause and effect of something . You may also choose to show or contrast something or show something differently .
 A chronological approach, which traces the order of events in which events occurred, Suits some topics . The chronical approach to events in the U.S. Suits a chronological approach .
 Other topics lend themselves to an analytical approach, in which a topic is thoroughly examined . This article is an attempt to make the most recent episode of American History of the Month .
 After you've decided on your thesis and approach, ask yourself what points you want to cover to support your thesis . Ask yourself if you have a strong point of support for your thesis to support it .
 At this stage, you needn't be too concerned about the order or completeness of your outline . At this point, you shouldn't be worried about the size of the outline .
 "The important thing is that you give yourself a clear direction before you begin to conduct your research," says the author .
 The next step you need to perform is preparing a list of sources to consult in your research . The list is a short list of people to consult with .
 To begin with, go back to the encyclopedia articles you read earlier to see if they include lists of sources to check for additional information . Go to Wikipedia for the most recent article in the world .
 Many of the sources you consult for your paper will include additional source lists or bibliographies . In addition, many of these sources will also include additional bibliographical information .
 You'll find additional sources when you check catalog, magazine and newspaper indexes in your library .
 For each source you locate, make a note: Make a note . For each book, article, pamphlet, record, tape, Web site, and so on—make a note.
 If you are using a computer, you can add each source you find to one list . You can also add each one you find on your computer to the list .
 If you are writing your source list, use one index card for each source . Use index cards to make your list of sources .
 These cards will be easy to organize and alphabetize when you later prepare your final list of sources . These cards are easy to alphabetize and organize .
 If a source does not have usable information, make a note on your list, or draw a line through its card . Make a list of useful sources, or write a note through the card .
 Keep the note so that you'll have a record of every source you checked in doing your research . But keep the note of all the sources you checked .
 The quality of your research paper depends greatly on the information in it, says the author of the book .
 It's important to find reliable, interesting information and record it in accurate notes, says author .
 You may need to examine various kinds of sources before you find the best possible ones . You may also need to look at various types of sources in order to get the best information .
 Your best information comes from a survey or interview, the Internet, or a museum or historical society in your community . But you may discover that your best information may come from surveys or interviews .
 Valuable information may turn up in places you least expect to find it . Valuable tips can be found in the wrong place to find valuable information .
 The notes on a record jacket could provide interesting details for a report on the origins of rock music . The notes could be used to provide interesting information about rock music history .
 You're out to track down leads and find the facts you will need to write the best paper you can . You're looking for leads and facts .
 See “A Guide to Research Skills” beginning on page 26 for detailed Suggestions . Suggestions on how to use the library or media center and how to get information .
 When you feel you have ail the information you need, it’s time to review and organize your notes . When you have all the information, it's time to organize and take notes .
 Remember, the thesis statement should summarize the purpose of your paper . Remember, it should be a summary of your thesis .
 All these questions will help you get ready to prepare your final outline . Ask these questions to help you prepare your outline for your book .
 It should be an accurate guide to what you plan to include in your paper . Use this article to help students understand today's featured news stories .
 After you've arranged your information in logical order, group it into large, obvious divisions . Use this article to help you understand the meaning of this article's title .
 You must have at least two subtopics under a main topic, or none of them . Subtopics must be under a single main topic or two sub topics .
 The final outline may be a topic outline or a sentence outline, but not a combination of them . The outline is intended to outline a topic, a sentence, or a topic .
 In either form, all the headings must be expressed in parallel phrasing . The headings should be expressed either way or in parallel phrases .
 Topics and subtopics are identified by Roman numerals, capital letters, Arabic numerals and lower-case letters, in that order, followed by periods . Topics are identified using Roman, Arabic, Roman and Arabic numbers . Subtopics include Arabic and Latin American numerals .
 The bottom of this column shows an example of a final outline for a research paper, preceded by the thesis sentence .
 Computers are learning tools that can significantly improve the writing skills of students . Computers should be made available nationwide, and should be available nationwide .
 Uses in the classroom A Encyclopedia and Internet research B Interactive learning programs C Testing spelling and other skills behind you .
 If you've done a good job on all the preceding steps, the writing should go smoothly . The writing process should be done well .
 With your final outline before you and your notes arranged in proper order, you're ready to begin writing your first draft . With your outline in place, you'll be able to start writing a new book .
 Use double or triple-spacing and wide margins to make later revisions easier . Use doubleor triple-space and wide margin to make it easier to read and write .
 As you write your first draft, concentrate on putting your ideas down in a clear and orderly fashton . With smooth transitions from one point to the next, with smooth transitions .
 Your thesis sentence should appear in the introduction and guide you as you write . The introduction should be a guide to your thesis .
 The details you include in the body of your report should relate to the thesis sentence . The details should be related to your thesis sentence.
 If you use a quotation, copy it exactly and enclose it in quotation marks . If you want a quote to be published in the UK, use it at the bottom of the page .
 A quotation that is more than five lines long should be indented and single-spaced, with no quotation marks . Quotes that are more than 5 lines long are indented . A quote that is five-lines long should also be five-lined .
 If you omit part of a quotation, use an ellipsis in place of the part left out . Use an ellipse to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 A Guide to Writing Skills: 17 tions and certain other material in your research paper require footnotes . Footnotes are required for footnotes in research papers .
 The main purpose for footnotes in a research paper is to document sources . Footnotes should be used to give credit to the author whose words or ideas you are using .
 Even if you restate someone else’s idea or opinion in your own words, you must credit that person . Even if it's not your own, it's important to credit the source of the story .
 You may be guilty of plagiarism—stealing someone else's words or ideas and passing them off as your own . If you plagiarism is plagiarism, it's plagiarism .
 You should also footnote facts or figures that you might have cause for questioning .
 As you write your first draft, put a footnote number in the margin whenever you write something that needs documentation . The footnote number should be in the margins when you write a draft .
 On a Separate sheet, write the footnote number and information about the source—title, author, and page number .
 Footnotes will appear at the bottom of each page on which documentation is required . You'll use this information later when you type your final draft .
 Others prefer to have all footnotes on a separate sheet headed “Notes” after the text of the paper .
 Some allow putting footnotes in parentheses after a quotation or material being footnoted . Some allow footnotes after a quote or a piece of material is foot noted . Others allow footnote in parentheses .
 The number of the footnote appears slightly raised above the line, after the quotation or other material being footnoted . The footnote is slightly raised .
 The same number appears before the footnote itself at the bottom of the page or on the separate “Notes” sheet .
 The footnote number is raised slightly above the line, and the start of the footnote is indented like a paragraph . The footnote numbers are raised slightly .
 Be consistent, and follow your teacher's 18 A Guide to Writing Skills instructions . Use these instructions to help students with writing comprehension and vocabulary .
 List of Sources contains all the sources you used in your research paper . The list of Sources includes books, articles, pamphlets, letters, interviews, Web links, and so on .
 The list of sources tells the reader both where you got your information and where further information can be obtained . The list includes both information on the topic of your knowledge .
 With your source cards or printout, preparing your final list is easy . With your printout or source cards, prepare your final printout of the list .
 Simply arrange the cards in alphabetical order by author (or title for a work that has no author) and copy the information . Copy the information into the cards by hand .
 You may decide to include tables, charts, graphs, diagrams, or other material with your research paper .
 If so, place the material at the end of the paper and label each item Appendix A, Appendix B, and so on . Label each item appendix A, appendix B, appendix A and appendix B .
 In the appropriate place in your text, you can refer to the material with a crossreference to the specific appendix . The appendix is a reference to the appendix .
 Set aside the first draft of your research paper for at least a day before you begin to revise it . Revising your first draft should be done at least one day a day .
 Judge it for content, organization, and style, as well as for such mechanical details of grammar, spelling, and punctuation . Then cast a critical eye on it and judge it carefully .
 Revising a research paper involves a few more steps than is needed for most other written work . Revising research papers involves more work than most other writing work .
 First, see that your footnotes are numbered correctly and have the required information . See that footnotes were numbered correctly .
 First, check any direct quotations to be sure they are worded accurately . Second, check out any direct quotes to make sure they're being quoted accurately .
 Check the list of sources to see that it is alphabetized properly and that each entry has all the required information with correct punctuation . Finally, check that it's alphabetized and that the list is properly alphabetized .
 The final copy is your teacher's style sheet . Follow it precisely as you prepare your final copy . The style sheet is a guide to how to use it .
 Type or print out your report on high-quality white paper, using one side only . Use one side of your report only to make sure it is printed properly .
 Leave a margin of 1 to 14 inches on the left and 1 inch (2 centimeters) on the right, the top, and the bottom of the paper . Leave margin between 14 inches and 14 inches . Use this margin to help people understand each other's work .
 Indent the first line of a footnote five spaces, and put the second and following lines flush with the left margin . Indent your first and following line five spaces and put it flush with your left margin. Put the first and second line of an article five spaces .
 Single-space the lines within a footnote, but double-space lines between footnotes and footnotes . Double-space between footnote and footnote .
 Begin each item on the list of sources at the left margin and indent the second and following lines five spaces . Indence the second, third and fourth and fifth spaces is five spaces.
 Single-space quotations that are indented rather than run-in with the text . Single-spark quotations used in the book include those from the book .
 User lower-case Roman numerals for the outline pages and Arabic for all other pages . Lower-case numerals are used for outline pages . Arabic numerals used for all pages .
 Center the number at the bottom of the first page of the outline, the text, and the bibliographical notes . Center the page after the outline .
 Prepare a title page, which contains the title, your name, and the date . Prepare your title page . Use the title page to show you what you want to do .
 The final outline, including the title of the paper and the thesis sentence, is the outline of the final outline . The outline is based on the title and thesis sentence .
 The title of the paper is repeated in all the letters on the first page . The text of the . paper, with the title of . the paper repeated in . all the . letters . on the . first page. The text is the same as the title .
 A page titled NOTES, which lists the footnotes if you did not put them at the bottom of each page, is titled "NOTES" The footnotes should be placed at the top of the page .
 Fasten your paper in the upper left-hand corner of the page . Put it in a folder or binder, or put it in your binder or folder .
 You're finished, and the paper is ready to turn in. Then congratulate yourself, You're Finished. Then congratulations yourself, Then Congratulations yourself,
 The thought of making a speech before an audience may fill you with dread . Yet the thought of speaking to an audience before a speech may fill your mind with dread.
 The guidelines given here for preparing and delivering a speech can help you become a confident Speaker . Use these guidelines to prepare and deliver a speech at the end of your speech .
 You will be asked to give a committee report at a club meeting, ask for donations for a charity, or make a presentation to your boss . And chances are that sometime during your life you will have to make a report .
 Learning how to handle SPEAKIN SKILLS J a it Wie M | oe NJ ¢ vA ¢, “ Speaking situations with ease is a Skill well worth developing,” says the author .
 There are six basic steps to follow in preparing a speech . Preparing a speech will help you communicate more ef .
 They are analyzing the audience, choosing topics, choosing a topic, determining the purpose of the speech, gathering information, organizing the content, and choosing a format . They are also choosing the topic, the purpose, and the purpose for the speech .
 To Speak effectively before a group of people, you need to Know something about them . To speak effectively, you must know something about the person you speak to .
 cP 3 EX \ WSS ies Vi fectively in a wide variety of everyday situations . You need to know such factors as their age and educational level and attitudes regarding various subjects .
 People of different ages and educational levels have different vocabularies and different abilities to understand ideas, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "People of all ages and . educational levels"
 Be sure your audience can understand what you're talking about and adjust your vocabulary to their abilities . Be sure that your vocabulary is appropriate for your audience's abilities .
 Consider how much knowledge about the topic your audience already has about it . Consider how well you know about your audience's knowledge of the topic . Also consider how much of your audience has about the subject matter .
 A speech on Apache Indian crafts presented to a group of 8-year-olds would be far different from a speech on the same topic presented to high school students . For example, a speech about Apache Indian craft would be different from that of a high school speech .
 The language you use and the number and kinds of facts you present would differ . The language used in this case would differ from what you say .
 Try to find what attitude your audience already holds toward a controversial topic . Attitudes are important in presenting controversial topics .
 If they're indifferent or likely to disagree, you may have to gather more facts and present them more forcefully to be effective . You may need to present more facts more forcefully if you want to persuade them .
 A large group may require a more formal speech presentation than a small group . Small groups may require more formal presentations than small groups .
 If the group is large, you may be speaking behind a podium or on a Stage . If the groups are large, it may be possible to speak on a large stage .
 If the group is small, you simply may be seated at a table with the other members of the group . You may also be seated in a small group .
 These factors may influence your choice of speech format and delivery techniques . These factors will influence your speech format .
 First, choose a topic that interests you or that you already know something about . Choose a topic of interest or something you already have something to do .
 Youre more likely to enjoy preparing and delivering a speech on a topic you like than on one you don't particularly care about . You're more likely than to enjoy .
 A speech on how to improve scores on video games might win an enthusiastic response from a sixthgrade class .
 The speech would probably be of little interest to a group of senior citizens . But such a speech probably would probably not be of interest to many of the elderly .
 You would not make the same kind of speech at a graduation ceremony that you would at a pep rally. "You would not be able to speak at a high school graduation ceremony. You would make the most of the speech you would make at pep rallies. That's not the
 Fourth, if your topic requires research, see that the necessary information is readily available . See that you have the necessary info readily available. See that your topic is a topic that requires research .
 Make sure you can cover your topic adequately within the time allowed . Finally, make sure that you have enough time to cover the topic .
 Limit your topic so you can present your main idea and support it with meaningful details . Limit the topic so it is clear what you want to do .
 An informative speech provides information and consists largely of facts presented in a straightforward manner . An informative speech provides information and consists of facts .
 A persuasive speech tries to convince an audience to do something or adopt a particular point of view . It is a persuasive speech to convince them to take action .
 Persuasive speeches rely on emotional appeals as well as facts to achieve their purpose . Persuasion speeches may rely on emotion to achieve its purpose .
 An entertaining speech provides a pleasant experience for the audience . It may have a more informal tone than the other two kinds of speeches . An entertainer's speech may be more informal than any other speech .
 For example, you may try to entertain the members of your audience in order to win them over . Or perSuade them—to accept your point of view .
 If your speech requires information you don't already have, you'll need to do research . If you're going to speak, it's important to learn more about your speech .
 If your speech is about how newspapers are recycled, visit a recycling plant to observe the process .
 The books, magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, and other materials you'll find will provide information on almost any speech topic . Use these materials to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Interview an expert or others who have firsthand knowledge of the effects of budget cutbacks . Interview the principal and some of the teachers at a local elementary school .
 As you develop the content of your speech, always keep in mind the importance of attracting your audience's interest in the beginning .
 In the body of the speech, present your main points and supporting details . Present your main point of interest in the speech . Present the main points of interest to the audience .
 Make sure details are related to your topic and interesting to your audience . Make sure the details are closely related to the topic and the audience .
 You can present your main points in several ways, depending on your topic . The best way to present is to present in a different way of presenting .
 You can arrange them in order of importance, putting the most important points first . You can also arrange the order of order in order to order the best photos .
 You can use chronological order to describe events in the order they occurred . Use this article to help you understand today's events in this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 In some speeches, you might discuss a topic that is new to your audience or difficult to understand . You might discuss topics that are new to the audience or hard to understand, such as new topics .
 In such cases, begin with the simplest facts and work your way up to the more difficult ones . Start with the simple facts and start with the most difficult ones. In such situations, start with simple facts .
 Think of something that members of your audience already know about that could help them understand the new or more difficult topic . Or think of a new topic that needs to be explained to your audience .
 The conclusion of your speech is your last opportunity to impress the members of your audience . Your speech should be your last chance to impress your audience, say experts .
 In many cases, a quotation from a famous person could provide a memorable conclusion to your topic . Quotes from famous people can provide a unique insight into a topic .
 An outline can help you organize the ideas and facts that make up each part of your speech . An outline is a good way to organize an outline for a speech .
 The phrases or sentences of the outline briefly state the points to be presented . The outline is meant to outline the points of each point in the outline .
 Your outline may consist of a simple list of points to be covered . Or your outline may be a list of things to cover in proper order, of course .
 You need to decide what kind of a format to use in delivering your speech . You must decide what type of format you want to use .
 In choosing a speech format, make sure it is one you are comfortable with and one that suits the occasion . Make sure you have a good choice of speech format and a good time to speak .
 You don't have to worry about forgetting anything, and you can make sure your speech precisely fits the allotted time . Don't forget your speech at the end of your speech .
 You may become so engrossed in your manuscript that you forget to look up at the audience . You may also become so distracted that you don't look up to the audience.
 You may begin speaking in a monotone-tone, causing your listeners to lose interest . You may also start speaking in monotones, or monosinos .
 Once they've lost interest, the point of your speech may never get across . Once they have lost interest you may never be able to get your point across .
 Reading your speech also makes it difficult to adjust the content in response to audience reactions . Reading a speech can also be difficult to read and adjust to the audience's reaction .
 If you choose to read your speech, type it double-spaced or write it out neatly so that you can read it easily . If you want to read it, type your speech out neatly and write it in a special way .
 Some people write their speeches on large note cards and make an effort to look up at the audience at least at the end of each card . Others write speeches on note cards .
 Memorizing a speech requires that you first write it out and then memorize it word for word . Memorizing the speech requires first writing it out, then memorizing it word-for-word .
 This type of delivery could mean hours or days of extra preparation time and effort . Depending on the length of the speech, this type of speech could mean more preparation time .
 You might concentrate so hard on remembering the speech that your voice sounds unnatural . You might be concentrating so hard that your speech sounds unnatural. You might also be concentrating too hard to remember .
 You're unlikely to add remarks or otherwise adjust your speech to suit the mood of the audience . And you'll be unlikely to be able to adjust your remarks to suit your audience mood .
 If you decide to memorize your speech, you'll have to keep in mind the need to make your delivery natural and relaxed . If you're planning on memorizing a speech, it's important to keep it natural .
 Comments offered at a committee meeting or club gathering are examples of impromptu speaking . Comments are offered at committee meetings or club gatherings . Imromptu speaking is a form of speech .
 This format can succeed only if you are well-informed about the subject, say experts . This format only succeeds if you're well informed about the topic .
 Impromptu Speech enables you to give a lively, spontaneous delivery . An impromptu speech can be delivered in a lively and spontaneous manner .
 Without adequate preparation, you may ramble and never get your point across effectively . Without preparation, the best way to communicate is to prepare for a meeting .
 Take at least a few minutes to organize your thoughts and perhaps jot down your main ideas to serve as a checklist . If you know ahead of time that you'd like to say something at a meeting or other occasion, take a moment to organize .
 Speaking extemporaneously is the most commonly used type of delivery in public speaking . It is also the most common way to express yourself in a public speaking style .
 You organize your ideas in a written outline and use it as a guide when you give your speech . Use it to help organize your speeches and give a speech .
 An extemporaneous speech has the advantage of being both organized and spontaneous . An extramarital speech can be spontaneous and organized . It can also be spontaneous or organized .
 It's not as difficult to maintain eye contact with your audience when you speak extemporaneously as it is when you read from a manuscript . And it’s not as hard to maintain your audience as it's when you talk from a book .
 To take full advantage of the flexibility of the extemporaneous speech, learn about your topic in depth . Learn about your topics in depth.
 There are many steps involved in the preparation of an effective speech . There are also many steps to prepare a speech .
 This would be the kind of mistake that could ruin a presentation. And yet this would be a mistake . And yet it could be the most embarrassing mistake in a presentation .
 You can also vary the Rehearsing and Delivering a Speech . After you've completed all the words you can choose how you want to deliver a speech .
 Steps in preparing your speech, recording of your speech and lisyoure ready to begin rehearsing ten to it critically . If possible, make a tape .
 You may find unless you're going to give an anim_—‘ that you're not pronouncing all promptu speech .
 Rehearsing is your words clearly or that you re obviously necessary for a memogoing too fast or too slow . Practice in front of a mirto a speech you plan toread . Rehearings is also vital to a good extemporaneous speech .
 The ror, paying attention to your posmore you rehearse your speech, ture and gestures . You rehearse speeches, speeches, gestures and speeches .
 Ask someone to listen to your speech and give an honest reaction to both content and delivery . Then, ask the more confident you'll be when someone listens to your speeches and deliver it .
 As you rehearse, remember listener may be able to spot disthat you want to convey more tracting mannerisms that you than information . Remember listener may have a sense of humor .
 You also want should correct, such as clenching to convey enthusiasm for your your fists at your sides or shuftopic. You should also want to correct .
 You can also your audience will be more likely videotape yourself to observe to listen to, and enjoy, your your own strengths and weakspeech. nesses .
 If you will be delivering your speech in an unfamiliar How to rehearse. Finally, if you have a speech in a foreign country, rehearse . If you are going to be delivering a speech, prepare for it .
 Begin replace, try to practice it there at hearsing by using your outline or least once . Practice it at hearsings by using an outline or at least once.
 You can read from your manupractice with a podium and microscript . That way, you can reading aloud from your podium and a microscript.
 As you repeat the speech phone if they are to be provided . many times, you'll come to depend less and less on your written voice . Your voice should be heard on the phone at all times .
 The way you use A Guide to Speaking Skills 23 your voice can add greatly to the impression you make when delivering your speech . Use A Guide To Speaking Skills to improve your speaking skills .
 Pay special attention to the vo/ume, speed, and pitch of your voice and to clarity of pronunciation . As you speak, pay special attention .
 You'll need to speak loudly enough so that the audience can easily hear you . Obviously, you'll want to speak loud enough to make it clear to the audience .
 You'll have to consider factors such as the size of the room, whether you'll be using a microphone, and whether there are outside noises you must speak over .
 At other times, you might gain attention by speaking more softly, making the audience listen more carefully . You might also gain attention when you speak softly .
 Varying your speed from time to time can make your speech more effective . Varycing your speed is a good way to improve your speech, say experts .
 A dramatic pause at the end of a particularly important statement can be an effective technique . And a dramatic pause is also a good way to communicate with your audience .
 Your voice sounds higher when you are excited and lower when you're serious . Your voice is higher when it is excited or when you want to be serious . You can also hear your voice higher than normal .
 During a speech, your voice should follow a natural pattern of pitch variation . Your voice should be similar to that of a person speaking in public .
 Dress neatly in comfortable clothing that is appropriate to your audience . Don't forget to dress up in comfortable clothes appropriate to an audience .
 Avoid wearing unusual clothes or jewelry that might distract the audience or get in your way as you speak . Don't wear unusual clothing or jewelry to distract from the audience .
 If you're reading from a manuscript, hold it up slightly so that you can easily glance at the audience from time to time . Hold your manuscript up so that it can be easily seen from the audience . If you want to write, hold your book up so you can look at the
 If you gesture constantly, you'll lessen the effect and make the audience more aware of your gestures than your words . The audience will be aware of these gestures more often .
 Make sure your gestures look natural and blend smoothly with what you're saying . And make sure your gesture look natural .
 ILE bi speiertties fot) etest ert ad a Lsistee “8 S& Sse aSse 7%, ate “Bare * oe % cv) | * ox x me ak teet as 4 2 ste a
 Audio-visual aids can add welcome variety to your speech and help hold the audience's attention . Audio- visual aids can help hold your audience attention .
 Words can leave a more vivid impression of your topic than words alone can convey . They can also make your speech more memorable by leaving the audience with a vivid impression .
 Whichever kind of audio-visual aid you choose, be sure it serves a definite purpose . Whichever type of audio or video, it will serve a purpose .
 An effective aid should clarify, illustrate, or dramatize a fact or idea, an effective aid . The aid is a way to clarify or illustrate a fact, idea or an idea .
 Speech explaining how the human ear works would benefit from a drawing, model, or computer animation of an ear .
 A discussion of various dialects might be greatly enhanced by a tape recording . A tape recording of a discussion of dialects may greatly enhance the discussion . A recording of the dialects will be greatly appreciated .
 In graphs and charts, the use of different colors can make statistical comparisons much easier to understand . In graphs, charts, use of colors can help statistical comparisons easier to see .
 You also need to be sure that your visual aid is big enough to be seen by the entire audience and that it is clearly labeled . It is also important to be a visual aid that is visible to the audience .
 Take into consideration the size of the room and the audience as you choose and prepare your audio-visual aids .
 Rehearse with your audio-visual aids so you can incorporate them smoothly into your speech . Rehears your speech using these aids to improve your voice .
 If an aid is particularly interesting or unusual, it may be a good idea to have the aid handy, but hidden, until the appropriate time in your speech . If you have an unusual or interesting aid, keep it handy but keep it hidden .
 Practice in front of a mirror, paying attention to your posture and gestures . A Wig is a hair accessory .
 Mount illustrations and set them up on an easel, rather than trying to hold them while speaking . Mount illustrations instead of holding them up while speaking, use them on your easel .
 Keep turning back to your listeners to keep your eye contact with them . If you're going to write on a chalkboard or paper, remember to keep writing on the chalkboard .
 If you'll be using such equipment as a film, a tape, a videotape recorder, or a computer, check it out before you speak . Check your equipment before you use it .
 Be Sure it’s in good working order and that an electrical outlet is nearby . Be sure that it is in good work order .
 Don't stand in front of a viSual aid or block the view of part of the audience . Don't be afraid of standing in front or blocking the view from the audience.
 When the time comes to deliver your speech, you ll probably suffer from that common ailment— Stage fright . You ll probably have stage fright .
 To Keep your nervousness from working against you, concentrate on what the person speaking before you is saying, rather than worrying about your own presentation . Concentration is key to keeping your presentation straight to eye .
 Look directly at the audience to gain the group’s attention . Walk briskly to your place and look directly at your place . Look directly to the audience .
 Most of us spend time each day each day asking questions and finding the answers to them . We often ask questions and find answers to these questions, but often don't know what answers are there .
 Others are more difficult, and you may need help in finding the answers . But others are easier to find out if you need help .
 It involves locating and retrieving information and then working with or communicating that information .
 If you know where to go or the person to ask to get answers to your questions, you've developed a skill that you can use all your life . In school, in a career, and in many everyday situations, it's important to know where you can ask .
 Developing good search skills can help you find information more quickly and efficiently, thus saving time . Developing a good search engine can help us find information faster and more efficiently .
 You'll learn other ways to get information and how to take notes so you can put your information to good use . You'll also learn how to use your notes to help with research .
 The library is probably the first place that comes to mind when you think about doing research . Library is a great place for people to go to research and use the library to learn more .
 Libraries—-or media centers in many schools—contain more information than any one person could learn in a lifetime . Libraries — or media centers — contain more than one person can learn from a library . Libraries are libraries, media centers, libraries and media centers .
 Many libraries also have pamphlets, brochures, computerized information, microreproductions, prints, photographs, maps, maps and maps .
 Library may have videotape recorders, slide and movie projectors, personal computers, copiers, satellite dishes, and other equipment . Library may also have videotaped recorders and slide projectors and personal computers .
 It's good to know what materials and services the library provides . Whether you're using a small school library or the main branch of a major city library system, it's important to check out what materials you need .
 Some libraries provide online orientations to familiarize you with their services . Some libraries even provide an online orientation guide to their services.
 Take some time to browse around in the library to become familiar with the various sections . Then browse around the library's various sections to learn more about the library .
 Most libraries have two major sections, the general circulation section and the reference section . The reference section is the most important part of the library's circulation .
 The general circulation section contains books and other materials that may be checked out of the library . General circulation section includes books, other materials and other material .
 In that section, you're likely to find all the fiction and most of the nonfiction books your liprary owns . The section includes fiction and nonfiction .
 The reference section has materials that, in most instances, must be used in the library . Reference materials are required to be taken to the library in order to be used .
 Most books in the reference section are not the kinds you would read from cover to cover . Most of the reference books are not meant to be easy to read, say experts .
 Reference works are encyclopedias, dictionaries, atlases, and other reference works that play an important role in research . Encyclopedia and dictionaries are important reference works for research .
 Sources can direct you to sources that contain information on a broader topic, such as the history of baseball . They can also provide information about baseball history .
 Some libraries have several librarians who speCialize in different kinds of information and services . Librarians are trained in different types of information, services .
 A reference librarian would be more familiar with the library's reference section than a children’s librarian . For example, a reference librator would be familiar with a reference section, rather than children's .
 A librarian also can help familiarize you with the library's various electronic and mechanical resources and devices . The Internet, a CD-ROM, or a photocopier can also be used to help you learn more about the library .
 The library catalog is your guide to locating the vast resources of the library . The catalog is available at the library in the U.S.
 It has information about every book the library contains and gives its location . It also has information on every book in the library's collection .
 Catalogs may also include entries for records, tapes, films, and other nonprint items . Catalogs are often used to catalog items such as records .
 If your library does not include entries for nonprint items in its catalog, ask where such material is indexed . If you want to see nonprint material in your library's catalog, check out the catalog for more information .
 Library catalogs take various forms, from traditional card catalogs to computer catalogs . The catalogs are cataloged in various ways, from card cataloging to computer programs .
 It’s important to learn how to use whatever type of catalog your library has . Library catalog catalogs are available at various libraries .
 If you go directly to the shelves without checking the catalog, you may never know about books that have been checked out or are waiting to be reshelved . If you check the catalog without checking it out, you never know if books are checked out .
 If you know your library has a particular book, but can't find it on the shelves, the librarian may be able to see if it’s simply waiting to be shelved .
 If the book has been checked out, you can ask that a “reserve” be put on it . If you have checked out of the book, you should put a reserve on it.
 In many libraries, however, it has been replaced or supplemented by other kinds of catalogs .
 For most books, there is one card under the author’s name, one under the book title, and one or more under the general subject . The author's name is listed in the author's book, the title and the subject .
 Some books may have additional cards for a joint author, an editor, a translator, or an illustrator . Some books have cards for joint authors, editors, translators, and illustrators .
 An additional line at the top gives the title, the subject, or some other heading above the author's name . They look much like the main entry, but they have an additional line, giving the title .
 The cards are arranged in A Guide to Research Skills 27 alphabetical order, according to the words on the top Jine. Jine .
 Each drawer has author cards, title cards, and subject cards, all interfiled alphabetically . Author cards, subject cards and author cards are interlaid alphabetically arranged .
 Subject cards are the best place to begin library research if you don't have a specific title or author in mind . The subject cards are a good place to start library research .
 To find books on your topic, you first need to think of an appropriate subject heading . The subject heading is an appropriate topic for a book .
 If you have trouble finding books on your topic, ask the librarian to suggest other subject headings to look under . If you want to find books on a topic, look under the subject heading .
 Library catalog cards are required to file catalog cards . Filing catalog cards is required to be filed by the library . The library's catalog card system is designed to look at catalog catalogs .
 Cards are arranged in alphabetical order, letter by letter to the end of the word, then word by word to end of a heading . Cards are ordered by letter by word, word by letter and word by name to end .
 If a title begins with “a,” “an, or “the” the card is filed beginning with the next word in the heading . The card must begin with the title of the title .
 Abbreviations are arranged alphabetically according to the letters in the abbreviation, not the letters of the entire word that is being abbreviated . Abbreviation is a form of abbreviation that is abbreviated alphabetically by letter .
 Adams” appears before “Collection of poems” because, alphabetically, the letters c-o-/-a come before c- o-/-l . Adams’s poem is published in New York City, New Jersey .
 Names beginning with Mc and Mac are listed alphabetically and treated as one word . Names beginning "Mc and Mac" and "Mac" are treated as a single word .
 Macadamia nuts Macmillan, Macbeth, Thomas Machinery, McAdam Maclean, John McHenry McLean, Alan 6.5.6.5 . Macadamamia nuts, Macdammies, Macfeth . Macdamia nuts .
 The U.S. participated in the first World War of the 1812 . The United States was involved in the second World War .
 Catalog entries for books by a person are filed before those about that person . Catalog entries are filed in the same place as books about the person .
 Unlike the card catalog, the computer catalog does not interfile all the records . Unlike card catalogs, the catalogs are not interfiled by computers .
 The catalog has separate indexes containing authors, subjects, or titles . Instead of the catalog, the catalog contains separate indexes . The catalog is available in the U.S.
 Computer catalog files alphabetically rather than chronologically . In addition, the computer catalog files are alphabetically instead of chronologically. In addition to the catalog files, they are also alphabetized .
 Computer screen would display U.S. and U.K. before the war of 1812 . The screen would then display the history of the war in a series of words .
 Each catalog card contains information that can help you decide how useful a book will be . The catalog card includes information that helps you decide whether or not to buy a book .
 The author, or main entry, card shows the author's name and life dates . The author's main entry card is a card with a photo of the author .
 When the author lived may be important in judging the value of the book for your particular purposes . The author lived when he was alive .
 Publication date can provide a clue as to how useful the book will be . Similarly, the publication date of the book can be a clue .
 If you’re looking for up-to-date information, a book published 20 years ago may not be helpful . If you're looking for updated information, check out the book here .
 The card tells you how many pages of front matter (content in front of the main text) the book has . The card is used to indicate the content content of the book .
 The card also tells how many text pages there are and whether the book is illustrated . The card is available in the U.S.
 Listed near the bottom of the card are other places in the catalog where a card for the book is filed . The catalog is also listed as a place to file the book .
 This information includes the content of this book and other books . Use this information to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . At the bottom of the page, please share the comments you think about the book .
 Call numbers are used to classify nonfiction books and other materials according to subject area and to arrange them on the shelves in a certain order . Call numbers also used to arrange nonfiction materials on shelves .
 Most public and schoo] libraries use the Dewey Decimal Classification System to classify nonfiction books . The Dewey classification system is based on nonfiction nonfiction .
 A letter and number code based on the author's name appears below the Dewey or LC number . The author is the author of the book and author of a novel .
 The call number of a book appears in the upper left-hand corner of the catalog card and on the spine of the book itself . Call numbers are displayed on catalog cards and on spine of books .
 The call number is important because it acts as the book's “address,” telling you exactly where to find the book on the shelves . The book's "address" is important to find out where the book is located .
 Continued decimal notation (e.g. and 599.61) permits ever-finer subdivisions . Continued decimal numbers permanent indecision may be used in future .
 A number appears on each library book and determines the way books are arranged in the library . The number of books on each book determines the order of each book in a library library .
 By getting the number from an auaad thor, title, or subject record in the card catalog, you can quickly locate any book on the shelves . The number is the title, title or subject of the book .
 World Book Photo is located in the library's reference section . Paenungulata number Si9\9 fr 599.61 Proboscidea World Book Book Photo .
 In most libraries, biographies are shelved together, separate from other nonfiction books . Biographies are often shelved separately in most libraries .
 Biographies are arranged in alphabetical order according to the last name of the person the book is about . Biographies have been published in the U.S. since 1973 .
 If only letters or the letter F appears instead of a call number, the book is a work of fiction . The book is available in the U.S. and Canada .
 Such books are shelved separately in alphabetical order according to the author's last name . Such books can be shelved in alphabetically order .
 When you find an entry in the catalog for a book you want to use, copy down the call number, title, and author . Copy down the book's call number and author, and the author's name .
 Go to the appropriate section of the library, and the call number should guide you to the book you are looking for . Call the library's call number will help you find a book you want .
 Computer, or electronic, library catalogs have replaced traditional card catalogs in many Iibraries . Computer or electronic catalogs replace card catalog catalogs .
 Catalogs store information about books and other media . Like traditional catalogs, they store information on books, other media.
 You can access information in computer catalogs by using the keyword search technique . Use the keywords to search catalogs for information in computers .
 For example, to find information about Siamese cats, you can type the keyword "Siamese" You can also search for information about cats in the U.S.
 The computer searches the database for all “matches” or “hits” of that word . The computer then searches for all matches or hits in the database .
 The keyword may appear anywhere in the title, subject, or description of the topic . Use it to help people understand each other's meaning meaning meaningfully connected to the story .
 Using a specific keyword, such a Siamese, helps you find information faster than using a more general word, such as cat . Using a different type of word, like cat, is a better way to find out more quickly .
 If your search turns up nothing, you then can try using a broader keyword . If you find no results, you can then use a broader search engine to find your results .
 Starting any search with a general word such as war, history, geography, or science will probably yield too much material . Likewise, starting any search will likely yield too many material for the general word .
 Words such as or, and, and not, called Boolean operators, connect keywords . Words such a Boolean operator are used to connect keywords such as "or" and "not" .
 Use or if you need to expand a topic or are unsure about how a topic is listed . Use the list to help people understand what topics you want to discuss .
 The electronic catalog record contains the same information you would find in a traditional card catalog record . For example, you can search under "The Electronic Catalog Record"
 This information includes the title, subject, author, publisher and copyright date, number of pages, and illustration information, and call number . The author of this article includes the author of the book and the publisher of this information .
 Computer card catalogs also allow searches by author, by subject, and by title . Computer cards catalogs can be searched by author or subject, author author or author author .
 Many allow you to limit your search to materials published before or after a certain date or to certain types of materials . Many also allow users to limit their search to certain content .
 Most computer catalogs indicate if material is in the library or checked out . Library catalogs also indicate whether material has been checked out or in the checked-out .
 With many computer card catalogs, you can print out information you need . Some computer catalogs only store information about materials available on site . Some catalogs store only about materials that are available for sale .
 Other catalogs are networked, or connected, to other libraries and collections in your city, region, or state . Library catalogs can be connected to other catalogs in your area .
 In microfilm and microfiche catalogs, printed material is photographed and greatly reduced in size, so that many lines fit onto a small piece of film . Microfilm catalogs are printed and reduced to a very small size .
 Special equipment enables users to enlarge the film image so it can be read on a screen . Special equipment can enlarge the image using special equipment .
 Each individual item may not be listed in the library catalog . For this reason, each individual item is not listed in catalog .
 You can find many answers to your research questions in reference materials . Use these references to help you understand your research .
 Some reference works, such as almanacs and encyclopedias, provide information directly . Almanacs are used to provide information about the world's most important topics .
 Other works, such as indexes and bibliographies, tell you where to find information . Find out more about this article by clicking here .
 Special or subject reference works such as The New Grove 30 A Guide to Research Skills Dictionary of Music and Musicians provide information on only one subject .
 Reference works cover a subject in greater detail than general reference works . Such reference works cover the subject of subjects such as science .
 Many of these sources are in multimedia format . They supply photographs, graphics, sound, and video . Information originally published in other sources such as newspapers or magazines .
 The reference section is arranged according to subject . Like the rest of the nonfiction collection, the reference section contains references .
 Familiarize yourself with the part of the reference collection that contains materials for your research . Use this reference collection to help students understand their research .
 You will be able to refer to them quickly when you need information . Then you can use them as a reference to your knowledge of important facts .
 Some will become reliable sources of information that you turn to again and again . But some will be reliable sources that will be hard to forget .
 The most frequently used reference works include encyclopedias, yearbooks, almanacs, dictionaries, and periodical and newspaper indexes . Encyclopedia is the most commonly used reference work .
 They contain thousands of articles on a variety of topics, and so the subject you re interested in is likely to be covered in some form . The articles are likely to cover some of the most common topics in the world .
 Reading an encyclopedia article can give you a good introduction to your topic and provide you with many of the facts you'll need . Reading a Wikipedia article can help you understand your topic better .
 The encyclopedia will also list related information, both encyclopedia articles and other sources . The encyclopedia also lists information from other sources such as Wikipedia .
 Almanacs provide up-to-date statistics and other facts on many topics, including business, politics, sports, entertainment, foreign countries, and population . Together with yearly almanacs, they provide up to date statistics .
 Archives, or collections of yearbook articles, can also be a good source of information on recent history . Archives are also a good place to look at yearbooks, yearbooks and yearbooks .
 Most people think of a dictionary as a source to use when they want to know how to spell or pronounce a word or learn what it means . A dictionary is a good source of information for people who want to learn more about a word .
 If you take time to become familiar with a good dictionary, you may be surprised at the other kinds of information you find . A good dictionary is not just a dictionary, but a dictionary is a good way to learn more .
 It may contain information about grammar, writing style, and how to proofread a manuscript . For example, it may contain instructions about grammar and style .
 Many dictionaries list foreign alphabets and words, common signs and symbols, and place names . Dictionaries also list common signs, words, and places .
 Magazines and newspapers are valuable sources of information, especially for topics of current interest that may not be covered adequately in books . Magazines, newspapers can be used to learn about current topics .
 They can also give you present-day views of events, issues, and perSonalities of the past . They can be used to help you understand events and issues in the world .
 Periodical and newspaper indexes are the reference tools that can tell you where to find articles on your topic in such sources . Periodicals and newspapers can be used to search for articles in periodicals .
 Some online sources provide methods of searching newspapers and magazines, and enable the user to select and read articles of interest . Some of the most popular online sources are from the UK .
 The Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature is the most widely used guide to magazine articles .
 The periodicals included may vary from volume to volume . Check the list that appears in the volume you're using .
 You'll also need to find out which periodicals your library has in its collection . Find out what periodicals you have in your library collection .
 The entries in the Readers’ Guide appear in alphabetical order by subject and author and, sometimes, by title .
 Abbreviations are used for many parts of the entry, including the name of the magazine and the date of the issue . The entry includes the name, date, and the title .
 An explanation of the abbreviations appears in the front of each volume of the guide . The guide's abbreviations appear in each volume .
 When nitrate reigns [air pollution damage to forests; cover story] J Raloff. il.com: "When nitrate . reigns"
 The entry tells you that an article titled “When nitrate reigns,” by J Raloff, begins on page 90 of the February 11, 1995, issue of Science News. It discusses air pollution damage .
 In addition to the Readers’ Guide, there are a number of specialized guides to periodicals, such as the Art Index and the Business Periodicals Index . The Art Index is a specialized index for the Art, Business and Periodicals .
 These works may lead you to articles not indexed in the Readers’ Guide . Use these articles to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Many libraries subscribe to this newspaper because it provides broad coverage of national and international news . Many libraries pay for this service because of its broad and international coverage .
 some electronic sources provide video, sound, and motion in addition to text . Many are updated more frequently than printed materials . Some electronic sources also update more frequently .
 Aypertext allows you to click on a word or phrase of interest, which will cause additional information to be displayed . A feature found in some electronic sources can be used to display additional information . Clicking on the word will give you more information .
 Keyword searching is used to find information in most electronic sources . Keywords used in this article include: "Keywords" and "Keyword Search"
 Electronic encyclopedias store all the information found in a multivolume set of encyclopias . They store the information in a computer-readable electronic encyclopedia .
 Such encyclopedias as The McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology are also available in electronic format .
 Other reference works stored in electronic systems include dictionaries, the Bible, William Shakespeare's plays, ZIP codes and addresses .
 Electronic periodical indexes, such as InfoTrac, index hundreds of magazines and journals . Electronic periodicals indexes index dozens of magazines .
 In this article, the author of the book, and others have published the most recent version of this article . The author also includes a summary of the article and the author's full text . This article includes a list of books published in this edition .
 The Internet is a worldwide network of computers that has become a popular online information service . It is also known as the Internet, which is a network of networks of computers .
 Government agencies, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and individuals provide free or fee-based access to their Web sites . Government agencies and businesses provide free, fee-free access .
 Each site is a collection of information taken from other publications or produced specifically for online delivery . Each site contains content that is available for download and delivery .
 Search features such as those in America Online, Netscape, and Yahoo allow keyword searching to find new Web sites or specific information . The World Wide Web allows users to search for specific sites or information .
 The Internet is especially useful when you are looking for information that changes often . It's especially useful to use the Internet when you're looking at information that's changing often .
 For example, you might go to the Web site of a newspaper to search the advertising section for used cars or apartments for rent . For more information, visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 Before going “online,” think about your information needs and your search strategy . Before going online, think about how you want to search for information .
 There is a wealth of information on the Internet, but much of it is unrefiable or of poor quality . Much of the information on this site is of a poor quality, says CNN.com.com .
 You will find help evaluating information sources in the section Judging the value of reference and source materials on this page .
 In most school and public libraries, you can go to the shelves directly to find the item you want . In most public libraries you can find the items you want from the shelves .
 In some large libraries, you'll need to fill out a ca// slip and request the item from someone who works at the library . In some libraries, the item can be requested by a person who works there .
 A Guide to Research Skills 31 zines on shelves for easy access . Most libraries keep current issues Of newspapers and maga. Most libraries Keep current issues of newspapers and magazines .
 Bound volumes consist of all the issues for a particular period bound together in one volume . Bound volumes are bound volumes of all issues from a period of publication . Bound volume is a bound volume of a single volume .
 A viewing machine enlarges the images and projects them on a screen so you can read the pages . Viewers also project them onto a screen to read them .
 As with books, you may be able to get bound volumes and microfilm yourself, or you may need to fill out a call slip .
 If your topic appears on several pages, the work is worth checking carefully . If you have a topic that appears on multiple pages, check it out .
 You can use either one of these tools to see how much coverage there is on your topic . Use the CNN Interactive News app to check out the latest trending news stories .
 The latest material is available in the world's most rapidly-developing technology . It's vital to keep up with the latest technology available for researchers .
 If you're dealing with a historical topic, such as the Korean War, the publication date may not be as important . The publication date is important, but it's important to consider if it's relevant to the historical context .
 Ina book, the publication date usually appears on the back of the title page . In a book, a book's publication date is usually shown on the cover page .
 32 A Guide to Research Skills for a recent event that you Know of, such as the death of a famous person . Spot check the Web site by searching on it for the publication date of the event .
 If the site contains the current information, it is more likely that the rest of the site is kept up to date . Use this information to help people with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 If you're consulting periodicals, it may be wise to avoid articles in popular magazines . Popular magazines not recognized as authoritative should be consulted on articles .
 If you have any doubts about the suitability of a magazine article, check with your teacher to see if it would be acceptable to use it .
 Use this article to help students understand today's featured news stories . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Send us a copy of this article for help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Ongoing events are covered in newspapers on a day-to-day basis as more information comes to light . Ongoing coverage of events will continue to be covered on a daily basis .
 As a result, comprehensive coverage on a topic is seldom available in one newspaper article . This is a result of comprehensive coverage of a topic rarely available in a single article . The Washington Post offers a unique perspective on the topic of national issues .
 If you are using the Internet to find sources, one way to ensure authoritativeness is to use Web sites with a “.org,” “edu” or “org” extension in the address of the site . The extension is often used to
 These extensions are used for the official Web sites of organizations, government agencies, and educational institutions . Use these extensions to help users with easier access to the Web .
 Web sites with ”.com” extensions are generally owned by companies or individuals, and are often less authoritative . Web sites that use extensions are often owned by individuals or companies .
 Although the latter Web site may have some interesting information, it is likely to be narrower in focus, be opinion-based, or omit important information .
 If you are doing research on the 1967 ArabIsraeli war, a book, article, or Web site on the subject by either an Arab or Israeli author might be biased . For example, if you are looking at the Arab-Israeli conflict, consider a book or article .
 Although it could be an interesting source to include among others, it would be unwise to use it as your main source . Use it as a guide to the world's most interesting news stories .
 Check the title page or copyright page to see if the book is a first edition or a revised edition . Check the copyright page of the book before you buy it .
 If there have been several editions, it could mean that the book has been well received and is considered a reliable source . If there are several editions of the book, it will be considered a good source of information .
 Skimming a few pages should tell you if a book, article, or Web site will be easy to understand or if it is chiefly for scholars in the field . Skimming of a book or article can tell if it's easy to read or not for scholars .
 Check to see if the book, article, or Web site has illustrations, maps, charts, glossary, or other helpful features . Use these photos to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Some Web sites provide animations, simulations, and video and audio files . Some animations and simulations are available on some Web sites .
 Judging the quality of a book ts relatively easy. lf itis in a liorary, it will have been carefully chosen. It will have had to be carefully chosen .
 There are thousands of Web sites, and judging their quality can be more difficult . Judging quality of these Web sites is more difficult than judging them .
 The presentation of information on a Web site does not necessarily determine the reliability of that information . Presentation of information is not necessarily determined to determine the accuracy of the information .
 To minimize the time spent researching your topic, avoid sites that are slow to use because of advertising or irrelevant graphics . Avoid sites that aren't organized or slow because of ads or irrelevant content .
 To make full use of a reference work, take time to familiarize yourself with its organization before you plunge into searching for information .
 See if a book or Web site has an introductory section on how to use the work . See if the book has a key to abbreviations, or similar helpful information .
 Consult the table of contents to get an idea of what the reference work covers and how the material is organized . Consult the contents of the work to get a sense of how the work is organized.
 The table of contents lists chapter titles and such features such as illustrations and maps . The table also lists chapters, such as chapter titles .
 Don't neglect to check any material that appears in the front and back of the book . Don't forget to check the material on the back and front of the pages .
 Appendixes may include charts, tables, the text of documents, and author's notes . Appendixes also include notes, charts, and charts .
 Bibliographies can provide you with titles of additional sources to check . The author of this article has published more than 50 books .
 The index offers a far more complete guide to the book or Web site than the table of contents . The index is available to help you understand the contents of the book and Web site .
 Most reference books have one general index, which lists proper names, titles, and topics together . The index is used to list proper names and titles in reference books .
 Some works have several indexes, for example, an author index, a title index, and a Subject index . A Subject index can be added to a list of titles and titles .
 Always check the index to find out where the information you want to find is located . Always check out the index for the latest information .
 To use an index, think of the word that most clearly identifies your topic . Think of the words that identify your topic in this index .
 You should prepare a source card for every source you consult . For information on the Nile River, for example, look at Preparing Source Cards .
 To prepare source cards, use standard-sized cards, ruled or unruled, and write in ink only . Write in ink on one side only .
 It will be easy to arrange the cards in alphabetical order later . That way of arranging the cards will be easier to use later .
 Use the same format for your source cards that you'll use for the final list of sources . Use this format to create a list of your sources for the best possible sources .
 The information you find in reference works must be clearly and accurately recorded in your notes before it can become part of a well-organized and well-written report .
 This method will make it easier to arrange and combine your notes in any order you want . Use this method to help you arrange your notes and combine them in any way .
 After you've located the proper pages, skim the text quickly to see if it has the information you need . skim the pages to find out what you need to read .
 Look at any headings; the first, or topic, sentence of each is what you think about . Use this article to help students understand today's featured articles .
 If you number each source card in the upper right-hand corner, you can use this number on your note cards to identify the source of the note . Instead of writing the author and title, you should write the author of each note .
 Include the page number of the source in case you need that information for a footnote later . Include that page number in the book .
 Write a short heading—called a s/ug—at the top of the Elephant anatomy anatomy . Caer neue their large to cool themselvey off .
 If the source has useful information, fill out a source card, read the text carefully, and take notes . If you want to learn more, fill the card with your source card .
 For more information on taking notes and preparing source cards, see the following sections . Take notes and prepare source cards .
 Note the nome of the librory where you found the book, the call number of the book and the library where you find it . When citing o book, include the authars' lost nomes, First nomes .
 Use the card to identify the topic or subtopic the note refers to . Then if you need to check the source again, you'll Know exactly where to find it .
 Slug should correspond to a heading in your outline . Slug should be the name of a character in an outline . If you've prepared an outline, the Slug should appear in the next section .
 Poge number 34 A Guide to Research Skills . Before writing a note, evaluate the material you've read to make sure it's worth recording .
 You may also wish to add personal reactions or other comments to your notes .
 If so, circle them, write them in a different color, or use some other method to distinguish them . Use the hashtag to help identify your friends .
 Library and Internet are not the only sources for research material . Using other sources may be necessary for research purposes .
 People and places near and far can provide you with information that will make your research more complete and more interesting . For more information, visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 Government agencies and business and professional associations can be important sources of information . Government agencies, business and associations are important sources for information .
 By contacting such organizations, you may be able to get reliable statistics and other facts that would be difficult to track down elsewhere .
 For example, e-mail or write to Canada’s provincial departments of education for the most recent statistics on literacy . For more information on literacy in Canada, visit www.cnn.org.uk .
 These sources publish a variety of pamphlets and other materials that you can use for research . Furthermore, these sources publish numerous other materials for research purposes .
 Your library will have directories with addresses of government, business, and other organizations . The directories will be available at your local library .
 Keep in mind that some groups are better equipped than others to handle requests . When you write for information, keep an eye out .
 Generally, make notes in your own words because they reflect your thinking, not somebody else’s . Make your own notes reflect your own thoughts, not someone else's .
 You should use direct quotes only when you want to refer to an expert’s Knowledge or opinion . Direct quotes should only be used when the author's words are particularly striking . Use this quote to help you with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Most important, don't assume that the reply will arrive by the time you need it . Don't expect that the replies will arrive in time for the next few days .
 Conducting an interview can be an effective way to get facts and personal viewpoints that add Special interest to your report . Conducting interviews can be a good way to find out what facts and perspectives you need to know .
 Begin with a courteous phone call or letter identifying yourself and requesting an interview . Start with a polite phone call to get an interview.
 Make yourself available at a time that is convenient for the person you are contacting . Be sure that you have a good time to make contact with your boss .
 You'll be better able to ask intelligent questions and follow-ups in the interview . That way, you'll be able to get smarter questions .
 Take notes on important points and be careful to write direct quotations exactly as they are Said .
 Ask for clarification of points you don’t understand and spelling of unfamiliar terms or names . Check out the spelling of some of the words you use understandstand .
 A tape recorder can eliminate the need for taking lengthy notes by hand . Tape recorder can also be used to record notes for a writer .
 If you use a tape recorder, make sure that it’s working properly and that you have enough tape for the length of the interview . Make sure that fresh batteries or an extension cord are on your tape recorder .
 Before you leave the interview, be sure to write down accurately the subject’s name, position or title, and place of business .
 You can ask people questions in person or draw up a written questionnaire . You can also ask for answers from people you want to know .
 In either case, phrase your questions carefully so that people can respond easily and clearly .
 Surveys that use a “yes or no” or “for or against” format are the easiest to evaluate . Surveyors that use the format of a survey are the best to evaluate the results .
 Whatever method you choose, take care to record the results accurately . Use the photos to test your knowledge of events in the news .
 Television documentaries, news programs, and interview shows can give you access to expert opinions and valuable information . CNN.com will feature iReporters on CNN iReport .
 If you watch a program as part of your research, be prepared to take careful notes . Take careful notes to make sure you know what you're doing .
 Be sure the name of the program, the network, and the date of broadcast for your list of sources and footnotes .
 Museums, art galleries, and historical societies may enable you to explore your subject firsthand . Museums and art galleries can be found in museums, galleries, museums, and museums .
 Report on the painter Vincent van Gogh could be enhanced by a visit to an art museum that exhibits some of his works . For example, visit to a museum that displays some of Van Gogh's works .
 Many museums and other cultural centers have libraries or other research facilities open to the public . Museums and cultural centers often have libraries and research facilities that are free to the general public .
 Check to see what your community has to offer that can help you understand your topic better . Check out what you need to know about your topic .
 The heading above the author line on a catalog card is the author of an entry entry . Abridged; abridgment added entry added entry .
 The card is filed by this entry . annotation A brief description of the content of a book .
 A list of books or other sources . Anonymous appendix . A section that follows the text, containing material not essential to the subject .
 May be general, selective, on a particular subject, or have a common theme . Often annotated, often annotated with a theme, often with a few words .
 Refers to an approximate date (e.g., C 1340) call number The classification number used to request a book. call number is used to refer to a book .
 A small disc is used to hold text, graphics, video, and sound for catalogs and reference works . It is a small disc that holds text, video and sound .
 It generally appears on the verso of the title page . Cross-reference is a reference to another entry entry .
 A see reference is to the preferred entry, the one under which the material appears; a see a/so reference is a related reference . The contents of several volumes arranged into one volume are stored in a computer database .
 A compact disc that can hold between 8 and 20 times as much information as a CD-ROM . Support for a statement, as in a footnote or bibliographical note, is a reference to a statement .
 Three spaced periods used to indicate an omission. Editor; edition ellipsis is used in this article . Use this article to help readers understand today's featured articles .
 The author's name takes the place of the author's title, the title and any identical material in the preceding footnote .
 Author's name used in place of author's name in additional references within a single footnote . See below; to be mentioned later .
 Internet A global computer network that links smaller networks, including government facilities, universities, corporations, and individuals . Internet is a global network of smaller networks that link smaller networks .
 In a footnote, refers to a passage already identified when there are intervening references to other sources . The modem Modulator-Demodulator .
 A device adapts a terminal or computer to a telephone line, allowing users to communicate with one another . A device that adapts terminal to telephone line .
 Network is an information system that links several pieces of computer equipment and computer databases together for sharing information among many users and stations . No date of publication or copyright given. network . Network is a network that links equipment and databases together .
 Published, publication v. quod vide, which see recto Right-hand page of a book; the back of a verso page rev. rev. vide . Published is published v. published, publication is published, published, and published is published .
 Revised, revision scope Extent of treatment, coverage series title . Series title The collective title for a group of books .
 The statement of purpose, the proposition to be explained or proved, tr. tr., trans. See above; previously mentioned thesis . See above . Supplement supra .
 Volume vide, see verso Left-hand page of a book; the back of a recto page viz. videlicet, namely. Volume vide . Volume vide is verso left-hand pages of a . book; . the back . of a Recto page is
 Each Web site contains a home page, and may also contain additional documents and files . Use these photos to help visitors to view the content of each page .
 Each site is owned and managed by an individual, company, or organization . Use this information to help people understand today's featured images and stories .
 World Wide Web is a system of Internet servers that support specially formatted documents . The documents can be easily accessed using a Web browser . A system of Web servers that supports specially formatted files .
 In order to list as many items as possible, the list is limited to titles and individual authors . The list includes the author of the novel, The Hunger Games .
 The section on electronic information sources represents those materials most frequently found in school and pubtic libraries . The section includes materials most commonly found in schools and public libraries .
 In the section on special reference works, the number in parentheses after a heading—Theater —is the Dewey Decimal Classification for that group . Theater is the subject of a special reference work .
 Although some libraries may give different classifications to certain titles, this device will assist you in locating books on these subjects . This device will help you locate books on certain subjects .
 The books listed below were selected from the many that exist under each subject heading . The books are selected from many of the books listed under each heading .
 They represent some of the most inclusive sources of information on various subjects of interest to students from the junior high school through the college level .
 Students should find these books most useful in helping them accumulate the kind of information they need in order to write essays, research papers, reports, theses, and dissertations .
 The books listed below are available in many school and public libraries . The books are available for children and adults in the United States .
 Cyclopedia of World Authors, Frank N Magill, ed. Brewer Encyclopedia of World Literature in the 2Oth Century . Oxford Illustrated History of English Literature Contemporary Authors, 1962 .
 John Bartlett Granger's Index to Poetry Play index, 1949-1997 Music The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians The New Oxford History of Music Mythology . Bulfinch's Mythology A Dictionary of World Mythology, Arthur Cotterell Meridia Handbook of Classical
 Oxford Companion to the Theatre, Phyllis Hartnoll, ed. The Oxford Companion of the Theatre . The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy Theater .
 Medicine Doctors: The Biography of Medicine, Sherwin Nuland Dorland’s Iilustrated Medical Dictionary Oceanography Essentials of Oceanography, Harold Thurman Zoology Walker's Mammals of the World, Ronald M Nowak, ed.
 Oxford Dictionary of Sociology, Gordon Marshall Anthropology Encyclopedia of Social and Cultural Anthropology, Alan Barnard and Jonathan Spencer Encyclopedia of Human Evolution and Prehistory, Alison Brooks, Eric Delson, lan Tattersall, and John Vancouvering, eds. Oxford Dictionary .
 Dictionary of American History, Peter N Stearns, ed. An Encyclopedia of World History . Encyclopedia of American history .
 A Division of OCLC Online Computer Library Center, Inc., owner of the copyright . OCLL is a Division of Online Computer Center .
 Subdivision was achieved by adding second letters and Arabic numerals through 9999 . Subdivision is achieved using second letters, Arabic numeral numbers and Arabic numbers .
 Laws that begin Act of or Act for appeer under their key words, as in Union, Act of. or Act of . Act of is Act of, Act for Appeer of, or Act . of. appeer .
 Doctors appear under the key wards in their titles, as in Chiropractic, or Doctor of Dr. Dr. of the Chiropractor . Doctors appear in the key areas of their titles such as Chiropology .
 Titles beginning with La appear under their key words, as in Boheme, La. Titles begin with La . Titles start with La and end with the key words .
 Titles beginning with the article Le appear under their key words, as in Nozze di Figaro, Le. Titles begin with the words "Le" and "Le"; they are followed by the words of the author . Titles end with the word "Le", "
 Titles beginning Los appear under their key words, as in Pazas de Ujloa, Los . Titles begin Los in Spanish .
 Names beginning with Van are alphabetized as single words or under their key word . Names begin with Van or Van . Van is Van .
 Names beginning with Von are alphabetized either as single words or under their key words . Von is Von, Von or Von, or Von .