 It was the first of a dramatic 13-day crisis that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . The first of 13 days of the crisis was a nuclear crisis in which the world was on the brink .
 The superpower navies were about to collide, and an escalation to general war with nuclear weapons was a definite possibility . The world's two superpowers were at risk of nuclear war with each other .
 Historians often glorify the role of Kennedy’s resolve and American military might in bringing this about . But recent sources indicate that the UN's unassuming secretary general, U Thant, played a crucial role in helping mediate an end the crisis .
 Thant ultimately was lauded by the two leaders for his contribution as well as by many newspapers of the day . Thant was ultimately lauded by both of the leaders .
 President Obama's first task was to de-escalate the world-threatening crisis and create a space for negotiation . His first task: De-escalating the crisis and creating space for negotiations .
 He appealed for a Soviet suspension of arms shipments and U.S. suspension of the quarantine . He began on Oct. 31 by appealing for the Soviet suspension .
 This would allow time for negotiations to resolve the crisis peacefully . It would allow negotiators to reach an agreement .
 Kennedy wanted Thant to ask the Soviets, as his own proposal, to stop their ships for a few days so preliminary talks could be arranged under UN auspices . Kennedy wanted to ask Thant, as well as asking the Soviets to halt their ships, to do so .
 Khrushchev accepted the proposal from the UN secretary general rather than an ultimatum from the U.S. president . He used it to save face while withdrawing his ships .
 Adlai Stevenson, U.S. ambassador to the UN during the crisis, later lauded Thant’s action . U.N. Ambassador to UN: Thant's action was a "miracle"
 The recorded deliberations of Kennedy’s top advisers, called the ExComm, reveal the powerful influence for restraint Thant was having . The ExComm is called a group of top advisers who discuss the president's policies in advance .
 His initiatives for negotiations were used by Kennedy and Rusk to prevent hawks from pushing the U.S. to invade Cuba . His initiatives were used to keep hawks away from pushing for an invasion .
 Both the president and his secretary of state argued with their colleagues that sufficient time needed to be given to Thant’s initiatives .
 Khrushchev too was influenced by Thant, and sought his “mediation” in a cable to Kennedy . Thant’s influence was evident in the 1960s and '60s .
 Thant proposed that the Russians would dismantle all their missiles immediately in exchange for a U.S. guarantee that it would not invade Cuba . Kennedy was under enormous pressure from the military brass to attack Cuba before the Russian missiles were deemed operational .
 Thant advocated this solution publicly, then specifically insisted on it with Stevenson . Thant: "This solution is a good way to get around the world," Stevenson said .
 Kennedy made secret commitment to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey . Two days later it became the final agreement, accompanied by secret commitment .
 Thant flew to Cuba to mollify Castro, the third party in the conflict, who might otherwise have upset the arrangements . Thant's visit to Cuba mollified Castro, who may otherwise have been upset by the arrangement .
 Castro refused a follow-on UN supervisory force . Thant was able to get first-hand accounts of missile dismantling in Cuba . Castro refused to accept the UN proposal .
 Soviet and American negotiators wrestled with the issues in the UN Secretariat building as Thant shuttled between the conference rooms . The Soviet Union and U.S. negotiators were involved in the negotiations .
 U.S. ships and aircraft could come into proximity with departing Soviet ships to count missiles . They agreed that United States ships and . aircraft could . come into . proximity with Soviet ships .
 Kennedy’s strength certainly played a role but so did his understanding of the need to give his opponent an honourable way out and of how to use an intermediary to achieve that . Kennedy's strength played a part but also his ability to use intermediary to get his opponent out of the
 The humble Burmese diplomat who epitomized quiet diplomacy deserves no less . He epitomised quiet diplomacy .
 Walter Dorn is a professor of defence studies at the Royal Military College of Canada . He is also chair of the department of security and international affairs at the Canadian Forces College .
 Robert Pauk is a retired Canadian military officer who served in UN peacekeeping operations . Pauk served in peacekeeping missions in the United States and Canada . He says he has served in more than 20 countries since the U.N. mission .