 Kennedy knew when Khrushchev was lying, what his capabilities were, and just as important, what they were not . Kennedy knew what he was doing, and when he was lying .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky stands as a classic example of the value of human intelligence operations . In this day and age of high-tech, ""Third Wave"" theories of our national ability to depend upon technical intelligence collection and information warfare .
 Policy makers on both sides of the Iron Curtain to seriously question and review their strategic policies for the use of nuclear weapons and military forces . Policy makers to adjust their use and understanding of diplomatic channels of communication .
 The Soviet Union misjudged the character and resolve of the U.S. presidency, the mood of the country, and most importantly, United States intelligence capabilities to learn what was really happening in both Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Mr Cohen outlines three reasons for the popularity of serious, academic inquiry into the sequence of events in October of 1962 . Mr Cohen's first position is the, ""unusual quality and 2 quantity of information available"" to the scholar .
 International diplomacy between the Superpowers was changed forever, from the installation of the ""hot line"" communications system between Moscow and Washington to the establishment of detente with the Soviet Union and recognition of the People's Republic of China . All of these events can be traced directly to the Missile Crisis
 The incident validated President Kennedy's strategy of ""flexible response"" and again proved the value of combined military operations in meeting a direct threat to the U.S. President Kennedy .
 Kennedy's apparent lack of will and determination in providing U.S. air support to the Bay of Pigs invasion may have led Khrushchev to believe that 6 Kennedy was a weak character .
 In deciding to install the missiles secretly, Khrushchev failed to understand that while the Soviets had a good case for contending that the introduction of missiles into Cuba was legal and was comparable to U.S. actions in Turkey . The Soviet's use of secrecy and deception would undercut the
 President Kennedy quickly perceived the multiple dangers and high stakes . President John F Kennedy quickly saw the threat posed by the Kennedy administration .
 The prestige and interests of the United States and the prestige and political fiiture of John F Kennedy were merged by this action . Inextricably, the prestige of the U.S. and the . prestige and . interests of John . F Kennedy .
 Khrushchev could perceive such action as an exploitable opening, and encourage him to attempt to capitalize on his investment . However, direct military action would certainly result in American casualties, and perhaps trigger a strong Soviet response, leading to war .
 First, enforcing the blockade were the superior U.S. naval forces which the Soviets could not possibly match, positioned across the globe . The Soviets were unable to match the superior United States naval forces .
 By the fall of 1962, CIA U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had achieved an impressive intelligence record, flying over the Soviet Union during the 1950's . The Soviet Bomber Gap was an Air Force m3nh .
 Approximately twenty American U-2 missions were flown over the Soviet Union from July 1956 to May 1960 . Francis Gary Powers was shot down on 1 May 1960, thus 15 ending overflights of Soviet airspace .
 When the Soviets first began sending weapons and armaments abroad, such equipment was fi'equently carried as deck cargo on merchant vessels . The Soviets began sending armaments overseas in the 1970s .
 Many cargo ships were old U.S. Liberty ships or vessels constructed in Western shipyards . The dimensions of these cargo ships are available to intelligence analysts .
 With an intuitive sixth sense and a steadfast belief in the value of high-tech equipment, the owner of the company believes in the use of technology .
 Director of Central Intelligence, John A McCone, was convinced that the discovery of SAM sites in mid-August presaged the installation of Soviet ballistic missiles .
 McCone faced heavy political skepticism for his views regarding Cuba . McCone was a Republican appointee in a Democratic administration . He faced skepticism fueled by the impending mid-term Congressional elections in November 1962 .
 Some reports were the result of fertile imaginations designed to prod the U.S. into direct military action against Castro . Some reports may have been made up of a plot to get Castro to kill him .
 Monitoring construction of power, fiael lines, launching booms and other equipment at the launching sites provided critical information . President Kennedy gave President Kennedy three extra days to discuss and decide how to proceed .
 Deputy Director for Intelligence, Ray Cline, believed that the initial imagery of the missile sites at San Cristobal was the key to the successful resolution of the crisis . Cline was in charge of preparing briefing packages for President and ExComm .
 It has not been conclusively determined whether any of the nuclear warheads had actually arrived in Cuba by mid October 1962 .
 CIA estimates of Soviet combat troop strength in Cuba were greatly underestimated . Intelligence estimates of 12,000 to 16,000 Soviet military personnel were provided to the President and the ExComm. CIA estimates .
 In the midst of the crisis, it provided the President and his advisors with very accurate, detailed infonuation on the sequence of events as they occurred, and could even predict future events such as the timing of Soviet missile activation .
 This action nearly triggered a U.S. decision to retaliate against one or more of the Soviet SAM sites in Cuba . The development would have placed the burden of continued peace in Khrushchev's pudgy hands .