 Jane Harman: I apologize to some of you if you had trouble getting into our space . The Wilson Center is president and CEO of the Wilson Center . She says she's sorry for some of the trouble getting in the space .
 A few hours ago we were part of a very touching memorial service to Nancy Hamilton, wife of Lee Hamilton . Hundreds of people in this building who want to shake Lee’s hand, and some of you are probably among those people, went on at the same time .
 I also welcome those tuning in via live webcast which is a terrific tool for bringing even more people into our discussions . I also want to welcome not just those in this audience whom I’m looking at, but those tuning into the live webcasts .
 Our hope is that these events will provide the public with new opportunities to engage in much needed civil discourse free from spin . We hope to encourage the public to engage with each other in civil discourse .
 Wilson Center provides a safe political space for political discourse free from spin . Imagine that in this election season -in the safe space that the Wilson center provides .
 Through the Wilson Center’s Cold War International History Project led by our own Christian Ostermann .
 Our experts conduct research and analysis on the Cold War . The Cold War is perhaps the most informative period in our history for policymakers and members of the public .
 National Conversation will focus on the time when the -when the Cold War got hot . This National Conversation is a weekly look at the history of Cold War in the UK .
 Thinking of that crisis reminds us that history sometimes calls for presidents to risk their careers to get things right . The crisis calls for the president to risk his career to get it right .
 LBJ pushed the Civil Rights Act through Congress, Nixon went to China, Bush 41 led a coalition of U.N. member nations into the Gulf War Conflict .
 President Obama’s call to carry out the attack to take down Osama bin Laden was the most recent example, in his view, in my view, of President Obama's call for the attack .
 Graham Graham says he's delicious, but he's not sure if anyone has ever used this word to describe him . Graham: "He is delicious. He is delicious"
 We were driving around and couldn’t find an entrance that was open, imagine. imagine. Imagine. We were in the middle of the night, imagine .
 Graham is currently the Director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and Professor of Government at Harvard’s Kennedy School . Graham is also a Harvard professor at Harvard's Kennedy School.
 He previously served as special advisor to the secretary of defense under President Reagan . He also served as assistant secretary for defense for policy and plans under President Clinton .
 The title comes from a JFK quote that I love, quote, “The essence of ultimate decision remains impenetrable to the observer, often in -"" let me try this again. The essence of the ultimate decision is impanetrable .
 After Graham speaks he will join a panel with Michael Dobbs and Tim Naftali, both Wilson Center alums . Graham will speak at the Wilson Center on Thursday .
 Michael, a former short-term Wilson Center Scholar, is now a correspondent for foreign policy . Michael is a graduate of the Wilson Center and is a former Wilson Center scholar .
 "Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War" is currently being made into a movie . The movie is being turned into a documentary .
 His new book on the period between the Second World War and the Cold War is coming out tomorrow .
 My kids say grandma here isn’t allowed to join Twitter, but those of you who do have access should be sure to check it out .
 He worked here in the '90s on a project called a comparative history of U.S. and Soviet policy toward Fidel Castro in the Kennedy-Khrushchev era . He worked on the project in the 1990s .
 Tim is a former director of the Nixon Library and now serves as a senior research fellow at the New America Foundation . Tim is also a senior fellow of the New American Foundation and director of Nixon Library .
 He is currently working on a study of the Kennedy presidency for publication next year . He is also a visiting professor at UCLA, a place I once taught too .
 Martha Raddatz won last week’s vice presidential debate debate . The moderator is Tom Gjelten, whose wife, Martha, won the debate last week .
 She is now -he -I don’t know if either of them is enjoying the fact that she’s a celebrity, but everyone now recognizes her all over this town and surely her talent is enormous .
 Tom led a terrific NatCon, as we call them, here last month on America’s role in the world post-9/11 . Tom spoke at a NatCon in Washington, DC, on the role of the U.S. in the post 9/11 world
 I’ve been called many things, but to be called delicious, I think I should probably stop now. I've been called a lot of things, including delicious, by Jane, Jane .
 Jane and her former husband, Sidney, have been great friends for many, many years . Jane is a huge fan of Jane and Sidney .
 I told Jane at one stage that I’m happily married for more than 40 years, but if I weren’t I would be courting, he said . 'If I weren't I would have been courting,' he said of his marriage .
 "Sometimes things look better than they are. My wife, I’m not sure would agree, but that’s because sometimes things look worse than they're," he says .
 Jane asked me to take 12 minutes, I’m not going to take more, to introduce this topic, and she set, as usual, an unusual question about the Missile Crisis . Jane asked for 12 minutes to talk about the crisis .
 Jane asks us to answer her question: 'What do you think of Jane?' She says she has been given an assignment from Jane .
 I’m going to give you three dates, three vignettes, three questions, and three questions and that’s four times three is 12 minutes, but I have only 11 left, so let me go fast. I'm going to go fast, but let me
 The dates are October 1962; you shouldn’t have trouble figuring out what that one was . It was October 1962 .
 I don't know whether they handed out this one-page sheet that I brought copies of, and I think there’s some there, Tom, on the table . And I don’t know whether there are any copies of it, Tom .
 President Kennedy’s private estimate to his brother of the likelihood that this would end in nuclear war . President Kennedy estimated the likelihood of a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 Bobby Kennedy took notes on how many Americans would die in scenario one and two scenarios . The notes were taken -handwritten by Bobby Kennedy in the personal papers that were just revealed last week .
 Historians have found nothing that historians have found in the 50 years since the Missile Crisis would lead one to believe that JFK’s estimate was an exaggeration .
 If you can't work your way to a dozen paths to that you’re not working hard enough . And if you can’t work your . way to that, it’s not working . hard enough. You’ve got to that .
 An air strike plus invasion would have triggered use of those weapons and you can work your way down that path . So an air strike and invasion of the country would have trigger use of the weapons .
 Contest ends tonight at 11:59, but you still have time to win . Contest ends at 11,59, and you can still enter .
 He did not say that it was we did crisis management, we knew how to do it, bring it on, bring on, we can do it again. He did say that . He said that it wasn't that crisis management was done, it was that we knew what to do
 He had the feeling that he had had had a gun to his head with five chambers and two of them had bullets in them, the trigger had been pulled and he had survived . He had a feeling that . had had five chambers with . five chambers . Two of the chambers had bullets
 CNN.com hosts a panel of experts on CNN iReport.com's iReport .com's John Sutter and others on the panel.com host the panel of CNN personalities.com/Heroes.com Live .
 He’s even not saying 50 percent chance that this is just going to happen . He's not saying there's even a 50% chance that it will happen .
 Two senators, Senator Lugar and Senator Nunn, and on the House side, Les Aspin and Lee Hamilton, who we were just remembering a few minutes ago. Thank goodness, two senators, senator Lugar .
 That a seemingly insurmountable problem can, by imagination and courage and great good fortune, produce results that nobody could have imagined, he says . That is a problem that can, in some instances, produce remarkable results, he writes .
 Security experts say they're accustomed to bemoan the list of crises that we currently have and think that the top 10 make this the most dangerous period, blah, blah . Well, we’re all accustomed, especially people who do international security, to . say .
 Nuclear weapons in the hands of somebody like al-Qaeda producing something like a nuclear 9/11 would be like a '9/11' Al-Qaeda would be able to use nuclear weapons in a nuclear attack .
 Jane gave a historical perspective on the question Jane gave us . Well, but let’s stand back and think about it if we’re putting it in historical perspective . Jane gave the question: ‘Let’t stand back, but think about what Jane said?
 Chance of a great power war today is not more than one in a 100,000, he says . Chance of such a war is "one in a hundred,000," he adds . War was the major characteristic of the 20th century, he said .
 Chance of nuclear terrorism today is 5 percent, not more, he says . "I worry hugely about, but I’d say maybe 5 percent," he says of nuclear terror threat .
 Chance of dying violently in the world today for the seven billion souls, less than half of one percent . Chance of death violently in world today is less than one percent, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The world of 1991 and 1962 is less dangerous, though extremely dangerous and extremely daunting, than the world of 1962 or 1991, says David Cameron . Cameron: "We should remember how a combination of imagination and strategy and stick-toitiveness and grace and good fortune produce results that make us
 NPR is partnering with the Wilson Center in these important National Conversations, very useful discussions . NPR is delighted to be partnering with Wilson Center for these discussions .
 Michael Dobbs will discuss the lessons that this Missile Crisis has had for us now when confronted with the challenges that we face today, and also, to review, recollect, remember actually what happened 50 years ago this week .
 Graham Graham: "Just at the very end here you said something that immediately had a question in my mind" Graham: 'Graham, just at your very end, just said something you said immediately had an answer in his mind'
 The Cold War was likely to end with a bang rather than a whimper in the '60s, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We’d have to go back and try to get into the mental frame, but I would say the generic thought in
 There was a famous course given at Harvard when I was an undergraduate, by Tom Shelley called ""Bombs and Bullets" and there it was, you know, whatever, two-thirds likely that this ends in war .
 We know that there's a risk every year, therefore, it’s a certainty that there’ll be a nuclear war, says Kim Jong-Hussein . We know every year that there is a risk of nuclear war .
 The general mood was that great powers traditionally had struggled with each other for a while and eventually found their way to war . So the general mood . was that if -it wasn’t about in '61, Cuba in '62, but there’d be a fuse in
 50/50 wouldn’t have been unreasonable, he says . So, I would say people would say . People would say that wouldn't be unreasonable. So, it would have been .
 Graham Allison: "If you say great power wars, now the United States and Russia continue to maintain these huge nuclear arsenals, and if they were exchanged we would kill several billion people"
 There are still ways you can get there but it's pretty farfetched as compared to then . So the consequences are the same but the likelihood now is now, there is still ways to get there . There is still a long way to go, but there is no easy way to get
 Michael Dobbs has a terrific live Twitter feed that you can check in every day over the next two weeks to see what happened 50 years ago .
 National Photographic Interpretation Center identified for the first time Soviet missiles on Cuba exactly 50 years ago today . National Geospatial Agency is successor to NPIC which is the successor .
 There were rumors of missiles being deployed to Cuba, but no missiles were deployed . Now, to just go back a little bit, there was rumors of a missile deployment .
 The Kennedy Administration, like today, was in pre-electoral mode, and the Republicans were attacking them for doing nothing about Cuba . Today, the Kennedy Administration was in a pre-election election mode .
 Jack Kennedy wasn’t exactly thrilled to have missile discovered in Cuba . Jack Kennedy was not pleased with missile discovery .
 10/17/12 imposed, a U2 blackout, between August and October 14 .
 One of our U2s had been shot down over Cuba and the president and the secretary of state decided it was too risky to send them over Cuba . On October 14 they sent a U2 over Cuba, it took photographs of a missile site at San Cristobal .
 About the time they were due to leave, about 4:00 or 5:00 in the afternoon, they were supposed to leave . "About the time of the departure, about . 4,00 or . 5,000 people were expected to leave. about 4,000 .
 The question was -they reported this up the chain to their bosses . Then the question was . They reported it up the . chain to . their bosses.
 Mac Bundy was informed about 8:00, 9:00 in the evening. I think Bundy -Mac Bundy, the national security advisor, was informed . Mac Bundy says he was informed of the plan by the White House .
 The president had already retired for the evening, and by the time they had definitively decided there were missiles in Cuba the president had gone to bed .
 Mac Bundy, national security advisor, decides not to wake up the president . Mac Bundy: "Mac Bundy, the national security adviser, decides to wake him up"
 The private phase they had six days before they went public with the news - before the President addressed the nation on October 22, and they were able to decide what they would do about this . The private period they had been in the private phase .
 Had then taken an immediate decision, they might well have bombed the missile sites . Had then decided to take action, they would have bombed missile sites.
 The blockade was introduced on October 24, two days after the president spoke to the nation . That was everybody’s preference including the president, but they had some time to think about it, and they adopted this alternative option .
 The culminating moment of the crisis was Black Saturday, October 27 . Black Saturday was October 27, when the crisis began .
 Khrushchev withdraws his missiles from Cuba on October 28, 1956 . Khrushchevski: "All kinds of things were happening that neither the president nor the president could fully control, and then all kinds were happening"
 When the president finds out which is October 16, the president will be informed . The president will find out on October 16 .
 The 13 days are from October 16 to October 28 when the Soviet leader announces he’s withdrawing his missiles . The 13-day period is when he announces he's withdrawing missiles .
 When they showed the president those pictures neither he nor Bobby Kennedy had any idea what they were looking at. Michael, there’s an interesting -you have interesting discussion in your book when they showed .
 Intelligence community analysts were able to see fuzzy pictures and know what they actually represented, CNN's John Sutter says . "It was very vague, and it was actually a testament to the skill of the intelligence community analysts," he says .
 Kennedy: "Kennedy’s first reaction was that this looks like a football field or something. You know, they were taken by a U2 from 60,000 feet and Kennedy was shocked"
 The Russians had this habit of -custom of parading their missiles through Red Square so, of course, photographs were taken . They matched up missiles that had been paraded through missiles . with those little dots in the football -in what Kennedy thought was a football field .
 Graham said in hindsight this crisis was every bit as dangerous as President Kennedy thought at the time . Now, Tim, Graham said that in hindsight, this crisis is every bit more dangerous than Kennedy thought . Graham: President Kennedy was right to say this was a mistake .
 Tom Gjelten: "She wouldn’t let you get away with it. She wouldn't let you escape with it" Tom: "I wouldn't -she wouldn't" Tom Gelten says .
 I don't know if the audience on the radio or watching us understands why this was a crisis. I don’t know if we’re talking about this crisis. We’ve been here for more than a decade. I’m not sure if we understand
 "Placing missiles in Cuba was very much as we had done in Turkey," says President Obama . "We had done very similar things in Turkey" says Obama .
 There’s nothing illegal about the Soviets putting missiles in Cuba and the U.S. putting them in Turkey, says President Obama . There was nothing illegal in Cuba, the president says, and there was nothing wrong in Turkey .
 This is the part of the story that has immediate relevance to today. And this is the one of the most important stories in American history. The story is important to today's story .
 We have heard how many times . Prime minister -the prime minister of Israel and Congressional Republicans ask for a red line . President Obama has been criticized for not drawing a 'red line' on Iran .
 He did it because he was convinced the Soviets never intended to put missiles in Cuba . He said he did it as he did not believe the Soviets intended to launch missiles in the country .
 In fact, using back channels the Soviets told them that they didn't intend to put missiles in Cuba . The Soviets told the U.S. that they had no intention of putting missiles into Cuba .
 The problem was the president went on television and promised the American people, and this is just before an election, mid-term but still important, that there - the United States would not countenance the placement of Soviet offensive weapons, which everyone understood to be missiles, on Cuba .
 How could Kennedy have said, “Oh, never mind.” when he discovered the Soviets had been lying to him? John F Kennedy . Kennedy .
 His credibility with his allies and most importantly with the Soviets was on the line, and it’s because the Soviets had lied to him about what they were up to . The Soviets lied to his allies, his credibility with them and his credibility .
 His military advisors, particularly Robert McNamara, are telling him that strategically this doesn’t really matter much . President Obama’s military advisors say that strategically, strategically, this is not really important .
 The amount of time you’d have to be notified would be cut . Yes, it means there’s less time if the Soviets were to launch a missile, it says .
 The United States is way ahead of the Soviets in strategic power . The U.S. is now a major force in the world .
 Kennedy until the summer -until October 1962 was a failed foreign policy president, let’s not forget . Kennedy until he died in October 1962, he was the president of the United States .
 The Bay of Pigs, a failed attempt to overthrow Castro, is known for failed efforts to develop democratic regimes in Latin America . Laos is a collapsing ally in Laos in Southeast Asia, which has fallen in recent years .
 Kennedy faced this problem that he had promised the American people he wouldn’t let the Soviets do something and they were doing it . Kennedy had promised that he wouldn't let the Soviet do something .
 Kennedy chooses after some debate the middle point, the quarantine . As Michael very well reminded us, Kennedy has a history of quarantines in the U.S. history .
 The quarantine was not a solution, the blockade was no solution because the missiles were already . Some of them were already in Cuba, some of them already in the country .
 Nobody understood how you could actually get the Soviets to take down missiles they already had there . The Soviets were already having missiles already in place .
 By one week into this crisis those missiles were operational . And, by the way, by one . week into . this week, those missiles are operational . The U.S. has not responded to the threat .
 The problem for the president was the Soviets already had missiles, they were already operational, Graham said . So the problem was the president, he said, was the problem for him .
 It wasn't as many missiles as they intended to have, but there were still enough . Yes, it wasn’t as many as they wanted to have . The U.S. military says it has more missiles now than ever before .
 I assure you that he probably would not have drawn this red line had the Soviets not so successfully deceived him . Or, I mean, we can all argue whether he should have ever done it, but we can't argue whether it should have been done .
 Presidents should be very careful about drawing red lines, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: President should be careful not to draw red lines .
 10/17/12 nightmare -very interesting in the context of 1963 . NATCON20121015 14 10/1812 nightmare .
 During the Missile Crisis, Kennedy’s administration assumed there were warheads but never actually saw them . In fact, during the missile crisis, Kennedy's administration never saw warheads . Kennedy administration assumed warheads were warheads .
 The Soviets are able to make warheads that are small enough now that could be fit in a suitcase . And they came back to him and they said, “Mr President, it is true that . Mr President,” said .
 It is impossible for us to monitor the movement of nuclear weapons in the world. It is not possible to monitor movements of nuclear arms in the U.S. It's impossible for the world to monitor nuclear weapons' movements.
 There was only one country in the world that could do it and we could deter them, we knew their address. Because there were only one of them that could . It was the only country that could be deterring them, and we were able to deter them .
 Kennedy understood by the technology of '63 that weapons -and by the way they used the term weapons of mass destruction - could be moved around without the United States intelligence .
 Only another state, only another state could create it, he says . "Only another state that was afraid of us because we had lots of nuclear weapons," he adds .
 The president’s position was no offensive weapons in Cuba; however, tactical nuclear weapons are generally, not necessarily considered offensive weapons . So, Tim, just to review a couple of points here, Tim says .
 The authority for operating them in Cuba resided in Cuba, the U.S. says . But those were not known to the United States at the time . "We now know that those were operational and, in fact, we now know," the president says .
 The U.S. military knew there were tactical nuclear weapons in the early 1960s, author says . This is something to keep in mind about the leadership of the United States military in the 1960s .
 They're heroes - they're heroes of World War II, but they thought in a prenuclear way, and they thought of tactical nuclear weapons as if they were just artillery with a bigger bang . They’re heroes -they’ve thought in pre-nuclear way .
 They knew there were nuclear weapons -tactical nuclear weapons . They were the same type as something that Americans created, something called the Honest John, which could have a conventional weapon -warhead .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff developed for Kennedy for the invasion of Cuba anticipated it would be a nuclear environment . The plans for Kennedy's Cuba invasion were based on plans developed by the Joint Chiefs .
 "They knew full well that they were going to encounter -the possibility of encountering a nuclear response," says CNN's John Sutter . That they knew full . well well that . they knew . that they would encounter - the possibility of encountered a nuclear . response .
 The equivalent to the Honest Johns were called FROGs or Lunas and they were discovered on October 25 . They were discovered in the same place as the Honest Johns .
 One of our lowlevel reconnaissance planes happened to discover these FROGs in a field . One of the low level reconnaissance planes discovered them in an area of the country .
 Soviets had 98 tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, including a whole class of weapons that we never suspected called FKR cruise missiles that were aimed at Guantanamo Naval Base . The full scale of the weapons did not become apparent until 30, 40 years later when the Soviets revealed they had 98 .
 At the beginning of the 13 days, Kennedy didn’t know about the tactical weapons, says CNN's John Sutter . Kennedy didn't know about tactical weapons during the 13-day mission .
 He discovers about the possibility that there are nuclear-capable FROGs so then they start have to planning for a tactical nuclear war, but up until that point they hadn’t planned for a nuclear war . Toward the end he discovers about . the possibility . that there
 They based their battlefield casualty estimates on the idea of a conventional resistance rather than nuclear weapons in the hands of the other side . The estimate is based on the fact that conventional resistance is not nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. military in the second week of the crisis was advocating an invasion of Cuba they knew that there was the possibility that the Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons . Naftali: "That means that when the United States . knew that . there was a possibility that . the
 To have advocated an invasion of Cuba knowing that the Soviets could respond tactically -with tactical nuclear weapons is, I would argue, itself highly dangerous . And to have advocated such a move, knowing that Soviet forces could respond to it with tactical nukes, is, he would argue .
 The war planners were thinking this is conceivable and that the FROGs were nuclear capable, but the presentations to Kennedy of the war plan that he said he would have rolled out on the 28th or 29th would have included an invasion .
 There’s another - someone else who definitely knew that these nuclear weapons were in Cuba was Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro is a character that doesn’t get probably as much attention as he deserves in this episode .
 He famously argued that these weapons should be used, not only those weapons but there should be a first strike against the United States homeland in the case of an invasion .
 CNN's John Sutter asks the question of rationality in moments of decision making like this . Sutter: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make a decision in this case."
 The relationship between Khrushchev and Castro was always quite -whatever - tense and tense . And he thought -the relationship between the two men was quite complex and tense and he thought he thought it was quite tense .
 Khrushchev was the bastion of Soviet revolution and communist revolution in the western hemisphere, but he was not considered dependable or otherwise . He was not somebody that Khrushvic thought was dependable, he says .
 'Early on he had been essentially excluded from the action, and he was very frustrated by this. So early on, he had had to be essentially excluded,' he said . 'He had been very frustrated with this. He was very disappointed by this,' he added .
 Cubans see the crisis as just one in a series of crises that began, certainly, well before the Bay of Pigs . Well, the Cubans say the crisis began well before, well .
 Fidel Castro had been preparing for showdown with the United States ever since taking power on January 1, 1959 . Operation Mongoose signaled to the Cubans and to their Soviet patrons that the Kennedy administration was out to overthrow the Castro regime . Deployment of missiles in Cuba was partly a response to
 Cuban Revolution slogan: "Patria o Muerte,"" Fatherland or death" Cuban president was irrational, but he was not irrational, says Cuban leader .
 "They were prepared, in order to defend their revolution, they were a much smaller country, the weakest of all these three players," says President Obama . "We are prepared to defend our revolution," says Obama .
 In order to have a chance of standing up to the super powers they had to be willing to push their resistance to the limits . The Cuban revolution was inculcated in the Cuban mind, and that was in defense of the revolution, the author says .
 From Fidel's point of view it was rational because it was the only real weapon he had, and he is in power 50 years later, at least he and his brother are in power . From Fidel’s point of . view, he said, “It was rational .
 This year we’re in a context of a Presidential election and words like appeasement get thrown around a lot, says Julian Zelizer . "Appeasement is a weakness in foreign policy leadership," he says .
 The president and the administration didn’t let the American people know how the crisis actually was resolved .
 President Obama was a better president than his rhetoric, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he was a "better president, if I may in my own humblest estimation, than rhetoric"
 John Kennedy did not believe that a war in Europe was likely, nor did he think the Soviets were interested in taking over Western Europe . For example, John Kennedy didn't believe that war was likely .
 Kennedy was such a smart politician he understood he could not reveal to the American people his complex view of the Cold War without seeming weak . The American people had been inculcated with hawkish rhetoric for 15 years, he says .
 Kennedy knew that was all stupid, but he couldn’t admit it, so he worked secretly, some would say deceptively, behind the scenes, all the time to seek compromises . Kennedy was the kind of person who worked secretly . He worked secretly to seek compromise .
 There could be no compromise on the issue of missiles staying in Cuba, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Kennedy wanted to find a way to give the Soviets a chance to save face so that the missiles could be removed from Cuba . Kennedy was trying to find something else, a little benni [spelled phonetically], something to give them a chance .
 Kennedy ultimately decided that he would give away the missiles in Turkey if that’s was Khrushchev needed to save face and remove the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy ultimately gave the missiles to Turkey .
 The beauty of this whole Crisis is that it can be debated forever - over whether Khrushchev really needed that benni or not .
 Kennedy used his brother to offer it secretly to the Soviets the Soviets were happy . That concession made it easier for Khrushchev to swallow this outcome, and when Kennedy used it to make it easier, it was easier for him .
 The full story of Bobby Kennedy’s concession -the full story didn’t come out until the 1980s . In fact, the full story had to come out .
 The Kennedys understood that pragmatic presidents in the nuclear age had to be prepared to give concessions . They were prepared to do it in the 'nuclear age' of nuclear power .
 This is delicious for students of this subject. Let me just make one footnote because as Tim said, this is delicious .
 Kennedy secretly taped the deliberations -that’s a whole other story, but just leave it aside -for us, after the fact as Jane said, we can go be flies on the wall. So Kennedy .
 Ernie May and Phil Zelikow produced the tapes . The tape is sort of scratchy, so you can just hear people deliberating about things . You can read a transcript of the tapes from the tapes that were produced .
 Either we attack the missiles now or -to prevent them from becoming able to fire against us - or we acquiesce and this becomes a Soviet offensive base . Either we . attack them now or . prevent them becoming . able to . become able to defend against us or we . acquiesce
 'You can see that this is in his head and he’s playing with the idea, but he can’t get any agreement at all. So, you can see . You can't see that, you . see that it is in the head of him and he
 He holds back his brother and five other people and says, “I got an idea.” Then he holds back five others, he says, "I got a idea. I got a new idea."
 We'll have a public deal, you withdraw the missiles, we’ll agree not to invade Cuba. We’ve got a deal: You withdraw missiles, not invade Cuba,’s not . ‘I’m looking forward to a public-private deal
 I need to hear from the president -from Khrushchev within 24 hours that he’s withdrawing the missiles or I’m going to act independently . I need a president to withdraw the missiles from the U.S. or I will act independently, he says .
 "There’s 10 people that don’t know that while we were talking -you know, we were having dinner -you were out making this arrangement," he said . "There's 10 people [people] that don't know that," he added .
 They're still debating options that have already been overtaken . And so they’re still debating ... options that already have already overtaken, says CNN.com .
 We’re going to open it up to some questions from the audience in a few minutes, but first I want to talk about today’s talk . We're going to go on to the next few minutes .
 Graham Graham: There are lessons for today’s challenges from the Missile Crisis . Graham: Graham, very quickly, you have a foreign policy - foreign affairs article this summer where you draw some lessons from the missile crisis . Graham, Graham, writes: “Very quickly, very
 There may, in your words, a Kennedy-esque third option for dealing with Iran, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There may be a JFK-esque option for Iran"
 Third option in the sense of not complete capitulation or complete military response . "Third option" is not "complete capitulation" or "complete military response"
 A Cuban missile crisis in slow motion gives you some clues about Iran's nuclear ambitions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The Iranian nuclear challenge is the big issue on the agenda today .
 President will have to choose between attacking to prevent Iran becoming a nuclear state, or acquiescing and it becoming so, he says . In the missile crisis, in 13 days one rushed up to the brink, the crisis was over 13 days .
 It may not take 13 months, it may take, you know fewer, or -about like that . It may take less than 13 months to get the job done .
 If one looks at this as Kennedy did the missile crisis, he thought, “Gee, if we attack, I might end up in a nuclear war,” he said . So, if one looks . at this . Kennedy thought that if we attacked, we might end
 Attacking, whew, I worked my way down that path and it just seems catastrophic; acquiescing, cascade of proliferation in the region, that one also seems horrible . Attacking the region seems catastrophic, but acquiescing is also horrible, he says .
 "I’d think in that space might be doing a lot of things that we would say would never, never do," he says . "We would never do anything," he adds .
 Iran has been doing this for 10 years, says President Obama . He says he doesn't think Iranians are going to ever not know how to enrich Iran .
 "This already happened, you can’t reverse those facts. So all these things, the United Nations resolution say ‘no, no, no.” you can't do this,” says CNN's John Sutter .
 "Kennedy-esque kind of deal would be extremely hard to do. Because today, with 24/7 news and many more investigative reporters and all the culture of leaks," he said .
 Of course, these situations today with Iran and North Korea involve many more players than were involved in the Missile Crisis, which was basically just Washington and Moscow . The situation is similar to the crisis in the 1960s, when it was basically Washington and Russia .
 There are some differences, there are many similarities and many differences between the two cultures . There are also similarities, but there are also many differences .
 When people use history to bolster their case for doing something, often we start making mistakes . And I think that when people . use history, often they start making . mistakes, he says .
 Many of these lessons have been the wrong lessons, many of them have been wrong lessons . And reading through these lessons, what really struck me was how wrong lessons were .
 President Johnson thought he was following in Kennedy’s footsteps of acting tough, controlling a crisis when he escalated in Vietnam, he says . We ended up in the quagmire of Vietnam .
 I think that was the wrong lesson and got us into a war that we should have avoided . I think he drew -I mean, people can disagree with that, people . People can disagree, but I think it was wrong lesson, personally .
 Israel cites the Missile Crisis as a precedent for drawing a red line and taking action against Iran . Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel has been citing the missile crisis as a reason for taking action . Netanyahu cites the crisis as an example of drawing a 'red line'
 'You can’t just take one historical situation and compare it to another, because there are many differences. I think the right sort of lessons - so you can't just compare it with another,’s many differences .
 Kennedy read a book by Barbara Tuchman called The Guns of August, which is about the beginning of the First World War . Kennedy: "When he was trying to figure out what to do in the Missile Crisis, he just read it"
 Kennedy: 'It showed for Kennedy how we got into the First World War without the political leaders in any of these countries really intending to - really understanding what they were getting into and not intending to bring the world to war'
 Robert Kennedy jots down on October 23, he’s having a private conversation with his brother and Jack Kennedy is thinking about The Guns of August . In fact, I was just looking at some of the materials from the Robert Kennedy collection at the -that have just been declassified
 If I go to war I better have a very good explanation for the American people about why I’m going to war, he says . "I better have to have a good explanation," he says. "I’d better have an explanation"
 The nuclear age is even more important in the nuclear age than it was in 1914, it is said . And that this is more important now than in 1914 .
 "We haven’t talked about the Soviets much, and so that’s part of a lesson, which is that your adversary may actually be rational and have a certain bounded rationality -you have to figure them out" "You have to Figure them out. We haven�
 Kennedy’s talents was to try to think through what Khrushchev needed to save face in this crisis . Kennedy's talents were to try and think through the crisis, he says . Kennedy: "One of Kennedy's greatest talents was thinking through what he needed"
 NATCON20121015 25 10/17/12 this crisis was that sometimes your adversary will bluff out of weakness, not out of strength . Sometimes your adversary is bluffing out of weakness .
 "One of the challenges for a democracy, of course, is that because we fortunately have access to information, that means all of us have . access to the bluffs of our adversaries. That's a challenge for democracy, as well as a democracy .
 There’s often a lot of pressure on our president to act on a bluff rather than the reality of the threat, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There’ll often be pressure on President Obama to act as a threat rather than a bluff"
 Weak states often will puff -I think of them as like those fish, the puffers - they’ll puff themselves up in order not to be swallowed . Weak states will puff up to protect themselves from being swallowed, he says .
 "The essential logic of lying about your weapons of mass destruction program in order to scare not only the United States but your allies and people in your own regime, that’s a good strategy for a dictator. I’m not saying that Nikita Khrushchev and Saddam
 President Obama should keep in mind when they face foreign adversaries, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 My favorite anecdote involves the Soviet decision making piece of this story and Tim, we’ve talked about this in the past. Tim, Tim, and I’m sure they’re going to talk about it. Tim says it’s a great example of Soviet
 It was a shock to me when I first discovered that, the Politburo had not decided on this decision to shoot down the U2. It was also a shock that, in fact, it had not been decided on the decision . The U2 was shot down by the Soviet
 The Goldilocks principle applies to this crisis: It's not too short and it’s not too long . The crisis is not just short and not just too long, it's not just long .
 If it had been too short they probably would have acted on their passions and God knows what would have happened . Both the Soviets and the Americans would have reacted to their passions . If it were too short, they would have .
 If it had gone on longer, it was coming apart at the end - at the seams, and a lot of passions were flowing that might have led to war . A lot of passion was flowing, but it might have ended in war .
 The situation in Cuba became almost untenable by the second week of the Crisis . The situation became almost impossible to control by the end of the crisis .
 Fidel spent the evening drinking beer and eating sausages with the Soviet KGB resident and Ambassador Alexiev during which he wrote and rewrote the Armageddon letter . The letter was written by Soviet KGB-resident Alexiev .
 The Cubans were working closely with the Soviets on the ground, not up in the diplomatic sphere, but in the ground . The Cuban government was working with the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 It was that tension, that edginess, maybe also the bravado of the Cubans that led to the decision by the Soviet commander to shoot down the U2 without preauthorization by Moscow . It gives you a sense of how things can run out of the control of even
 The shoot-down of the U2 in addition to Castro’s letter and intelligence the Americans actually might invade Cuba, placed an enormous amount of pressure on Nikita Khrushchev on the morning of October 28, and helped make the decision to accept the American offer .
 The shoot-down of the U2 in Cuba really illustrates that neither leader really knew what was going on in Cuba . "I think what that incident really illustrates really illustrates -the shoot down of the . U2 -was that neither . leader really . knew what happened in Cuba,"
 As Tim said, the U2 was shot down on the authority of local soviet commanders in Cuba . The U2 were shot down in Cuba on a mission to Cuba .
 Khrushchev didn’t know, he only found out later and he got a rather garbled version of it . The world's most powerful man in the world didn't know what was happening .
 We were sending U2s to the north pole to gather nuclear evidence of Soviet nuclear tests . The mission was to gather evidence of nuclear evidence .
 U2 blundered over the Soviet Union on the most dangerous day of the crisis, without the president being informed until it spent an hour and a half over Soviet Union .
 Neither Khrushchev nor Kennedy was aware of many of the secrets of the Cold War . Kennedy was not aware of these secrets .
 The real risk that we ran in the Missile Crisis was that many sons-of-bitches who didn’t get the word. And to me that is really the real risk, was that we got to a point when there were many sons of bitches not getting the word
 The two leaders were unable to fully control what was going on and indeed they weren’t aware of many things that were going on. And indeed, indeed, they weren't aware of . And the two leaders weren't fully control of what was happening .
 The best that we can determine is that there was some discussion of an oral pre-delegation of the -for the use of tactical weapons . This is a -what happened was, best as we . can determine because it involves oral testimony - the best that . we can .
 Once the crisis started for the Soviets, Khrushchev and the presidium, that’s what the Politburo was called then, told the local commanders, you may not use tactical nuclear weapons without our permission . But once they -once John F Kennedy gave his speech on
 The commander had physical control of the weapons, that is, at the time if he had said use it -Tom Gjelten: he could have done it . Graham Allison: But just a footnote on that, so, first, the commander had .
 The reason why they rescinded the permission would suggest that they had permission, so that -and so if instead of announcing the blockade, which Kennedy did on the 22nd, he had gone with the air strike, these weapons wouldn’t have been used, he says .
 We have the minutes of the first presidium meeting, as they’re awaiting Kennedy’s speech . We have a video of the meeting .
 "They don’t know if he’s going to announce an invasion, in fact I don't think any of them thought he would announce a blockade," he said . "I don”t think any thought he . would announced a blockade, he said. "
 Khrushchev leads about using tactical nuclear weapons in response, but then he calms down, they hear the speech, and they make sure that they control weapons . And so there is a discussion of how he will respond and there was a discussion about how he would respond . Khrush
 If the U.S. had launched an attack, it is hard to predict, it’s impossible actually to predict if the Soviet response would have been measured . But the truth of the matter is, if the United States had attacked, it's impossible to predict .
 Penkovsky was the Soviet spy who -actually he had given the technical manual for the R12 missile, which is this medium-range ballistic missile . He was quite crucial during this period because he had . given the . technical manuals for the missile .
 When they were figuring out what these things were in Cuba, they Identified them as R-12s or as we called them, SS-4s . So when they were . figuring out . out, they identified them as . R-11s or SS4s.
 They had the technical manual which told them what you had to do to prepare them to fire . They had to prepare themselves to fire, and they had to be prepared for fire .
 The U.S. was able to observe what was happening in Cuba at the missile sites, put that against the information that they’d received from Penkovsky, and told the president when these missiles were ready to fire . And they were able to put that information against the
 The Soviets probably had an eye on him for some time and they wrapped him up during the 13 days and he was later executed . He was later wrapped up and executed .
 President Obama listed the foreign policy failures that the president was dealing with for October . But he didn't mention the construction of the Berlin Wall and Kennedy getting cuffed around by Khrushchev .
 JFK "walked into an ambush" in Vienna, he says, but Kennedy did not share the view about Vienna because he's seen it . Kennedy was assassinated in the early 1960s .
 Khrushchev intended to do what he did, which was to embarrass Kennedy, to harangue him, to throw an ultimatum at him, he says . "Khrrushchev wanted to do this to embarrass him," says Kennedy .
 Kennedy’s mistake was not to have anticipated this, but you know what, none of the Sovietologists around Kennedy anticipated it,’S. ‘You know what’�s a mistake,” he said .
 In terms of the Berlin Wall, I don’t fault Kennedy for the Berlin wall at all, in fact the . Berlin Wall took some of the pressure off of Berlin, says CNN.com's Richard Quest .
 Khrushchev emerged from the that '61 crisis hurt . He stood tall against the Soviet leader, and it’s Khrushche who emerged from that ’61 crisis .
 The Chinese, the Albanians, and the Chinese, they don’t care so much, but in those day’s they were part of the socialist commonwealth . The Chinese and Albanians are not particularly fond of the Chinese .
 The Chinese and the Albanians were very critical of Khrushchev, as were the East Germans for standing down . The East Germans were also critical of the Chinese and Albanians who stood down from the government .
 Kennedy’s efforts to work with the Soviets which had been largely secretive -you know, his use of Bobby during this crisis was not unique . But the -I think the point is that Kennedy's efforts to . work with . the Soviets had been . largely secretive, he said
 Bobby Kennedy worked with a Soviet intelligence officer named Georgi Bolshakov, who was military intelligence . He’d used Bobby Kennedy working with Soviet intelligence . Bobby Kennedy’s use of Bobby Kennedy as a cover for the CIA .
 Or tried to establish a back channel with Khrushchev to try to . try to figure out what Khrush .chev’s bottom line was . or tried to . establish a . back channel . or established a back . channel . Try to establish back channel or establish back .
 Kennedy felt that all leaders have a bottom line, and he tried to suss out Khrushchev’s . And you can say that naive - that Kennedy was naive -that Kennedy was . I suppose, but he felt that . He felt that he was naive, he felt
 Michael points out that we’re very fortunate to have, in the audience, the last surviving witness of JFK’s handling of the Missile Crisis . Former deputy head of intelligence at the State Department, former deputy head .
 The way he saves face presumably is to have it widely known that he’s -that that was the deal . The way to save face is to be widely known, he says .
 Andrei Kokoshin was a young, whatever, Komsomol leader, you know at the time, and they said that when they would have party meetings, as early as 1963; they would say, “We know a big secret, look and see what happened with
 If the situation had been reversed, the Kennedy administration would have leaked it . I think the Soviets simply weren’t as savvy about spinning the press as the Americans, the Americans .
 The main -Khrushchev’s main constituency was not Soviet public opinion, which played absolutely no role in the Soviet Union . And the main - and main - constituency was . not Soviet . public opinion .
 His main constituency was his fellow members of the Soviet leadership, the Soviet Presidium . He was a member of the Presidium of the USSR .
 He argues that he said well we got them to take their missiles out of Cuba - out of Turkey . So he certainly made sure that they were aware of it, and he argues that . He says that he argued that he . said well . we got [Cuban] missiles out
 He was not so interested in shaping public opinion as his American counterpart would have been . But he was keen to shape public opinion in the U.S.
 Khrushchev knew that he had promised Kennedy not to say anything about it, he also assumed that if he said something, those missiles would never be removed . It took a number of months, four months actually for those Turkish missiles to be removed, he says .
 The time to have actually done the spinning was the time during which the Turkish missiles were actually still in Turkey . So the time . was when the time when the . missiles were still in . Turkey . was actually in Turkey when the missiles were .
 Mr Hughes, I want to ask you if you have - if there’s a memory that you have from those events that you’d like to share or that maybe hasn’t got a lot of attention . Mr Hughes: "Mr Hughes,  I want
 If the missiles had been discovered two weeks earlier or two weeks later it would have had a considerable difference in how the whole thing was handled, says Graham Allison . Graham Allison said that if the missiles were discovered sooner it would've been better handled .
 U2 overflights had cameras that at the time took pictures of the ground that would allow you to see things this is way, way before the Internet, Google Earth, anything like this . So the fact that they were -a great intelligence coup, and I would say great intelligence success
 Had this been two weeks later, the construction project would have been finished . So, had this been a two-week delay, the project could have been completed .
 "We were extremely fortunate that one was in this quite short window. So I think that actually we were extremely lucky," she said . "We are extremely fortunate," she added .
 If you'd gone two weeks later and now try to see what Kennedy’s options would have been, they’d been much, much narrower and not have included the blockade . The blockade was about preventing additional missiles, additional warheads, and without even knowledge of whether there were
 The Soviets had operational missiles already, so in terms of the Soviet attitude, it probably wouldn’t have been different . One thing to keep in mind is that the Soviets already had operational missile launchers .
 Khrushchev’s plan and his alone, he says, was Khrushchevitch's plan . He says the plan to build up the Soviet Union in the 1960s and '60s was Khushchevchevchev's alone .
 Khrushchev is supposed to be the dictator of the Soviet Union and yet it takes two meetings for them to agree to this cockamamie scheme . Now imagine, imagine, that it took two meetings in two weeks to agree .
 Khrushchev never told them that this would entail going to the brink of war . And secondly, he said, 'This would be the first time we had gone to war. And then we had to go to war'
 The Soviets never wanted to go to the brink of war, and so when they went to war, they removed them . And I think one of the -the one element of this story that is very important is that the Soviets never . wanted to . go to a war, so when
 CNN's John Sutter says the U.S. military has a long history of failed missile launches . He says it would not matter if they had more than 40 or 80 missiles operational . Sutter: "It wouldn't matter if [the U.N. had] 40 or
 The fact that the U.S. would go to war over one operational missile in Cuba was something that they had not taken into consideration . The United States had not considered the possibility of going to war with Cuba .
 Turkish missiles were obsolete. They were given -there were Polaris submarines placed off the coast of Turkey . Polaris submarines were placed off .
 President Obama has bought the administration’s story, which was a good story, but was not true, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think Tim has bought it, and I think Tim bought it."
 The missiles only became operational for the first time just by accident during these 13 days . So, first, they became operational by accident . The missiles were launched by accident.
 Government program could be obsolete the minute it starts . It's not the first time a government program has been obsolete .
 The second question is, anybody that’s offered Polaris submarines which are in the ocean, which are of course, just as good as the missiles that are here in Cuba -excuse me, missiles, sorry, missiles in Turkey . If there's an attack on Turkey, it
 In the same way that American troops at a base are, quote, a guarantor. In the . same way, they are guarantors. Americans at a . base are . quote, "guaranteed" by the United States .
 The recent years has witnessed a series of escalating disputes or confrontations in the South China Sea between the two powers .
 President Obama accentuated that by the year 2014 Americans troops going to pull out of Afghanistan, he said in a debate .
 All of the troops won't just pull out in a time till the -let’s say San Francisco. But they of course they won’t pull out of the time . But they will .
 U.S. troops are providing technical support to troops in front of the gates of China . They’re providing some kind of operational support to American troops .
 North Korea and Japan and the -what’s happening between Pakistan and India, they’re all about nukes. I mean -not to mention the North Korea . Not only North Korea, Japan and Pakistan are all about nuclear weapons.
 The scenario under which we can imagine kind of a U.S.-Chinese confrontation, he says . Because that is where we -that’s the scenario under . which is where . we - that is . that's where we . can imagine a confrontation under which . we can
 I'll do a short version of it and then in the Foreign Affairs piece, I’ve got a little bit - a longer version - in the foreign Affairs piece . I will do both in the short and long versions .
 The U.S. century that he’s supremely confident is the American century, there's some analogies here that are interesting . There are analogies to the American Century .
 When the British proposed that they’ll help resolve territorial disputes between the U.S. and Venezuela, he says, “Forget about it.” He says the United States and Venezuela won’t help resolve disputes .
 The U.S. resolves all these issues bilaterally, entirely on our own terms, says Obama . So the U.N. will not be drawn in on the issue, he says .
 How about we have a coup, we declare a new country, it’s called Panama? Panama is Panama . How about a coup? How about it? Panama was Panama .
 I call this the Thucydides Trap that when you see a rising power rival a ruling power, generally this is a sad story . So I would say it’s going to be extremely difficult, I call it the Thuciadides Trap . The rise of a rising
 If the leadership of China and the U.S. perform no better than the leadership before -in the Guns of August -before World War One, this will end up badly . The challenge is not inevitable but it’s -it’ll require a stretch to better sense
 Professor Allison Allison is the author of a new book, "Professor Allison" The book is published by NATCON.com .
 Timothy Naftali, in his opening remarks, spoke very eloquently about the political and even electoral considerations on President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 I want to ask anyone on the panel, specifically about the strategic reality, and it’s something I’ve never really gotten about the crisis, which is the crisis . The Sovs had had nuclear weapons for 13 years and two months, since August of 1949 .
 According to the theory, they were deterred from doing so by our massive nuclear capability . The theory is that the U.S. was deterred by its nuclear capabilities .
 The U.S. has moved missiles a little closer and a little bit less of a warning time . So I’m not quite sure what really changed in terms of the fundamental strategic status quo by moving missiles closer .
 It didn't change a huge amount strategically, but the president had said, “This would be unacceptable to us,” so therefore he had to act. It didn’t change a lot strategically, he says .
 The U.S. won't miss the 10/17/12 gap but it was in favor of the United States . NATCON20121015 37 .
 The United States had about a 10-to-one advantage in warheads that could hit the other side at this point . The U.S. had about 10 to one of the world's most powerful nuclear weapons .
 The Soviets would have got another 40 warheads that could reach the United States, if they’d succeeded in getting away with the Cuba gamble . The U.S. would have gotten 40 warheads from Cuba .
 The president was deterred just by the thought of one of those Soviet warheads getting through, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Soviet warheads did not give the Soviets a first-strike capability against the U.S. But deploying these warheads to Cuba -missiles to Cuba, did not . The Soviets did not have a first strike capability .
 Kennedy’s credibility was wrapped up in a . certain -in a prohibition of placement of missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's credibility was . wrapped up . in a certain . prohibition of . placement of missile in Cuba, he said .
 President Obama is so careful about the words he chooses and uses about Iran, says CNN's John Sutter . Obama is careful about what he chooses to say, Sutter says .
 Each time he says something about Iran, he is investing his credibility into that policy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Obama is investing credibility in that policy .
 Graham Allison said about the lessons learned with regard to Iran. Yeah I’d like to return what -to . Graham Allison . Allison said that Graham Allison’s view of Iran is that it is possible to have a nuclear deal with Iran.
 Russia and Iran are the two countries involved in the Syrian conflict, says President Vladimir Putin . Russia and Syria have been involved in Syria's conflict with Syria . Russia is the only country in Syria and Syria to be involved in a Syrian conflict .
 Russia is considered by them a strategic issue, says President Vladimir Putin . Relations with Russia has deteriorated significantly, Putin says .
 I would like you to comment on that aspect of this Middle East situation . And I would also like to ask you if you have any knowledge of the situation in the region .
 Tom Gjelten: "As brief as you want to make it. As brief as possible" Tom Gelten says: "I don't want to be too brief"
 The missile crisis was 'essentially a two-person game' in the early days of the missile crisis, says President Bush .
 In the case of Iran, there's Iran, the U.S., there's the P5-plus-one, there’s Israel, Israel, Iran, Israel . In the past, Israel has been involved in a nuclear reactor in the region .
 Getting the pieces right in this case, therefore, is hugely more challenging than in the Missile Crisis . So there are a lot of actors, and getting the piece right is more difficult than in Missile Crisis, says President Obama .