 All their skill would have been to no avail if Khrushchev had preferred his prestige, as they preferred theirs, to the danger of a world war .
 The CIA began campaigns to assassinate the Cuban leader and President Kennedy initiated the complete economic blockade that exists until today . The blockade was initiated by the CIA and the Cuban government .
 In October 1962, U.S. spy planes sighted the construction of Soviet surface-to-air missile installations and the presence of Soviet medium-range bombers on Cuban soil .
 These sightings were made after Republican leaders had begun to attack Kennedy for allowing a Soviet military presence on the island .
 Photos indicated that the Soviets had also begun to build ground-to-ground missile installations on the island . Kennedy defined the installations as “offensive” and a threat to national security . The Soviets also built ground-based missile installations .
 Kennedy assembled a special team of advisors, known as EXCOM, to discuss various responses the United States might make . After securing the photographs Kennedy assembled his own team, EXCOM .
 He excluded any strategy that prioritized taking the issue to the U.N. for resolution . He excluded a strategy that would prioritise taking it to the United Nations .
 High drama, much of it televised, followed the initiation of a naval blockade of Soviet ships heading across the Atlantic to Cuba . The blockade was initiated by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 The leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, sent notes to the President that led to a tacit agreement between the two leaders whereby Soviet missiles would be withdrawn from Cuba and the United States would promise not to invade Cuba to overthrow the Castro government .
 The President indicated that obsolete U.S. missiles in Turkey would be disassembled over time . In addition, the President said that obsolete United States missiles would be dismantled over time.
 The missiles constituted a threat to U.S. security, despite Secretary of Defense McNamara’s claim that the missiles did not change the strategic balance between the United States and the Soviet Union . They agree with the administration view .
 Leading social scientists have written that the Kennedy team carefully considered a multitude of policy responses . Given the importance of the missiles, leading social scientists wrote that the team considered a variety of policy options .
 EXCOM did not ignore competing analyses, as had been done in the decisional process prior to the Bay of Pigs decision . EXCOM said it did not disregard competing analyses .
 All observers agreed that the United States and the Soviet Union had gone to the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and Soviet Union were on the verge of war .
 Even the President estimated that there was a 50 percent probability of full-scale nuclear war . Even the U.S. President estimated .
 The crisis suggests that the U.S. quest to maintain and enhance its empire would lead it to go to any extreme, even nuclear war, to defend capitalism . The crisis actually suggests that .
 To avoid serious losses, any policy, for capitalism, is justified, says David Frum . To avoid significant losses, the policy was justified .
 Kennedy was calculating the effects of the missiles on the chances for his party to retain control of Congress in 1962 . Further, in terms of U.S. politics, Kennedy was also calculating the effect of the missile launch .
 Kennedy was driven by the need to establish a public image as courageous and powerful in confronting the Soviets . Kennedy also wanted to establish an image of himself as a powerful and courageous leader .
 The world almost went to nuclear war 50 years ago . Because of imperialism, politics, and personal political fortunes, the world almost ended up in danger .
 The Rag Blog is a reader-supported newsmagazine produced by activist journalists committed to progressive social change . Richard D Jehn, Thorne Webb Dreyer, editor Onward Through the Blog .
 This blog enforces a specific comment policy that prohibits personal attack, goading and harassment, and other malicious remarks . The policy prohibits personal attacks, harassment and goading .
 We will delete remarks considered inappropriate, at the discretion of the editors . We will also delete comments considered inappropriate .
 Progressive Dems See Opening for New Politics by Tom Hayden / The Rag Blog . Progressive Dems see opening for new politics . Progressive Democrats see Opening for new Politics .
 The sight of progressive Democrats shaming and exposing the Wall Street-funded ""Third Way" Democrats is a sign of a powerful new opening for progressives on the American political spectrum . The sight is of a new opportunity for progressives .
 Climate Change Confab Brings Too Little Too Late by Jack A Smith / The Rag Blog . Climate change Confab brings too little too late .
 Growing scientific indicators of impending disastrous global climate change have failed to motivate the principal developed countries to accelerate their efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . Developed countries are failing to accelerate the lackluster pace of their efforts, the authors say .
 Narvaiz Takes On Doggett Again in Gerrymandered 35th by Lamar W Hankins / The Rag Blog .
 Former San Marcos mayor Susan Narvaiz is running for the U.S. House of Representatives . She is seeking to replace U.C. Rep. Ruben Navarrette Jr. in the next election .
 Lloyd Doggett in Texas' gerrymandered 35th district, is a political chameleon who says what she needs to say to protect herself from political accountability . Lloyd's district is so gerry-mandated that he can't be held accountable for his actions . Dog
 The southern half of TransCanada's Keystone XL tar sands pipeline includes a ""Houston Lateral Pipeline" The pipeline is leading the LyondellBasell refinery to retool itself for the looming feast of tar sands crude and fracked oil bounty .
 November Guests Include Spiritual Counselor, Citizens' Advocate, Singer-Songwriter by Rag Radio / The Rag Blog . November guests include spiritual counselors, citizens' advocate, singer-songwriter .
 Thorne Dreyer's guests included a Methodist minister and longtime social activist, a noted citizens' advocate, two staffers from the original Rag, author of a book about the 'movement that started the civil rights movement' and an acclaimed singer-songwriter .
 Paul Buhle's 'Radical Jesus: A Graphic History of Faith' by Alan Wieder / The Rag Blog . The Rag blog is a weekly feature of the Rag blog from The Rag .
 Paul Buhle is one of the most prolific and insightful critics from the American left . He has published an acclaimed series of nonfiction comics .
 The Coachella Valley in Southern California hosted a massive four-day health clinic . More than 2,500 uninsured patients were treated at the clinic . The clinic helped more than two,500 patients .
 Our celebrations during the Winter Solstice take from many traditions, including Roman Saturnalia, Druid customs, the German ""Yule,"" and the birth of Jesus . Queen Victoria popularized the lighted Christmas tree .
 Paul Anthony Ciancia considered himself a warrior against the traitors who were taking over our government, bankrupting our currency, and trying to establish a New World Order - when he opened fire with an assault rifle .
 Matt Hern Writes With Bravado That Sports Do Matter that Sports do Matter . Hern writes with Bravado that sports do matter .
 Matt Hern's "One Game at a Time" is motivated by the belief that sports do matter as much as sports fans think they do . Engagingly written, it is written by Hern .
 Right-Wing Rants and the Abominable Straw Man by Lamar W Hankins / The Rag Blog . Right-wing Rants .
 The Internet is a marvelous tool when used honestly and correctly, and with recognition of its limitations . The Internet can be a wonderful tool if used correctly and with respect for its limitations, author says .
 The far right is home to angry rants, often from the far right, that make ridiculous claims . One said that the Obama administration was setting up gasoline stations to provide free gas to low-income people . But it is also home to rants from the right .
 More in Bob's series on the continuing movement to democratize Egypt, this time covering the period from 1947-48 when an anti-imperialist left made experienced growth .
 Real historic figures -like Nelson Mandela -get sanitized, sanitized and redefined as defenders of the ongoing order rather than activists who committed their lives to revolutionary change . An irony of 21st century historical discourse is how real historic figures get sanitized .
 Mike continues his remarkable memoir, accompanied by -and inspired -photos from -his upcoming book .
 Chileans appear to be reelecting Socialist president Michelle Bachelet . The vote comes on the 40th anniversary of the bloody U.S.-supported coup against Salvador Allende . The U.N. backed a bloody coup against Allende in Chile .
 Alice writes about the dramatic contradictions in Chilean politics and history . Alice is the author of a book about Chilean politics .
 A Tale of Two Alternative Media Conferences by Paul Krassner / The Rag Blog . The Rag blog is the world's largest alternative media conference .
 Paul remembers the original Alternative Media Conference in June 1970 at Goddard College in Vermont . It was a wild and wooly affair headlined by the likes of Ram Dass, Harvey Kurtzman, and Art Spiegelman . The college hosts another conference keynoted by progressive radio host Thom Hartmann
 Singer-Songwriter Slaid Cleaves in Interview and Performance Interview by Thorne Dreyer / Rag Radio .
 Acclaimed musician Cleaves talks about Woody Guthrie's influence on his work . Cleaves reflects on his time as a busker on the streets of Ireland .
 Fear of falling behind some fictional adversaries is an ongoing fear used by economic, political, and military elites . From the fear of ""falling behind the Soviets"" to the missile gap and more recently the wars on drugs and terrorism, the fear has been used by some of the world's
 Anne Lewis' New Website Brings Austin Movement History to Life . Anne Lewis has a new website to celebrate the Austin Movement .
 Beverly Gologorsky was Shaped by Sixties, Feminism, and The Bronx . She was inspired by the Sixties and the Bronx .
 Jonah interviews novelist Beverly Gologorsky about her latest book, "Stop Here,"" ""the title of which nearly shouts its presence" Jonah talks with Gologorky about his latest novel .
 Gologorsky edited anti-war publications Viet-Report and Leviathan in the '60s and '70s . He is considered a novelist shaped by the New Left .
 The latest in Feldman's series on the ""movement to democratize Egypt"" covers the period of 1945-6 when Egyptian communist and labor grew and faced government retaliation .
 Long-time pacifist writer and activist McReynolds says there's something ""infinitely sad"" about the recent celebration of Veterans Day . He says it's sad that Veterans Day has been celebrated so far .
 October Interviews with Poppy Northcutt, Maneesha James, Seth Holmes, and Thomas Zigal . Interviews by Thorne Dreyer / Rag Radio .
 In October Rag Radio guests addressed Texas feminist history, the plight of migrant farmworkers, and the post-Katrina craziness captured in fiction . Guests addressed issues involving death and dying, and issues involving migrant farm workers .
 Waldman reviews vintage, mostly-British television series now available on DVD, Netflix, and YouTube . Waldman has been reviewing vintage British television series .
 From the Rag Bloggers Alan Locklear Alan Pogue Alan Waldman Alice Embree and Alyce Guynn Anne Lewis . Bill Ayers Bill Fletcher Jr.
 Bill Freeland Bill Meacham Bill Narum is the new president of the U.S. Senate of Representatives . The new president will be sworn in on Thursday .